A DISCOURSE Concerning the IMPUTATION OF CHRIST'S Righteousness To US, and OUR
SINS To HIM; With many useful QUESTIONS, thereunto pertaining, Resolved.

Together with Reflections more at large upon what has been published
concerning that Subject by Mr. Robert Ferguson in his Interest of Reason in
Religion; and by Dr. John Owen in his Book styled Communion with God.

By Thomas Hotchkis Rector of Stanton by Highworth in the County of Wilts.

Remissio peccatorum est justitia imputata. Cham. Tom. 3. l. 21. c. 19. Idem
sunt Remissio peccatorum and Justificatio. Urs. Cat. Q 60. LONDON, Printed for
Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-Head, in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXV.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THE Scope of this Treatise is to demonstrate Christ's Righteousness to be in
no other Sense imputed to Believers, than were their Sins to him; that is, as
their Sin it self, or in it is formal nature, was not imputed to Christ, but
only in the deserved punishment thereof, so neither is Christ's Righteousness
imputed to them otherwise than in it is blessed fruits and saving effects: So
that Sinners being justified by Christ's Obedience, or made righteous (as St.
Paul expresses it) is no more than their being disobliged and acquitted from
Condemnation for the merit of Christ's Righteousness.

The occasion of my Undertaking this Service, was, the perusing some late
Books, concerning whose Authors, though I must bear them record, that they have
a zeal of God, yet I cannot say, as gladly I would, that it is according to
knowledge. The Doctrine maintained in this Treatise is by one of the said
Authors Mr. Rolls accused as damnable doctrine, as a limb of Popery, yea the
very Rats-bane of Popery, and the maintenance of it an express contradiction of
the Church of England in the great point of Justification: By which words, and
many others to the same purpose, he has done more credit to the Church of
Rome, and more wrong and dishonor to our own Church, than I believe he did
intend, or was aware of. Another of those Authors Dr. Owen in his Vindication
against Mr. Sherlock has very much of the same uncharitable and unadvised
talk. And after the perusal of these, Mr. Ferguson's Book, styled the Interest
of Reason in Religion came to my hands, wherein I perceived the like fervent
and inordinate Zeal: Hereupon, as the Apostle says of the good Zeal of his
Corinthians, that it had provoked very many, the Zeal of these Brethren for the
upholding and propagating Error has in a different Sense provoked me, viz. to
offer an helping hand for the defense of the truth, nor has ought else induced
me hereunto; as having not the least Pique at any of those Authors persons, in
regard of their dissent from my sentiments, or on any other account, they being
all perfectly unknown to me, nor the least touch of envy at their Popularity,
nor was I excited to this undertaking by any other.

If any shall object against my thus voluntarily appearing in this Contest, as
Eliab did against his brother David's forwardness to another kind of Combat,
saying, it is the pride and naughtiness of thy heart, I think it enough to
reply as David did, Is there not a Cause? Seeing so many at this time employ to
the utmost their Pens and Tongues to decry and defame the great Truths here
contended for, and to defend and promote the erroneous Principles here opposed.

As for my manner of writing, I was solicitous only to speak intelligibly to
the capacity of ordinary Readers, not affecting curiosity of the Style: And, I
hope, it will appear that I have endeavored to right the Truths of the Gospel
without wronging any of my dissenting Brethren, by misrepresenting their words
or sense or uncomely reflections upon any of them: I think it expedient
likewise to declare, that in this Controversy concerning imputed Righteousness,
I do not step forth as a second to any, who have of late appeared for the Cause
I maintain, either particularly Mr. R. Baxter, Mr. William Sherlock, Mr. Joseph
Truman, Mr. Edward Fowler, or any other. My only aim was, according to my
slender Talent, to serve and bear witness to the truth, without design to
please or gratify any person.

If after this Profession of an honest meaning and sincere desire to do good,
it shall prove my Lot to hear ill in any kind, to be accused as a (...), or
Prevaricator, one who would build again what by his Subscription to the
Articles and Homilies of the Church of England he has destroyed, to be
reproached as a Socinian, or to suffer by any other name of intended Ignominy,
I shall not thereupon be so surprised, as if some strange thing had happened to
me, nor shall I in the least (I hope through God's grace) be discouraged by
such usage, nor yet exasperated, but shall say in the words of the Prophet
Jeremy, Truly this is a grief and I must bear it.

Lastly, I think it not amiss to add this Information, that the following
Treatise is only one Part of what I designed to publish concerning imputed
Righteousness, and that I have almost perfected a second part concerning
Forgiveness of Sin, as that very Righteousness which is said in Scripture to be
imputed by God to believing Sinners, for the sake of Christ's Righteousness;
and withal concerning Faith, as the thing it self, which is most expressly and
very frequently said in Scripture to be imputed for Righteousness; with the
resolution of many material Questions pertaining thereunto. I desired to have
had both these parts published together, but this having been a great while in
the Press, it was thought more advisable, that it should not stay for the
other, but come out by it self.

To conclude, Let us be zealously affected always, Gal. 4.18. but with the
great St. Paul's Limitation in a good thing, and according to the weight of
every such matter, let the height of our Zeal be; and above 1 Pet. 4.^. all
things let us have fervent Charity among our selves: May the God of Peace, and
Love, and Truth be with us all, This shall be ever the heart's desire and
prayer of

Stanton. July 26. 1675. Reader, Thy aged Servant in the Work of the Gospel,
Thomas Hotchkis.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. i. Q. Is the Righteousness of Jesus Christ imputed to Believers? Answ.
Although it be yielded, that in Romans 5.18. there is express mention of the word
[Righteousness] undeniably to be understood of the Righteousness of Christ,
nevertheless neither in that Scripture, nor in any other place, is Christ's
Righteousness expressly said to be imputed to Believers. page 1. Chap. ii. Q.
Have all our Protestant Preachers and Writers erred from the Truth of
Scripture, who have spoken of Christ's Righteousness under the name, or notion
of a Righteousness imputed, or have asserted the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness to us. Answ. No, God forbid, two reasons of which answer are
rendered. p. 3. Chap. iii. Q. In what sense is it true, or false, to say, That
Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us? In answer hereunto a twofold
acceptance of the word [Righteousness] is specified, respectively to which
different acceptance of the word, it is determined in what sense the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us, is to be asserted, and in what sense
it is to be renounced, with certain Reasons of the abrenunciation thereof. p.
4. Chap. iv. An Objection from 2 Cor. 5.21. answered and also retorted. The
blasphemy of Mr. William Air in his Assize-Sermon preached at Sarum, 1652.
reproved p. 10. Chap. v. Q. Did Christ take upon him the Guilt as well as the
Punishment of our Sins? Answ. No. A brief explication of the Distinction of
Guilt, commonly styled Guilt of Fault, and Guilt of Punishment; together with a
Reply to what is alleged by certain late Writers out of Bishop Andrews. p 13.
Chap. vi. An Answer to several unjustifiable passages in Mr. Ferguson's Book,
styled [The Interest of Reason in Religion -- ]. His false and manifold
uncharitable insinuations, answered. Wherein it is showed what manner of guilt
or obligation to punishment that was, which Christ took upon him. That Christ
did not suffer, however by occasion of that Law (Gen 2.17.) as transgressed,
yet not by virtue thereof, as if that Law in, or by his sufferings had been
executed. His mistake of the true nature of Gospel justification, demonstrated.
That it is not against the essential Holiness of God (as Mr. Ferguson pretends)
to justify a sinner upon an obedience (Ex. part sui, seu peccatoris)
imperfect, with the reason of his mistake. p. 16. Chap. vii. That the Scripture
does no where assert a surrogation of Christ in our room, in such a strict
Law-sence, as that we may be said in, and by, him to have done and suffered
what he did and suffered, and in or by him to have redeemed our selves. And
that Christ did not in such a Law-sence, represent us as Proctors and Attorneys
do their Clients, Ambassadors their Princes, or Guardians their Pupils, acting
accordingly in our names, but officiating as a Mediator betwixt God and Man.
The evil Consequences charged by Mr. F. upon the contrary Doctrine, are denied.
His thwacking Contradiction imputed to others, avoided by them, and retorted
upon himself. p. 25. Chap. viii. Mr. Ferguson's mistake in thinking, that a
sinner by his justification is freed from the guilt of punishment and fault
too. That Christ's righteousness is not more, or otherwise imputed to us for,
in, toward, or in order to, our justification, than the remission of our sin.
The nature of justification [forensick] opened, both of justification
indefinitely considered, as also of Gospel-justification in special. The truth
of the matter laid down in several Propositions. p. 28. Chap. ix. That those
who assert, That the Law of works is abrogated, do in substance of truth accord
with those, who choose rather to express themselves, saying, It is relaxed or
dispensed with. God in justifying a sinner does not pronounce him just and
righteous, that is, no sinner. A sinner not otherwise made just and righteous
by his being justified, than by his being pardoned through Christ. That a
sinner cannot possibly be justified from the accusation of the Law, in it is
charging him to be a sinner. p. 36. Chap. x. That the difference betwixt
remission and Gospel-justification is not at all in this, viz. That remission
is the result of mercy, and the act of one exercising favor, and justification
the offspring of Justice, as Mr. F. says. The usage of words in common speech,
sometimes in signification contrary to that of Scripture, exemplified in the
language of our Brethren of Scotland. Mr. Ferguson's notorious mistake in
asserting, That to justify is no where in the Scripture-usurpation equipollent
with to forgive. p. 39. Chap. xi. Mr. Ferguson's mistake in saying, That we are
made Righteous With the Righteousness of Christ, as also Dr. Owen's in his Book
styled (Communion with the Trinity) refuted, and that in Romans 5.18. alleged by
him, answered, wherein is declared, That it is one thing to be justified By,
and another thing to be justified With the Righteousness of Christ. The Doctor
's misinterpretation of Phil. 3.9. and Ephesians. 2.8. That the asserting of the
whole of Justification, to consist in remission of sin, has no such evil
consequences, as Mr. F. charge it with. p. 42. Chap. xii. Q. Is a sinner said
in a proper or improper sense to be justified? In answer hereunto it is
declared, 1. That the Question in it self in immaterial. 2. Nevertheless for
the satisfaction of Mr. F. the Question is answered, and therein it is proved,
That the Justification of a sinner is of, or in it is kind a proper
Justification, and in what respects so said to be, specified. And Objection
answered. p. 48. Chap. xiii. Q. Why, or for what reasons, may pardon of sin be
called Justification, and Vice versa? Or, What reasons are there for their
promiscuous use in the N.T? Answ. In answer whereunto, 1. It is acknowledged,
That the Question is in it self not so considerable. 2. Nevertheless for the
satisfaction of many dissenting Brethren, in answer thereunto, several reasons
of the thing are assigned and specified. p. 54. Chap. xiv. Q. How is the
justification of a sinner to be denominated, whether Evangelical or Legal?
Answ. Rather Evangelical, and the reason assigned. The Arguments of those on
the contrary side both answered and retorted, who acknowledge, that the
justification of a sinner is Evangelical ex part principii, but would not have
it absolutely to be so styled, but rather a Legal justification. The reason why
this Question is debated and answered. p. 58. Chap. xv. Several mistakes in Mr.
F. according to the obvious construction of his words, detected. That Christ
suffered not the Idem, but the Tantundem, manifested by three things,
distinctly specified, and two evil consequences of the contrary Doctrine. With
a Caution in the close. p. 63. Chap. xvi. The Imputation of Socinianism
groundlesly charged by Mr. F. upon his Brethren. Mr. F. his charging his
Antagonists with nonsense, refuted. That sort of union with Christ to be
renounced, the native consequence whereof is the reciprocal Imputation of our
sins to Christ, and of his Righteousness to us, in the sense of Mr. F. with his
Adherents (i.e.) properly and formally, or otherwise than in the fruits and
effects of the one, and of the other. The reason thereof rendered. p. 69. Chap.
xvii. That Christ may very well be said to be made sin for us, to bear our
sins, to dye for our offenses -- although it cannot be truly said, that he did
bear our sin it self, or sin in it self, or otherwise than in the fruit and
effects of it, the contrary whereunto is pretended by Mr. F. Mr. Ferguson's
mistake in confounding an Antecedent impulsive Cause, with a meritorious Cause,
the difference whereof is asserted and exemplified. His mistake in not
distinguishing betwixt An Obligation and Our Obligation to suffer. That though
our sins did properly merit Christ's suffering, nevertheless it will not follow
from thence, that Christ himself did merit it, or took upon him the meriting
thereof. That Christ may be said in an improper sense to be punished. The word
[Demerit of Punishment] ambiguous, a twofold sense whereof is specified. The
Arguments which overthrow the Popish doctrine of believers, being discharged
from the guilt of sin, but not the Punishment, altogether mis-applyed by Mr. F.
to the point in hand. p. 73. Chap. xviii. Reflections upon certain passages in
Dr. J. Owen's Book styled (Communion with God) concerning Christ his being made
ruddy in his own blood, Morally by the Imputation of sin; and concerning that
blessed Bartering and Exchange pretended by him, betwixt Believers giving up
their sins to Christ, and their taking from him that Righteousness, which he
wrought for them. His obscure, ambiguous, un-Scriptural phrases reproved, and
his mistakes therein (according to obvious construction) detected. An Objection
answered, wherein a twofold Taking or Receiving of a thing is specified, and
applied to the purpose in hand. His mistake in affirming, that the Saints by
giving up their sins to Christ, and taking from him his Righteousness, do
fulfill the whole of that in 2 Cor. 5.21. The falsehood of the reason asserted by
the Doctor, why those, who said, Lord, Lord, were disappointed in their
expectation, instead whereof, the true reason or reasons are assigned. That for
sinners to plead their repentance and duties, is not to barter with themselves
only, to take Christ's work out of his hand, and to ascribe it to other things,
or to say their duties shall bear their iniquities (according as the Dr.
misconstrues the matter) but it is in very deed and in true construction, to
put the work of their being actually saved, into the hand of Christ, and to
keep it there. The manner of a sinners Bartering with Christ laid open, if it
may fitly be so styled. p. 81, 82. Chap. xix. In what sense may it be truly
said, That we are interessed in Christ's Merit or Satisfaction. In answer
hereunto it is said, That three things may possibly be meant, by the Merit or
Satisfaction of Christ, which being distinctly specified, the Question is
accordingly determined. p. 98. Chap. xx. Q. To what profit would the
Righteousness of Christ in it self, imputed to the justification of a sinner,
be more than the Imputation of it in the benefit thereof? Answ. None at all,
except that be a benefit, which the Familists do pretend unto, and which they
call Our being Christed with Christ. The suffrage of the very learned Dr. Henry
More. An Objection answered, taken from the pretense of several benefits, which
being distinctly specified in the following Chapters, are there manifested to
be null and void. p. 102. Chap. xxi. One benefit pretended by diverse, That by
Remission of sin, a sinner is freed from the punishment deserved by his fault,
but by Christ's Righteousness imputed, he is freed from the fault it self, the
vanity of which pretense is discovered. Several Objections answered, wherein is
shown, That a sinner may be disobliged from suffering the punishment deserved
for his fault, and yet remain faulty still; and that it is repugnant to the
nature, as well as to the Law of God, for God to repute a sinner to be that,
which he is not, or not to have committed those faults, which he has
committed. That it is one thing for God to repute a person to be innocent, and
quite another to be dealt with respectively to impunity as innocent. In what
sense a Thief having made satisfaction for his theft, is in the sense of the
Law a Thief still. The main ground of mistake in this matter specified. p. 105.
Chap. xxii. Another benefit pretended to be had by Justification, through
Christ's Righteousness imputed, over and above the pardon of our sins is, That
remission of sin does take off a sinners obligation to punishment, but
Justification by Christ's Righteousness imputed, does put him into a state of
favor and acceptance with God, the vanity of which pretense is discovered.
The definition of Justification, given by the late Assembly of Divines, in
their lesser Catechism explicated, so as to reconcile it with the truth of
Scripture, though not from tautology. Three main grounds of the mistake, in the
difference here pretended, to be betwixt remission of sin, and justification by
the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness. p. 114. Chap. xxiii. A third benefit
pretended by a sinners justification, through Christ's imputed Righteousness,
over and above remission of sin, is, That this latter does only free the sinner
from eternal death, but justification does moreover entitle him to eternal
life, the vanity of which pretense is discovered; with an answer to what is
objected to the contrary by Mr. Anth. Burges. An Answer also to the Question,
Whether believing sinners are not restored by Christ, unto a greater degree of
felicity, by their justification through Christ's Righteousness (supposing the
Imputation of it) than upon the bare score of the forgiveness of their sins?
The Contradictions of Mr. Anth. Burges, in certain particulars instanced in. p.
118. Chap. xxiv. Q. What are the evil Consequents, which do naturally flow from
the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, in the sense here impugned? In answer
hereunto, one mischievous consequence is specified, viz. That Christ is a
sinner, and the greatest of sinners. p. 129. Chap. xxv. Another evil
Consequence of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, in the sense disowned,
viz. That Believers are as perfectly Righteous, as is Christ The Righteous,
yea, that they are more Righteous, than if they had in their own persons
perfectly kept the whole Law, and that they are as acceptable to God the
Father, as is Christ himself. The falsehood and impiety of which sayings at
large manifested, and some Scriptures which are suborned to speak against the
truth, vindicated. That man may be said to be justified by the Righteousness of
another, and not by his own, three ways, in the Application of which
distinction it is plainly declared, in what sense we are, and in what sense we
are not justified by the Righteousness of another, and not by our own. Several
unjustifiable and intolerable sayings of Dr. Owen, in his Book styled,
Communion with God, related, with brotherly and necessary animadversions
thereupon. p. 133. Chap. xxvi. Another evil Consequence of the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, in the sense opposed, That God sees no sin in the
Saints, all their sins being covered from the sight of God, by their being
clothed with the Righteousness of Christ; the falsity of which is discovered,
and certain Scriptures vindicated from their abuse. A reply to Dr. Owen, who
denies, That it will follow from the said Imputation of Christ's Righteousness
to us, that we are as perfectly righteous as Christ is. p. 147. Chap. xxvii.
Another evil Consequence of the said Imputation, That it leaves no place for
remission of sin, in persons made so completely righteous, with Christ's
Righteousness, and that it does utterly overthrow the nature of
Gospel-Justification, making the justification of a sinner to be quite another
thing, and of another kind, than indeed it is. An Objection answered. p. 152.
Chap. xxviii. Another evil consequence of the said Imputation, That it subverts
the necessity of our repentance, in order to our salvation by Christ, that the
non-necessity thereof in Believers, has been asserted by some. p. 155. Chap.
xxix. Another evil Consequence of the said Imputation, That it overthrows the
necessity of new obedience, in order to a sinners being saved by Christ; Whence
it is, that diverse Authors, whereof some are named, do assert, That Christians
are not to do any good duties, that they may be saved. Several passages to this
purpose in Dr. Owen's Book styled (Communion with God) related, with
Animadversions thereupon more at large. p. 157. Chap. xxx. Q. May Believers be
truly or fitly said to be clothed with the Robe of Christ's Righteousness, or
the like form of words? Four Reasons why the said Question is proposed and
answered. The Answer it self. 1. That there are no such express sayings in
Scripture, nor any Scripture wherein Christ's Righteousness is set forth under
the Metaphor of Raiment. 2. That our own personal Righteousness, in the several
branches thereof, does go under the Metaphorical expressions of Robes, comely
raiment, and splendid array. Several Scriptures, objected to the contrary,
answered. In what sense it is true, and in what, false, to say, that we are
clothed with the Robe of Christ's Righteousness: And that it is more fitly and
intelligibly said, that it purchases or procures Clothing for us, than that
it is it self our Clothing. p. 175. Chap. xxxi. Dr. Owen's mistake in thinking,
That when all sin is answered for, all the Righteousness, which God requires
for that time, is not fulfilled; the contrary whereunto is proved. Several
other of his mistakes discovered, and his mis-interpretations of several
Scriptures. p. 184. Chap. xxxii. That it is no where said in Scripture, that we
do receive the Righteousness of Christ. The Doctor's perverting that in Phil.
3.9. from the true meaning of the Apostle. That he perverts the sense of 1 Cor.
1.30. utterly beside the meaning of the Apostle. That he mistakes the sense of
Romans 5.10. That Christ has done no more by the obedience of his life for a
sinners salvation, than for his reconciliation, the contrary whereunto is
supposed by Dr. O. His iterated mistake touching the end of Adam's obedience.
p. 189. Chap. xxxiii. The Doctor's allegation of several Scriptures to no
purpose. That we are no otherwise justified, than we are reconciled, or
pardoned through the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, the contrary
whereunto is pretended by Dr. O. That none of those Scriptures alleged by him,
to prove the Imputation of Christ's obedience it self unto us, do evince the
same. His error in attributing our justification to the life of Christ, whereas
the Apostle does (Romans 5.9.) expressly attribute it to his Death, however it is
not to be understood, as excluding the obedience of his Life. p. 194. Chap.
xxxiv. Dr. Owen's mis-interpretation of Zech. 3.3, 4. That remission of sin is
no more the proper fruit of Christ's death (as the Doctor would have it) than is
Justification. That there is not required a collation of Righteousness, over
and above remission of sin (as he asserts) in order to a right to Heaven. His
allegation of Esa. 61.10. to no purpose. p. 198. Chap. xxxv. That our
deliverance from a state of rejection, or un-acceptation, and our Acceptance
with God, are not two things, and to be ascribed to two several causes, as the
Dr. pretends. That in 2 Cor. 5.21. mis-alledged by him for his purpose,
retorted to the purpose against him. His unreasonableness in supposing, the old
quarrel betwixt God and us to be taken away, and yet no new friendship
contracted. His senceless contradiction in supposing, That Adam was guilty of
no sin, and yet not to have had thereupon a positive as well as a negative
Holiness. That the non-imputation of sin, and the imputation of righteousness,
are not two things, but one and the same thing. That Christ's Righteousness is
not our righteousness before God, otherwise than in a causal sense, and that
our Righteousness it self before God is our own personal righteousness. That in
Romans 5.18. vainly alleged by the Dr. to prove his purpose. That the
non-imputation of sin, and the Imputation of Righteousness (as they are the
same thing) so they are to be ascribed to one and the same cause. p. 203. Chap.
xxxvi. The difference betwixt Dr. Owen and Mr. Ferguson in their opinion,
concerning the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, or Obedience unto us,
plainly laid open in their own words, recited. That the Doctor denies Christ's
death to have been in our stead, but only as it was penal. The Author's opinion
plainly and expressly declared, in opposition to the Doctor's. That satisfaction
was no otherwise the effect of Christ's death as a penalty, than as a price, and
as a sacrifice. p. 208.
OF THE IMPUTATION OF Christ's Righteousness, etc.
CHAP. I.
Q. Is the Righteousness of Jesus Christ imputed to Believers? Answ. Although
it be yielded, that in Romans 5.18. there is express mention of the word
[Righteousness] undeniably to be understood of the Righteousness of Christ,
nevertheless neither in that Scripture, nor in any other place is Christ's
Righteousness expressly said to be imputed to Believers.

Q. 1. IS the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, (i.e.) to believing
sinners?

Answ. That the Righteousness of Christ is imputed to believers, is an
assertion no where in terms to be found in Scripture. And whereas by the
Righteousness of one, or that one Righteousness mentioned Romans 5.18. is
unquestionably meant the Righteousness of Christ, expressed by name in the
foregoing verse: Yet this Righteousness of Christ is not there, or in any other
place of Scripture (for ought I know) expressly said to be imputed to us: and
forasmuch as the Scriptures are so silent therein, I cannot but wonder, that
any one should affirm, that the sound of the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness is in the Scriptures as shril, or loud as was that of the Trumpet
at Mount Sinai, as if the sound thereof had gone forth ten times out of the
mouth of the Apostle in that one Chapter, Romans 4. whereas the truth is, that
although there be frequent mention in that Chapter of the words [Righteousness
and Imputed] nevertheless as to the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness there
is Altum silentium, a deep silence, it being neither in that, nor in any other
Chapter of the Bible expressly asserted, that Christ's Righteousness is imputed
to us.

I will conclude this short Chapter with the suffrage of Pareus de justitia
Christi Act. and Pass. Nunquam legi, humanam sanctitatem Christi nobis
imputatam esse justitiam nostram, vel ejus partem. Si quis legit, quaeso mihi
ostendat, ut and ego legam, and credam. In this sort must I needs say of the
Righteousness of Christ, whether Active, or Passive, or both, or without any
distinction, that I never found it expressly said to be imputed to us, or to be
ours by imputation or any part of our righteousness. If any man has any where
in the Bible read such sayings, I beseech him to direct me to the Repositories
(Chapter and Verse) where they are to be found, that having read them, I may at
once believe both my own eyes and his.

CHAP. II.
Q. Have all our Protestant Preachers and Writers erred from the truth of
Scripture, who have spoken of Christ's Righteousness under the name, or notion
of a Righteousness imputed, or have asserted the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness to us. Answ. No, God forbid, two reasons of which answer are
rendered.

Q. 2. FOrasmuch as it has been very ordinary with our Protestant Divines both
in their Sermons and Writings (both in polemical and positive Divinity) to say,
That Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us, and imputed to us for
righteousness, have all of them erred from the truth in so saying?

Answ. No, God forbid: for although none of them have precisely kept to the
form of wholesome words, but swerved or varied rather from the language of
Scripture in that saying, nevertheless there is no necessity to conclude them
all to be under error upon that account: for 1. A man may possibly, yea, we do
very ordinarily speak the truth of Scripture, although not in the words, or
terms of Scripture. An assertion may be a Scriptural truth, though it be not
formed, or asserted in Scripture-words, and phrase.

2. There are several senses of the word [Righteousness] respectively whereunto
it is as well true, as false, to say, That Christ's Righteousness is imputed to
us; and this I will endeavor to explicate, in answer to the following
Question, which will be the subject of the next Chapter.

CHAP. III.
Q. In what sense is it true, or false, to say, That Christ's Righteousness is
imputed to us? In answer hereunto a twofold acceptance of the word
[Righteousness] is specified, respectively to which different acceptance of
the word, it is determined in what sense the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness to us, is to be asserted, and in what sense it is to be
renounced, with certain Reasons of the abrenunciation thereof.

Q. 3. WHat are those diverse acceptations of the word [Righteousness] with
respect whereunto the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us may be asserted
as a truth, or is to be rejected as an Error?

Answ. The word [Righteousness] is taken in a double sense, viz. properly, or
figuratively: 1. It is taken in Scripture sometimes, yea very often,
improperly, or figuratively, not for the thing it self, but for the issue, or
benefit thereof. This kind of Trope is usual in Scripture and in common speech,
it being ordinary with us to put the name of a thing in the propriety of it
instead of its return in the blessed issue, fruits, or products thereof. In
this sense the word is taken Job 33.26. where Elihu says, That God will render
to a man his righteousness (i.e.) not the thing it self, but the fruit and
comfort of it. In this sense those, who fear God, are said to eat the labor of
their hands (i.e.) that emolument, which with their hands they did labor for,
Ps. 28.2. In the like sense he who planted a Vineyard, is said to eat, or not
to eat of it (i.e.) of the fruit of it. Deuteronomy. 20.6. Thus work is put for the
reward of it, Rev. 14.13. Job 34.11. The work of a man will he render unto him.
Thus Ephesians. 6.8. Whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he receive
of the Lord (i.e.) not the self same thing, that is done, but the same in the
fruit and reward of it. In the like sense are those words of St. John to be
understood, wherein he admonishes the Elect Lady, and her Children to beware,
That they lose not the things which they had wrought (i.e.) the reward of the
things wrought by them. Now in this sense it is true to say, and a truth worthy
of all acceptance, That Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us, that is, in
the saving effects of it, or blessings procured by it. In this sense to say,
That Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us, is the self same thing as to say,
That the fruit and benefit procured by his Righteousness is conferred upon us.
And this, I doubt not, is the meaning of the Apostle in those his saying, Romans
5.18, 19. That by Christ's Righteousness the free gift (of pardon, or
justification) comes to us, and That by his obedience we (the (...), the many
there mentioned) are made righteous (i.e.) we for the sake of his
righteousness, or obedience, are constituted righteous (i.e.) pardoned, or
justified. And be it observed, That as [Righteousness] so sin also in the same
figurative sense is said to be imputed to a sinner (i.e.) in the deserved
fruits and effects of it: When the deserved punishment thereof is, or is not
inflicted upon a sinner, then is his sin said to be imputed, or not imputed to
him. In this sense those words of Shimei supplicating his Sovereign for pardon,
are to be understood, he saying, Let not my Lord impute iniquity unto me, 2 Samuel 19.19. Where by iniquity he does not mean the thing it self in a proper
sense, Ipsam culpam, the sinful action, or the act of sinning, but the deserved
fruit and punishment of it: In this sense the word sin, or iniquity, are very
oftentimes taken in Scripture, as in Genesis 4.13. and 19.15. Luke 7.18.

And as touching the word [impute] when applied to what is in it self good, or
desirable, be it observed, That it is the manner of Scripture sometimes to
express the collation of a benefit upon us, or derivation thereof unto us by
the word [impute] whether the benefit it self accrues to us by the way of debt,
or free donation, as appears Romans 4.4. To him, that works, the reward is
reckoned, or imputed (for so the word is rendered three times in the same
Chapter, v. 22, 23, 24.) not of grace, but of debt (i.e.) on such a one it is
conferred not of grace, but of debt, and so to be reputed. In this sense to say
Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us, is all one as to say, Christ's
Righteousness is in the saving fruit and benefit thereof conferred upon us; and
he, who says so, speaks the very truth of Scripture. Having declared in what
sense the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ may and ought to be
asserted and maintained, I shall in the next place specify the sense, wherein
it is to be rejected, in order whereunto let it be observed, that

2. The word [Righteousness] is sometimes taken properly and formally for the
very thing it self in its essential nature, in which sense, as it is very
oftentimes taken, when applied to the righteousness of man, Prove. 10.2, 12, 28.
Acts 10.35. Romans 6.13, 18, 20. so likewise to the Righteousness of Christ, Romans
5.18. where the Righteousness of Christ is expressly mentioned. And be it
observed, That as Righteousness in the former sense may not unfitly (as I
think) be styled a Passive, and in the latter an Active Righteousness, so the
said two different senses of the word [Righteousness] do differ as Officium and
Beneficium, the one being the receiving of some good, They differ as work, and
wages, as Duty and Mercy.
or benefit conferred on us, the other the doing of some good, or duty performed
by us. The phrase [receiving righteousness] see in Psalm. 24.5. He shall receive
the blessing from the Lord, and Righteousness from the God of his Salvation:
Righteousness in that place being the self same thing with Gods blessing, his
saving blessing. The phrase [doing righteousness] see in 1 John 3.7. He, that
does righteousness, is righteous. As this is styled a sowing of righteousness,
Prove. 11.28. so that may very fitly and suitably to the language of Scripture
both of the Old and New Testament be styled Reaping Righteousness, Hos. 10.12.
Gal. 6.7, 8, 9. Now in this proper, formal sense of the word [Righteousness]
the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us is a doctrine, however owned by
too too many, yet by very many others of our own and foreign Protestant
Churches justly disowned as that, which is no where to be found in Scripture,
whether in the words, or meaning of any Text in Scripture: for to assert, that
Christ's Righteousness is in this sense imputed to us, is to assert, That God
does account or reckon, that the Righteousness which Christ wrought, we wrought
in and by him, or that we are reputed by God to have fulfilled the Law, and
satisfied Divine Justice in and by Christ, that what Christ did in his own
natural Person, God does account, we did in and by him: for, to have any thing
imputed to a man in the propriety, formality, or essential nature of the thing,
is to be reputed the doer of what is so imputed to him, these being terms
equivalent and explicatory one of another; and as thus explicated do the
Brethren, whom I do take upon me in this point to oppose, openly own the said
doctrine touching the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us; it being their
error to think; that Christ's Righteousness cannot be accepted by God in our
behoof, or prove savingly beneficial to us, unless it be imputed to us in their
said sense; or to imagine (as they do) a necessity, that what is imputed to, or
for the justification of a sinner, should be reputed to be done by him, who is
justified; for it suffices to imputation in this case, if that which is done,
be accepted of God in the behalf of sinners, or instead of that, which a
justified person should in his own person have performed. Nor is there any
cause, or color for them to suspect, that the denial of the said Imputation in
their said sense does infer, or include a denial of Christ's satisfaction,
whether in the thing it self, or in the blessed effects of it. I am at once
both sorry, and I wonder to read such passages as these in some learned
Authors, they saying to this purpose, viz. That human reason, or man's
understanding cannot comprehend, how Christ's satisfaction can be of saving
benefit to us, unless it be imputed to us in its formal and essential nature:
The contrary whereunto is as obvious to be conceived by any unprejudicate
person, as obvious almost can be. For my own part I do humbly conceive it to be
a great and dangerous mistake to think, that Christ satisfied Divine Justice
for believing sinners, that they might be reputed by God to have satisfied in
and by him as their surety; the truth of Scripture (to my understanding) being
this, viz. That Jesus Christ did in human nature, and his own person as
Mediator, or in the person of a Mediator betwixt God and Man satisfy Divine
Justice, not that we might be reputed to have satisfied in and by him, or that
his very satisfaction should be imputed to us, but that no such satisfaction
should be required of us; and that his fulfilling of the law of Mediatorship
was accepted of God not as our fulfilling either of that law (for the law of
Mediatorship belonged not to us, it being peculiar to Christ himself) or of any
other law whatsoever; but it was reckoned, reputed, or accepted by God as a
satisfaction for our not fulfilling the law of God imposed upon mankind: I
mean, the law in the rigor of it, or as a covenant of works, and that such an
exact fulfilling of the law should not be exacted of us as the covenanted
condition of our salvation, but that faith and sincere obedience to the Gospel
of Christ should be so required. And I am glad to perceive, that in asserting
the end of Christ's satisfaction for mankind, I have the concurrence of the
Author of the Book lately published, styled (The interest of Reason in
Religion --) he saying page 548. It was in consequence of Christ's susception to
be our Sponsor (or Mediator, say I, the word Sponsor and Mediator being
promiscuously used by the Apostle, as appears by comparing Heb. 7.22. with
chap. 8.6. and this latter word being of more frequent use with the Apostle,
than the former, that being only once in its usage applied to Christ in
Scripture) and with respect to the obedience of his life and sacrifice of his
death, as the procuring and deserving cause, that God entered into a covenant
with mankind, promising to pardon their sins, receive them into favor, and
crown them with life upon such terms and conditions as the Father and Son
thought fit to prescribe. In these words the word [Mankind] is remarkable, the
Author saying expressly, That for Christ's sake [for the obedience of his life
and sacrifice of his death as the deserving cause thereof] God entered into a
Covenant [not only with a few, with the Elect only, but] with Mankind,
promising -- And I am the more glad to perceive, that I have the concurrence of
the said Author in asserting the Covenant of Grace to be procured for Mankind,
because I shall have occasion by and by to mention some things, wherein I am
necessitated (much against my will) to dissent from him, and certain others of
my Brethren. And I shall take a fit occasion to do it in answer to an Argument
for the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness (in the sense disowned by my self
with many others) taken from those words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.21. from
which words I have seen in a certain learned Author the Argument thus formed,
as shall be expressed in the beginning of the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
'An Objection from 2 Cor. 5.21. answered and also retorted. The blasphemy of
Mr. William Air in his Assize-Sermon preached at Sarum, 1652. reproved.

QUomodo, in what sort, or manner Christ was made sin for us, in the same
manner was he made Righteousness to us. But he was made sin for us only by
Imputation. Ergo --

Answ. This Argument is not at all to the purpose in hand, or the matter here
in controversy, which is not, Whether Christ's Righteousness be imputed to us,
or whether our sins were imputed to him; for although it be not expressly, and
in terms asserted in any place of the Bible, either that our sins were imputed
to Christ, or that his Righteousness is imputed to us, nevertheless it is
readily and unanimously granted, That both of them may truly be asserted in a
certain sense to be imputed, the only Question being this, viz. In what sense
were our sins imputed to Christ, and in what sense is Christ's Righteousness
imputed to us, whether as Sin and Righteousness are taken properly, and
formally, or else figuratively, and in the effects thereof; whether Formaliter,
or Effective, as are the School terms: And that either the one, or the other
were in their formal, and essential nature imputed (our Sins to Christ, or his
Righteousness to us) or otherwise imputed to him, or us, than in the fruits and
effects thereof, that Scripture in 2 Cor. 5.21. does not prove. Yea, that
Scripture does plainly and convincingly prove and disprove that sense of the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, which I have, and still do both own and
disown (i.e.) own in the said figurative and improper, but disown in the formal
and proper sense of the word [Righteousness.] And for the purpose in hand, an
Argument from the said Scripture may be thus formed:

In what manner, or in what sense of the word [Sin] Christ was made Sin for us,
or our Sin was imputed to him, after such a manner, or in the same sense were
we made the Righteousness of God in him, or his Righteousness was imputed to us;

But he was not made Sin for us, nor was our Sin [formally taken, and in its
essential nature] imputed to him, but only in its poenal fruits or punishment
deserved by it, Ergo --

For proof of the Minor (for the Major will be yielded by all those with whom I
am now in the dispute) be it considered, That if our Sin it self properly in
its essential nature had been imputed to Christ, then had he been reputed by
God to have deserved, or contracted the guilt of what he suffered; which if so,
he could not have satisfied for us, or his sufferings be reckoned by God as
satisfactory to Divine Justice.

2. The Apostle does not say, that Christ was made a Sinner for us, nor do I
know, how such a saying can be vindicated from blaspheming the Holy One of God.

3. If Sin as properly taken was imputed to Christ, and he in that sense of the
word was made Sin for us, I see not, but that this blasphemy will from thence
follow, viz. That God reputed Christ to be a Sinner, or made him a Sinner for
us. And this is that I find in a printed Sermon preached by Mr. William Air at
the Assizes at Sarum, His Text was Psalm. 45.10.
1652. and dedicated to the Council of War then sitting at Whitehall, wherein
he says, page 10. That such was Christ's zeal for Righteousness, that to make us
righteous, he was content himself to be made a Sinner. And to abet him in his
blasphemy, he alleges the authority of the Apostle, saying, So the Apostle,
He was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him,
2 Cor. 5.21.

What? So the Apostle? Verily not so: for the Apostle says, He was made Sin for
us, the importance of which word is not, that he was made a Sinner for us, but
that he was made a Sacrifice for Sin, or a Sin-offering for us, in which sense
the word Sin is frequently taken in the Scriptures both of the Old and New
Testament, which being so obvious and well known, I need not to specify Romans
8.3.

CHAP. V.
Q. Did Christ take upon him the Guilt as well as the Punishment of our Sins?
Answ. No. A brief explication of the distinction of Guilt, commonly styled
Guilt of Fault, and Guilt of Punishment; together with a Reply to what is
alleged by certain late Writers out of Bishop Andrews.

Q. DID not Christ take upon him our guilt, or the guilt of our sins as well as
the punishment of them?

The former is Meritum poenae, the deserving of punishment; the latter is
Obligatio ad luendam poenam, an obligation to suffer the punishment it self
deserved.
Answ. No: Christ did not take upon him Reatum culpae, guilt of fault, but only
that which we call Reatum poenae: the former some Casuists do style (if I do
not mistake) Obligation to fault, the latter Obligation to punishment. See
Bishop Sanderson De juramento. lect. 1. Sect. 12. But, because there are, it
seems, very learned men, who are otherwise minded in this matter, I think my
self obliged for the truths sake to reply to certain passages, which I have
lately read in some Authors, of whom two, I perceive, do allege the authority
of that most learned Bishop Andrews in his Sermon upon Jer. 23.6. wherein
having quoted the said words of the Apostle in 2 Cor. 5.21. he says,

Mark, how every thing is lively, and as full as can be imagined. Christ one,
not only that had done no sin, but that had not so much as known sin, has God
made (not a sinner, but) sin it self, as in another place (not accursed, but) a
curse it self; sin in respect of the guilt; a curse in respect of the
punishment.

Answ. Under Episcopal favor I humbly crave to reply by suggesting my
thoughts, as follows:

1. If this Author must be supposed to insinuate, that to know no sin does
imply more than to do no sin, I conceive it to be a mistake; for although To
know no sin may be yielded to be a more significant, or as is here said, a
lively expression, yet I do not think that it is significant of more than we
are given to understand by that other expression [He did no sin] these two
phrases (the one of St. Paul, the other of St. 1 Peter 2.22.) being of the self
same adequate importance. There be many phrases, that are more emphatically
significant of the truth, or sense intended by the speaker, that do not imply
more truth, or more of sense than other not so emphatical, but plain and
downright expressions. Besides, I leave it to the consideration of the Learned,
whether the expression [He knew no sin] be not an Hebraism, the Apostle therein
speaking after the manner of the Hebrews, in whose language the word [know] is
used for To do, and this both as applied to good and evil (as were easy to
exemplify) to know good and evil being no more in true sense and construction,
than to do them. 2. As it is remarkable indeed, that the Apostle does not say,
that God made Christ a Sinner, so withal it is remarkable, that he does not
say, that God made him Sin it self, but Sin. 3. The phrase [to be made Sin it
self] seems to sound forth this sense, viz. To be made Sin in it self; which to
say is to imply, that Christ was made a Sinner with a witness, a great Sinner;
the word Scelus being used by Latinists sometimes for Scelestus. But I do not
charge this sense as intended by that Renowned Author, however it be owned by
Mr. William Air in his Sermon forecited, he quoting in the Margin of his Book
certain of the Ancients ( Austin and Oecumenius) as asserting the same. 4. If
the said Author must be supposed to insinuate, That the phrase [To be made
sin] is pregnant of more sense, or does imply more, than To be made a Sinner, I
can say no less, than there is no such implication, but an implication of the
contrary; For To be made sin is a less thing, yea it is quite another kind of
thing, than to be made a Sinner, for to be made a Sinner is to be made
Culpable, Reus culpae, or guilty of fault, whereas to be made Sin does imply no
more than respectively to suffering to be dealt with as a Sinner, or to be made
a Sin-offering, as was before said. 5. As guilt is distinguished, or a distinct
thing from punishment (these two things usually distinguished by Reatus Culpae,
and Poenae, and sometimes by Obligatio ad Culpam, and Obligatio ad Poenam, as
has been already said) Christ cannot be truly said to have been made Sin in
respect of the guilt, this being in effect to say, That he was made Culpable,
or a Sinner, and did thereupon deserve to suffer. 6. As [to know no Sin, and to
do no Sin] are phrases of the self same adequate sense and importance, so also
are the phrases [To be made a curse, and to be made accursed] the former,
though more emphatically significant of the Speakers intended sense, yet not
importing more sense as intended to be spoken. 7. Christ was no otherwise made
Sin, than he was made a curse; for in this very respect he is in one Scripture
said by the Apostle to have been made Sin for us, in that (as the Apostle
expresses and interprets himself in another Scripture) he was made A Curse for
us: for he was made a Sin-offering by undergoing the cursed death of the Cross,
or as Saint Peter expresses the matter, 1 Pet. 2.24. By bearing our sins in
his own body upon the Tree, as the Altar upon which he offered himself as a
Sacrifice without any spot of Sin to God.
CHAP. VI.
An Answer to several unjustifiable passages in Mr. Ferguson's Book, styled
[The Interest of Reason in Religion. -- ]. His false and manifold uncharitable
insinuations, answered. Wherein it is showed what manner of guilt or obligation
to punishment that was, which Christ took upon him. That Christ did not suffer,
however by occasion of that Law (Genesis 2.17.) as transgressed, yet not by virtue
thereof, as if that Law in, or by his sufferings had been executed. His mistake
of the true nature of Gospel justification, demonstrated. That it is not
against the essential Holiness of God (as Mr. Ferguson pretends) to justify a
sinner upon an obedience (Ex part sui, seu peccatoris) imperfect, with the
reason of his mistake.

HAving thus replied to the words of that Learned Bishop (under whose authority
the Adversaries do in this contest take shelter) I shall address my self to
make answer to Mr. Robert Ferguson, who being a zealous asserter of the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in the sense here disclaimed and oppugned
by me, does endeavor the propugnation and defense thereof in the following
passages of his forenamed Book [The Interest of Reason in Religion.]

Mr. Ferguson.
P. 409. I will not here discourse how inconsistent it seems with the wisdom and
sapience of God to introduce a perfect righteousness, such as that of his Son
was, merely to make way for his justifying us upon an imperfect righteousness,
such as that of our obedience is.

Answ. So far as appears to me by the reading of his Book, this Brother has
not the true notion [I do not say of justification in general, or of the word
as indefinitely taken, but] of Gospel-justification, or the justification of a
sinner, which neither is, nor can be otherwise than by a pardon, and this
pardon is not ex nuda Dei voluntate, merely of divine will and pleasure, but
merited by the satisfaction of Christ. Of this his mistake of the quiddity, or
true nature of Gospel-justification, I may have occasion to speak, in reply to
some other passages of his Book. In the mean time, I shall take it as a truth
not to be gainsaid, That Gospel-justification is forgiveness of sin, this kind
of justification being it alone that a sinner is a subject capable of, and
thereupon I do reply, That however the matter seems to this Author,
nevertheless in truth it is no way inconsistent with the wisdom of God, for the
sake of his Sons most perfect righteousness, to justify or pardon sinners upon
an imperfect righteousness, such as that of our obedience is, which if perfect,
would have no need of pardon.

P. 409. Nor shall I argue, Mr. F.
How that the righteousness of Christ's life, and sacrifice of his death, must
be imputed to us for justification, in a proportionableness to our sins, having
been imputed to him, in order to his expiatory suffering.

Answ. I have already granted, that in what sense or sort our sins may be said
to have been imputed to Christ, his righteousness may be said to be imputed to
us, but withal declared, that neither of them can be truly so said to be
imputed in the proper sense of the words (sin and righteousness) which is the
sense of this Author and his Abettors, but in an improper sense, (i. e.) in the
fruit and effects both of the one and the other.

P. 409, 410. Mr. F.
To attribute Christ's sufferings merely to Gods dominion without any respect to
sin, is the grossest of Socinianism, and repugnant to the Scripture in an
hundred places.

Answ. They, who deny the imputation of Christ's righteousness unto us, in the
sense by this Author asserted, are far from attributing Christ's sufferings
merely unto Gods dominion, without any respect to sin: For as they do
unanimously preach and print, that Christ's sufferings had a respect to our
sins, so they do attribute his sufferings not merely to Gods dominion, without
any respect to sin, but to that voluntary compact, which was betwixt the Father
and the Son, that Jesus Christ should suffer for sin and sinners, and that
thereby he merited our pardon.

2. Consequently I cannot forbear to say, That it does very ill become this
Author to insinuate so foul a slander against his Brethren, as guilty of
Socinianism, gross Socinianism, the grossest Socinianism in this matter.

Mr. F. See amongst other Scriptures, Esa. 53.5, 6. 1 Pet. 2.24. Gal. 3.13. and
Dr. Stillingfleet's vindication of them from the exceptions of Crellius.
P. 410. To say, That our sins were imputed to Christ in the effects of them,
but not in the guilt, is to contradict all principles of reason. For guilt and
obnoxiousness to punishment being equipollent phrases, he cannot be supposed to
have been made liable to the last upon the account of our sins, without having
been brought under the first. Nor is it imaginable, how without submitting to
the guilt of our sins he could have been punished, should it be granted that
without respect to them he might have suffered: Though without any habitude to
sin his sufferings might have been dolorous, yet they could never have been
penal.

Answ. 1. To say, That our sins were imputed to Christ in the effects of them,
(i. e.) in the deserved punishment thereof, but withal to deny, that our guilt
of fault was imputed to Christ, is not to contradict all principles, nor any
one principle of reason.

2. Nor does it at all contradict any of those Scriptures alleged by this
Author in the Margin of his Book, which Scriptures do only prove an imputation
of our sins to Christ, in the sense I own and acknowledge, (i. e.) in Christ his
undergoing suffering for them, but not in his taking our guilt upon him. And as
Dr. Stillingfleet does well maintain the imputation of our sins to Christ in
the former respect, (i. e.) the effects of them, so I am persuaded, that that
most learned Doctor is a man of more reason and better principled, than to
maintain the imputation of our guilt to Christ, as this Author would have it.

3. I grant, That guilt and obnoxiousness to punishment are equipollent
phrases; but I deny, that it will follow from thence, that because Christ took
upon him to suffer the punishment, which we for our sins deserved, he did
therefore take upon him our guilt. He did indeed take upon him a certain guilt,
or obligation to suffering; (i. e.) a guilt, or obligation peculiar to himself,
but not the same guilt that lay upon us, not our guilt, not the same numerical
guilt, (for Philosophy tells us, that an accident being removed from the
subject perishes) nor the same specifical guilt, (i. e.) of the same sort, but
a guilt specifically different, not having the same, but a far different
Substratum, ground, foundation, or efficient, from ours; ours being Violatae
Legis, grounded or founded upon our transgression of Gods Law, but his
Sponsionis propriae, an obligation of contract or consent, founded upon the
agreement betwixt him and his Father in that behalf. Obligation to punishment
we style guilt, and our guilt was guilt of fault, and of suffering for our
fault, from or by virtue of Gods Law threatening the same; but Christ's guilt was
only guilt of suffering for our fault, arising from, or by virtue of his
voluntary undertaking and compliance with the will of his Father. Briefly, That
Law of God, which did threaten man with suffering for sin, did not oblige
Christ to suffer for it, or us, nor did he die by virtue of that Law threatening
man with death, upon supposition of his sin, Genesis 2.17. nor was that Law
fulfilled, or executed in his death, but by occasion of that sin-threatning Law
transgressed by man, he did voluntarily oblige himself in the person of a
Mediator to suffer, and to suffer death for us, or for our sins, (i. e.) the
expiation of them.

4. Christ may well be supposed to be liable to suffering upon the account of
our sins, by virtue of the said contract betwixt him and his Father, without
having been brought under our personal specifical guilt. And it is easily
imaginable, that without submitting to our personal guilt, he might suffer such
suffering as was equivalent to that punishment, which we by our sins had
deserved. This is as easily imaginable, as to imagine, how St. Paul should take
upon himself to satisfy for the damage, which was done to Philemon, by the
injury of his unfaithful servant Onesimus, and was willing to have the same
imputed to him, (as the word signifies, Philem. 18.) and yet not submit unto or
take upon him Onesimus his personal guilt of defrauding, or wrong-doing. And
(to speak the very truth) in such a sense as St. Paul was willing to take upon
himself the wrong done to Philemon by Onesimus, and to have it reckoned to him,
saying, (...), impute it unto me, (meaning thereby not Onesimus his personal
guilt, Reatum culpae, or his sin it self, but the effects of it, in the damage
thereby sustained by his Master.) In the like sense (I say) were our sins
reckoned or imputed to Christ, he taking upon him an obligation by his doings
and sufferings, to satisfy for the damage or wrong done to God, (as I may so
say) I mean, to vindicate the Honor and Authority of the Law and Lawgiver, to
demonstrate the justice of God, his hatred of sin. -- And indeed herein, viz.
in an aptitude for the attainment of these and the like ends of God our Maker,
Ruler, Lawgiver, Benefactor, better than the damnation of all mankind could
have done, consists the meritoriousness and satisfactoriness of Christ's
doings and sufferings; and this is the reason of our styling them satisfactory
or meritorious.

5. Though we deny, that Christ took upon him our guilt of sin, yet it will not
follow from thence, that we deny his sufferings to have had any habitude, or
respect at all to sin, as is here insinuated by this Author; for had it not
been for our sin, he had never suffered.

6. Forasmuch as Christ's sufferings had not the self same individual or kind of
habitude to sin, as our sufferings, in case we had suffered according to our
desert, would have had, (i. e.) forasmuch as Christ's sufferings were not
merited, or inflicted on him, by or upon account of any sin of his own,
therefore are his sufferings to be accounted rather dolorous than penal, I
mean, punishments in a strict, and the most proper acceptance of the word;
punishment being properly and strictly Malum triste, inflicted upon a guilty
person propter malum turpe. Proper punishment I conceive to be the effect of
proper guilt, which is Reatus Criminis [Guilt of fault] not merely Contracius
[of Contract] as Christ's was.

P. 410. Mr. F.
It Is a thing utterly unintelligible, how Christ could be made sin for us, and
have our punishment transferred to him, without a previous imputation of sin,
and the derivation of its guilt upon him.

Answ. What this Author has asserted to be unsupposable, unimaginable, and
here asserts to be utterly unintelligible, I have already, as I am persuaded,
made plain, obvious and easy to be understood by every intelligent, impartial,
unprepossessed Reader, and I shall show my self ready to do it further, as this
Author shall minister occasion.

P. 410. Mr. F.
Now by proportion, If our sins were imputed to Christ otherwise than merely in
the effects of them, so must likewise the righteousness of his life and
sacrifice of his death be otherwise imputed to us, than merely in the benefits
of them.

Answ. Having made it apparent in my foregoing Answers to this Authors
arguings, that our sins in the propriety of the word were not imputed to
Christ, or otherwise imputed to him, than in the effects of them, I may well
and warrantably infer by proportion, that the righteousness of Christ's life and
sacrifice of his death (his doings and sufferings formally and properly taken)
are not imputed unto us, or otherwise imputed than merely in the benefits of
them.

P. 411. Neither will I press, Mr. F.
how that secluding not only the righteousness of Christ's life, but the
satisfaction of his death, as the matter, and the imputation of it, as the
formal cause of justification, it seems repugnant to the immutability and
essential holiness of God to justify us upon an imperfect obedience, the Law
which requires a perfect obedience remaining still in force, and denouncing
wrath, in case of every failure.

Answ. By these words it appears again, that this Author does mistake the true
notion and right conception of Gospel-justification, he supposing, that the
righteousness of Christ's life and satisfaction of his death is the matter, and
that the imputation of it is the formal cause thereof; whereas the
unquestionable truth (to my simple understanding) is, that if we speak of
matter in a proper sense, as here, viz. for a material cause, in way of
contradistinction to a formal cause, neither the righteousness of Christ's life,
nor satisfaction of his death, can fitly be said to be the matter, or material
cause of a sinners justification; the satisfactoriness both of his life and
death (of his doings and sufferings) being undoubtedly the external impulsive,
or morally efficient cause thereof; and how one and the same thing should put
on the habitude of two causes so different in kind, as is the material and
efficient (that being internal, and pars constitutiva rei, and this wholly
external) I do not understand, such a conception being altogether contrary to
the Logic, which hitherto I have been acquainted with.

2. Whereas this Author and others make the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, to be the formal cause of justification, I do clearly conceive
them mistaken, and that the formalis ratio, or formal cause of
Gospel-justification, is forgiveness of sin, this being Res ipsa, the very
thing it self, wherein the justification of a sinner does consist.

3. Had this Author rightly apprehended or minded, that a sinners justification
is, or does consist in, the pardon of his sin, he would scarce have questioned
it as a thing in the least wise repugnant to the immutability and essential
holiness of God, to justify us upon an imperfect obedience: For what though it
may be granted, that the Law, which requires a perfect obedience, and
denounces wrath in case of every failure, does remain still in force (i. e.)
so far forth as to command the one, and to threaten the other, yet I presume he
will not, I am sure he ought not to say, That that original Law (the Law of
works, I presume, he means) does still stand in its primitive force, as a
Covenant of works, both promising life to sinners upon perfect obedience, or
conditionally upon their not being sinners, and threatening death unavoidably
upon every failure. Does this Author forget, That there is a Law of Grace, of
oblivion, a Lex remedians, a Law of indemnity enacted by God through the blood
of Christ, whereby the force of that Law so threatening, may as to the execution
of the threatening, be vacated by a gracious pardon, and certainly so shall be,
upon a sinners sincere however imperfect obedience to the Gospel of Christ?

4. This Author seems to think, that a sinner is justified in respect of the
precept, or preceptive part of the Law, (i. e.) as one who had in and by Christ
performed all manner of duty, whereas a sinner is justified only in respect of
the sanction of the Law, (i. e.) as one, who notwithstanding his failings, has
right to impunity, and to a discharge for Christ's sake by a pardon.

CHAP. VII.
That the Scripture does no where assert a surrogation of Christ in our room,
in such a strict Law-sence, as that we may be said in and by him to have done
and suffered what he did and suffered, and in or by him to have redeemed our
selves. And that Christ did not in such a Law-sence, represent us as Proctors
and Atturneys do their Clients, Ambassadors their Princes, or Guardians their
Pupils, acting accordingly in our names, but officiating as a Mediator betwixt
God and Man. The evil Consequences charged by Mr. F. upon the contrary
Doctrine, are denied. His thwacking Contradiction imputed to others, avoided by
them, and retorted upon himself.

P. 411. NEither shall I urge, how there can have been no surrogation of Christ
in our room; Mr. F.
nor can we properly be said to be redeemed by him as our substitute, if all
redounding to us by his death, be only the procurement of the Gospel Covenant,
in which God upon such conditions as he there requires, undertakes to pardon
our iniquities and sins. A surrogation in our room and stead to acts and
sufferings, which are not in a Law-sence accounted ours, I am so far from
understanding, that without admitting injustice in the Rector, who allows the
substitution, it seems to me a thwacking contradiction; especially if we
consider, that Christ was our substitute to make satisfaction to the demands of
the Law and not of the Gospel; and that by his obedience and death he has only
freed us from what we were obnoxious to upon failure of perfect obedience, but
not at all from what we were liable to in case of unbelief, and want of sincere
obedience.

Answ. 1. The Scripture no where asserts such a surrogation of Christ in our
room, as that we can properly be said to be redeemed by him as our substitute:
For had he been in a strict proper sense our substitute, there is cause to
assert, That we have in and by him redeemed our selves, yea that we rather have
redeemed our selves than he us, or That we are our own Redeemers rather than
Christ: For what is done by a proper substitute, is not in a Law-sence so much
his act who does it, as ours, whom he as our surrogate and substitute does
personate or represent, let the representation be Quocunque modo, or quacunque
ratione, (i. e.) whether he represent us by our own will, consent, or
constitution, (as Proctors and Atturneys do their Clients, that pay and receive
moneys, and transact matters in their names, and Ambassadors, who are employed
by Princes to deal with foreign States and Nations) or by allowance and
authority of Law, (as what Tutors and Guardians do in the name of their Pupils)
in these cases whatsoever is done by such substitutes in the person of another,
is not so properly and in Law-construction his act who does it, as theirs whose
substitute he is, and whose person he does represent.

2. Forasmuch as this Author does assert such a surrogation of Christ in our
room, as that we can properly be said to be redeemed by him as our substitute,
if he shall notwithstanding that assertion deny, That we have in and by Christ
redeemed our selves, or are in and by him our own Redeemers, it behooves him to
consider, how he can avoid the just imputation of that thwacking contradiction,
which upon his swopping mistake he insinuates his adversaries in this point to
be guilty of. And it concerns him also to consider, how his Hypothesis can be
maintained, without admitting that injustice (which he mentions) in the Rector,
who notwithanding his allowance of the said substitution, does deny instantly
to confer upon us the benefits of Christ's redemption and satisfaction, these
being no other than what we our selves have in and by Christ made a full
satisfaction for, and which upon that account we may fitly and properly be said
to have purchased for our selves.

3. Whatsoever bad consequences there be of Christ's being our surrogate and
substitute, in such a strict Law-sence as he does fancy to himself, there is no
such repugnancy or contradiction, as here he speaks of, that does follow from
what we do assert in this matter, viz. That Christ our Passover was sacrificed
for us, that he died for our sins as a ransom, sacrifice, atonement, or
propitiation; and forasmuch as he suffered for our sakes, and in our stead, (i.
e.) such suffering as was equivalent to what we deserved, and such as was fit
to attain the ends designed by our Creator and Redeemer, better than the
damnation of all mankind could have done, we do not deny, but that our sins may
be said to be imputed to Christ, and his sufferings to us, but neither of them
properly and in their essential nature, not our sin it self to him, or his
sufferings themselves to us, but both of them in their effects, our sin to him
in its penal, and his sufferings to us in its saving effects. And this as we
do, so we may very well and warrantably maintain, notwithstanding it be yielded
(as the truth is) That Christ was substituted or given of God, to make
satisfaction to the demands of the Law and not of the Gospel, in the sense here
specified by this Author.

CHAP. VIII.
Mr. Ferguson's mistake in thinking, that a sinner by his justification is
freed from the guilt of punishment and fault too. That Christ's righteousness is
not more, or otherwise imputed to us for, in, toward, or in order to our
justification, than the remission of our sin. The nature of justification
[forensick] opened, both of justification indefinitely considered, as also of
Gospel-justification in special. The truth of the matter laid down in several
Propositions.

HItherto I have related the arguings of this Author word for word, as I find
them continued together from p. 409. to p. 412. and accordingly the Reader may,
if he please, take view of them all as contiguous. But forasmuch as I judged it
most conducive to the conviction of gainsayers, and to the edification of all,
to shape my reply thereunto, (...), period by period, I have therefore
accordingly recited them, and suited my reply to every distinct period in those
pages. As for his ensuing arguings in the same Chapter to the close thereof, I
cannot in such sort recite them verbatim, without the transcribing of seven or
eight whole pages, from p. 413. to p. 421. nor will it be at all necessary so
to do, it being fully satisfactory to demonstrate, that his arguings do proceed
upon his utter mistake of the true nature of Gospel-justification, or that
peculiar kind of justification, whereof a sinner is the subject, or subjective
matter; and for the manifestation thereof be it considered, That he premiseth
these two things, p. 413, 414. 1. That to justify is in its proper acceptance
here a forensick term, signifying to acquit and absolve one that is accused. 2.
That justification not only supposes us to be indicted, but withal imports an
absolution from the charge of that Law, of the breach whereof we are accused,
viz.
The Law of perfect obedience, which is not abrogated by the Law of faith, but
does remain in force, and we being all guilty of the violation of its terms,
there lies accordingly a charge against us, from which by justification we are,
as he says, to be acquitted.

Now yielding to the former of the two premises, which he proves by several
Scriptures apt to the purpose, I reply to the latter, That there being a
twofold guilt, which the Law of God, being violated, may be supposed to accuse
us of, or charge us with (the ignorance or non-observance of which distinction,
is the cause of great confusion and misunderstanding in the doctrine of
justification) viz. guilt of fault, and guilt of punishment, (i. e.) actual
obligation to punishment, it is the great mistake of this Author (as of many
other of our Brethren) to think, that by justification we are freed or
acquitted from both the said kinds of guilt, or (as some do imagine) that by
pardon of sin we are freed from the latter kind of guilt, and by justification
with the perfect righteousness of Christ imputed to us, from the former.
Whereas the truth is, That the righteousness of Christ is no more, nor
otherwise imputed to or for the justification of a sinner, than it is to or for
the non-imputation, (i. e.) the pardon of his sins, and that there is no
possibility for a sinner by any plea whatsoever, to be justified or acquitted
from the former kind of guilt, I have already manifested, and shall farther
manifest according to occasion in the sequel of this Treatise. In the mean time
I will speak somewhat more at large for the due understanding of the nature of
justification, both as indefinitely considered, and specially, as the subject
thereof is a sinner. And in order thereunto I will lay down the following
Propositions.

1. Justification as indefinitely taken, Propos. 1.
or as abstracted from the consideration of the special quality of the person
justified, is the absolution of a person supposed to be accused from the guilt
that he is charged with, and according to the quality of the person accused
(guilty or not guilty) such is the nature of his justification. If innocent, he
is justified a reatu culpae, from guilt of fault, or from having deserved any
punishment, through any fault he is charged with. In this sense the word is
taken in many Scriptures, as in Deuteronomy. 25.1. Esa. 5.23. And so I conceive the
word is taken in 1 Cor. 4.4. Only it is to be understood, that St. Paul there
speaks of that kind of justification, which is commonly styled Justificatio
causae, not personae, his meaning being, not that he was conscious to himself
of no sin at all, but not of insincerity or unfaithfulness in his stewardship
or Ministerial office, in which respect he was able to justify himself,
although that was a thing comparatively not so material, forasmuch as he must
stand to the final sentence of God the Judge of all. 2. If the person accused
be guilty or culpable, Propos. 2.
his justification is of another kind or nature, the only justification which
such a person is capable of, being from another charge, viz. from the guilt of
punishment, (i. e.) from his being actually bound over to suffer, and from the
suffering it self of that punishment, which for his delinquency he deserved.
With the former kind of justification, no flesh living (all being sinful flesh)
can possibly be justified. God himself (with Reverence to the divine Majesty be
it spoken) has no kind of power to justify any wicked person, no moral power,
(for it is a sinful thing so to justify the wicked, Exodus 23.5. Prove. 17.15.)
nor physical power, (for the thing is simply impossible, and does imply a
contradiction.) But with the other kind of justification, any flesh living
(though never so sinful) may and shall through Gospel-faith and obedience, or
an obediential faith, be justified. 3. As justification and forgiveness of sin
are obviously and vulgarly taken, Propos. 3.
or according to common usage of speech, so they are contrary the one to the
other, as is light and darkness: For to justify a person in common use of the
word, is to free or absolve him from guilt of fault, to acquit him as innocent
from the fact or fault of which he is wrongfully accused. And this kind of
justification is by a twofold plea, either the denial of the fact, (hereby
David justified himself from the imputations of Saul, 1 Samuel 24.9, 10.) or by
denying the fault, pleading the fact to be no fault, or breach of any Law,
whether of God, (by which plea Daniel justified himself against the accusation
of his professed enemies, Dan. 6.22.) or man, or both, (by which plea St. Paul
justified himself against the accusations of his Contrymen the Jews, Act.
24.14.) maintaining his innocence not only in respect of the Law of God, but
also of Caesar, Act. 25.8. there being no Acts at that time made by any of the
Caesar's against Christian Religion, nor till the fifth year of the reign of
Claudius, as History does report. So that if a person be justified in this
vulgar sense of the word, he is not so much as in a natural capacity of being
pardoned, nor if pardoned, of being so justified as aforesaid; I never heard of
the substitution of one person in the room of another, to have been allowed in
criminal cases, whatever allowance there has been in pecuniary mulcts, or
matters.
pardon of sin and justification in the said vulgar sense, being of so contrary
a nature, that if the one be affirmed of any person, the other must needs be
denied. And in this sense of the word (justify) this Author speaks truth in
saying, p. 416. That as to justify and to pardon are not only wholly distinct
in their Natures and Idea's, but always separated in the cases of such as are
arraigned at humane tribunals, (unless it be where the substitution of one
person in the room of another is allowed) and even then, though they accompany
one another, yet they are both distinct acts, and we have distinct notions of
them: For neither can an accused innocent by being acquitted be said to be
pardoned, nor a condemned criminal by having the execution of his sentence
remitted, be said to be justified. 4. However in common usage, justification
and remission of sin are not only diverse, but also adverse things, nevertheless
if we speak of that peculiar kind of justification frequently mentioned in the
Scripture, whereof a sinner is the subject, and of that kind of pardon, that is
peculiar to sinners so often there mentioned, (a pardon conveyed by Law, and
purchased by the satisfaction of Christ, not that kind of pardon, which is ex
nuda voluntate) if, I say, we do speak of this kind of justification and
pardon, then I do affirm it as an undoubted truth, That justification and
pardon of sin are words equivalent, importing one and the self same thing,
without any real or substantial difference, for proof whereof, two or three
Texts of Scriptures may suffice (among several others) to be produced. Act.
13.38, 39. Be it known to you, that through this man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are justified from all things,
from which you could not be justified by the Law of Moses, (i. e.) for which
the Law of Moses admitted no expiatory sacrifice in order to pardon. Romans 3.24,
25. Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past,
through the forbearance of God, to declare I say at this time his
righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of him who is of the
faith of Jesus, (i. e.) of the Christian faith. See also Romans 4. where that
which he calls blessedness, v. 9. and Gods justifying the ungodly, v. 5. he
styleth Gods forgiving their iniquities, and covering their sins. Thence that
of Grotius de satisfactione, p. 38. Justificatio passim in sacris literis,
maxim in Epistolis Paulinis, absolutionem significat, quae praesupposito
peccato consistit in peccatorum remissione, ipso Paulo semet clare explicante,
praesertim Romans 4. I might hereto add the testimony of other Authors famous in
their generation, were it needful.
By the way take notice, That I have said nothing concerning his affirming,
that the introduction of the Law of faith has not abrogated the Law of perfect
obedience, but this as well as that does remain in force; nor do I think it
necessary so to have done: For although some choose to say, that that Law of
our Creation, or of God our Creator, is abrogated or repealed, (there being no
Law since the new modelling of the government of mankind, but the Law of
Redemption, or of God our Redeemer, the moral part of the original Law being
taken into it as the matter thereof) and others choose to assert only a
dispensation or relaxation of that Law, nevertheless I do humbly conceive, that
(all things considered, yet not so needful here to be mentioned, that are said
on both sides) there is no real difference between them as to substance of
truth, but only in modes and manner of speaking, and for that cause I can give
liberty to any one to speak the truth with due caution, in what words he
pleases. Only I must say, That I dare not take liberty to my self to say, That
the Law of works does now remain in force as well as the Law of faith, without
a just explication, how far it does and does not remain now in force. I well
remember, that two late worthy Authors do very differently express themselves,
touching the immediate effect of the introduction of the Law of faith. The most
learned Mr. George Lawson chooses to say, That the original Law (of works) is
by the Law of faith or indemnity abrogated and repealed; whereas Mr. Joseph
Truman will not allow that saying, instead thereof asserting it to be only
relaxed, or dispensed with, and he gives reasons for what he says. But because
his reasons are not (I think) so convincing, as to be incapable of a
satisfactory reply, and forasmuch as I do apprehend the difference betwixt them
(all things considered) to be rather verbal, than real, I can therefore leave
every man to his own choice, in wording the matter as he pleases. Only I shall
say, That although I do not impute any error of judgment to Mr. F. in saying,
[That the introduction of the Law of faith, has not abrogated the Law of
perfect obedience, but this as well as that remains in force] nevertheless
forasmuch as such sayings do need explication, I wish for the truths sake, that
such sayings were not roundly and simply uttered, or without due caution and
explication.

The premises considered, it is easy what judgment to make of several
passages in this Author, which I will now recite, and briefly animadvert upon.

CHAP. IX.
That those who assert, That the Law of works is abrogated, do in substance of
truth accord with those, who choose rather to express themselves, saying, It is
relaxed or dispensed with. God in justifying a sinner does not pronounce him
just and righteous, that is, no sinner. A sinner not otherwise made just and
righteous by his being justified, than by his being pardoned through Christ.
That a sinner cannot possibly be justified from the accusation of the Law, in
its charging him to be a sinner.

P. 415. Mr. F.
AND indeed the Socinians express themselves in this more consonantly to their
principles, than some others do: For having stated the whole of justification
in the remission of sin, upon performance of the conditions of the Gospel, in
pursuance of this they accordingly plead for the utter abrogation of the Law.

Answ. 1. What the Socinians do hold concerning the abrogation, or
non-abrogation of the sanction of the Law, I concern not my self to know. This
only will I say, That by how much the Socinians are more obliged to this
Author, for his charity toward them in this matter, by so much are those his
Brethren (the some intended by him) upon a contrary score bound to con him the
less thanks.

2. As I said before, so I say again, That those Brethren who do hold, that the
Law of works is abrogated, and those who say, it is not abrogated or repealed,
but dispensed with and relaxed, do both of them agree in this truth, viz. That
there is a Law still in force, that does command perfect obedience, under the
penalty of damnation, (the only difference between them, for ought I know,
being in this, viz. By what Law it is now required, or by what name that Law is
to be styled, whether the Law of works, or the Law of grace, wherein say the
former it is indeed required, under the penalty of damnation, but not
peremptorily and unavoidably ex part Legis, as it was in the Law of works, but
with a Proviso, as to the execution thereof.) Now forasmuch as our Brethren do
universally accord as aforesaid, I judge this Author to be unjust in
determining, that the Socinians do express themselves more consonantly to their
principles, than some others do.

The Author arguing for justification, its being a different thing from pardon
of sin, because otherwise we cannot in any propriety of speech, be said to be
justified from the accusation of the Law, he says in that case as follows.

P. 416. Pardoned indeed we may be, Mr. F.
but justified in a proper sense we cannot. For to suppose God to pronounce a
person just that is unjust, or to declare him righteous that is unrighteous, is
to make him pronounce a sentence that is unjust and false, and to act
repugnantly to his own holy and righteous nature.

Answ. As to the justification of a sinner from the accusation of the Law,
whether it is, or may be properly or no so called, I shall speak my thoughts by
and by, in my Answer to a Question that shall be put expressly for that purpose.
Mean while it may be sufficient to say, 1. That if by just and unjust this
Author does mean a sinner and no sinner, (as for ought I know he does, and
agreeably to his principle, touching the imputation of Christ's righteousness to
us, in its essential nature, he must mean) he does utterly mistake the nature
of justification in thinking, That a sinner through the imputation of Christ's
righteousness is of unjust made just, (i. e.) of a sinner made perfectly
righteous, and freed from guilt of fault, the impossibility whereof I have
already spoken of.

2. A sinner is no otherwise of unjust and unrighteous made just and righteous,
by being justified, than by being pardoned; and what kind of righteousness that
is, wherewith he is by his justification or pardon made just and righteous, I
will at large declare in Answer to a Question, which shall be the subject of
another Chapter.

3. Forasmuch as it has been already proved, that a sinner cannot possibly be
discharged from the Law, its accusation of him as a sinner, or its charging him
with the guilt of sin, this Author must needs err in thinking, that in any
manner of sense (proper or improper) a sinner can be said to be justified from
the same.

CHAP. X.
That the difference betwixt remission and Gospel-justification is not at all
in this, viz. That remission is the result of mercy, and the act of one
exercising favor, and justification the offspring of justice, as Mr. F. says.
The usage of words in common speech, sometimes in signification contrary to
that of Scripture, exemplified in the language of our Brethren of Scotland. Mr.
Ferguson's notorious mistake in asserting, That to justify is no where in the
Scripture-usurpation equipollent with to forgive.

THE difference betwixt remission of sin and Justification, he does specify in
the following words.

P. 417. Remission is the result of mercy, Mr. F.
and the act of one exercising favor; but Justification is the offspring of
justice, and imports one transacting with us in a juridical way, without the
infringment of Law or equity.

Answ. These words are true, if understood of Remission, ex nuda voluntate, and
of the Justification of a person innocent. But if understood of
Gospel-Justification [the Justification of a sinner] and of Gospel-pardon,
(which for kind is both a pardon derived to us by Law, and purchased for us by
a satisfactory price) they are notoriously untrue: For as we are freely
justified, so we are freely pardoned by divine grace, through the Redemption
that is in Christ Jesus, Romans 3.14. Ephesians. 1.7. Gods Justice and gracious favor
jointly concurring no less to the one, than to the other.

2. As it is best known to the Author himself, what kind of Remission and
Justification he intended in those words, so it is too too suspicious by his
words immediately following, that he did mean Gospel-Pardon and
Gospel-Justification, which words of his I shall recite, and leave it to the
Judgment of the impartial Reader, what his meaning was.

P: 417. Mr. F.
The word Justify, neither in its Etymology, nor application and usage,
according to the institution of men, and least of all in the
Scripture-usurpation, is equipollent to pardon, nor coincident with to Forgive.

Answ. 1. However it may be in some respects useful to know the Etymology and
usage of common speech, nevertheless this is not so much to be regarded in the
stating or determining of any Question pertaining to Divinity, the usage of
words in Scripture being as the Pole Star, to direct the course of our
conceptions (as I may so say) in such matters: And for that cause I cannot but
commend that passage of this Author, he saying, p. 155. That that which is
chiefly to be attended unto in the sencing of Scripture, is the use of words in
sacred Writers, God being many times pleased to restrain or enlarge the
signification of words, as in his wisdom he judges meet. And I do the rather
mind the Author of this his saying, because if we regard the Etymology of the
word Justify, it will (to speak the least) as much favor the Popish sencing
of the word, (th^se sencing it To Sanctify, or to make just, sensu physico,
(i. e.) by infusion of grace) as the Protestants interpretation thereof, who do
construe it sensu juridico, to make just by apology, defense, or plea.

2. As for the usage of words in common speech, this is sometimes contrary to
their common usage in Scripture, as I have already declared in the use of the
word Justify, this signifying in common usage, to absolve or acquit a person a
reatu culpae, (i. e.) as innocent and not guilty. And because this Author (as I
guess by his name) is a Scotchman, I shall therefore put him in mind, That
whereas to be justified and to be pardoned are all one in the usage of
Scripture, they are contrary in the usage of Scotland, to be justified there
being not be pardoned, but to be hanged, our Scotch Brethren using to say, That
a man is justified, when he is hanged or executed; as I learn from the worthy
Dr. Hammond, in his Notes upon some place of the Epistle to the Romans.

3. It is a most notorious mistake in this Author to assert, as here he does
expressly, That to Justify is least of all (meaning thereby in obvious
construction not at all) in the Scripture-usurpation, equipollent to pardon,
nor coincident with to forgive. The not observing of the contrary truth, which
has been already proved by several Scriptures, I do judge to be the occasion of
other errors in this matter, whereupon I may sadly take up the old saying, Hinc
illae lachrymae. The Authors next ensuing words to be animadverted upon, are as
follows.

CHAP. XI.
Mr. Ferguson's mistake in saying, That we are made Righteous With the
Righteousness of Christ, as also Dr. Owen's in his Book styled (Communion with
the Trinity) refuted, and that in Romans 5.18. alleged by him, answered, wherein
is declared, That it is one thing to be justified By, and another thing to be
justified With the Righteousness of Christ. The Doctor's misinterpretation of
Phil. 3.9. and Ephesians. 2.8. That the asserting of the whole of Justification, to
consist in remission of sin, has no such evil consequences, as Mr. F. charge
it with.

P. 413, 416, 419. Mr. F.
SO that upon the whole, If we be not made Righteous with the perfect
Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, but that God only for the sake of Christ
will dispense with the rigor of the Law, and -- I dare affirm, that
Justification as it is opposed to the accusation of the Law, its charging us
with guilt, and its passing sentence of condemnation against us thereupon, does
not admit a proper sense in the whole Scripture, but must every where be
construed Metaphorically; and that the import of it is, not that we are
properly and in a Law-sence justified, but that such benefits accrue to us by
Remission of sin, as if we were so. According to the sentiments of our Author,
we are only pardoned, but by reason of some allusion betwixt the advantages
redounding to us by forgiveness, and the privileges, immunities and benefits,
which ensue upon a proper Justification, we are therefore Metaphorically said
to be justified. It were to bid defiance to the Scripture in an hundred places,
to say that we are not at all justified, and yet in effect their principles
imply no less: For by stating the whole of our assoilment, from the accusation
of the Law in remission of sin, they indeed say, that we are not justified,
only we are improperly said to be so. --

Answ. 1. It is the error of this Author, as of many others to say, that we are
made Righteous With the perfect Righteousness of Christ imputed to us. And
among others, I perceive Dr. Owen does err in this particular, which because he
pretends to prove by certain Scriptures in his late Vindication, p. 102, 103. I
will for the truths sake reply thereunto. 1. He alleges, Romans 5.18. By his
obedience we are made Righteous, made so truly (says he) and accepted. To which
I answer, 1. That Scripture proves not the Doctor's purpose, nor is pertinent
thereunto; for the Apostle does not say as the Doctor would have him, With
whose obedience, but By whose obedience we are made Righteous; now we may be
truly said to be made Righteous By it, though we neither are, nor can be truly
said to be made Righteous With it: For,

2. These two Monosyllables ( By and With) are very much different in
signification, the former particle [By] implying the nature, energy, or
interest of an efficient, and as here applied, morally efficient, or
meritorious cause, the latter particle [With] pregnantly importing the nature,
or interest of a formal cause. Now forasmuch as the Doctor is a man of such
reading and learning, as that he cannot be ignorant of the true state of the
Question, about the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness unto us, (it being not
at all touching the meritorious cause of our Justification, whether we are
justified By Christ's Righteousness, but about the formal cause, whether we are
justified With Christ's Righteousness imputed, as some say, or With the
Imputation thereof, as say some others, (i. e.) with the very thing if self
imputed to us, or with the imputation thereof in its formal or essential
nature.) I say, Forasmuch as this Doctor cannot but know these things, it did
ill become his learning and ingenuity, to hood-wink the eyes of the vulgar
Reader, from seeing the true state of the Question, and consequently from
perceiving, how nothing at all to the purpose in hand this Scripture is, that
is alleged by him.

3. There is not the least whisper of the obedience of Christ as Imputed to us,
or of the Imputation of Christ's obedience to us, in that of Romans 5.18. For
though the Apostle says, By his obedience, yet he does not say, By his
obedience Imputed to us, or By the Imputation of his obedience we are made
Righteous. No, as to the words (Imputed, and Imputation) there is Altum
silentium, not a word or syllable.

2. The Doctor adjoyns thereunto, Phil. 3.9. saying, That this is that, which
the Apostle desires to be found in, in opposition to his own righteousness. To
which I answer, That the righteousness wherein St. Paul did there desire to be
found, was not the obedience or righteousness of Christ, in opposition to his
own evangelical obedience, (as the Doctor here says, and too too many with him)
but his own evangelical obedience, or the sincere practice of Christian
Religion, together with the blessed consequents and benefits thereof, or
promised through Christ thereunto, in opposition to a Judaical righteousness
(styled his own, he being a perfect Jew by descent, an Hebrew of the Hebrews)
with all its carnal privileges, of which that Nation did so much boast, which
notwithstanding being put in competition with those of Christianity, were in
his esteem no better than dung, than that we call Garbage, or Dogs-meat, as is
the importance of the word there used by him, whereby to express his contempt
in the highest degree. That this is the true meaning of the Apostle, I may have
occasion farther to demonstrate. In the mean while I shall take into
consideration, what the Doctor affirms concerning our own obedience or
righteousness, and Christ's, he saying in these words, This distinction the
Apostle does evidently deliver and confirm, so as nothing can be more clearly
revealed, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10.

To this be it answered; Of a truth I perceive, how like to the black or yellow
Jaundise that distemper of the intellect is, which we call Prejudice or
Prepossession, in that it makes us as confident as confidence it self, that we
do see, and see evidently, and as clearly as can be, such entities, and
adjuncts of entities, as have no visible existence to the eye or understanding
of any impartial man: For 1. there is ne^ vola, nec vestigium, no sign or
footstep of the distinction betwixt Christ's obedience and ours, in that
Scripture, for ought appears to me.

2. All I see in these words is, A distinction betwixt the Grace of God,
together with the obedience or works of faith, or faith wrought in us by free
grace, and certain other works, in opposition unto, and contradistinction from
the said Grace and Faith, (i. e.) works wrought by their own natural strength,
without the infusion of special graces, antecedent to the Ephesians their
embracing the faith of Christ, and consequently such works, as do make for
boasting.

2. Hereupon I cannot but wonder, in what term or terms of the said Scripture,
the most sharp-sighted or Eagle-ey'd Divine, can perceive the obedience of
Christ to be so evidently there delivered, as that nothing can be more clearly
revealed. Surely the Doctor will not say, That by Grace or by Faith visibly
there mentioned, is meant the obedience of Christ; for Grace and Faith and
Christ's obedience, are without all controversy several things, whether
physically, metaphysically, or theologically considered; so that one member of
the Doctor's distinction is evidently wanting in that Scripture; although I
readily grant, that forasmuch as every act does presuppose an object, faith
must be understood there not as excluding, but as including the person and
obedience of Christ, I will not say (though some peradventure will) as its
adequate, but as its partial, however prime, object.

3. Were the obedience of Christ there expressly mentioned, nevertheless it is
to be denied, That this obedience of Christ is there opposed to our obedience,
(i. e.) to our evangelical obedience, or to the faithful works thereof (as the
Docto^ would have it) but to another kind of works, which do make for boasting,
as was aforesaid. And this I may perhaps endeavor to make apparent in another
Treatise, and there manifest, how the Doctor does mistake the true sense of the
word (saved) in that Scripture, which although he interprets for justified,
(and so indeed in some Scriptures it is to be interpreted, and it is an
important truth, that Gospel-Justification is the self-same thing with
salvation from the guilt of sin) nevertheless by [saved] in that place is meant
sanctified, quickened, regenerated, saved, from the power of sin. This right
interpretation of the word [saved] does utterly make void what the Doctor says
in the following lines, whereby to confirm the distinction betwixt Christ's
obedience and our evangelical obedience, to be there as evidently delivered, so
as that nothing can be more clearly revealed.

I shall now return to the forecited words of Mr. Ferguson, to which I answer,
1. I do deny, That to assert that the precise nature of Gospel-Justification
does consist in Remission of sin, does bid defiance to the Scripture in an
hundred places, or that that Principle does imply, That we are not at all
justified. And if I should say, in compliance with the language here of this
Author, I do defy Mr. Ferguson, to prove what he has charged, as the effect
of the said Principle, I think, I should be blameless: But I shall choose to
forbear that word, it being my desire and design to reply with words of alike
meekness as wisdom, whatever provocation there be to the contrary.

2. I deny, That to state the whole of our assoilment, from the accusation of
the Law in Remission, is indeed to say, That we are not justified.

3. I deny, That to say, That a sinner is in an improper sense said to be
justified, is indeed to say, That we are not justified. Deus bone! To say, That
God is said in an improper proper sense to render to a man his work, (work
being put for wages, or the reward of his work) is this indeed to say, That God
will not render to a man his work, or that his work shall not be rewarded of
God?

4. Because it is such an abhorring to this Author to conceive, or speak of a
sinner his being in an improper sense said to be justified, I will therefore
(the matter being now ripe for such a purpose) put it to the Question, as
follows in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XII.
Q. Is a sinner said in a proper or improper sense to be justified? In answer
hereunto it is declared, 1. That the Question in it self is immaterial. 2.
Nevertheless for the satisfaction of Mr. F. the Question is answered, and
therein it is proved, That the Justification of a sinner is of, or in its kind a
proper Justification, and in what respects so said to be, specified. An
Objection answered.

Q. IS a sinner said in a proper or an improper sense to be justified? Answ. 1.
I think this Question to be too too near of affinity with those, which St. Paul
in one place calls unprofitable and vain, Tit. 3.9. and the native product
whereof (as he says in another, 1 Timothy 6.4.) are envy, strife, railings, evil
surmisings; and for that cause I am convinced, that it ought not much to be
disputed; it being no whit material, whether a sinner be said in a proper or
improper sense to be justified; for (to use the Apostles expression, Phil.
1.18.) notwithstanding every way, whether properly or improperly a sinner is
justified truly; I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice, yea and cannot
otherwise than rejoice, and rejoice to eternity. What need there in effect to
be more said to the comfort of a sinner, than what our Savior said to the
Leper, Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, Mat. 9.2. That Leper
was as happy in his having his sins forgiven him, as was the penitent Publican
in departing from the Temple to his house justified, Luke 18.14.

2. Nevertheless forasmuch as an improper kind of Justification does, I
perceive, so stick in the stomach of this Brother, as that he cannot digest it,
I shall for this once endeavor to prove, That a pardoned sinner may in a
proper sense be said to be justified, or That a sinner justified with a pardon,
is properly said to be justified. I am not ignorant, that some very learned men
do distinguish of Justification in a Law-sence, into that which is properly and
that which is improperly so denominated, assigning the Justification of an
innocent person to the former sense of the word, and of a sinner to the latter.
But for my own part I am of opinion, That both the innocent and the sinner may
be truly said to be justified, sensu forensi proprie dicto, in a proper
Law-sence: For what though the Justification of these two sort of subjects, be
of a different kind, yet both of them for their kind may be proper, they being
considered respectively to their different habitudes, which I will endeavor to
demonstrate, as follows.

The Charge from which an innocent person is justified, is guilt of fault, the
Charge from which a sinner is justified, is guilt of, or obligation to
punishment. Now why may not he, that is justified from this latter charge, be
as properly in his kind said to be justified, as the former in his kind? I know
nothing should hinder, except it be said and proved, that the Law hinders; but
that the Law does not hinder, I prove, Because as the case stands with sinners
to God-wards, there is a standing-Law for the Justification of the one, as well
as of the other; there being a Gospel-Law for the Justification of sinners,
which like the Law of the Medes and Persians is not to alter, but to stand even
to the worlds end. And forasmuch as a sinners Justification is by the Law of
faith or the Gospel, and in that respect is a legal kind of Justification, I do
therefore judge, That this Author is clearly mistaken in his affirming, that a
sinner pardoned, cannot be properly and in a Law-sence said to be justified;
for is not he, who is justified by, from, and through Law (the standing-Law of
faith) justified in a Law-sence?

2. Forasmuch as there is a twofold Justice, (1. Of obedience, when all is
done and left undone, which the Law did either command or forbid, and
consequently no desert of penalty incurred. 2. Of satisfaction, when, the breach
of the Law supposed, there is due satisfaction made to the Law, in
consideration of that breach) why may not he, who can plead the Justice of
satisfaction, be properly said to be justified, as he in his kind, who has
performed the Justice of obedience, the former being Rectus in Curia, as well
as the latter? Where (by the way) if I have offended this Brother, by minding
him of that [to us Englishmen most uncouth] saying of his Countrymen, That a
man when he is hanged, is justified, or justified by being hanged, I will make
him satisfaction, by justifying the saying to be rational, and this upon the
account of the foresaid distinction of a twofold Justice (of obedience and of
satisfaction) upon which latter account, the Malefactor executed may be reputed
just, (i. e.) with that kind of Justice called the Justice of satisfaction,
forasmuch as he, who has suffered the penalty of the Law, has thereby
satisfied the Law. To this sense is agreeable the use of the word (Justify) in
the form of Commission issued from our King to his Judges, (as I have somewhere
read) Praecipimus tibi, quod tu justicies, We command thee, that thou shall
justify (i. e.) see, that the Law be every way satisfied. But because I
foresee an Objection, I will therefore answer it. Obj. The alone satisfaction,
which a sinner can plead for his pardon, is not by his own either doings or
sufferings, but only by Christ's, and therefore a pardoned sinner is not
properly justified, or pardon of sin cannot in a proper sense be styled
Justification? Answ. If for this reason a sinners pardon cannot in a proper
sense be styled Justification, then his pardon cannot in a proper sense be
called pardon: For according to the pretense or principle of this Author,
pardon of sin in a proper sense is ex nuda voluntate, upon mere good will and
pleasure, and without satisfaction. And if so, yet I hope, that he will not
deny Gospel-pardon of sin, because it is not pardon in a proper sense. Nor can
I conceive any just reason, why any man should be in less love and liking with
Gospel-Justification, because it is not properly such, than with Gospel-pardon
upon the same account. Whereupon I shall say, Let this Author reject, and be
displeased with both, or else with neither of them, upon the poor pretense of
the impropriety of the word or words; which if he be with either of them upon
any such score, all that I will say is, that I cannot help it. Only forasmuch
as various ways of expressing the same thing, do much conduce to the better
instruction, and more effectual conviction of an adversary, I will express my
mind in another manner of distinguishing, as follows.

As there are two integral parts of Gods Law, viz. The Precept and the
Sanction, (the one constituting Debitum Officii, the other Debitum Supplicii)
so there is Sensu forensi, a twofold Justification; 1. With respect to the
precept of the Law, when a person accused of fault can say to his Accusers, as
our Savior did, Which of you convinces me of sin? 2. With respect to the
penalty of the Law, when a person guilty can plead satisfaction made for his
trespass or trespasses against it, and that the Law therefore is disabled from
condemning him.
Now because I do conceive, (as will be said more fitly in another Chapter)
that satisfaction is a proper righteousness of its kind, respectively to the
sanction of the Law, even as innocence is a proper righteousness of its kind,
with respect to the precepts thereof, I do not therefore perceive, but that a
sinner may as well and properly be said to be justified, with respect to the
sanction of the Law, upon satisfaction made, as an innocent person, with
respect to the precept of the Law, upon perfect obedience thereunto.

But I do so little regard, what this or any other Authors do fancy, concerning
the impropriety of our being justified By, or (to speak more properly) With a
pardon, that I can give them leave to think and speak therein as they please,
being fully assured, That I am as properly said to be justified, as pardoned;
yea though neither pardoned nor justified properly, yet forasmuch as I am
assured, that being pardoned and justified (properly or improperly) I am
certainly pardoned and certainly justified, and shall be glorified, I am well
contented with it, and am abundantly thankful to God and Christ Jesus for it.

Thus have I dared to oppose, what this Author (as he says) has dared to
affirm, viz. That if a sinners Justification be the same thing with the
Remission of his sins, then does that his Justification not admit a proper
sense in the whole Scripture, and that to say so, is in effect to say, we are
not at all justified, and so to bid defiance to the Scripture in a hundred
places. And I do leave it to the judgment of every learned and impartial
Reader, what sentence to pronounce both upon the one and the other, this his
Affirmation, and my Opposition. I shall in the next place address my self to
the answering of another Question, as follows.

CHAP. XIII.
Q. Why, or for what reasons, may pardon of sin be called Justification, and
Vice versa? Or, What reasons are there for their promiscuous use in the N.T?
Answ. In answer whereunto, 1. It is acknowledged, That the Question is in it
self not so considerable. 2. Nevertheless for the satisfaction of many
dissenting Brethren, in answer thereunto, several reasons of the thing are
assigned and specified.

Q. FOR what reason or reasons, can pardon of sin be styled Justification, and
Justification pardon? Answ. I say concerning this Question, as of the former,
That it is not very material: For if I know, that Gods pardoning mercy, as in
Scripture it goes under diverse other names, (Redemption, Salvation,
Reconciliation, Righteousness --) goes also under the name Justification, I may
very well rest assured, that there is a reason for it, because the only wise
God will not give a name to any thing, for which there is no reason. But
because this Author either is ignorant of the reasons usually rendered for it,
or else does dissemble his knowledge thereof, I will therefore for his sake,
make answer to the said Question, and I desire, that my Answers may be looked
upon as a Superpondium, or measure running over, given into his bosom. My
Answers are,

1. One Reason, why Gods saving mercy to sinners is called by different names,
is taken from the diverse mischievous effects, or consequences of sin. Because
sin does make the sinner obnoxious unto, or binds him over to punishment,
therefore is Gods saving mercy in the blood of Christ toward sinners, styled
Remission, this being Gods loosing the bond, or discharging of the sinner from
the said obligation. 2. If Mr. Bradshaw's opinion be right, viz. That if an
offender be pardoned without any amends and satisfaction, he is not at all
justified, and consequently where a fault is of that nature, as that no
sufficient satisfaction or amends can be made, there can be no justification of
a person so offending, then this reason will well warrant Remission of sin to
be styled Justification, viz. Because our pardon is a peculiar kind of pardon,
(i. e.) not Pura puta and omni modo gratuita, merely and in all respects free,
but some way merited, viz. By the satisfaction of Christ our Mediator,
whereupon God is just, and does exercise justice in the pardoning of sinners,
and consequently may be said to justify those, whom he does upon such
consideration remit. 3. But because this ground perhaps is not so justifiable
and satisfactory, forasmuch as that Delinquent, that can Quocunque modo, seu
ratione qualicunque produce a pardon, is justified from the accusation of being
obliged to suffer the penalty of the Law, and by consequence respectively
thereunto is just, Rectus in Curia. If any, I say, be dissatisfied in that
reason of Mr. Bradshaw's, I shall offer to him instead thereof this reason,
viz. Remission of sin is styled Justification, because it will stand a sinner
in as much stead before the Tribunal of God (the Judge of quick and dead) as a
Justification upon perfect justice would do a person, who being perfectly
innocent is impleaded. This reason, I have cause to presume, will not much be
regarded by this Author, but distasted rather, because he thinks, that for this
reason a sinners Justification must needs be wholly improper, and altogether
Metaphorical, which he can by no means endure. But as I have endeavored to
cure him of that his mis-conception, so I doubt not, but that this reason will
be of a perfect good relish, to others of another and more sound palate. 4.
Another Reason (as some think) is, because a sinner is pardoned by course of
Law, his pardon is derived, or accrews to him, not as that of a Malefactor
sometimes does, by the mere will and prerogative of his Sovereign Prince, but
by virtue of the Law of the Gospel, enacted as an instrument for the conveyance
thereof.
As for the Reasons of Remission of sin, its being styled Justification, and
Justification its being styled Remission of sin, I think they may be fitly to
the purpose in hand thus expressed.

1. Gospel-Justification is styled Remission of sin, in respect of the quality
of the person, who is the Materia, circa quam, the subject, about which that
saving grace or mercy is conversant, the person or recipient subject thereof
being not an Innocent, but a person in himself obnoxious, viz. a sinner: For
Gospel-Justification though Justa(just) yet it is not Justification Justi, but
Injusti, (i. e.) it is the discharge of a person, who in himself is unjust,
from that obligation to punishment, wherewith he is charged by the Law.

2. Remission of sin is in the N. T. frequently styled Justification, in regard
of the manner of its conveyance, which is not as many others, if not most
pardons from man are, upon mere good will and pleasure, but from Law and
Covenant, A sinners pardon being of a peculiar kind from what many other
pardons are, as in one respect it is pardon granted by God upon the
satisfaction of Christ, so in another respect it is upon the faith and
repentance of a sinner, and in both respects it may be said to be a covenanted
pardon, or pardon by a Law.
which Law or Covenant is twofold, 1. The first is a Law or Covenant peculiar
to Christ, as Persona restipulans, God the Father therein requiring
satisfaction to be made by him, and thereupon covenanting and promising, That
no strict satisfaction should be exacted of the sinner. This satisfaction
according to the said Law or Covenant, (as commonly styled, or as others style
it, divine decree, they referring the matter to the Decretive, rather than the
Legislative will of God) this satisfaction, I say, Jesus Christ did according
to the said Covenant or Decree of God, and at the time appointed, most fully
make; whence it is, that the Apostle says, He gave himself A (...), a
counter-price, a satisfaction instead of a satisfaction, 1 Timothy 2.6.

2. The second Law or Covenant is that, wherein we sinners are the
Restipulators, and which in Scripture is styled The Promise, The Law of Faith,
The Gospel, The new Covenant -- wherein God through Christ does promise
remission of sin upon certain conditions, upon performance whereof, he does
accordingly bestow it upon us.

3. Remission of sin may be styled Justification, in respect of the profit or
benefit thereof, and this both special and general. 1. Special, In that it does
prevent, remove, or take away the obligation to condemnation, which is due to
sinners, which condemnation is the direct opposite to Justification, as is
apparent by many Scriptures. 2. In general, In that it is equivalent unto, or
will prove to be of like universal benefit, privilege, or emolument to a
sinner, with that kind of Justification, which is the justification of a
person, who in himself is altogether just, and never was obnoxious.


Thus have I replied to the whole of what Mr. Ferguson has said in his second
Chapter, concerning a sinners Justification, and the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness unto him. But before I proceed to reply to any other passage in
his Book, which concerns the matter in hand, I will answer a Question, that
will come in fitly to be proposed, by occasion of what has been said upon this
last, namely, That the justification of a sinner is By a Law.

CHAP. XIV.
Q. How is the justification of a sinner to be denominated, whether Evangelical
or Legal? Answ. Rather Evangelical, and the reason assigned. The Arguments of
those on the contrary side both answered and retorted, who acknowledge, that
the justification of a sinner is Evangelical ex part principii, but would not
have it absolutely to be so styled, but rather a Legal justification. The
reason why this Question is debated and answered.

Q. HOW is the Justification of a sinner to be denominated, whether
Evangelical, or rather Legal? Answ. I propose this Question, not for the
satisfaction of Mr. Ferguson, but for the sake of some other Brethren, who may
need a due information therein: And my answer is, That forasmuch as that Law,
by which a sinner is justified, is The Law of Faith, of Grace, or of the
Gospel, it is therefore to be denominated not a Legal, but an Evangelical
Justification. Herein [by not Legal] I must not in reason be understood to mean
Not in any sense so, or by no Law at all, but not by the Law of works, or as
the word Legal is opposed to, or contradistinguished from the word Evangelical.
And there cannot be (as I think) a more convincing Argument to prove, That
Evangelical in the case, or question in hand, is the fittest name, than by
alleging that, The Law of works is not the Law, By which, but a Law, From
which, (i. e.) by an appeal from which to the Law of grace, a sinner is and is
to be justified.
which will be granted by all, viz. That the Law, by which a sinner is
justified, is an Evangelical Law, the Law of the Gospel: For forasmuch as the
Law, by which a man was and is to be justified, is twofold, 1. The Law of God
Creator, commonly styled Lex originalis, or Law of works; 2. The Law of God
Redeemer, called Lex remedians, or the Law of grace or faith;
and forasmuch as the former Law was enacted, as the Rule of justifying an
innocent person, and the latter of a sinner, how can we better express the
difference betwixt the justification of an innocent and a sinner, than by
styling the former a Legal, and the latter an Evangelical Justification? The
peculiar species of the Law, by which a person is justified, is that which does
specificate the justification it self, and is therefore most apt and fit to
give it its peculiar denomination.

I desire, That the answer here given may the rather be duly weighed and
observed, because it may serve to rectify the mistake of a certain learned
Author, (perhaps also of some other Brethren) who albeit he does allow a
sinners justification to be Evangelical, ex part principii, (Evangelical Grace
in Christ, being the fountain of it) and so to be called, with a respect
thereunto, nevertheless he will not allow it roundly and absolutely to be
denominated Evangelical, but rather Legal, for these two reasons: Because it is
Legal, ex part termini and medii. 1. Ex part termini, because it is minated
in the satisfaction, which is to be made or performed to the Law: He has freed
me from the Law of sin and death. --

To this I answer, What he means here by the satisfaction to be made to the
Law, (upon which the justification of a sinner is by him said to be terminated)
I do not know, nor will I take upon me so much as to guess, lest I should
mistake his meaning; only I will say as follows, 1. That by the Law of the
Spirit of life, ( Romans 8.2.) is meant the Evangelical Law, the Gospel of
Christ, or Law of Faith. 2. That Justification is one part at least of that
saving benefit, which the Apostle comprizeth under the expression of his being
by that Law, made free from the Law of sin and death, it being as well the
guilt of sin, as the power of sin, which by that Law he was made free from.

3. Consequently I say, That that Scripture proves not the Author's purpose,
but the direct contrary, viz. That because it is by the Law of the Gospel, that
we are made free, or justified from the guilt of our sins, therefore our
Justification is to be called Evangelical, and not Legal.

2. Respeciu medii, in respec^i of the means (says he) which is the Legal
Righteousness of Chrifr, by, or through faith imputed to us.

To this I answer, 1. As in some respect the Righteousness of Christ may be
styled Justitia Legalis, (the Law of his Mediatorship requiring it, and it
being the rule thereof) so in another respect it may be fitly said to be
Justitia pro-Legalis, (it being to us instead, or standing us instead of a
perfect legal Righteousness) so also in another respect it may very fitly be
styled (and so I find it styled by some Authors) our evangelical righteousness;
and an evangelical righteousness it may, I say, be very fitly styled, 1.
Because the Gospel is it, and it alone (not the light of nature) by which it is
revealed and made known to the world. 2. Because it was of Gods grace to
appoint it. 3. To accept it also, and this for gracious or Gospelends, viz. the
pardon or justification of sinners. And for this reason I may well conclude,
That the justification of sinners is to be denominated not a legal (as the
Author contends for) but an evangelical Justification.


2. As for his saying, That this legal Righteousness of Christ is imputed to us
by, or through faith; I answer, 1. It is not at all imputed to us in the sense
of this Author, (i. e.) properly, and in its essential nature, but only in the
saving effects thereof, as I have already (I hope) convincingly demonstrated.

2. Nevertheless I grant, that [in subordination to the Righteousness of
Christ] faith is a Medium, or means of a sinners justification, though it is
another kind of Medium, than is Christ's Righteousness, to which it is
subordinate in the justifying of a sinner; Christ's Righteousness being such a
Medium, as has the nature or efficiency of a meritorious cause, but our faith
having only the nature of a condition simply so called. I have thought meet to
intimate this for these two reasons, 1. To prevent the misunderstanding of
what I said in the foregoing Chapter, wherein was said, that Gospel-pardon was
ex Christi satisfactione, and ex peccatoris fide, which must not be so
understood, as if the word ex did imply the self same importance in both
places: For the truth is, that as the particle ex is of different importance
(it importing sometimes one kind of cause, and sometimes another, and sometimes
no cause at all, but an antecedent condition, and the same I may say of the
particles in English, Greek and Hebrew corresponding to the Latin particle ex)
so in the former application of the particle, it does imply efficiency, or an
efficient meritorious cause, but in the latter only an antecedent, or a
condition, sine qua non.

2. To prevent the mis-construction of the word [faith] in many places of
Scripture, where, by faith many do understand only its object (Christ, or his
Righteousness) whereas, as faith and Christ's Righteousness are two things of
distinct consideration, so by faith in such sayings as these ( We are justified
By faith, and saved By faith --) we are to understand not only the object
thereof as employed (Christ, or his Righteousness) but also the act believing,
or the thing it self faith.

Lastly, I answer, That forasmuch as God is graciously pleased in his Gospel,
to appoint and to declare his acceptance of faith, as the condition of a
sinners justification, through, or for the sake of Christ's Righteousness,
therefore I answer as before, That a sinners justification is to be denominated
rather Evangelical, than Legal.

I shall now return to Mr. Ferguson, and reply to certain other passages, which
I find here and there dispersed in his Book, as grounds for the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness to us, in the sense by him contended for.

CHAP. XV.
Several mistakes in Mr. F. according to the obvious construction of his words,
detected. That Christ suffered not the Idem, but the Tantundem, manifested by
three things, distinctly specified, and two evil consequences of the contrary
Doctrine. With a Caution in the close.

P. 536. MAN having taken off his dependency upon God, Mr. F3
by transgressing the Law of Creation, Gods Rectorship over him, which is
regulated by his wisdom, holiness, veracity, and the eternal rectitude and
righteousness of his nature, would not allow, that he should be received into
favor, but in such a way, and by such means, as may secure the ends of
government, manifest the displicency that is in God to sin, evidence his truth
and immutability, in proceeding according to the penal Law, which in pursuance
of his own Attributes, and man's rational nature and relation, he had at first
enacted.

Answ. I assent to the whole of what is here recited, except this, That God did
for the ends specified, proceed according to the penal Law, which at first was
enacted, in which saying, there is a complication of mistakes involved; for 1.
That Law was only dispensed, and not executed, neither upon Christ, nor upon
mankind; not upon Christ; for Christ was not at all threatened in that Law,
neither did he die the death by virtue of that Law, however by occasion of it,
as has been already said. Nor was that Law executed upon all mankind,
supposing, (and taking it for granted) that by the death there threatened, is
meant eternal as well as temporal death.

2. A mistake of the nature of that obligation, which a divine commination does
induce, seems to be employed in the said words of this Author; for Comminatio
est obligatio Legem violantis ad poenam ferendam, The threatenings of God do
induce only an obligation upon transgressors to suffer the punishment
threatened, but not any necessary obligation upon God to inflict it.
non Legem ferentis ad inferendam; that commination did signify what man was
bound to suffer, not what God was bound to do: Upon disobedience man was bound
to suffer, but God was not thereupon bound to inflict punishment; otherwise
supreme Lawgivers could have no power to pardon; and therefore there is no
necessity, that the punishment threatened should be executed, and it is an error
to assert, or imagine any such necessity: The only inevitable effect of that
threatening was, That upon man's sin punishment should be his due, and so it was;
man being bound to punishment Ipsofacto, upon his offense committed. And herein
is the difference betwixt a Commination and a Denunciation of punishment, this
being an act of judgment or sentence, or else a prediction of a decree to
punish, whereupon the punishment denounced is always inflicted.

3. There seems also to be this mistake (a mistake of very evil consequence)
employed in the clause forecited, viz. That Christ suffered the Idem, not the
Tantundem, the same suffering, to which that Commination did oblige, and that a
sinners liberation from the punishment, to which he was obliged, was by the way
of strict payment, not satisfaction, or compensation.

4. There seems also to be this mistake employed in the said clause, viz. That
the ends of Gods sovereign rule and government, could not be secured by a
Compensation, or without strict solution, or payment of that very debt of
punishment, which was by the sin of man contracted. And if I were sure, that
this Author would own this opinion, (for God forbid, that I should causlesly
fasten any thing upon him, or any of my Brethren) viz. That the sufferings of
Christ were Ipsa debiti solutio, and not Pro debito satisfactio, Christ's
sufferings were not the very payment of our debt in kind, but a valuable
satisfaction to divine justice for our not payment of it, or for Gods not
exacting of us the payment thereof.
I would more at large suggest somewhat of my own, and endeavor to improve
what has been (so far as my knowledge reaches) said by others against it.
Nevertheless because there are of my Brethren, who do maintain, that Christ
suffered the very Idem, which was in a sinners obligation, and not the
Tantundem, at least that it is not much material, whether we say the one, or
the other, I will for their satisfaction, do these two things;

1. I will briefly set down the substance of what is commonly and truly (as I
believe) said by the most learned judicious Divines, whose writings I am
acquainted with, in this matter. 2. I will suggest two or three things, which I
conceive to be the native consequences of Christ his suffering, the Idem of our
obligation, and not the Tantundem.
For the first be it considered,

1. That the person who made the payment, was not the same who was in the
obligation, but another: For it was not Christ, who was in the obligation, but
the sinner, the Law threatening not him in person, or him in our person, but the
sinner. Briefly, that Law obliged none to die, but the sinner, nor any other to
die for or instead of the sinner.

2. The sufferings of Christ were not altogether of the same kind. There was
that exclusion of sinners from the favor of God, threatened in the curse, and
which shall one day be executed upon some sinners, which was not suffered, or
undergone by Christ: For as the Apostle says, upon supposal of a perfect
similitude betwixt our great High Priest, and those after the order of Aaron,
(Then must Christ often have suffered since the foundation of the world, Heb.
9.26.) Even so, upon supposition, The ground of Christ's obligation and our
obligation to suffer is extremely different: for ours was founded upon the
guilt of sin committed; but Christ's was founded upon his own voluntary
sponsion, whence it is, that ours is justly denominated Obligatio Criminis, but
His only Cont^actu^.
that whatsoever suffering was threatened to the sinner, was inflicted upon
Christ, I may say, Then Jesus Christ should have often suffered since the
foundation of the world; yea to the end of the world, yea world without end,
even to all eternity. His sufferings (forasmuch as he was both God and man in
one person) however they were equivalent to whatsoever was threatened by the
original Law to sinners, yet they were not the same.

3. The ground and reason of Christ's and sinners obligation to suffer, was not
of the same kind, or denomination, his being Obligatio fidejussoria, or
Contractus, but ours Criminis, or ex delicto, as has been already said. As
sinners were obliged to suffer by one Law, so Christ's obligation did result
from another, and that Law peculiar to himself.

2. As for the evil consequences of asserting, That Christ suffered the Idem,
the same thing which was in a sinners obligation to suffer, be it considered,
that thence it will follow, That a sinner should Ipso facto have an immediate
present right, to be discharged from his obligation to suffer (according to
that celebrated saying of the Civilians, Solutione ejus quod debetur, tollitur
obligatio) which to say, is a branch of downright Antinomian doctrine, which
maintains the Justification of Infidels, or of sinners, in their damnable
unbelief.

2. It follows, That a sinners discharge from his obligation to suffer, is not
truly, and therefore cannot rationally be styled Pardon of sin, or that a
sinner (upon such a supposition) cannot rationally be said to be pardoned: For
I look upon the sayings of those two learned men ( Grotius and Wotton) as
undoubted truths, viz. Vbi idem solvitur vel a debitore, vel ab alio debitoris
nomine, nulla contingit remissio; nihil enim circa debitum agit Creditor, aut
Rector. Grot. de satisf. p. 119. Where the same thing is paid either by the
debtor himself, or by any other in his name, there is no remission, or pardon
of the debt. The Creditor, or Rector, does in that case act nothing, he only
receives the debt. And says Mr. Wotton, De reconcil. Pecc. p. 157. Poena, ac
venia diversa sunt, ita plane, ut qui poenas dederit, non sit absolutus, qui
absolutus est, supplicio affectus non fuit. Punishment and pardon are contrary
(so the word Diversae is here to be construed) so as that he, who has suffered
the punishment for his sin, is not pardoned, or absolved, and he who is
absolved (i.e.) absolved by a pardon, was not punished.

My reply to what this Author says in the next Page, shall be the subject of
the following Chapter.

Only lest I should seem willing (which is indeed a thing far from me) to
charge this Author, with the holding of any point of doctrine, which he does
dis-own, I think it meet at the close of this Chapter, to give the Reader to
understand, that he does elsewhere in effect say, That Christ did not suffer
the Idem, but the Tantundem; for he says expressly, p. 557. That Christ
submitted to the demerit of our sins, so as to undergo the penalty in the
substance and kind of it (though not in the adjuncts, and consequential
accidents, which would have accompanied it upon such weak, finite, depraved
subjects as we are) that we should have undergone.

Hereupon all that I can peremptorily say is this, viz.

1. That I am not able to reconcile this Author with himself in both his said
sayings: For if Christ did undergo the penalty of the Law, which we should have
undergone only in the substance, and not in the circumstances thereof, as here
specified, how was it true to say as he said in Page 536. That in Christ's
suffering for our sins, God did evidence his truth and immutability, in
proceeding according to the Penal Law, which in pursuance of his own
Attributes, and man's rational Nature and relations to God, he had at first
enacted? For was not the circumstances, adjuncts, or accidents of punishment,
as well as the substance of punishment, threatened to man in that penal Law, and
which man having sinned, should accordingly have undergone? Now if Christ did
undergo the penalty only in the substance, but not in the adjuncts threatened,
how is this consistent with his saying, That in the sufferings of Christ, God
did proceed according to the penal Law, which at first was enacted?

2. It is not reconcilable to, but flatly against the truth to say, That
Christ suffered that punishment in kind, which we should have undergone: For I
would demand of him, Was not eternal death comprised in the penalty threatened
in that Law at first enacted?

3. If by Gods truth and immutability, Mr. F. means (as it is evident, he does)
the immutability and truth of God, in fulfilling that his threatning-word, Genesis
2.17. it is his notorious mistake so to think, or say: For that penal Law was
not by the sufferings of Christ fulfilled, or executed, but through a
compensation, or through his compensatory sufferings dispensed with, as was
upon occasion before said, God therein manifesting his mercy and justice, but
not his truth and immutability, respectively to that threatning-Law.

CHAP. XVI.
The Imputation of Socinianism groundlesly charged by Mr. F. upon his Brethren.
Mr. F. his charging his Antagonists with nonsense, refuted. That sort of union
with Christ to be renounced, the native consequence whereof is the reciprocal
Imputation of our sins to Christ, and of his Righteousness to us, in the sense
of Mr. F. with his Adherents (i.e.) properly and formally, or otherwise than in
the fruits and effects of the one, and of the other. The reason thereof rendered.

P. 537. To say, Mr. F.
That Christ suffered only for our advantage, and not in our room, is plain
Socinianism; and to say, That he bare our punishment, without being charged
with our guilt, is plain nonsense; and yet to remonstrate to such a Relation
between him and us, as may and ought to be styled a Legal Union, is to vent
repugnancies in the same breath.

Answ. What is here said, has in effect already been answered; and to the same
purpose I say again;

1. The imputation of Socinianism is causless, forasmuch as we do acknowledge
what they deny, viz. That Jesus Christ being God and man in one person, did
make a satisfaction, or compensation to Gods justice, and by his doings and
sufferings did merit the pardon of our sins.

2. We deny not, but that Jesus Christ may be truly said to have suffered in
our room or stead, (and for that cause to be styled in the word of one of the
Ancients our (...)) because he suffered that which was equivalent to the
suffering, which being due to us we should have suffered, and thereby to save
us from suffering; and we say, That Christ suffered in the person of a
Mediator, to procure our pardon and reconciliation with God. Only we do deny,
That Christ was in such a sense our (...), or that he did in such a strict
sense die in our room and stead, as that he may be said to die in nostra
persona, in such sort representing our persons, as that we can truly be said to
have satisfied in and by him, or that his sufferings are in their essential
nature imputed to us. One King may be said to rule (...), in the room of
another, though he may not therefore be said to be the Representative of that
other, as Archelaus is said to have reigned (...), in the room of his Father
Herod, Solomon in the room of David, 1 King. 5.5. Benaiah to be made
Captain General of the Host, in the room of Joah, 1 King. 2.35. and Elisha to
be substituted or anointed a Prophet, in the room of Elijah, 1 King. 19.16.
although none of these can be truly said in a strict sense to represent the
persons of those, in whose room they were substituted.

3. If by Our punishment this Author means the Idem, the self same
punishment, which we should have born, it has been already gainsaid, and the
contrary truth proved, as also that he did not bear our guilt, neither our
guilt of fact, or fault at all, nor the self same guilt or obligation to
punishment as was ours, but another kind of obligation, that was peculiar to
himself.

4. What nonsense soever there is in saying, That Christ bare Idem supplicium,
our very punishment, without being charged with our guilt, nevertheless it is
true sense, and the sense of Scripture to say, That Christ did contract, or
take upon him an obligation to suffer, and did actually undergo such
sufferings, as were equivalent to that punishment which we deserved to suffer,
and this without being charged with our guilt.

5. The things being justly to be denied, which he does here presume as
granted, or to be granted, ( viz. That Christ did at all take upon him our
Reatus facti, or culpae, our guilt of fact, or fault, or the self same guilt,
or obligation to punishment, which was ours) it follows, That there is all the
reason in the world, to remonstrate unto any such union of Christians with
Christ (by what name soever dignified or distinguished, Mystical, Conjugal,
Political, Legal, Evangelical, Supernatural --) the native consequence whereof
is, That Christ was charged with our guilt of sin, That he took upon him the
self same obligation to punishment, which was ours, That our sin really in it
self was imputed to him, and undergone by him, and That his doings and
sufferings (briefly) his Righteousness, was formally in it self imputed unto
us. All these Consequents are justly to be remonstrated against, and
consequently so are all the Antecedents (be they never so specious) from whence
they do naturally and necessarily result, or flow, for (as the common saying
is) Ex vero nihil nisi verum, From truth nothing but truth does natively and
necessarily issue. These things considered, it is easy to answer his arguings
in p. 556, 557. which I shall more at large now recite and reply to.

CHAP. XVII.
That Christ may very well be said to be made sin for us, to bear our sins, to
die for our offenses -- although it cannot be truly said, that he did bear our
sin it self, or sin in it self, or otherwise than in the fruit and effects of
it, the contrary whereunto is pretended by Mr. F. Mr. Ferguson's mistake in
confounding an Antecedent impulsive cause, with a meritorious cause, the
difference whereof is asserted and exemplified. His mistake in not
distinguishing betwixt An obligation, and Our obligation to suffer. That though
our sins did properly merit Christ's suffering, nevertheless it will not follow
from thence, that Christ himself did merit it, or took upon him the meriting
thereof. That Christ may be said in an improper sense to be punished. The word
[Demerit of punishmeit] ambiguous, a twofold sense whereof is specified. The
Arguments which overthrow the Popish doctrine of believers, being discharged
from the guilt of sin, but not the punishment, altogether mis-applyed by Mr. F.
to the point in hand.

P. 556, 557. Mr. F.
HAD not the susception of our sins preceded, as the antecedent impulsive cause
of Christ's sufferings, he could neither be said to be made sin for us, nor to
bear them, nor to have them laid upon him, nor to die for our offenses, nor to
be our ransom: Nor could the inflicting of sufferings upon him have been either
good in it self, or an act of Rectoral justice in God, or have had any tendency
to his glory, or to the honor of his Law, or to deter sinners from offending;
yea, preclude once the consideration of sin, as the meritorious cause of the
Agonies which Christ underwent, and the love, wisdom, justice, and Rectorship
of God, are obnoxious to reflections, and stand liable to be impeached. And if
it be once obtained, that our sins are the meritorious impulsive cause of
Christ's death, his susception of our guilt will necessarily follow. For guilt
being nothing but an obligation to punishment, and it being impossible to
conceive such a habitude betwixt a person and sin, that it should be the
meritorious impulsive cause of his punishment, and yet he not be under an
obligation to punishment, it plainly follows, that guilt must be supposed
antecedent to a demerit of punishment. Guilt and punishment being Relates, he
that is obnoxious to the latter, must be previously under the Imputation of the
former, as Bishop Andrews expresses it, Christ was first made sin in respect
of the guilt, and then a curse in respect of the punishment. Sermon. of
Justification on Jer. 23.6.

Ans. Almost all of this, either in the same words, or in words to the same
effect, has been before recited out of this Author, and a reply accordingly
shaped thereunto. And for that reason, it is necessary only to repeat the
Answers, which have been already given. I answer then,

1. Christ may very well be said to be made sin for us, to bear our sins, to
have them laid upon him, to die for our offenses, and to be our ransom, in that
he did take upon him an obligation to suffer, and suffer to death for the
expiation of them, although it cannot be truly said, That Christ did bear our
sin it self [properly and formally taken] but only in the fruit and sad
consequents of it, viz. suffering equivalent punishment, to that which was due
to us for it.

2. As to the Authors expressions [Antecedent Impulsive Cause]

1. It is the Authors mistake, to confound an Antecedent Impulsive Cause with a
Cause Meritorious. That he does so, is most apparent and undeniable by his
forecited words. But that it is his mistake so to do, be it considered,

1. That the misery of an indigent Creature, may be well said to be an
antecedent impulsive cause of that compassion, which is showed toward it by
those, who are conscious unto, or spectators of its misery. And accordingly I
doubt not to aver, That the miserable effects of sin, specially in making us
obnoxious to the vengeance of eternal fire, was an antecedent impulsive cause,
moving God, (speaking of him after the manner of men, which we must do, or else
we can scarce say any thing of him) fore-ordain the sufferings of our Lord
Redeemer Christ Jesus, whereby to rescue us out of our wretched, and otherwise
forlorn condition. Yet who will, or can justly say, That the misery of a
Creature, does in a strict or proper sense merit the pity, whether of God or
man? This if it did, pity would scarce deserve the name of pity, I mean, it
would not be so thank-worthy, forasmuch as that which is merited, deserves
little, if any thanks. Is a Labourer obliged to give his Master thanks for his
wages, which he has earned, or merited? Misery may be well said to be Res apta
nata; an object naturally fit to move mercy, or to be an impelling cause
thereunto, and yet not a Meritorious cause thereof, in the strict and proper
usual sense of the word Meritorious.

2. Though I grant it as a truth, and a fit saying, That our misery contracted
by sin, was an antecedent impulsive cause of Gods mercy, in delivering up
Christ for us all, nevertheless I do utterly deny, that our sins were the
Meritorious cause of Christ's death, or sufferings. I grant, that our sins were
the Occasion of Christ's sufferings, but I deny, that our sins did merit his
sufferings. And I have just and great cause so to do, forasmuch as our Logic
tells us, that there is a great difference betwixt an Occasion and a Cause
(truly so called) as this Author cannot but know very well. I remember the
saying of David to Abiathar, 1 Samuel 22.22. I have occasioned the death of all
the persons of thy fathers house; which notwithstanding it could not be said,
That he had caused their death. In like sort may we say to God, We have
occasioned thee to bruise the Son of thy love, and to put him to grief, we have
been the occasion of all his sufferings; but we may not say, That our sins did
merit them.

3. Forasmuch as what this Author has sought, he cannot obtain, viz. an
acknowledgment, That our sins were the meritorious cause of Christ's death; and
forasmuch as he makes this the ground of his following inferences, it is not
therefore needful, that I should use many words in replying thereunto: For if
the foundation of a building be removed, the superstructure falls of it self,
and without hands. Nevertheless I add,

3. Although I do deny, that our sins were the meritorious cause of Christ's
sufferings, nevertheless I do assert, that Christ was under An obligation to
suffer for our sins. It is this Authors great mistake, not to distinguish in
this contest, betwixt Christ's obligation and Ours, whereas, as has been
aforesaid, these are two obligations specifically different; and all his
inferences here are utterly groundless, e. g.

1. That Christ could not suffer, or be under An obligation to suffer, except
he had been under, or had taken upon him, Our obligation to suffering. 2. That
he could not else have been said to bear our sins, to be made sin for us, to
have our sins laid upon him, to die for them, nor to be our ransom. 3. That
without this, the inflicting of sufferings upon Christ, could not have been
either good in it self, or an act of Rectoral justice in God, or have had any
tendency to his glory, or -- All these inferences, I say, are altogether
groundless. 4. I answer Ex abundanti, If our sins could properly be said to
have merited Christ's sufferings, nevertheless it will not from thence follow,
That we meriting, that he should suffer, then he himself did merit it, or took
upon him the meriting thereof; and therefore although guilt, as he says, must
be supposed antecedent to a demerit of punishment, yet where there is no such
demerit (as in Christ there was not) there it is not necessary to suppose any
antecedent guilt: Nor indeed in any case, but where the person suffering is
properly punished, which Christ was not, but only a sufferer of that, which we
for our sins deserved to have suffered in our own persons, and which if we had
personally suffered, it would have been formally and properly a punishment to
us; but was not to him, because he never deserved it, nor was any such guilt,
or deserving it imputed to him, or taken upon him. And yet he may be said in
some improper sense, to be obliged to punishment; I do not mean the word
[improperly] in reference to Obliged (for Christ's obligation to suffering,
however it was not at all Obligatio Criminis, yet being truly Obligatio
Contractus, it was therefore In suo genere, a proper obligation) but to the
word [Punishment] and I do therefore express the matter now plainly, and say,
That Christ may be said to be obliged to punishment improperly so called,
because he did voluntarily undertake, and obliged himself to suffer those
pains, which being inflicted on us, would have been properly, or proper
punishments. 5. As for the testimony of that renowned Bishop Andrews, I have
made reply thereunto in an entire Chapter ( Chapter 5.) and I have thought it my
part the rather so to do, because, as I perceive by my late reading, not Mr.
Ferguson only, but certain other Brethren, by their allegation of that saying
of the Bishop, have adopted it as their own.
There is but one passage more, which I have observed in my reading of his Book
throughout, to refer to the matter in hand (The Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness to us, or our guilt to him) which because it will not need any
large reply, I will not assign a peculiar Chapter thereunto, but shall
therewith close both this Chapter, as also the whole of what I have here to
animadvert upon, with reference to him.

P. 577. Mr: F.
Where sin is so charged, as to expose a person to a demerit of punishment,
there is an obligation to it, and where there is such an obligation to it,
there is in some sense or other, guilt. Those very Arguments, whereby we
overthrow the Popish Dogm of Believers, being discharged from the guilt of sin,
but not the punishment, do equally disprove Christ's undergoing the punishment
of sin, without susception of the guilt.

Answ. 1. The word [demerit of punishment] is ambiguous; for it may signify
two things, viz. Either the meriting of punishment, or punishment it self
merited; in the latter sense it is true, That our sin was so charged upon
Christ, as occasionally to expose him to demerit of punishment (i.e.) to suffer
the punishment, which was the demerit of our sin, or which we by our sin had
merited; but in the former sense it is a notorious untruth to say, That our sin
was so charged upon Christ, as to expose him to the demerit of punishment (i.
e.) That he was charged with the meriting of any punishment.

2. Thence it follows, That although there was an obligation upon Christ to
suffer, yet not our obligation, nor any such obligation as was ours, but an
obligation of a different kind from ours, as has several times upon occasion
been said before.

3. The Author speaks at random, and not to the purpose in hand, in that his
inference, saying, There is in some sense or other, guilt: For as there are
diverse senses of the word [Guilt] yea diverse kinds of Guilt [Guilt of fault,
and Guilt of, or obligation to punisment] so the Question in hand is not,
Whether Christ did not take upon him Guilt in some sense or other, nor whether
he took upon him An obligation to punishment, but whether he took upon him that
kind of Guilt at all, which is called Guilt of fact, or fault (i. e.) our
deserving to suffer, or due obligation to suffer what we by our sin had
deserved.

4. I conceive, That the Popish doctrine here reflected on is this, viz. That
Believers are discharged from the guilt of sin, as to eternal punishment, by
the satisfaction of Christ, yet not as to temporal punishments, but by
satisfaction made by themselves; but whatever the Popish doctrine be in this
matter, I do utterly deny, that those very Arguments, whereby we do overthrow
that, or any other Dogmata of the Papists, do at all disprove, what I my self
with other of my Brethren, do in this contest, assert, viz. That Christ did
undergo an obligation, to suffer the punishment, which we deserved for our
sins, without any undergoing, or taking upon him our guilt, or deserving
thereof. And as to the distinction of Remissio culpae and poenae, and also as
to the common saying, Sublata culpa tollitur poena, I have twenty years ago
plainly spoken my thoughts, in the 10th. and 11th. Chapters of my Exercitation,
concerning the Nature of forgiveness of sin, and I am still of the same mind,
as I have there expressed it in opposition to the Papists (that I may not say
also in way of dissent from some of our own) viz. That there is no such thing
as Remissio culpae [Remission of fault] in way of distinction from Remissio
poenae [Remission of the punishment] these two being one, and the self same
thing.

These are all the passages, relating to the reciprocal Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness unto us, and of our sins to him, which I have to reply unto, upon
a due consideration whereof, I submit to the judgment of the learned and
impartial Reader, whether it may not be truly said of this Author, in those
words of Elihu, Job 35.16. That [as to the foresaid matters in debate] he has
multiplied words without knowledge (i.e.) the right knowledge of the nature of
the things, he undertook to treat of.

CHAP. XVIII.
Reflections upon certain passages in Dr. J. Owen's Book styled (Communion with
God) concerning Christ his being made ruddy in his own blood, Morally by the
Imputation of sin; and concerning that blessed Bartering and Exchange pretended
by him, betwixt Believers giving up their sins to Christ, and their taking from
him that Righteousness, which he wrought for them. His obscure, ambiguous,
un-Scriptural phrases reproved, and his mistakes therein (according to obvious
construction) detected. An Objection answered, wherein a twofold Taking or
Receiving of a thing is specified, and applied to the purpose in hand. His
mistake in affirming, that the Saints by giving up their sins to Christ, and
taking from him his Righteousness, do fulfill the whole of that in 2 Cor. 5.21.
The falsehood of the reason asserted by the Doctor, why those, who said, Lord,
Lord, were disappointed in their expectation, instead whereof, the true reason
or reasons are assigned. That for sinners to plead their repentance and duties,
is not to barter with themselves only, to take Christ's work out of his hand,
and to ascribe it to other things, or to say, their duties shall bear their
iniquities (according as the Dr. misconstrues the matter) but it is in very
deed and in true construction, to put the work of their being actually saved,
into the hand of Christ, and to keep it there. The manner of a sinners
Bartering with Christ laid open, if it may fitly be so styled.

MY work in the remainder of this Treatise, will be for the most part in
answering of such needful Questions, as are (so many as at present I can call
to mind) incident to the subject in hand, which shall be distinctly proposed
and handled in the ensuing Chapters. Only I shall desire the Reader to take
notice (now I have in a manner parted from Mr. F.) that what I have replied to
him, touching the Reciprocal Non-imputation of our sin to Christ, and of
Christ's Righteousness to us, in their formal and essential nature, or otherwise
than in the cursed and blessed effects of the one and of the other, is alike
subservient for the refutation of several passages of Dr. J. Owen, (a partaker
with Mr. F. in several mistakes, and misinterpretations of the sacred
Scriptures, as will be manisested in certain Chapters, toward the close of
this Treatise) in his Book styled, Communion with God, some whereof I will here
relate, and reply to.

P. 53. Christ was made ruddy (says the Doctor) in his own blood two ways, 1.
Naturaly, in the pouring out of his blood, Luke 22.24. Joh. 19.34.2. Morally,
by the Imputation of sin, whose color is red and crimson, 2 Cor. 5.21.

P. 221. The Saints make an Actual commutation with the Lord Jesus, as to their
sins and his Righteousness.

Having said, p. 222. That they do lay down their sins at the cross of Christ,
upon his shoulders, he proceeds to express this Commuting of Believers, their
sins with Christ, and his Righteousness with them, in the following words, p.
223.

Having thus by faith given up their sins to Christ, and seen God laying them
all on him, they draw nigh, and take from him that Righteousness, which he has
wrought out for them: So fulfilling the whole of that of the Apostle, 2 Cor.
5.21. He was made sin for us, that we might become the Righteousness of God in
him. They consider him tendering himself and his Righteousness, to be their
Righteousness before God; they take it, and accept of it, and complete this
blessed bartering and exchange of faith. Anger, curse, wrath, death, sin as to
its guilt, he took it all, and takes it all away --

Answ. As to one of the passages here recited, I need not say much more, than
what has been already said in answer to Mr. F. wherein I have manifested what
manner of guilt our Savior took upon him. I will only say further, That I have
with a complication of affections (grief and sadness, with a mixture also of
some indignation and abhorrency) taken notice of three or four things in his
express words.

1. I observe, That in his asserting, that Christ was made red in his own
blood, Morally by the Imputation of sin, whose color is red and crimson, he
seems to say with Mr. F. that Christ did take our sin upon him not only in the
punishment, but also in the guilt thereof. This, I say, seems to be his meaning.

1. Because the heinous nature or guilt of sin, is set forth in Scripture by
the Metaphor here used by him, of redness, like to that of crimson or scarlet,

2. Because he says expressly; not only that Christ took upon him Anger, Curse,
Wrath, Death, but sin also as to its guilt; in which words, he makes the guilt
of sin a distinct thing from the punishment of it, which he expresses in the
four preceding words [Anger, Curse, Wrath, and Death.] Now the contrary truth
to this his meaning (if indeed he did mean as he spoke) I have already made
known in my answer to Mr. F. and to the words of Bishop Andrews, Chapter 5.

2. I observe his canting phrases (laying down our sins at the cross of Christ,
upon his shoulders, Commuting, Exchanging, Bartering, By faith Giving up our
sins to Christ, and Taking from him his Righteousness) language obscure,
ambiguous, most alien from the Scripture, more fit to delude, than to edify
any common Reader or Hearer. And if any partial or less intelligent person,
shall be offended with the word (Canting) as in his apprehension Durus Sermo, a
censure too harsh, I will for his satisfaction say as follows:

1. As for the Doctor's expression (The Saints giving up their sins to Christ
by faith, Laying down their sins at his cross, upon his shoulders) I know no
such sayings in Scripture; and I do therefore judge them fit to be rejected,
with words like those of the Apostle in another case, The holy Scriptures have
no such custom of speaking, nor the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11.16. And I do
judge thus the rather, because the inspired Scriptures were given of God, to be
attended unto as the rule of our speaking, in and about the concernments of our
soul, and matters of Religion, as well as of our thinking.

2. A bad meaning of the phrases is very obvious to any common understanding,
That Christ did and will own our sins in the simple guilt thereof, or that our
guilt of sin was imputed to him by God, and being thus tendered to Christ, laid
by us at his cross, on his shoulders, will be welcomed and accepted by him as
an acceptable offering, or as a grateful present; in which fond imagination we
do wrong God and Christ, and do out of measure flatter our selves, as has been
already manifested.

3. The best construction, which I can (according to the utmost of my
understanding) make, of the said phrases, is, That the Saints do verily
believe, that Christ did bear their sins in the deserved punishment thereof.
And if the Doctor's meaning was no more than this, I answer,

1. We may believe this as an undoubted truth, and yet not be Saints. An
historical faith (as it is usually styled) is not therefore necessarily a
sanctifying or saving faith.

2. It was God himself, who did antecedently to our believing lay our sins upon
Christ (i.e.) in his suffering for them; but we do no where read in Scripture,
that the Saints by their faith do lay their sins upon him, although it is most
true, that every sinner ought to make a penitential confession of his sin to
God, with faith in Christ, who was sacrificed for them.

3. The said true construction (if that indeed was the Doctor's meaning) is a
thing so latent in his said expressions, that without an Interpreter, could
scarcely be found out. So that upon the hearing of such uncouth phrases, from
the mouth of any Minister, well may the Auditors sigh, saying in allusion to
that in Ezekiel. 20. last. Ah Lord God, does not the Preacher speak Parables?

2. As for the Doctor's other expressions ( The Saints their taking from Christ
that Righteousness, which he has wrought out for them, and his tendering it to
them, to be their Righteousness before God) I say of them much-what as I did of
the former, viz.

1. I do not remember and such express sayings in Scripture, and I cannot
therefore approve them as agreeable to the form of wholesome words.

2. I see no reason, upon which in charity to presume, that the Doctor had any
good meaning in the said phrases (i. e.) that his particular meaning therein
(for I judge him not for want of a good meaning in general, which a man may have
both in speaking falsely and doing wickedly, Joh. 16.2.) was sound and good: For
it appears by the current of his Book, That he would have sinners to believe,
that that very Righteousness, which Christ wrought for them, is in it self
tendered to them, and taken by them, and that it is in its essential nature
imputed to them, and is their Righteousness before God. I shall to this purpose
in this place, transcribe only one passage out of his Book, p. 200.

Christ, says he, tenders his Righteousness to sinners, declares the usefulness
and preciousness thereof to their souls, stirs them up to a desire and
valuation of it, and lastly, effectually bestows it on them, reckoning it to
them as theirs, that they should By it, and For it, and With it, be perfectly
accepted with the Father.

Scarce any thing can be more plainly spoken, as well in this, as in other
passages of his Book (hereafter to be mentioned) from whence to conclude, That
he asserts Christ's Righteousness it self, or in it self, to be imputed to
sinners, and that with the Imputation of the very thing it self, Pardon of sin
in the blood of Christ being in truth a Righteousness in its kind, Believers
may with it boldly and confidently make their appearance before the Judgment
seat of Christ. A Malefactor with the Kings pardon in his hand may boldly look
his Judge in the face.
they are justified or accepted with God; the error of which imagination I have
already discovered, and shall speak somewhat more of in Chapter 35. wherein I will
manifest, that although figuratively (i. e.) in a causal sense, Christ's
Righteousness is a sinners Righteousness before God, nevertheless (to speak
properly) a sinners personal Righteousness, which consists in his
sanctification and Remission of sin, is his Righteousness before God. In the
mean while, I shall assert this to be the plain truth of Scripture in this
matter (even as in effect has been before asserted by me upon occasion) viz.
That believing sinners are justified before God, and accepted with him, By and
For the Righteousness of Christ, as the meritorious cause thereof, but not With
the Imputation of the thing it self, or With the Righteousness of Christ in it
self imputed to them.

3. The best and only true construction, that I can possibly make of the said
un-Scriptural phrases, is this, viz. That the Saints do take from Christ his
Righteousness, or the Righteousness he wrought out for them, in the saving
fruits or effects thereof; in which sense a like phrase is used, and was before
upon occasion instanc't in 2 John 8. where, by the things which Believers had
wrought, are not meant the very things themselves, but the fruit or reward of
them. But upon supposition of this true sense of the said phrase or phrases, I
must say,

1. That the Doctor and his Adherents, in this controversy, concerning the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, will not own, or content themselves, with
the bare truth of that construction.

2. Were the said construction the Doctor's true meaning, nevertheless I must
needs say, That his expression thereof is very un-scriptural, and upon that
account, not such as becomes the Oracles of God: For it is not the manner of
those divine Oracles to say, That Believers do by faith take Christ's
Righteousness, in the saving fruit or effect of it, but that the blessed effect
thereof Comes upon them; for which see Romans 5.18. As by the offense of one,
judgment Came upon all men to condemnation, so by the Righteousness of One, the
free gift Came upon all men to the justification of life; and Romans 4.9. Comes
this Blessedness upon the Circumcision only, or --

Obj. 1 Pet. 1.9. Believers being there said to receive the end or reward ( for
so the word Answerably to the Hebrew word (gnekeb) which signifies the like, as
appears by Ps. 119.33 and 19.11 in the former place in signifies an End, in the
latter a Reward.
(...) signifies, viz. both end and reward) of their faith, is not that all
one, as to take it in the Doctor's sense of the phrase here used by him?

Answ. No: For there is a twofold taking or receiving of a thing, viz. Ethical
and Physical, or Active and Passive, as it may be fitly expressed; the former
implies our duty, and is a taking or laying hold of a thing, by an act of faith
or believing, in which sense it is taken in the Doctor's phrase or expression;
the latter imports our felicity, and does only imply our Having, Enjoying, or
our being partakers of the thing, which we are said to receive, in which
Physical or Passive sense it is taken in 1 Pet. 1.9. and in which sense of the
word (Receive) we are said to Receive evil as well as good at Gods hand, Job.
2.10. and Romans 1.27. Receiving in themselves that recompense of their error,
which was meet. And the word is applied to things as well as persons, Heb. 2.2.
(Every transgression Received a just recompense of reward) unless by sins there
we understand sinners, Every Transgression (i. e.) every Transgressor received
-- the abstract being put for the concrete, a thing in Scripture not unusual,
as circumcision for circumcised; the same word also being used in the same
sense (Transgressions for Transgressors, as some think, Heb. 9.15.)

Briefly, In such a sense as Believers are said to Receive a Kingdom, which
cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28. they may truly be said to Receive Christ's
Righteousness (i. e.) to receive it in the benefit or fruit thereof; which
fruit in the final upshot, is indeed the Kingdom it self there spoken of, and
by which reception, is not there meant a Moral or Active Reception by the hand
of faith, or action of believing (for it is not there commanded as a duty) but
a Passive Reception (it being there mentioned as the blessed fruit of a divine
promise) or Having it, as is the Apostles word, Romans 6.22. You Have your fruit
unto holiness, and the end everlasting life; and Mat. 19.27. What shall we Have
therefore? To which our Savior answers, v. 29. You shall Receive an
hundredfold. --

3. The third thing, which I observe in the Doctor's words, is his Vanity, in
calling the said Commuting with Christ (their sins with him, and his
Righteousness with them) A Blessed Bartering and Exchange: For Jesus Christ
does not like, nor did he ever make offer of such a bartering or exchange, as
seems here to be intended by the Doctor (i. e.) Christ's taking to himself not
only the punishment, but also the guilt of our sins, and [in the way of
exchange] our taking from Christ his Righteousness it self. This I have already
manifested; so that although the Doctor has in Gods name blessed such a
Bartering, Commuting, Exchanging, nevertheless I may truly say, That sinners do
no better than cheat themselves, by such vain imaginations and fancyful
conceits. Whereupon that admonition of the Apostle ( Gal. 6.7.) is in this case
to be minded, Be not deceived, God is not mocked. Though in commuting,
exchanging, bartering commodities one with another, we may deceive and be
deceived one by another, yea although in the barter and exchange here spoken
of, we may cozen and deceive our selves, yet God and Christ will not be so
mocked or deceived. Nevertheless I do acknowledge, that there is a kind of
giving and receiving betwixt Christ and a sinner, which if any one lift to call
Bartering, may well and warrantably be styled A Blessed Bartering, and what
this kind of Bartering is, I will declare in my reply to another passage of the
Doctor's, by and by to be recited, after I have intimated one thing more in his
words forecited, wherein

4. I observe his mistakes in saying, That by the said Bartering, Believers do
fulfill the whole of that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.21. For

1. The Apostle by those expressions does not mean such a Commutation,
Exchange, or Bartering, as aforesaid, and it is a perverting of that Text, to
affix such a sense thereunto, as the Doctor does.

2. It is not true to say, That Believers by ought, that is, or can be done by
them, do fulfill the whole of that Scripture; for it is God, who made Christ,
and Christ, who made himself to be sin for us, and this also antecedently to
our believing; it is not Believers, who made him to be sin for themselves, or
for any others. Yea, as the Apostle said in another case, 2 Timothy 2.13. (If we
believe not, yet he abides faithful; he cannot deny himself) in like sort may
it here be truly said, Although sinners believe not, yet God ever was, and
still abides faithful to fulfill, or verify the whole of that of the Apostle,
saying (God made him to be sin for us, That we might be made --) together with
that in Joh. 3.16. and other the like sayings in Scripture, [God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him,
should not perish, but have everlasting life.] Our unbelief (as the Apostle
says elsewhere, Romans 3.3.) cannot make the faith of God without effect (i. e.)
cannot hinder the fulfilling of his Word.

The Doctor having pronounced the said Commutation, to be a blessed Bartering
and Exchange, proceeds to tell us, how much Jesus Christ is therewith honored,
saying in the same Page,

Many indeed cry, Lord, Lord, and make mention of him, but honor him not at
all. How so? They take his work out of his band, and ascribe it unto other
things; their repentance, their duties, shall bear their iniquities. They do
not say so, they do so. The Commutation they make, if they make any, it is with
themselves. All their Bartering about sin, is in and with their own souls. The
work that Christ came to do in the world, was to bear our iniquities, and lay
down his life a ransom for our sins.

1. Although it be very true (and a sad truth it is) that many do cry, Lord,
Lord, and do not honor him at all (yea do dishonor him in so saying) yet it
is no less false to say, as the Doctor has here said in his answer to the
Question, How so? For the reason is not, as he says, Because they take Christ's
work out of his hand, and ascribe it to other things, their repentance, and
duties; but the true reason or reasons thereof are such as these:

1. Because perhaps they did never rightly understand the work, which Christ
did put into their hand (i. e.) which he did impose upon them, in order to
their enjoyment of salvation, through his sufferings, and bloodshed. It is
thus with too many, who do deceive themselves in thinking, that a form of
godliness will sufficiently serve for that end, although they deny the power
thereof.

2. Because if they do know the work put into their hands, or imposed upon them
for that end, yet they will not do it (i. e.) they will not so believe, as to
repent and convert, that they may be saved.

3. Consequently, because they do ascribe that to a form of godliness, or to
the bare profession of Christianity, which through the mercy of God in Christ,
is promised only to the power and practice of Christian Religion. The truth of
what I have herein answered to the said Question (How so?) and the falsehood of
the Doctor's answer thereunto, is apparent by that very Scripture in Mat. 7.21.
--

1. It is evidently false, that those vain and empty Professors, did commute
only with themselves, and would have no bartering with Christ; for that they
would fain have commuted with Christ, is apparent by their closing and scraping
acquaintance with him, saying, Lord, Lord, or (to speak in the Doctor's phrase)
by laying down their sins at his cross, upon his shoulders, who had born their
iniquities. These words uttered by their own mouths (Lord, Lord) do audibly
speak their presuming upon Christ to save them, or their making account, that
Christ would barter with them.

2. The truth of the reason or reasons, as before specified by me, is most
apparent also: For they did not repent, according as were their duty to have
done, but they did continue to be workers of iniquity, as our Savior tells
them to their faces, v. 23. and upon that account he bad them depart from him,
not upon any such account as the Doctor would have it, As if they would take
Christ's work out of his hands, and ascribe it to their repentance (which was
impossible for them to do, who did not repent, except through self-deceit, in
thinking they were penitent, whereas indeed they were not) and would have no
bartering with him, but with their own duties. So that if we will believe our
Savior Christ, we cannot believe what the Doctor has said, in answer to the
said Question (How so?)

2. If those carnal Professors had indeed repented, and converted from their
iniquities, They might well and warrantably have pleaded their repentance and
conversion, as a title (through the mercy of God in Christ) for their
admittance into the Kingdom of Heaven, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us;
instead of saying (Have not thou taught in our street, have not we eaten and
drunk in thy presence, in thy name cast out devils --) they had been able to
say with David, I have kept thy Word, I have been upright before thee, and have
kept my self from mine iniquity, or as Hezekiah, or Nehemiah, or St. Paul said
of themselves, 2 King. 20.3. Neh. 14.22. 2 Timothy 4.7. Christ would not doubtless
have turned them going with that cutting word (Depart from me) but have said
for their comfort, as to the good servant, Well done good and faithful
servants: For thus to have pleaded, was not to take any work proper to Christ,
out of Christ's hand, or to ascribe ought, that was peculiar to Christ, to any
other thing; which to have done, was far from those Old Testament and New
Testament Saints before-named. Did David in that saying ( Lord save me; for I
am holy, Ps. 86.2.) renounce all bartering with Christ, or take the work of his
salvation out of Christ's hands, or ascribe that to his own personal holiness,
that was peculiar to the person of Christ? I trow not. Yea, for professed
Christians in such sort to plead as aforesaid, is in very deed to put the work
of their salvation into the hands of Christ, who as he did by bearing their
iniquities, purchase their being saved, conditionally upon their return to God
through him, by faith and repentance, so he gives repentance to sinners, that
thereupon both he and they may be in a proximate, or moral capacity, he of
pardoning and saving them, and they of being pardoned or saved by him. Briefly
then, the sin and folly of those carnal Professors was not, that they would not
at all, or upon any terms Barter with Christ (only with themselves) but that
they would have bartered with Christ, with coin not current, or with
counterfeit ware (i. e.) not with true repentance for sin in the name of
Christ, and conversion from it, but with an outside profession of Christianity,
owning Christ professedly as their Lord and Master, themselves in the mean time
being servants to, or workers of iniquity: For had they indeed parted from
their sins, they had never parted from Christ, nor would Christ have refused
commuting with them, but would have given them the benefit of his
Righteousness, in exchange for their parting with their own unrighteousness.
And because as our Savior speaking concerning the worshipping of God in Spirit
and in truth, says (The Father seeks such to worship him) so Christ himself
seeks such Chapmen, as will forsake all their sinful ways, that so they may
win him, and the benefit of his Righteousness; I will therefore speak a few
words, whereby to drive the bargain betwixt the Savior and the sinner; to
which end my advice to every sinner, is as follows:

1. If ever you mean to drive a saving bargain with Christ, or by bartering
with him, gain the benefit of his Righteousness, you must know the market-rate,
or (to speak in the language of Scripture, Luke 14.28.) You must sit down, and
count the cost. And in the name of the living God, I beseech you to take heed
of thinking, That it is enough for you to lay down your sins at the cross of
Christ, upon his shoulders, or to give up your sins to Christ in the guilt of
them, which some use to call, An applying of Christ to our selves: For if this
be all, I may well say, in allusion to those words of our Savior ( Mat. 5.47.)
What do you more than others? more than those others, who said, Lord, Lord.

2. You must rightly understand, what are the commodities, that Jesus Christ
does offer or expose, and withal the true value and worth of them, they being
the fruits of his Righteousness [Remission of sin, Reconciliation with God,
Redemption, Justification unto life, Everlasting salvation.] It is the office
of Gods Ministers, faithfully to acquaint sinners, that although Christ has
done his work, in bearing the burden of their iniquities, in the punishment
thereof, nevertheless there is a certain burden or yoke of duty, to which every
sinner is to submit his neck and shoulders, that would have the benefit of
Christ's sufferings actually conferred upon him; which yoke and burden (for our
comfort our Savior assures us) is easy and light.

3. You must after a due deliberation, and count of the cost, come to a fixed
resolution, to come up to the market-price, and to bid no less than Christ does
demand: For if we mean to barter with him, we must not think to bring him down
to our terms (the wearing of his Livery, professing his name, doing some more
cheap, easy, external duties --) but we must come up to his terms (i.e.) we
must deny our selves, take up our cross and follow him, as he has from the
beginning told us, Mat. 16.24. For though we may cozen or cheat our selves, yet
Christ will neither cozen us, nor would he, that we should be cozened by our
selves, or by any others.

4. Let no man deceive you with vain words, as if the doing according to the
foresaid Resolution, were a bartering with your selves, and not with Christ, or
a taking of the work out of Christ's hand, and ascribing it to your own faithful
performances: For this is but to do our own work under Christ, and by his
helping grace; this is to be workers together with God; this is under Christ to
do our own part, for the saving of our selves, which every sinner must do, who
expects to be saved through Christ, Acts 2.40. 1 Timothy 4.16. It Is true, as the
Doctor says, That the work, which Christ came to do in the world, was to bear
our iniquities, and to lay down his life a ransom for our sins; but withal it
concerns us all to remember, that we have a work or works to do, that the
benefit of that his ransom and sufferings may be ours, whereupon as to us they
may not at last prove in vain, and we reproached, as those who have rejected,
or frustrated the counsel of God against our selves, Luke 7.30. Our only work
is not to give up our sins to Christ, to lay them upon his shoulders, or to
believe, that he has born them. We can never barter, or commute with Christ
merely upon such terms. Nor let us regard such vain words, as are here
suggested by the Doctor, as if repenting for our sins, and doing our duty, that
we may be saved by Christ, were in effect to say, Our repentance, our duties,
shall bear our iniquities. The truth is, in these four things,

1. Whether we repent, or not repent, whether we do, or not do our duty, most
undoubtedly Christ has born our iniquities.

2. If Christ had not born our iniquities, although we had done our duty in
repenting, our repentance would have been to no saving purpose; for we must
still our selves have born our iniquities notwithstanding.

3. Though Christ has born our iniquities, nevertheless repentance for sin,
and converting therefrom to God in Christ, are our duties, and duties of such
indispensable necessity, that unless we do repent and be converted, we our
selves must bear our iniquities in the eternal punishment thereof.

4. To repent and to do our duty, that we may not our selves in this sort bear
our iniquities, is not in any rational construction to say, as the Doctor, it
seems, does interpret it, That our repentance and duties shall bear our
iniquities.

I have been the more copious in answer to the said passages of the Doctor,
that I might preserve, or rescue the souls of men, from being ensnared thereby:
And although I expect no thanks for my pains from many, but contempt and
derision rather, nevertheless forasmuch as I look upon the said passages, as
dangerous gins and snares, suited in their own nature to entangle sinners,
instead of tending to their edification, in ought that is good, I shall not
repent of this my work and labor of love.

I will now proceed to the proposal of such useful Questions, as in the
beginning of this Chapter, I intimated should be the subject of several the
Chapters following.

CHAP. XIX.
In what sense may it be truly said, That we are interessed in Christ's Merit or
Satisfaction. In answer hereunto it is said, That three things may possibly be
meant, by the Merit or Satisfaction of Christ, which being distinctly
specified, the Question is accordingly determined.

FOrasmuch as such sayings as these, are ordinarily heard from the mouths, and
to be seen in the printed Sermons of many popular Preachers (Believers are
interessed in the Merits of Christ, They may lay claim to his Merits, Christ's
Satisfaction is theirs, They may challenge it as their own --) and forasmuch as
such sayings, are by the common sort of Hearers and Readers (not to mention any
the Authors accustomed to such words) either not at all understood, or
mis-understood; and indeed forasmuch as such sayings do need a due explication;
as well therefore to promote the truth, as to prevent error, in the minds of
people, by their mis-conceptions, I will propose, and answer the following
Question.

Quest. In what sense may it be truly said, That we are interessed in Christ's
merit and satisfaction, or, That we may challenge, and lay claim thereunto as
Ours?

Answ. Although there has been enough said already, for a due resolution of
this, in the determination of the third Question, nevertheless for the more
abundant satisfaction of any, who perhaps may need it, I will answer thereunto,
as follows.

There be three things, which possibly may be meant by the Merit and
Satisfaction of Christ. 1. Christ's Righteousness it self, or his very doings
and sufferings themselves, wherein his Righteousness did consist. 2. The
valuableness, satisfactoriness, or meritoriousness of that his Righteousness
and Obedience. 3. The thing or things, which by Christ's meritorious obedience
were merited.
These three do differ in sense and signification, as Efficient, Efficiency,
and Effect; The first (Christ's Righteousness or Obedience) has the nature of
an Efficient cause; The second (the satisfactoriness of Christ's Obedience) of
Causality; The third (the thing or things merited) of an Effect so caused. Now
when we say, that we are interessed in Christ's merit and satisfaction, that
they are Ours, that they are imputed to us, or bestowed upon us, the words
(Merit or Satisfaction) are to be understood in the third sense of the words,
and in neither of the two former senses. If the Question were thus formed or
worded, What is the subject of Christ's merit or satisfaction? It is truly to be
answered,

1. As merit is taken in the second sense, the subject thereof (I mean,
Subjectum immediatum, seu inhaesionis) is Christ's merit or satisfaction, as
taken in the first sense of the words before specified: For the worthiness (the
Vis aptitudinalis) or aptitude of Christ's Righteousness to merit or satisfy,
has to that his Righteousness, the habitude of an Adjunct, even as the
keenness of a Knife, or its aptitude to cut, has to the Knife it self the same
kind of respect. 2. As merit or satisfaction is taken in the first sense, yea
also in the second sense of the words, as before specified, so Christ himself
is the subject thereof, I mean, Subjectum denominationis: In these two senses,
his Merit and Satisfaction is truly his own Merit and Satisfaction, and so to
be denominated, but not Ours, they being in the said senses of the words
Incommunicable to us. 3. As Christ's Merit or Satisfaction are taken in the
third sense of the words before-named, Believers are the subject thereof; for
they are the persons, who have interest in, or do partake of the saving fruits,
effects, or benefits thereof, or thereby purchased. Now in this only sense (in
my apprehension) can Christ's merit or satisfaction, be truly said to be Ours,
To be imputed to us, or bestowed upon us, or we to have interest in it, or (as
is the usual expression of some Preachers) to have it made over to us.
Briefly, In such a sense as Our Demerit may be said to be Christ's, so his
Merit may be said to be Ours. As the word [Merit] so the word Demerit may
possibly mean three things;

1. The evil act, or action of sinning. 2. The demeritoriousness, or
deservingness of punishment, that does necessarily adhere to that evil action.
3. The punishment it self thereby deserved. Now in the two former senses of the
word, a sinners Demerit is his own and not Christ's; nor did Christ ever assume
to, or take upon himself our Demerit in any such sense, but only in the third
sense of the word, as that word does import the punishment it self, which we by
our sins had merited or deserved.
CHAP. XX.
Q. To what profit would the Righteousness of Christ in it self, imputed to the
justification of a sinner, be more than the Imputation of it in the benefit
thereof? Answ. None at all, except that be a benefit, which the Familists do
pretend unto, and which they call Our being Christed with Christ. The suffrage
of the very learned Dr. Henry More. An Objection answered, taken from the
pretense of several benefits, which being distinctly specified in the following
Chapters, are there manifested to be null and void.

Quest. CU I bono, To what purpose or profit, would the Righteousness of Christ
imputed, or the imputation thereof (in the sense here disowned) to the
justification of a sinner, be more than the imputation of it, in the benefit
thereof unto him, viz. the remission of his sin?

Answ. None at all, so far as I have been able, by all that I have heard or
read hitherunto, to comprehend: For what more does a sinner need, or can he in
reason desire to receive from God, or is he capable of receiving from God
through Christ, than a free and full pardon of all his sins, upon his faithful
and penitential return to God in him? What more should God do for a penitent
and believing soul, than to be merciful to his sins, or to him a sinner (these
are Scriptural expressions of Gods pardoning mercy, Ps. 51.1. Luke 18.13. Heb.
8.12.) for the Righteousness sake of Christ, or the meritoriousness thereof? Is
there any thing beyond Heaven, that a believing sinner, a sanctified soul, can
desire? And what is it, that can keep a sinner out of the Kingdom of Heaven,
but sin unpardoned? Sin retained, does indeed keep the gate of Heaven fast shut
against us, by the arm of the Almighty; but sin remitted, or the remission of
sin, makes those everlasting doors to fly open, even as that iron gate did to
Peter of its own accord, Act. 12.10. whereupon to every pardoned soul, there is
an entrance ministered abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. I know no benefit, that a sinner is capable of receiving,
by any imputation of Christ's Righteousness, beyond what has been said, he
does, or shall enjoy, through the pardon of his sin, unless we shall account it
a benefit to be Christed with Christ; a benefit, which as I do not understand,
so neither do I think it to have any existence, otherwise than as of old, in
the brains of Jacob Behmen, and Henry Nicols, so in those their followers,
styled, The Tribe or Family of Love, who have inferred Our being Christed with
Christ, from such an Imputation of Christ's Righteousness unto us, which being
by many others unwarrantably asserted, is in this Treatise deservedly
disclaimed and opposed. I do here call to mind the words of the very learned
Doctor Henry More, very pertinent to the present purpose.

If you prescind it (says he) from remission of sin, through the sacrifice of
Christ on the Cross, this phrase Imputative Righteousness, has no
signification at all, and that therefore there is no damage done to our
Religion, if it be not accounted a distinct Article, from the Remission of sins
in the blood of Christ: For it cannot afford any true and useful sense distinct
therefrom, nay I may say, any that is not mischievous and dangerous, and such
as tends to that loathsome and pestilential error of Antinomianism.

The premises considered, there is just cause to conclude, that those
Ministers, who without affectation of new phrases, and modes of speaking, do
love still to utter (...) (as is the Apostles expression, 1 Cor. 14.9.)
intelligible speech, or (as our Translation renders it) words easy to be
understood, I mean, who do in plain downright Scripture Language, preach
remission of sin, through the blood, righteousness, or obedience of Christ, do
preach all that is true, or truly comfortable in that doctrine, which in the
Sermons and Writings of many, does go under the name of Christ imputed
Righteousness.

Object. But do not the contrary minded pretend, that Justification, by the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness it self to a sinner, is a greater benefit,
than remission of sin, and that also, which a sinner, over and above the pardon
of his sin, has absolute need of, in order to his admittance into the Kingdom
of Heaven?

Answ. I am not altogether ignorant, of what is to that purpose pretended by
too too many of my Brethren, whose pretenses I shall faithfully relate, and
because I do judge them to be weak and groundless, I will endeavor to manifest
the same in the ensuing Chapters.

CHAP. XXI.
One benefit pretended by diverse, That by Remission of sin, a sinner is freed
from the punishment deserved by his fault, but by Christ's Righteousness
imputed, he is freed from the fault it self, the vanity of which pretense is
discovered. Several Objections answered, wherein is shown, That a sinner may
be disobliged from suffering, the punishment deserved for his fault, and yet
remain faulty still; and that it is repugnant to the nature, as well as to the
Law of God, for God to repute a sinner to be that, which he is not, or not to
have committed those faults, which he has committed. That it is one thing for
God to repute a person to be innocent, and quite another to be dealt with
respectively to impunity as innocent. In what sense a Thief having made
satisfaction for his theft, is in the sense of the Law a Thief still. The main
ground of mistake in this matter specified.

1. IT is pretended, that by remission of sin, the sinner is freed from the
punishment deserved by his fault, but by his justification, through Christ's
Righteousness imputed to him, he is freed from faultiness, or the fault it
self. To this purpose says Mr. John Warner, in his Book styled, Diatriba Fidei
justificantis qua justificantis, printed in the year 1657, the Book it self
being chiefly written, in opposition to Dr. Hammond, Mr. Baxter, Mr.
Woodbridge, and my self, as to several passages in my Exercitation, concerning
the nature of forgiveness of sin.

His words, p. 139. are these; Whereas pardon of sin does take away Reatum
poenae, justification does constitute a man so righteous, as to take away
Reatum culpae.

To the same purpose I have read in another Author, who says, That whereas
remission of sin takes away the punishment, justification takes away the fault,
so that the Law has no power to pronounce us faulty. So Mr. Anth. Burges of
Just. 2d. part, p. 268.

As for the vanity of this pretense, I have said enough already, partly in this
Treatise, and partly in the 4th. Chapter of my Exercitation, concerning the
Nature of forgiveness of sin, and if need be, am ready to say more, for the
discovery thereof. And for the better understanding of the matter, let the
difference betwixt Guilt of fault, and Guilt of punishment, be rightly
understood, and still remembered, viz. That these two do differ Sicut Meritum
poenae, and Obligatio ad luendum poenam, in the former sense he is guilty, who
has committed a fault, and thereby has deserved punishment, but in the latter
sense he only is guilty, that remains actually obliged to suffer the
punishment, which he by his fault had deserved. Now (as I have said before) as
Christ's Righteousness is no more, or otherwise imputed to a sinner, for his
justification, than his pardon, so also his justification does stand him in no
more stead than does his pardon; albeit Justification does [even as Remission
of sin] take away the guilt of punishment, yet it neither does, nor can take
away the guilt of fault, or faultiness it self, from the sinner; so that albeit
the Law cannot pronounce a sinner, who is justified, to be guilty, as a person
actually obliged to suffer for his fault, yet it may, and does, and cannot
otherwise choose but pronounce him faulty, or guilty of fault; yea the Law, in
its express pronouncing a person to be pardoned, justified, or not guilty of
punishment, does implicitly pronounce him to be guilty of fault. So true are
those sayings, Quod factum est, fieri infectum non potest. Habere eripitur,
habuisse nunquam, it a peccare cessat, peccavisse nunquam. Hereupon it, was
most truly said by the Poet,

-- Ne non peccarim, Mors quoque non faciet. But because I am well assured,
that Mr. Warner and Mr. Burgess are not alone in that their mistake, as
aforesaid, I will therefore relate certain passages, which I have somewhere
read, objected against the truth here; and in the 4th. Chapter of my said
Exercitation asserted, and return answer thereunto.

Object. Either in forgiving sin, God must Peccantem non peccantem facere, or
else he does nothing?

Answ. 1. If this be true, that God in forgiving sin, does make a sinner to be
no sinner, or of faulty not faulty, then there is no difference at all as to
this particular, betwixt forgiveness of sin and justification, seeing God in
forgiving the sinner, as well as in justifying him, does make him no sinner (i.
e.) not faulty, or culpable.

Object. Gods taking off the obligation to punishment, is in order to his
making Peccantem non peccantem (i. e.) a sinner to be no sinner?

Answ. I deny, that Gods taking off a sinners obligation to punishment, is in
order to any such matter, as is here pretended: For his taking off a sinners
obligation to punishment, is in order to his non-inflicting, or his actual
taking off the punishment it self, in his appointed time.

2. If it were truly said, that Gods taking off a sinners obligation to
punishment, were in order to his making of a person faulty not faulty, then the
difference betwixt remission of sin and justification, cannot be as is here
pretended.

Object. As long as a sinner is faulty, he is still obliged to punishment?

Answ. Woe be to us, if this be true. For if there be truth in that saying, we
have all cause to say with the Disciples, Who then can be saved?

2. Be it known to sinners, for their great Consolation in Christ, that what is
here objected, is a notorious mistake; the very truth being this, viz. That a
sinner may be disobliged from suffering the punishment deserved by his fault,
even when, and while he stands faulty, yea although to all eternity he does
stand faulty; and in very deed, every pardoned or justified sinner shall so
stand before God, it being a thing simply impossible, but that he, who is
pardoned or justified by Gods free grace, through the Redemption which is in
Christ Jesus, should remain faulty or culpable, as to his former sins, even
unto all eternity.

Object. It is not a contradiction to say, A sinner may become no sinner in
Gods account, or by Imputation, that being done for him, and made over to him,
which be should have done himself?

Answ. 1. Whereas the Scripture tell us, that Christ is our Mediator and
Advocate with the Father, this Objection supposes him to have been our
Mandatory, Proxy, or Delegate, and that Christ's doings were so done for us,
and in such a sense made over to us, as that God imputes the very things done,
or the very doing of the things themselves unto us, the error of which
imagination, I have already sufficiently (as I hope) demonstrated.

2. As a person having sinned, or committed a fault, is thereupon to be
denominated a sinner, even so does God still from thence forward account of
him, neither is it possible, that God should upon any account whatsoever,
repute him otherwise than as a person faulty: For look upon what account any
one shall affirm, that God does repute any such person not faulty, he must upon
the same account attribute to the All-seeing God a mistaken judgment (i. e.) to
repute a person to be such a manner of person, as indeed he is not, or not to
have committed the fault or faults, which indeed he has.

3. As it is a contradiction for any one to say, That what is done, was never
done, so it is a notorious untruth to say, That God reputes a man not to have
done the faults, which he has done, or not to have thereby deserved, what he
has deserved.

Object. What difference is there betwixt being imputed innocent, and dealt
with as innocent? And if justified persons be accounted innocent, then their
faultiness is done away by Imputation?

Answ. 1. There is a plain difference betwixt imputed (I think, the Objector
would or should have said reputed) innocent, and dealt with respectively to
impunity, as innocent: For the former does imply, that the person is esteemed
to have committed no fault, and thereupon that he is justified by works, the
latter does imply, that although a person be a sinner, yet his punishment is
remitted, and that he is justified by free grace.

2. Persons that are justified by grace, or with a Gospel-kind of
justification, are not accounted innocent (for upon the account of innocence,
they must be justified by works and not by grace) and consequently their
faultiness is not done away, by any imaginary imputation whatsoever.

3. It is one thing for God to repute a man Innocent, and quite another thing
for God to repute him As Innocent: For, for God to repute a person Innocent, is
to repute him to have committed no fault; but for God to repute a person As
Innocent, is for God to pardon him, or not punish him for his faults, but to
deal with him as one, who never committed any.

4. Though I readily grant, that the faults of a person pardoned, or justified,
are done away, as to the Non-imputation of guilt of punishment (in which
respect, their pardon or justification is styled a Non-imputation of their
faults to them, Ps. 32.2. 2 Cor. 5.18.) nevertheless I must still deny, that
the faultiness of such a person is done away, and affirm the contrary, viz.
That his faultiness, or his sin in the faultiness thereof, is still imputed to
him (i. e.) that he is still reputed by God, to have done or committed a fault,
and thereby to have deserved punishment.

Object. Though in justifying a sinner, God does not Peccata non peccata
facere, yet he may Peccantem non peccantem facere?

Answ. Because God cannot do the former, therefore he cannot do the latter: For
Peccatum and Peccans being Conjugata, it does necessarily follow, that
whosoever does Peccantem non Peccantem facere, he must in order thereunto,
Peccatum non Peccatum facere; for that cannot be done without this: A man
cannot of Peccans be made Non Peccans, till that his Peccatum be made Non
Peccatum. Peccatum must be undenominated Peccatum, or denominated Non Peccatum,
before Peccans can possibly be undenominated Peccans, or denominated Non
Peccans. I conclude therefore, that in his pardoning or justifying a sinner,
God does not, yea cannot, do either of the said things, I say, Cannot, because
it implies a contradiction, (i. e.) to make one, that has sinned, not to have
sinned, or that, which once was a sin, not to have been a sin.

Object. A Thief having made satisfaction for his fault, is in the sense of the
Law no longer a Thief, or faulty as to theft, and so it is in the case of a
sinners justification?

Answ. 1. I readily both give and grant, that look how it is with a Thief, who
by himself has made legal satisfaction for his fault, so it is with a
justified sinner (I say not, who has made satisfaction for himself in or by
Christ, but) for whom Christ has made satisfaction, and which satisfaction as
so made by Christ, God has accepted: And the case of both I judge to be this,
viz. That although both of them do still remain faulty, or Rei culpoe, yet
neither of them are Obligati ad poenam (i. e.) actually obliged to suffer the
punishment deserved by, or for their faults.

2. Those words (A Thief, that has satisfied for his fault, is in the sense of
the Law no longer a Thief) are ambiguous: For as the word Thief may signify
two things, viz. One that has stolen, and one that is liable, or obliged to
suffer for his theft, so the foresaid words may signify, either that the Law
cannot say, That such a one has stolen, or, That such a one is liable, or
obnoxious to be condemned. Now although the said Thief, who has made legal
satisfaction, be in the sense of the Law no longer a Thief, in the latter sense
of the word [Thief] yet he still is a Thief in the former sense of the word,
and shall be still so senced by the Law, even so long till theft be no theft,
or the Law become never to have been a Law, or till that which is once done,
shall become a thing that never was done.

Object. The faultiness of the sin, and of the person from that sin, are two
things, the act of theft will be theft, but the person committing that, though
once a Thief, yet having satisfied the Law, in the sense of that Law is become
no Thief?

Answ. 1. This in part has been already answered, in my reply to the Objection
immediately foregoing, wherein has been declared, in what sense of the word
Thief, the said person is in the face of the Law looked upon as no Thief, and
yet still as a Thief (i. e.) though not as one, who is obliged to suffer for
his theft, yet as one, who has stolen or committed theft.

2. I deny, that the faultiness of the sin, and of the person resulting from
that sin, are two things, (i. e.) two separable things, as the Objector
pretends: For there is not one faultiness of the sin, and another of the
person, nor can the faultiness of theft, or of any other sin, be separated from
the person of him, who has committed such sins; the faultiness of such sins,
will in the simple faultiness thereof, result upon the persons of such sinners,
so long as Peccans and Peccatum, Furtum and Furans are Conjugata.

3. One special reason, why some do not perceive their mistake in this
pretended difference, betwixt remission of sin and justification (they
asserting remission takes away the punishment, but justification the fault)
seems to be this, viz. Because they do not discern, or mind the difference,
betwixt that twofold guilt of sin, which upon occasion has oft-times before
been mentioned, and once at least explicated [Guilt of fault, and of
punishment] this being one main difference betwixt them, viz. That guilt of
punishment is a thing separable from the sinner, but the guilt of fault not so:
For although it be most true, that satisfaction being made for a fault (which
was the case here supposed) the fault does not Redundare in personam (i. e.)
result upon the criminal, in the punishment thereof (this being the case of
every pardoned, or justified sinner) nevertheless the Reatus simplex,
faultiness it self (this being a thing inseparable from the sin and sinner)
does still result upon him, and shall abide upon him, till such time as the
foresaid contradictions can be verified, which will be Ad Groecas Calendas,
neither in this world, nor in the world to come.

Thus have I answered to what I ever hitherto have read, touching the first
grand benefit, which is pretended to be in a sinners justification, by the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness unto him, over and above that, which does
consist in the Remission of his sin. I proceed to the mention of another, which
shall be the subject of the next Chapter.

CHAP. XXII.
Another benefit pretended to be had by Justification, through Christ's
Righteousness imputed, over and above the pardon of our sins is, That remission
of sin does take off a sinners obligation to punishment, but justification by
Christ's Righteousness imputed, does put him into a state of favor and
acceptance with God, the vanity of which pretense is discovered. The
definition of Justification, given by the late Assembly of Divines, in their
lesser Catechism explicated, so as to reconcile it with the truth of Scripture,
though not from tautology. Three main grounds of the mistake, in the difference
here pretended, to be betwixt remission of sin, and justification by the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness.

2. A Second benefit pretended to be had by justification, through Christ's
imputed Righteousness, over and above the pardon of our sins, is this, That
remission of sin does take off a sinners obligation to punishment, but
justification puts him into a state of favor and acceptance with God.

To this pretense I reply,

1. Forasmuch as the punishment of sin is privative as well as positive, of
loss as well as of sense, (as are the common expressions) and forasmuch as the
loss, or privation of a sinners favor and acceptance with God, is one part of
that punishment, which is threatened for sin, it cannot therefore be otherwise,
but that if the punishment of our sins, through a pardon be remitted, but that
our persons should be accepted, and restored into favor with God. To this
purpose it is observable, that Reconciliation with God, and remission of sin,
are used in Scripture as terms Synonimous, or of the same importance;
reconciliation with God, being a part at least of remission of sin; for proof
whereof, see 2 Cor. 5.19. where Gods reconciling the world to himself, is said
to be his not imputing to them their trespasses, which non-imputation is (as
has been before-said) all one with remission of sin. See also Heb. 2.17. and
9.12. where we find it to be all one, for Christ to make reconciliation for
sinners, as to purchase remission, or redemption for them. See Act. 10.43. with
Romans 5.11. To receive remission of sin, and to receive atonement or
reconciliation with God, are there mentioned as the same thing.

2. I desire the Reader to consider, whether, if a sinner through the remission
of his sins, be not brought into an estate of favor and acceptance with God,
Psalm. 32.1.
the Psalmist had sufficient ground to pronounce a sinner blessed, upon the
account of the forgiveness of his sins. Had not remission of sin, in its very
nature, employed the acceptance of our persons with God, the Psalmist would
doubtless not have said, as there he does once and again, [Blessed is the man,
whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered, and Blessed is the
man, to whom the Lord imputes no iniquity.]

Quest. Do not the late Assembly of Divines, make justification to be more than
remission of sin, as seems by that description of justification, which in their
lesser Catechism, is by them described to be An act of Gods free grace, wherein
he pardons all our sins, and accepts us as righteous in his sight, for the
righteousness of Christ imputed to us --

Answ. 1. That God accepts us as righteous, for the righteousness sake of
Christ, is the truth of Scripture, and a truth worthy of all acceptance; but
that this is for the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, no Scripture does
expressly affirm, and forasmuch as those Divines do not explain the meaning of
that their saying, I am willing to construe it, in such a sense as agrees with
the Scriptures, and as has been opened in the third Chapter of this Treatise.

2. I am willing also to make such a construction of those additional words, in
their description of justification (And accepts us as righteous in the sight
of God) as to reconcile them to the truth of Scripture; and the best
construction, that possibly (to my understanding) can be made thereof, is this,
viz. That those words are a mere tautology. Gods pardoning us, is all one with
his cleansing us from all unrighteousness; whereupon be it seriously
considered, How God can be said to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, and not
eo nomine, accept us in his sight as righteous: For there being sins of
omission, as well as commission, if God pardon the former, as well as the
latter, he must of necessity accept of our persons as righteous; for as by
pardoning a sinner his sins of commission, he accepts of him as a person, that
has done no evil, so by pardoning him his sins of omission, God accepts him as
a person, that has performed all good, and what is this, but to accept him as
righteous, positively righteous? There needs no more therefore to
righteousness, than pardon of sin: For that which puts an offender into such a
state, as if he had broken the Law in nothing, and had performed it in every
thing, that does necessarily justify, or constitute him righteous.

The premises considered, it does evidently appear, That to say, By the
remission of our sins, God discharges us from the punishment of them, and by
justification he accepts us as Righteous, is all one as to say, That by
remission of sin God pardons, or discharges us from our sins of Commission,
and by Justification he pardons, or discharges us from our sins of Omission;
and how unreasonable this assertion is, it is easy to determine.

The main grounds of the difference in this Chapter, pretended to be betwixt
remission of sin and Justification, seem to be these: 1. Because such
pretenders do not consider, that there are sins of Omission, as well as of
Commission, and that whenever, or to whomsoever God pardons the one, he
pardons the other. 2. Because they fancy an Imputation of Christ's Righteousness
to a sinner, in or toward his justification, which is not toward, or in order
to his pardon; whereas it is the undoubted truth of Scripture, that Christ's
Righteousness is no more, or otherwise imputed for, or in order to the one,
than the other. 3. Because they fancy such a kind of Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, or that it is in such a sense imputed to a sinner in his
justification (they making it not the Medium unto a sinners righteousness, but
the very thing it self) as is repugnant both to reason, and Scripture.


CHAP. XXIII.
A third benefit pretended by a sinners justification, through Christ's imputed
Righteousness, over and above remission of sin is, That this latter does only
free the sinner from eternal death, but justification does moreover entitle him
to eternal life, the vanity of which pretense is discovered; with an answer to
what is objected to the contrary by Mr. Anth. Burges. An Answer also to the
Question, Whether believing sinners are not restored by Christ, unto a greater
degree of felicity, by their justification through Christ's Righteousness
(supposing the Imputation of it) than upon the bare score of the forgiveness of
their sins? The Contradictions of Mr. Anth. Burges, in certain particulars
instanced in.

A Third benefit (much-what of affinity with that in the foregoing Chapter)
pretended by a sinners justification, through Christ's imputed Righteousness,
over and above the Remission of his sins, is, That remission of sin does only
free a sinner from eternal death, but justification does more (i. e.) it
entitles him to eternal life.

To this I reply. That the thing here pretended, has been indeed asserted by
several Writers and Preachers; but for the discovery of their mistake therein,
I need not say much more, than to desire the Reader to reflect upon what has
been already said, specially in the foregoing Chapter, and withal to consider,
That forasmuch as the loss, or forfeiture of our title to life, is one part of
the deserved punishment of sin, it must needs follow, that a sinners deserved
punishment being remitted through a pardon, he is Ipso facto and eo nomine,
restored unto that title to life eternal, which by his sin he had lost or
forfeited. If a sinner being obliged to lose heaven, and to be cast into hell
for his sin, shall be once pardoned, through the dissolution of that his
obligation, by a pardon he becomes In statu quo prius, he has right to
impunity of both kinds, I mean, to freedom from hell, and to the enjoyment of
heaven. If the loss of the enjoyment of God be punishment of its kind (called
therefore Poena damni) then does pardon of sin restore right to that enjoyment
of God, else the sinner is not fully pardoned, no more than justified, as if a
Traitor or Murderer be pardoned, yet must lose his goods, he is then pardoned
as to his life and lands, but not as to his goods. So that a sinner so far
forth as he is pardoned, he is justified, there being no more in the
justification of an offender, than pardon of sin, as to the form, or formal
nature of the thing.

I will spend this Chapter in answering such Arguments, as I have seen
alleged, for the strengthening of the said vain pretense, and shall begin with
Mr. Anthony Burges. He says in his Book of Justification, the second part:

Object. It follows not, where all evil is removed in a subject capable, all
good is introduced (if a man shall not be damned, he must be saved) for though
these are inseparable, yet this does not follow Ex natura rei, but
extrinsecally by the order and appointment of God, because God might have
delivered a sinner from hell, and yet have annihilated him, as a King may
forgive a Malefactor by sparing his life, and yet not admit him for a Courtier,
and make him a Favorite.

Is not Annihilation an eternal evil? Why then does this Author, or how can he
in reason suppose a person pardoned to be annihilated, he acknowledging withal,
that pardon of sin does remove the eternal evil, that was deserved?
Answ. 1. Although I grant, That hell torments are one thing, and the
annihilating of a sinner is another, yet I must needs say, That this learned
Author, with certain others, do speak after a strange rate, or notion of
pardon, who do speak of a person pardoned, or disobliged from punishment, and
yet will suppose him to be annihilated: For to suppose him to be annihilated,
is to suppose him not to be pardoned, but punished, and that severely too.

2. They, who say, That God might have freed a sinner from eternal death, and
then by annihilation have rendered him incapable of eternal life, do in plain
consequence say, That God might have pardoned a sinner, and then have punished
him.

3. Though I yield these three things;

1. That Annihilation is rather to be chosen, than hell, That Praestat non
esse, quam semper miserum esse. 2. That upon that account, a sinner set free
from hell, and yet annihilated, may be said to be pardoned in a diminutive
sense, that is, to halves, or comparatively with himself, if he had been cast
into that lake, which burns with fire and brimstone for ever. 3. That God in
his sovereignty, or by virtue of his absolute dominion, or a priori, might, if
he had so pleased, have in such sort pardoned a sinner to halves by
annihilation. This I yield: For as it is in Gods power to pardon a sinner upon
what terms, in what way, and at what time, so also how far forth, or in what
degrees it seems good to his divine wisdom and pleasure.
But these Concessions notwithstanding, be it considered, That God has in his
Word revealed his divine will and pleasure in this point, viz. That he is so
well pleased with the satisfaction of his only begotten Son (Jesus Christ our
Lord) as to promise unto, and in due time to bestow upon believing sinners, not
a partial pardon, but a full and plenary pardon of sin; and from this plenary
pardon so promised, according to Gods good pleasure, it does, I say,
necessarily follow, That if a sinner be pardoned with that pardon, which the
Gospel promises, and which alone is here in question, he is Ipso facto,
restored into Gods favor and fatherly acceptance, and entitled to life
eternal.

The premises considered, I infer these three or four Conclusions: 1. That
upon the removal of eternal evil from a person, who is pardoned, eternal good
is immediately introduced, by Gods order and appointment. 2. That to grant (as
the Objector here does) that forgiveness of sin does remove the eternal evil,
is to yield the cause, and to acknowledge, that by Gods order and appointment,
forgiveness of sin does introduce eternal good, or a title to eternal life. 3.
That if we do suppose a sinner pardoned, to be only freed from hell, and then
annihilated, we do even then, therein, and thereby, suppose him not pardoned
according to the tenor of the Gospel, or with such a plenary pardon as the
Gospel promises; and consequently, that to argue after such a rate, as is here
argued, is to forsake, or to depart from the subject of the Question, a thing
much unbeseeming a close Disputant, such as this Author was by many accounted.
4. That it is a groundless imagination to think, as too too many do, who having
first unnecessarily distinguished of Christ's obedience, into active and
passive, do sort them to several distinct purposes, dogmatizing thereupon, That
Christ by his passive obedience, has freed us from the guilt of eternal death,
and by his active obedience, has procured us a title to eternal life, and That
by forgiveness of sin we have freedom from the one, and by Justification by
Christ's Righteousness, we have title to the other. As particularly Dr. Owen
speaks, in his Book of Communion with God. And because it is much to be
desired, that Christians would (...) (as is the Apostles prayer for the
Philippians, Chapter 1.10.) first try, and then approve or disapprove, according to
the different nature of things, my purpose is in certain Chapters of this
Treatise, to expose to an impartial examination, what that Author has dictated
concerning this matter.


In the mean while, I shall offer two things to consideration:

1. Mr. Baxter says in those sheets, which he wrote in reference to Mr. Edw.
Fowler's Book styled (The design of Christianity.)

We believe, says he, p. 17. That Christ's habitual perfection, with his Active
Righteousness, and his sacrifice, or sufferings, all set together and advanced
in value, by their conjunction with his Divine Righteousness, were the true
meritorious procuring cause of our pardon, justification, sanctification and
salvation. Not one part imputed to this effect, and another to that, but all
thus making up one meritorious cause of all these effects, even of the
Covenant, and all its benefits.

He adds, saying (and which is the main truth, which I do by this whole
Treatise contend for)

And thus Christ's Righteousness is imputed and given to us, not immediately in
it self, but in the effects and fruits: As a ransom is said to be given to a
Captive, because it is given For him, though strictly the ransom is given to
another, and only the fruits of it to him.

This I take to be the Catholic Faith, in the Article before us.

2. Be it considered, That there is no Medium betwixt Life and Death, no middle
condition rationally imaginable betwixt these two. Hereupon we may certainly
conclude, That he who by the forgiveness of his sins, is freed from eternal
death, cannot otherwise but be conceived to have a right to life eternal.

I proceed to answer certain other Arguments, objected from the Scriptures.

Object. The Apostle having said, Acts 13.38, 39.
that through Christ was preached to them the forgiveness of sins, he adds, as
a further privilege or benefit, saying, And by him all that believe, are
justified. This is objected (if I do not mis-remember) in the said Book styled
Communion with God.

Answ. 1. The words being translated out of the original, run thus, Be it known
unto you therefore Men and Brethren, that by this man forgiveness of sins is
preached unto you, and from all things, from which you could not be justified
by the Law of Moses, this is the entire v. 38. in the Greek, and then it
follows v. 39. By him every believing man is justified. The words being thus
rendered, and an Emphasis laid upon (...) (which is oft-times in Scripture as
much as even) do clearly make the same thing to be meant by (...), that is
meant by (...), do clearly, I say, make justification and remission of sin to
be the same thing, or of the self same adequate importance, that implying no
more privilege or benefit than this.

2. Read the words as we find them translated, and it is sufficiently clear,
that the words (justification and remission) are but varied phrases of one and
the same thing, it being the manner of Scripture, frequently to express the
self same thing, by varied words and phrases.

3. The said Scripture, being alleged usually for the proving, that
justification does denote a further privilege than forgiveness of sin,
especially the Imputation of Christ's active obedience, must for that purpose
thus be paraphrased, Through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of
sins, and by him all that believe, have Christ's active obedience imputed to
them from all things, from which you could not have Christ's active obedience
imputed to you by the Law of Moses. Hereupon let any Reader judge, whether this
Scripture makes for the purpose, for which it is alleged, whether by Dr. Owen,
or any other of the adverse Brethren in this controversy.

Some other Objections there are, but they are so weak, that no impartial or
unprejudicate person will (I am most assured) be swayed by them; and therefore
having answered the most considerable, I shall let pass the rest.

I shall now propound another Question.

Quest. Are not believing sinners restored by Christ unto a greater degree of
felicity, than Adam did lose, or forfeit by his sin, and are not Believers
entitled to this greater degree of glory by their justification, through the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to them, and not upon the mere score of the
forgiveness of their sins?

Answ. In answer hereunto, I will set down in the first place, what the opinion
of others is in this matter, and then speak my own sense.

1. There be many, who as they judge, that Believers are restored to a greater
degree of felicity in this life, than Adam did enjoy in Paradise, so also that
they shall enjoy through the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, a greater
degree of heavenly glory, than Adam should have enjoyed upon his continuance in
a state of innocence. But there are others who think, that both of them are
justly questionable, and scarce proveable by the Scriptures, especially the
latter.

2. There be others, asserting, That there is in the merits of Christ, not only
Plenitudo sufficientiae, but also redundantiae, or that his satisfaction was
super-satisfactory (not only Legalis justitiae, but also Super-legalis meriti
(as are the expressions of the very learned Dr. Reynolds, Bishop of Norwich, in
some of his Sermons, if I do not mis-remember) they, I say, thus asserting, do
yield, that Believers shall enjoy through Christ, a greater degree of glory in
heaven, than they lost by the fall of Adam, or in him: But they say, That they
are entitled unto this overplus of glory, not simply by virtue of the remission
of their sins, or justification (for this, say they, does only restore them
Adstatum quo prius, to such a degree of happiness as they lost in Adam,) but by
virtue of the super-aded grace of adoption; and of this opinion are those two
learned Authors, Mr. Will. Bradshaw, and Mr. John Goodwin; and how far forth
Mr. Baxter is inclinable thereunto, and what his opinion more fully is, himself
has declared in a peculiar Section thereabout, in his Book against Colvinus,
if my memory do not fail me.

2. As for my own sense, I conceive;

1. That as the loss of Gods fatherly love and favor, and our becoming
children of the devil, was one part of the punishment of man's sin.

2. As thereupon it follows, That our adoption, or being restored into Gods
fatherly love and favor, is one prime branch at least of forgiveness of sin:
So consequently,

3. That Believers are no otherwise entitled to that farther degree of glory,
by virtue of their Adoption, than by virtue of the remission of their sins; and
I do the rather conceive this to be the truth, because whatever that higher
degree of glory here supposed is, I doubt not, but the loss or miss thereof is
threatened, for sins committed against the Covenant of grace, together with a
greater degree of positive punishment, than was threatened to Adam, for breach
of the Covenant of works. Now forasmuch as Jesus Christ has by his
satisfaction, procured pardon for sins committed explicitly against the New, as
well as the Old Covenant (always excepted to final nonperformance of the
conditions of that New Covenant, which are summarily comprehended in Repentance
toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ) and forasmuch as this
pardon is promised, and vouchsafed to sinners, upon their repentance and faith
in Christ, it does, as I think, necessarily follow, That what sinner soever
has his sins (all his sins against both Covenants) pardoned, that person is
immediately discharged, or freed not only from that punishment, and loss of
favor, which he did incur, and forfeit in Adam, but he is moreover set free
from that greater degree of punishment, which is threatened for sins committed
against the Covenant of grace, and is also by his pardon, entitled to that
higher degree of glory and happiness, which is supposed to be promised in the
same. But that he is entitled thereunto by his justification, with such an
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, as is here pretended, I see no reason at
all to acknowledge, and therefore I must still deny it, till I see it proved,
adding withal, that as for the said higher degree of heavenly glory, supposed
to be enjoyed by Believers for Christ's sake, I think it to be a matter rather
of curious, than necessary enquiry, wherein we are not to be solicitous of
being wise above what is written.

I shall close this Chapter with the words of Mr. Anth. Burges, the said Author
of the Tract concerning Justification ( first part, p. 143, 144.)

Remission of sin (says he) is not only Ablativa mali, but also Collativa boni,
it is not a mere negation of-punishment due to us, but also a plentiful
vouchsafing of many gracious favors to us, such as a Sonship, and right to
eternal life.

These words in his first Book concerning Justification, when I compare with
what he says directly and professedly contrary thereunto, in his second Book,
which came forth some years after, which are these, p. 269.

(Remission of sin and justification differ in this consideration, In
forgiveness of sin there is Ablatio mali, in justification there is Collatio
boni; when sin is forgiven, the eternal evil deserved is removed, but when we
are justified, eternal good is promised.)

When, I say, I compare those contradictory sayings of the same Author
together, I call to mind, what is said to have been facetiously replied in
Parliament, to one Mr. Jordan, a Member thereof, upon his declared change of
mind [ What ailest thou, thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back?] What ailed
this Author, so plainly and palpably to contradict both the truth and himself?
It seems, that that Greek Proverb ((...) -- Second thoughts are best) is not
always true.

There are certain other contradictory passages in this Author, concerning the
subject, which I am now treating upon.

He says, p. 268. Whereas remission of sin does only take away the guilt of
sin, justification does remove the sin it self.

But he says, p. 432. Notwithstanding the Imputation of Christ's active
obedience, God does see the imperfect graces and sins of his people.

Again, Although it be this Author's professed design in his Book (second part)
to maintain the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, in the sense impugned in
this Treatise (he making Justification to consist of two integral parts, viz.
Remission of sin, and Imputation of righteousness) nevertheless he seems
plainly to contradict himself, and to yield the cause by me contended for in
this Treatise, touching the manner of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness,
my assertion, as aforesaid, being this, viz. That it is not in it self
immediately, or in its essential nature imputed to us, but in the blessed
effects, or benefits thereby purchased for us, and by God according to promise,
conferred on us.

And he says the same, page 135, 136.

None say, Christ's obedience is imputed unto us in such a sense, as that we
should be said to be the efficients of that righteousness, but that we should
be the passive subjects, receiving the benefit of it.

CHAP. XXIV.
Q. What are the evil Consequents, which do naturally flow from the Imputation
of Christ's Righteousness, in the sense here impugned? In answer hereunto, one
mischievous consequence is specified, viz. That Christ is a sinner, and the
greatest of sinners.

Quest. WHAT are the evil Consequents, which do seem necessarily to follow from
that doctrine, touching the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness unto us, in the
sense which in this Treatise is disowned?

Answ. Having in the foregoing Chapters manifested, that no good at all, over
and above Remission of sin, does, or can come of it, this Question comes in
very fitly to be demanded, What are the evil consequents to it? And if besides
the No good, or profit, I shall be able to prove, that there are many
mischievous consequences thereof, I hope, that those who have espoused it, will
no longer be enamored with it, but will be contented rather to give it a Bill
of divorce, and fairly to dismiss it.

Mr. Baxter says, It is the heart and root of so many errors, yea of the whole
body of Antinomianism, that he would rather write a great volume against it,
than leave it with a brief touch.

(Mr. Baxter's Confession, p. 229. and p. 266.) That it is the root of many
dangerous errors, very plainly subverting the Christian Religion.

And in those few sheets, which he wrote in reference to Mr. Edw. Fowler's
Book, styled, The Design of Christianity, his words are, p. 12.

It is not to be denied, or hid, that more than downright Antinomians, have so
ill expounded the points of Christ's suretiship, and of the Imputation of our
sin to him, and of the Imputation of his Righteousness to us, as has proved
the great occasion of some men's running into the contrary error, yea and as
would exclude all pardon of sin, and all true Religion, had their notions been
practically and prevalently held.

He names also several Authors, both of our own and foreign Churches (Olevian,
Vrsin, Piscator, Paraeus, Windeline, Camero, Wotton, Gataker, Bradshaw, Le
Blank --) by whom their opinions have been confuted.

Mr. Joseph Truman, in his Book styled, The great Propitiation, p. 92, 93.
says thus;

You may see, how contrary to reason (as well as Scripture) that way of theirs
is, who hold, that Christ's fulfilling of, and Christ's obedience to the Law is
accounted, imputed, as if Believers had fulfilled and obeyed the Law in his so
doing: You may hold the active and passive Righteousness of Christ, a
satisfaction to justice, for our breach of the Law, both of them a valuable
consideration, on which God will acquit the Offenders, so they do but perform
the Gospel-conditions; and I can easily (says he) answer all the Arguments I
have read, to exclude his active obedience, from being part of the satisfaction
to justice, for the breach of the Law: But to hold over and beside such a
satisfaction for our disobedience, that there is made over to us a right to his
obedience, so as God to account us, as if we had obeyed the Law in him, beside
the danger of making God account men as perfect as Christ, and accounting, that
which is not true, it is

1. Altogether needless. -- 2. It makes the death and sufferings of Christ
needless. -- 3. It dissolves the Law, its obliging us to obedience. --
I will instance in some of the prime mischievous consequences, of the doctrine
here opposed, which being cried up by some Authors, as a Gospel-mystery (a
Mystery of piety) will manifest it to be indeed A mystery of iniquity.

1. It follows from thence, That Christ was made a sinner, or That by Gods
Imputation, and man's Reputation, Jesus Christ was the greatest sinner in the
world.

Mr. Air affirms the former, as has been said, the latter is asserted by Dr.
Grew, in his late printed Sermons upon Jer. 23.6. (he quoting the Authority of
Luther, for one branch of the assertion, touching Gods Imputation, and that
Scripture in Mar. 15.28. touching man's Reputation) as if, because he was
reputed a transgressor by the unbelieving Jews, therefore it is to be concluded,
that he was, or was to be so reputed by all others. What Christian ears can
bear with the sound of such a saying as this, That by Imputation of God, Jesus
Christ was the greatest sinner in the world? And how false is it to say, That
God did repute Jesus Christ to be otherwise, whether in life or death, than
indeed he was (i. e.) A Lamb without spot and blemish, holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, as the Scriptures speak of him? 1 Pet. 1.19.
Heb. 7.26.

The truth is, if any such saying has dropped from the pen of Luther, it is not
to be justified, but to be abhorred: For Christ by Imputation was no sinner at
all, nor so reputed, either by God or man, except such as did not know him, and
who therefore hanged him on the tree.

As for the said Dr. Grew, he says indeed ( p. 23, 24.) That in this sense only
Christ was made sin for us, in that he took on him the obligation to
punishment: Where let two things be observed;

1. That the Doctor does mistake and mis-report the true sense of that
Scripture, wherein Christ is said to have been made sin for us, the true sense
whereof is (as has been already said) not that he was made sin it self, or sin
at all for us, but a sin-offering, or a sacrifice for sin. 2. Be it observed,
That the Doctor does not say, that Christ took on him An obligation, but The
obligation to punishment; by which saying, he must rationally be understood to
mean The error whereof I have manifested in another Chapter against Mr.
Ferguson.
Our obligation to punishment, or the same obligation, wherein, or whereby we
sinners were bound to punishment. And if he had meant otherwise, his own reason
and understanding would no more have suffered him, to approve that saying
fathered upon Luther, of Christ his being the greatest sinner in the world by
Imputation, than his stomach would have served him to have eaten his
excrements.
CHAP. XXV.
Another evil Consequence of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, in the
sense disowned, viz. That Believers are as perfectly Righteous, as is Christ
The Righteous, yea, that they are more Righteous, than if they had in their own
persons perfectly kept the whole Law, and that they are as acceptable to God
the Father, as is Christ himself. The falsehood and impiety of which sayings at
large manifested, and some Scriptures which are suborned to speak against the
truth, vindicated. That man may be said to be justified by the Righteousness of
another, and not by his own, three ways, in the Application of which
distinction it is plainly declared, in what sense we are, and in what sense we
are not justified by the Righteousness of another, and not by our own. Several
unjustifiable and intolerable sayings of Dr. Owen, in his Book styled,
Communion with God, related, with brotherly and necessary animadversions
thereupon.

2. ANother evil Consequence of this doctrine, is, That Believers are as
perfectly Righteous, as is Jesus Christ the Righteous.

This Consequence is owned by diverse, among whom I shall instance only in two
or three Authors;

The first shall be Mr. Will. Air, who in his forecited Assize-Sermon, says,
p. 10.

That upon Christ his becoming our Surety, and taking our sins upon himself,
sinners are thereby made as perfectly Righteous, as Christ the Righteous.

Nor does he content himself only to say it, but he does also wrest that
Scripture in 1 John 3.7. to prove it; I say, wrest that Scripture to prove it;
for that Text proves no such thing, but only this, viz. That he who does
righteousness, is born of him (as is the expression, 1 John 2.29.) that is,
does resemble him, or is like him, as a child resembles the father who begat
him. Yea, he does bless that his false doctrine with his subsequent prayer,
therein taking Gods holy Name in vain, by saying, Now the good Lord open all
our eyes, to see the real and glorious excellency of this Privilege. But while
he does thus proclaim the Privilege of the Saints, have we not cause to say,
That he has forgotten that Prerogative of our Savior, mentioned by the
Apostle, Col. 1.18. it being his right to have the Pre-eminence in all things?
Certainly St. Peter's eyes were not opened to see this as his privilege, when
he said to our Savior, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord; for had
he owned any such glorious privilege, or been sensible of the excellency
thereof, he would in all reason have mated his Lord and Master (as I may so
say) or have set himself cheek by chole with him, and have said, Abide by me,
keep not at distance from me; for I am as perfectly Righteous, as thou art. The
same Author does further amplify and illustrate the said privilege of the
Saints, saying, p. 12.

This Privilege is not only negative, but positive, as they are uncloathed and
stripped of their own filthy garments (Zech. 3.4.) so they are clothed upon with
the immaculate robe of Christ's Righteousness, adequate and commensurate to the
Law of God; by the obedience of one ( says the Apostle, Romans 5.19.) many are
made righteous (i. e.) perfectly and completely righteous, more than if they
had kept the Law in their own persons; hereby we come to have boldness and
confidence in the sight of God, his infinite purity and holiness does not
daunt, or discourage us from going to him; for as Christ is before him, so are
all they that do believe in him, through that Righteousness of his, that is put
upon them, see Ephesians. 3.12. Romans 5.2.

But the meaning of those words (By the obedience of one many are made
Righteous) is not as this Author expounds it (perfectly and completely
Righteous, more than if they had kept the Law in their own persons) but the
meaning is, They are, for the meritoriousness sake of Christ's obedience, made
Righteous, with another kind of Righteousness, than is that, which does consist
in their personal, perfect and complete performance of the Law of God, yea,
with such a kind of Righteousness, as is not competible with it, viz. with the
pardon of their sins, or that kind of evangelical justification, which is
styled, The gift of grace, v. 15. and the free gift of many offenses to
justification, v. 16. and the gift of Righteousness, v. 17. For sinners to be
made, or constituted Righteous, is in the sense of the Apostle (as appears by
the context) to be justified, out of the abundance of Gods grace in Christ, or
to be freely pardoned; which no persons can be, or be said to be, who are as
perfectly and completely Righteous, as if they had kept the Law in their own
persons: For those who are as perfectly and completely righteous, and more
righteous, than if they had kept the Law in their own persons, are not
justified of grace at all, or are they capable of a gracious pardon.

And as for the boldness and confidence, which the Apostle speaks of in Ephesians.
3.12. and Romans 5.2. it is an holy boldness and confidence, grounded upon their
pardon of sin and justification, through Gods grace in Christ (mentioned in the
foregoing Paragraph) and not upon any such mis-construction of the sacred
Scriptures, as this Author was so extremely over-bold and confident to suggest.

And whether Believers may be truly, As for that in Zech. 3.4. the true sense
whereof is here perverted by Mr. Will. Air, I shall vindicate it from his
abuse in Chapter 34 in answer to Dr. Owen, by whom it is in like sort perverted
also.
or fitly said to be clothed with the Righteousness of Christ, or to have
Christ's Righteousness put upon them, I shall speak my thoughts more at large in
a peculiar Chapter, and in answer to that Question purposely put. In the mean
while I shall presume to say, That it is not only false, but (as I am
persuaded) blasphemous to say, as does this Author, That as Christ is before
God, so are all they that do believe in him, through his Righteousness: For
Jesus Christ is before God a Savior of sinners, and whereas Believers in
Christ are before God sinners still (i. e.) Rei culpae, guilty persons, and as
such (however pardoned) they do still stand before God, and shall so stand to
all eternity. Christ is before God the Son of God by nature, and Righteous
without a pardon, whereas Believers in Christ, are before God his sons by the
adoption of grace, and Righteous by, or with a gracious pardon, in the blood of
Christ.

The next to Mr. Air I will quote, is the Author of the Book styled, The
Marrow of Modern Divinity, who says, p. 127.

That God the Father, in that voice from heaven, Mat. 3.17. and Joh. 12.30.
does cheer the hearts of poor sinners, and greatly delight them with singular
comfort, and heavenly sweetness, assuring them, that whosoever is married unto
Christ, and so in him by faith, he is as acceptable to God the Father, as
Christ himself, according to that of the Apostle (He has made us acceptable in
his beloved, Ephesians. 1.6.) Wherefore if you would be acceptable to God, and be
made his dear child, then by faith cleave unto his beloved Son Christ, and hang
about his neck, yea, and creep into his bosom, and so shall the love and favor
of God be as deeply insinuated into you, as it is into Christ himself, and so
shall God the Father, together with his beloved Son, wholly possess you, and be
possessed of you, and so God and Christ and you, shall become One entire thing,
according to Christ's prayer, That they may be One in us, as thou and I are One.
--

I need say little more to the words of this Author, than was said to those of
Mr. Will. Air, it being enough for me to say to every Reader of these lines,
as the High Priest said to the bystanders at Christ's arraignment (he indeed
causlesly, but I justly) Ye have heard their blasphemy: Only I desire the
Reader to observe further;

1. How he does wrong the Apostle, by bringing him in to abett him in his said
blasphemy, I mean, by alleging that in Ephesians. 1.6. as if the Apostle in saying,
That God has made the believing Ephesians accepted in the Beloved, had said,
That they were as acceptable to God, as Christ himself; whereas it will appear,
That the Apostle did intend by that very expression, to insinuate a peculiarity
of the Fathers Love, to that his only begotten Son, who lay in his bosom from
all eternity. 2. Observe, how like a canting Familist he speaks, in saying,
That upon our hanging about Christ's neck, and creeping into his bosom (i.e.)
upon our believing in Christ, God the Father, together with his beloved Son,
will wholly possess us, and be possessed of us, and so God and Christ and we,
shall become One Entire Thing. 3. Observe, how notoriously he does abuse the
words of our Saviors Prayer, and our Savior Christ himself in them, as if in
praying, That Believers might be one, as the Father and he were one, he had
requested, That they all may become One entire thing. To pray, That Believers
may keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, that they may accord and
continue uniformly in one faith and doctrine, that this agreement of all, (God
the Father, Son and Believers) may be a powerful means of convincing the world,
that Jesus was the Christ, sent by God -- To pray, I say, to this, or the like
purpose, is this to pray, That God and Christ and Believers, may become One
entire thing?
Thus have I cited a second Author, or Authors should I say? forasmuch as there
are so many, who by their several Epistles do applaud the Divinity of his Book,
no less than five names.

The third Author is brought to my hand by Mr. Samnel Rols (a zealous Asserter
of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, in the sense here challenged) in
his late Book styled Prodromus, who informs me, that the words following, are
the words of the most excellent Mr. Richard Hooker, in his Ecclesiastical
Polity, or in some of his Writings annexed thereunto, p. 4. alias 38.

But the Righteousness, wherein we must be found, if we will be justified, is
not our own, therefore we cannot be justified by any inherent quality. Yet even
the man, that is in himself full of sin, being found in Christ by faith, and
having his sin remitted through repentance, him God beholds with a gracious
eye, puts away his sin, by not imputing it, and accepts him in Jesus
Christ as perfectly righteous, as if he had fulfilled all that was commanded
him in the Law, shall I say, more perfectly righteous, than if himself had
fulfilled the whole Law? I must take heed what I say, but the Apostle says, 2
Cor. 5.21. That we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. Such we are
in the sight of God the Father, as is the very Son of God himself.

To this my reply is;

He calls it his own righteousness, not because it was his at what time he
spoke those words, but because it was his at what time he was a Jew, and before
a Convert to the faith of Christ.
1. That Judaism, or a Judaical Righteousness, is that Righteousness, which St.
Paul does call his own, and this in opposition to Christianity, or the
practical knowledge of Christ, wherein alone he did desire to be found; and
therefore it does not follow from thence, that a sinner cannot be justified, or
freed from condemnation, upon the account of any inherent Christian grace, or
graces.

2. A man may be said to be justified by the Righteousness of another, and not
by his own, in a threefold sense: 1. By way of merit. 2. By way of form. 3. By
way of a condition.


In the first sense it is most true, that the Righteousness, by which we must be
justified, is the Righteousness of another (even of Jesus Christ the Righteous)
and not our own.

2. But in both the other senses, it is altogether untrue: For

1. That Righteousness, by, or (to speak more accurately) with which a sinner
is formally justified, or made righteous, is always a man's own, viz. his
pardon, or the remission of his sins. 2. That Righteousness, by which as a
condition of his discharge, a sinner is justified, is always his own, and not
another, viz. His own faith. It Is true indeed, that in respect of procurement,
both these Righteousnesses (with and by which a sinner is justified) are
Christ's, and in respect of collation, they are Gods, but in respect of
possession, or performance, they may be well said to be our own Righteousness,
they being freely given us of God, for the sake of Christ, Act. 5.31.

And that sinners are in this last sense of the phrase, justified by some
inherent quality, or grace of their own, certainly Mr. Hooker would not deny,
for he in that Citation says, That it is through repentance, that our sins are
remitted; which is as much as to say, That by, or through repentance a sinner
is pardoned, justified, or not condemned by God.

3. The Apostle in saying (We are made the Righteousness of God in Christ) does
not say either expressly or constructively, That we are made more perfectly
righteous, than if our selves had fulfilled the whole Law; no more than he says
the same thing in Romans 5.19. which was for that purpose alleged by Mr. W.
Air, but to no purpose, as I have manifested. 4. As for the closing words
(Such we are in the sight of God the Father, as is the very Son of God himself)
I have said enough already, declaring, how such sayings are not to be
justified, but to be abominated, as most false, if not blasphemous, there being
nothing to be alleged for the excuse thereof, save the innocent intention of
the Authors.
I will close this Chapter with a request, That the foresaid distinction
[touching the several senses, wherein a man may be said to be justified by the
Righteousness of another, and not by his own] may the rather be observed,
because it may serve for a twofold purpose;

1. It may be subservient to us, how to give a ready and satisfactory answer to
that passage of Dr. Owen [with certain others] in his often cited Book, wherein
he says, p. 167.

Christ is made of God to the Saints Righteousness, and they will own nothing
else to that purpose.

To this I answer:

1. For Christ to be made of God Righteousness to the Saints, is not for God to
impute Christ's Righteousness immediately in it self to them (as the Doctor
would have it, he saying to that purpose as in other places, so p. 110. That
that perfection of obedience, which we have in Christ, is imputed to us) but in
the saving effects of it, according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.30. He is
of God made unto us Wisdom and Righteousness, and Sanctification and Redemption
(i. e.) he is causally, efficiently, or effectually made all these unto us: And
one would think, that this Doctor should content himself with that sense of the
phrase [Christ his being made of God Righteousness unto us] for he says, p.
104. That in the Covenant God becomes our God, and we his people, and thereby
all his Attributes are ours (i. e.) as to the benefit of them, as elsewhere he
interprets it.

The Doctor does not say, That upon our being in Covenant with God, Gods
Attributes are imputed to us, nor does he barely and simply say, Gods
Attributes are ours; but he explicates that saying in these words [that is, as
to the benefit of them] so that there is just cause to think, that the Doctor
of any man should rest satisfied with that explication, which others do give of
such phrases, touching the manner of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness,
or its being made ours, they saying of Christ's Righteousness, as he says of
Gods Attributes.

2. Though the Saints will own nothing, as the meritorious cause of their
righteousness, pardon, or justification, but the Righteousness of Christ,
nevertheless they may, and ought to own evangelical obedience (i. e.) their
return to God in faith and repentance, as the condition, without which the said
saving effect, or benefit of Christ's Righteousness, shall not be theirs.

Where (by the way) observe the unjustifiableness of those Antinomian sayings
of the Doctor, p. 118.

That Christ himself is the Righteousness, that he requires at our hands. And
p. 166. It will one day appear, that God abhors the janglings of men, about the
place of their own works and obedience, in the business of their acceptance
with God.

To these sayings I reply;

1. Christ himself is our Righteousness, in such a sense as he is said to be
our Life (i. e.) not in a formal, but in a causal sense, the predication in
such Propositions not being Formalis, or Essentialis, but Causalis, as is the
manner of Logicians to express such matters. 2. As it is not truly said in a
literal, but only in a tropical sense, that Christ himself is our
Righteousness, so it is not true in any sense (I know) to say, That Christ
himself is the Righteousness, which he requires at our hands, neither do I
remember any such saying in Scripture, but rather that Christ's Righteousness or
Obedience, How many disputes have been managed, ( says Dr. O. p. 166, 167.) how
many distinctions invented, how many shifts and evasions studied, to keep up
something in some place or other, to some purpose or other, that men may dally
withal? Hereby it appears, that the Doctor will not suffer evangelical
obedience to have any manner of place (one or another) in order to our
acceptance with God.
was a thing required at his hands, and not at ours. 3. As Christ's
Righteousness was a thing required at his hands, so it is apparent by the
Scriptures, that there is a personal evangelical Righteousness required at our
hands, in order to our acceptance with God, by, through, or for the
Righteousness sake of Christ, and without which evangelical Righteousness, the
unrighteous shall not be accepted with God, Mat. 5.20. and 25. last. 1 Cor.
6.9. 4. It will one day appear, how God abhors the vain janglings (that I may
not say also the juglings) of men, who not perceiving, or acknowledging the
consistency, or subordination of our own personal Righteousness to Christ's, in
the business of our acceptance with God, would thrust either of them out of
their proper place (i. e.) either Christ's Righteousness out of the place, or
office of the alone meritorious cause, or our own evangelical Righteousness (i.
e.) our return to God by faith and repentance, from the office or place of a
condition of our acceptance. What God said to Cain (Genesis 4.7. If thou do
well, shall thou not be accepted?) the same in effect does God in his Gospel
say to every sinner, If thou do well, (i. e.) If thou do believe in Christ,
if thou do repent and convert, thou shall be accepted through Christ; if
otherwise, sin lies at the door, and will obstruct thy acceptance with God.
Again, Observe from the premises, the unreasonableness of that other saying
of the Doctor, p. 219. where having quoted 1 Cor. 1.30. he says, Not that
Christ is this, or that part of our Acceptance with God, but he is all, he is
the whole.

To this I answer, as the very truth is;

1. Although Christ be the whole, and sole meritorious cause of our acceptance
with God, yet he is not the whole, nor any the least part of our acceptance it
self: For Christ being altogether a cause extrinsecal to our acceptance with
God, he cannot possibly be any part of, or ingredient into the thing it self:
For this were to make Christ to be a cause intrinsecal to it, and consequently
either the formal, or material cause thereof (for these only are Causae, or
Parts Constitutivae, which do Ingredi naturam rei) neither of which he can be
said to be, but the meritorious cause.

2. As was before said, so I say again, That in order to our acceptance with
God, both Christ has his part, and we have our part to act, both of them being
severally and jointly assigned us of God. So that if by the whole of our
acceptance with God, the Doctor does mean, that Christ and his Righteousness,
is all that God requires, in order to our acceptance with him, his saying is
to be rejected as false, and a branch of Antinomian doctrine.

2. I desire, that the foresaid distinction may the rather be observed, because
it may serve to discover the maleyolence, or in-sincerity, or at least (to
speak most favorably, and with the utmost of charity) the ignorance of those,
who say, That the dispute here is, Whether we are justified before the Just and
Holy God, by our own righteousness, or by the Righteousness of a Mediator?

These are the very words of the Author of the late Book styled, In the last
Page of the Preface to his Book.
Anti-Sozzo; who should either have had more wit to know, or more grace to
acknowledge the contrary, viz.

That the Dispute between Protestant and Protestant is not, Whether sinners be
justified before God, by their own Righteousness, or by the Righteousness of
Christ our Mediator; but whether there be not also an evangelical Righteousness
(consisting in a return to God by faith and repentance) required of every
sinner, in order to his being justified, for the sake of Christ's Mediatory
Righteousness, as the alone meritorious cause thereof.

And this is that, which however some Protestants do dispute, and seem to
gainsay, yet others do not, but do professedly maintain; among whom I shall
instance in the late Assembly of Divines, as appears by the Confession of their
Faith and Catechism; they professing ( Chapter 15. Sect. 3. of their Confession)

That although repentance be not to be rested in as a satisfaction for sin, or
any cause of the pardon thereof, which is the act of Gods free grace in Christ,
nevertheless it is of such necessity to all sinners, that none may expect
pardon without it.

And as appears also by the express answer, which they do instruct every
Catechumen to make unto this Question [What does God require of us, that we may
escape his wrath and curse due to us, by reason of the transgression of the
Law?] the answer put into their mouths being this,

That we may escape the wrath and curse of God due to us, by reason of the
transgression of the Law, he requires of us repentance toward God, and faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and --

I might also instance in the judgment of our own Church, touching the
necessity of a personal Righteousness in sinners, that so they may be justified
before God, through the Righteousness of Christ, or for his sake absolved from
their sins.

This appears by the tenor of that discharge, or absolution, which after the
general Confession in the Liturgy, every Minister is in Gods Name, and as his
Commissioner, to pronounce, saying, He pardons and absolveth all them that do
truly repent, and -- wherefore let us beseech him to grant us true repentance,
and -- so that at the last we may come to his eternal joy, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. I do well remember, that in the Scotch Liturgy, after the Petition,
That God would grant us true repentance, and his holy Spirit, the following
words are inserted (That we may receive from him absolution from all our sins)
which insertion I never heard to have been challenged, by any of our Scottish
Brethren, as holding forth any false, Popish, or un-Christian doctrine, nor do
I know any color of reason for such an accusation, or suspicion, albeit I do
well know, That to pray to God to grant unto us true repentance, and his holy
Spirit (That we may receive from him absolution from all our sins) is all one
in effect, and the self same thing, as to pray to God to grant unto us those
requests, That we may be justified, or not condemned, but escape wrath to come.

But forasmuch as Dr. O. is such a professed adversary, to all manner of
set-Liturgies, for the carrying on of Gods public Worship (as appears by what
he has written, p. 296, 297.) and forasmuch as I do not know, of what credit
with him, an Assembly of Divines at St. Peters-Westminster, is more than a
Convocation at St. Pauls-London, or what considerable valuation, he has for
either of them, I will not therefore urge him with the Authority of either the
one, or the other, nor indeed with any other Authority, but what I am most
assured, he will own, and which indeed is all-sufficient for my purpose, viz.
The divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures.

Having ended this Chapter, I shall now proceed to specify the next evil
Consequence, of the said Imputation here disowned, which shall be the subject
of the Chapter next ensuing.

CHAP. XXVI.
Another evil Consequence of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, in the
sense opposed, That God sees no sin in the Saints, all their sins being covered
from the sight of God, by their being clothed with the Righteousness of Christ;
the falsity of which is discovered, and certain Scriptures vindicated from
their abuse. A reply to Dr. Owen, who denies, That it will follow, from the
said Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us, that we are as perfectly
righteous as Christ is.

ANother evil Consequence, of the said Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to
Believers, in the sense aforesaid is, That God sees no sin in them.

This seems to be an unavoidable Consequence of the former; for if Believers
are as perfectly righteous as Christ the Righteous, and more perfectly
righteous, than if they had perfectly kept the whole Law in their own persons,
and if they are in the sight of God, as the very Son of God himself, then does
it follow, that God sees no sin in them; for how can God see any sin in any
person so perfectly righteous?

And this is that Consequent, which is owned by Mr. Will. Air, in his
Assize-Sermon before cited, he saying, p. 11.

The soul, that has Christ's Righteousness put upon him, by Gods gracious
Imputation, has all his sins covered and hidden from the sight of God, the eye
of divine justice sees not the least spot of sin (Ephesians. 5.27.) or iniquity in
those, that are clothed with it, the Saints through his death are presented
holy and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight, Col. 1.22.

In answer hereunto, 1. I have in certain Chapters of my Exercitation,
concerning the nature of forgiveness of sin, suggested several Rules, for a due
interpretation of those Metaphorical phrases, whereby forgiveness of sin is
expressed in Scripture, such as these (Gods covering our sins, blotting them
out, casting them behind his back, hiding his face from them --) whereby is not
meant a bare intuitive sight in God, but Gods not seeing our sins, so as to
condemn us for them, or that the Saints shall no more be condemned for their
sins, than if God did not see them, than if they were blotted out, covered, or
hid from his sight. See Chapter 3. and 4th. and 9th.

2. As for those forecited Scriptures, Ephesians. 5.27. Col. 1.22. they do indeed
prove partly what Believers at present are, viz. That they are in a present
state of reconciliation with God (reconciled, pardoned, justified --) and
partly what at last they shall be, that is, That they shall be presented
perfectly holy, as a spouse in perfect beauty -- But they do not prove, what
Mr. Air does insinuate, viz. That they are now so presented, or that God sees
not the least spot of sin, or iniquity in them.

Quest. Do not some deny this and the former evil Consequence, of the said
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness?

Answ. Yes: For so indeed Dr. Owen in his Book styled, Communion with God,
would seem to do; but with what success, may appear by my Reply to that his
answer, which he makes to an Objection, both which I shall recite as I find
them, p. 187.

Having asserted in the foregoing Pages, that Christ's active obedience is
reckoned, or imputed to Believers (mis-alledging, and mis-interpreting for that
purpose several Scriptures, Phil. 3.9. 2 Cor. 5.21.) he objecteth against it,
and answers to it in the words following:

Object. But if this be so, then are we as Righteous as Christ himself, being
Righteous with his Righteousness?

Answ. But first here is a great difference, if it were no more, than that this
Righteousness was inherent in Christ, and properly his own, it is only reckoned
and imputed to us, or freely bestowed upon us, and we are made righteous with
that, which is not ours.

But secondly the truth is, that Christ was not righteous with that
Righteousness for himself, but for us, so that there can be no comparison; only
this we may say, We are righteous with his Righteousness, which he wrought for
us, and that completely.

To this Answer I reply;

1. That the difference here mentioned by the Doctor, and said to be Great, is
indeed Small: For the difference is rather Modal, than Substantial, a
difference rather Quoad Modum, than Quoad veritatem rei, I mean plainly, a
difference about the manner, how Christ's Righteousness was his own, and how it
is Ours: For he does acknowledge, that the self same individual Righteousness,
which Christ wrought for us, is Ours, the only difference being in the Modus,
or manner, how it was His, and how Ours (i. e.) His properly, inherently, or
originally, Ours improperly, by Donation, Imputation, or at the second hand. 2.
As the said difference is comparatively small, so it is nothing at all as to
the matter in hand, or the purpose, for which it is alleged: For
notwithstanding this Modal difference, if the self same individual
Righteousness, which Christ wrought for us, be truly and substantially Ours, or
in it self imputed to us, it will follow from thence unavoidably (as I think)
that we are as righteous with Christ's Righteousness, as Christ himself was with
it. 3. Although it be true, that Christ was not righteous with that
Righteousness for himself, but for us (i. e.) for our behoof, and that we might
reap the fruit and benefit of it; and although upon such a construction of his
Righteousness, its being not for himself, but for us, there can be no
comparison betwixt him and us; nevertheless if the Doctor will allow us to say
(as indeed he does) that we are righteous with his Righteousness, which he
wrought for us, and that completely, he must allow to others the comparison
aforesaid, which they make to themselves, touching their being as perfectly
righteous, as was Christ the Righteous, and that God sees no sin in them: For
how should God see sin in them, who are completely righteous with that
Righteousness, which Christ wrought for them, more than in Christ himself? 4.
Though we forbear the comparison, yet granting (as the Doctor does) that we may
say positively, That we are righteous with his Righteousness, which he wrought
for us, and that completely, it will from thence necessarily follow, that God
sees no sin in us: For supposing Christ's Righteousness to be a complete
Righteousness, (which we cannot suppose, except we suppose it to be without the
least spot of sin) and supposing, that we are completely righteous, with that
his spotless, sinless Righteousness, how it is possible for God to see sin in
us, I do not understand, or can perceive.
Having been so large in the foregoing Chapters, touching the evil Consequences
of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, asserted in the sense aforesaid, I
will be more brief in the rest.

CHAP. XXVII.
Another evil Consequence of the said Imputation, That it leaves no place for
remission of sin, in persons made so completely righteous, with Christ's
Righteousness, and that it does utterly overthrow the true nature of
Gospel-Justification, making the justification of a sinner to be quite another
thing, and of another kind, than indeed it is. An Objection answered.

ANother evil Consequence of the said Imputation of Christ's Righteousness is,
That it leaves no place for remission of sins, in persons made completely
righteous with it.

It is certain, that God forgave Christ no sin: And the reason is obvious,
because being perfectly righteous, he had no sin to be forgiven, according to
that of St. John (1, 3, 5.) And in him is no sin. Now if men be righteous with
the same sinless Righteousness, wherewith Christ was righteous, they have no
sin to be pardoned, no more than he had. Whereas Remission of sin, as it is a
saving benefit which we all have need of, and the great purchase of Christ's
blood, so it is that, which Christ has taught Believers daily to pray for,
even after and notwithstanding this Imputation of Christ's Righteousness unto
them (if any such thing were) except we will maintain, that our Savior Christ
composed that pattern of prayer, only for the use of Infidels and Unbelievers.

Now to ask Gods mercy in the forgiveness of our sins, and yet to conceive our
selves to be righteous, with the spotless Righteousness of Christ, and this
completely, is rather to mock, or dissemble with God, than seriously and in
good earnest to worship him, whom we pray unto.

Briefly, The said Imputation does utterly overthrow the true nature of
Gospel-Justification, or the justification of a sinner, which does consist in
the remission of his sins, as has been already manifested: For a legal or
perfect Righteousness, imputed to a person in the very formality thereof, does
not justify him by way of forgiveness of sins, but is of it self intrinsecally
and essentially his justification, and is such a kind of justification, as with
which forgiveness of sins is not competible: For what need has he, who has a
legal Righteousness imputed to him, of forgiveness of sins, whenas such a
Righteousness excludes all sin?

If it be objected, That a man's sins are first forgiven him, and then Christ's
perfect Righteousness is imputed to him, and so he is justified?

To this it has been already answered;

1. That Christ's Righteousness is no more, or otherwise imputed to a sinner, in
order to his justification, than in order to the remission of his sin. 2. That
a person, who is a sinner, is capable of no other kind of justification, than
that, which is by, or does consist in the remission of his sins. 3. That if a
man's sins be forgiven him, he has no need of any Imputation, of any further
Righteousness for his justification: For when God has given men their offenses
(according to that expression of the Apostle, The free gift is of many offenses
unto justification) that is, has forgiven them, he has fully justified them.
The Apostle in that expression [the gift of offences] alludes to that Metaphor
of debts, under which notion our Savior speaking of sin, did teach his
Disciples to pray for the forgiveness thereof, to give a debt, and to forgive
it, being all one, Mat. 6.12.
Lastly, Whereas this Objection supposes, that by the passive obedience of
Christ, we have remission of sin, and by the Imputation of the active part of
his obedience, we are justified, as I have already disproved it, and asserted
withal, that the whole obedience of Christ [God-man] does make up the
meritorious cause of all saving benefits bestowed on us, so I add, If we will
needs distinguish the effects of Christ's active and passive obedience, after
that manner, I cannot perceive, that it is any ways reasonable, to invert the
order of these effects, and dispose of them thus Ad placitum, in a cross method
to their several causes producing them, which some Authors presume to do, and
in special Dr. Owen among others. Christ did not first die, and then keep the
Law for us, but he first kept the Law, and then suffered death for us.
Therefore if we will needs make the Imputation of the one, a distinct benefit
from the other, reason (methinks) would, that that which is first purchased,
should be first bestowed, or received, and consequently, that Imputation of
Righteousness, should have a precedence in order, before remission of sin.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Another evil Consequence of the said Imputation, That it subverts the
necessity of our repentance, in order to our salvation by Christ, that the
non-necessity thereof in Believers, has been asserted by some.

MR. Baxter having charged the opinion here impugned, as many ways subverting
Christian Religion, for proof of that charge, I shall suggest to consideration,
Whether in the consequence thereof, it does not subvert the necessity of
repentance and new obedience, in order to a sinners salvation by Christ.

To this end be it considered, how the matter is obvious to be argued, e. g. If
Adam had kept the Law, he had needed no repentance more, than Christ himself
needed it: Now, if upon the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness unto us, in its
essential nature, we may be said to have kept the Law in Christ, as exactly and
perfectly as he did, what need of repentance have we, or can we have, more than
the first, or the second Adam, Christ Jesus? For if the exact and perfect
obedience of Christ, be the ground and reason, why Christ himself needed no
repentance, and this obedience in all the exactness and perfection thereof, be
as truly Ours by Imputation, as it was his, or as it could have been Ours by
personal performance, how is it possible, that it being a sufficient ground, of
a non-necessity of repentance in the one, it should not be the same in the
other? Yea, if it be true, what has been related, as owned by Mr. Will. Air
and Mr. S. Rols, viz. That through the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, we
are not only as perfectly righteous, but also more perfectly righteous, than if
we our selves had fulfilled the whole Law, it must follow from thence (in all
reason I think) that we have less need of repentance, than the first Adam ever
had since his creation.

I have somewhere read (the story is told by Mr. John Godwin) that a certain
Minister being pressed with this Argument, was thereby constrained to
acknowledge to him, That Believers being perfectly righteous, through the said
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, have no need of repentance.

And the self same thing was asserted by Dr. Crispe, Rector of Brinkworth, near
me, as I have heard it related from the mouths of two ear-witnesses (Mr. Tho.
Baily, Minister of Minal, and Mr. Nicholas Proffet, Minister of Malborough,
both of them Members of the late Assembly) and who gave me leave to publish it
in Print (they professing themselves ready to attest the same.)

The story in short (for it is needless here to relate the circumstances
thereof, as to the time when, place where, and company among whom, all which I
did set down in writing) is this;

The said Doctor being seriously, and not Disputationis ergo (as himself
protested) maintaining the said assertion (That Believers have no need to
repent of their sins) and being urged by them, with the example of David's
repenting, for his horrid crimes of adultery and murder, he answered, That
David did more, than he ought to have done, he being not so fully and clearly
acquainted with Gospel-Priviledges, as we now under the New Testament are.

Thus we have heard the mischievous Consequence, of the said doctrine of
Imputation, respectively to sin past, and as for the consequence thereof,
respectively to future duty, the next Chapter will discover.

CHAP. XXIX.
Another evil Consequence of the said Imputation, That it overthrows the
necessity of new obedience, in order to a sinners being saved by Christ; Whence
it is, that diverse Authors, whereof some are named, do assert, That Christians
are not to do any good duties, that they may be saved. Several passages to this
purpose in Dr. Owen's Book styled, (Communion with God) related, with
Animadversions thereupon more at large.

THat the said opinion overthrows the necessity of new obedience, in order to a
sinners salvation by Christ. If God does impute a perfect, formal Righteousness
to men [such as Christ's was] what need can there be of personal holiness, in
order to impunity? For in the said case of Imputation, it must be supposed,
that the rights and privileges belonging to such a Righteousness, do accompany
it in the Imputation; so that the person, to whom such Imputation is made,
stands really invested and possessed of them: For otherwise God gives husks,
shells, shadows, and empty titles, without the substance of benefit, and true
honor.

Now one main Privilege of a perfect, formal Righteousness, is to invest with a
full and entire right to life, even of its own intrinsecal and inherent worth.

Hereupon some Preachers do not stick to profess and teach, that there is
nothing necessary to be done by sinners, That they may be saved by Christ;
among whom I have observed Mr. Thomas Shepherd, of New England, in his Book
styled, The Sincere Convert, to be a prime one, he saying, That sinners are not
to do good duties (to repent and reform their sinful ways) that they may be
saved. but for other ends, and That the doing of good duties, that they may be
saved, is the way to be damned.

And some years ago, I heard a certain Minister, (eminent in the repute of the
Vulgar, for one of the most able and evangelical Preachers in the whole County
where he lived) who preaching concerning those words of the Psalmist ( Ps.
98.1.) and from thence having raised this doctrine, which was the subject of
his whole Sermon, viz. That Jesus Christ has done mavelous things, and got
himself the victory; he did in the Application thereof, inform his Auditors in
the first place, That there is nothing for the Saints to do (meaning, as he did
interpret himself) that the Saints have nothing at all to do for their
salvation: And he did blame people for thinking, That doing is the way to
heaven, he only acknowledging, that we must do good duties, in the way of love
and thankfulness to Christ, who has done all for us, and has got himself the
victory. But if it had been objected to this person, That we must not only
fight, but through Gods help also in our own persons, get the victory, if we
think to be crowned (according to that in Rev. 2.7.) and if it had been further
on the other hand objected, What need is there of the principles of Love and
Gratitude in the Saints, seeing according to the doctrine of the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, here impugned, Love it self, and Gratitude it self, even
the self same Love and Gratitude, which was in the Son of God himself, as well
as other his graces, or gracious actings, are reckoned to them, and are theirs
by Imputation, in the very letter, formality, or essential nature thereof. If,
I say, such Objections had been put to the said Preacher, would they not have
put him to a stand, think we?

And whether Dr. Owen be not of the same mind, with the two forenamed Authors
in this point, viz. That we are not to do good duties for this end, that we may
be saved, I shall leave the judgment thereof to the Reader, by the following
passage, which I shall immediately recite, and then animadvert upon.

Dr. Owen, p. 185. Christ yielded perfect obedience to the Law, but how did he
do it? Purely, as it stood in that conditional, Do this, and live. He did it in
the strength of grace he had received. He did it as a means of life, to procure
life by it, as the tenor of a Covenant? Are we then freed from this obedience?
Yes, but how far? From doing it in our own strength, for doing it for this end,
That we may obtain life everlasting. It is vain, that some say confidently,
that we must work for life. It is all one as to say, we are yet under the old
Covenant; Fac hoc, and vives; We are not freed from obedience, as a way of
walking with God, but we are as a way of working to come to him.

Reply.

1. The Doctor in saying, That Christ yielded perfect obedience to the Law,
seems to mean, That he did perfectly obey every Law of God, which we in our own
persons should have obeyed; and I presume, that he would be understood to mean
thus, for he says often and expressly, p. 179. That whatsoever was required of
us by virtue of any Law, that Christ did, and fulfilled. And if this be his
meaning (as it seems plainly to be) I must crave leave to gainsay, saying, That
God did not require of Christ to do, and fulfill whatsoever was required of us,
by virtue of any Law. There are things required of us, by virtue of divine Laws
peculiar to us, and the doing whereof is inconsistent with the person of
Christ, and office of his Mediatorship, and he did plainly refuse, when he was
upon earth, to do some things, which some of us are by the Law of God obliged
to do, because he was under no such Law for the doing of them.

2. The Doctor in saying [That Christ yielded perfect obedience to the Law, as
it stood in that conditional, Do this, and live] does seem to mean, That the
Law, to which Christ yielded perfect obedience, was the Law and Covenant of
works, made with Adam, and that as such he yielded obedience thereunto, whereas
the Law to which Christ yielded perfect obedience, was the Law of Mediatorship,
and a Law in that respect peculiar to himself, there being but one Mediator
betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus.

3. Whereas the Doctor says, That Christ yielded perfect obedience to the Law,
as a Covenant of works, as a means of life, to procure life by it, as the tenor
of a Covenant, I conceive no such thing to be true, but that the truth is, That
Jesus Christ did yield perfect obedience to the Law of Mediatorship, or that
(to speak in his own words) he did finish the work, which God gave him to do,
as Mediator, whereby to purchase life for us, according to the tenor of another
Law or Covenant (i. e.) the New Testament in his blood.

4. Although Christ has freed us from obedience to the Law of works, as a
Covenant of life, and from obeying it for this end, that we may obtain life
everlasting, according to the tenor of that Covenant, nevertheless he has not
freed us from obeying the Law, or Covenant of grace for this end, that we may
in so doing obtain everlasting life. It is not vain (as the Doctor censures)
that some say, confidently, but it is the very truth of Scripture, which all
should say with the most assured confidence, That we must work, that according
to the Law of grace we may have life? For Seek good and not evil, that ye may
live, Rev. 22.12.
says the Prophet Amos, chapter 5.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments,
that they may have right to the tree of life (i. e.) life everlasting.

5. The Doctor's charge is notoriously false and groundless to say, That to
work for life, is all one as to say, We are under the old Covenant, Fac hoc,
and vives. Is it all one to say, Do this (i. e.) perform perfect and perpetual
obedience, that thou may live, as to say, with St. Peter, Repent and be
converted, that your sins may be blotted out? Or to say with the Prophets Esaias
and Jeremy, Let the wicked forsake his may, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and return to the Lord -- Esaias 55.7, 8. And Jer. 4.14. Wash thine
heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved? Or to say with the Apostle, So
run, that ye may obtain? obtain what? what less, than life everlasting, as
appears by the Verse following, wherein he interprets himself? 1 Cor. 9.24, 25.

6. Walking is in truth working; our Christian walking is our Christian
working, yea I will say, it is our Christian warring, fighting, running,
wrestling, doing like the Olympian Athletae, even all that belongs to the
Champions of Christ, God, Angels and Men being spectators. All these are
comprised under the Metaphorical and Scriptural phrase of Walking with God.

7. As our obedience is a way of walking with God, so it is a way of working to
come to him, nor are we more freed from obedience (evangelical obedience) as a
way of working to come to God, than we are freed from it, as a way of walking
with God.

8. Evangelical working or obedience, as it is the way of walking with God, so
it is eo nomine, the way of coming to God, or that will (through the mercy of
God in Christ) bring us to God; and as the means must be used, that by the use
thereof we may obtain the end, so are we [as well in reason as in conscience]
to betake our selves to the way of walking with God, that therein, or thereby,
we may be brought, or come to God.

I proceed to the examination of certain other passages to the same purpose, in
the Doctor's forecited Book, wherein he says, p. 244.

There being an impossibility of obtaining life by the Law, we are exempted
from it as to any such end, and that by the Righteousness of Christ, Gal. 3.21,
22, 23.

To this I answer, By the Law in that Scripture is meant the Mosaical Law, by
the perfect obedience whereof, there was indeed an impossibility, for any
persons of obtaining life, or justification unto life: But this does not prove,
that there is any impossibility of obtaining life by the Law of the Gospel, or
that we are exempted from it as to any such end.

2. It is the promise of God in Christ first made to Adam, Genesis 3.15. and
afterward renewed to Abraham, and which promise is specified, v. 16, 17. by
which sinners are exempted from absolutely perfect obedience to any Law of God,
to this end that they thereby may have life.

3. Although by the Righteousness of Christ, What the Law of Moses, or of Works
could not do, the Law of the Gospel (through the mercy of God in Christ) can
do, (i. e.) the condition thereof being kept, it can save sinners.
(included in that promise) sinners were exempted from the said perfect
obedience to any Law, to this end that they may have life, nevertheless sinners
are not upon any account whatsoever, exempted from sincere obedience, to this
end that they may have life, according to the tenor of the Gospel-promise,
wherein life is promised to those, and only those, who perform the condition
thereof.

The Doctor proceeds to say in the following Page 245.

There be Gibeonites, outwardly attending the family of God, that do the
service of his house, as the drudgery of their lives, the principle they yield
obedience upon, is a Spirit of bondage unto fear, Romans 8.15. the rule they do
it by, is the Law in its dread and rigor, exacting it of them to the utmost,
without mercy and mitigation, the end they do it for, is to fly from the wrath
to come, to pacify conscience, and seek righteousness, as it were by the works
of the Law. -- The Saints obedience is a free obedience, without fear, terror,
bondage and constraint, they go forth unto all holy obedience in Christ.

Answ. 1. What opinion the Doctor has of the Gibeonites, literally or properly
so called, I know not; but certain I am, that he had no cause to use their name
as here he does, in the way of reproach and disgrace, either because they were
Gibeonites, or because they did the meaner sort of services belonging to the
Tabernacle, one of the meanest whereof holy David did value at a high rate.

2. It is against reason to say, that there are, or ever were any such
Gibeonites, in that full character, whereby they are here described by the
Doctor: For if sinners apprehend no other rule of their actings, than the Law
in its dread and rigor, exacting of them to the uttermost, without mercy and
mitigation, it is more rational to conceive, that they should lie down in utter
despair, than to drudge or trudge to no purpose. Otherwise I cannot perceive
the sense of the Psalmist's reasoning, he saying, There is mercy with thee;
therefore shall thou be feared, Psalm. 130.4.

3. They are not Gibeonites necessarily (in the Doctor's disgraceful sense) but
they may be true Israelites, who do Gods service, that they may escape wrath to
come, and enjoy peace of conscience here; nor is any Christian the less an
Israelite, or in truth the less a Nathaneel, because he serves God upon account
of the reward promised thereunto, it having the promises both of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8.

4. The Doctor does ill to jumble things together, as synonimous and
homogeneous, which are exceeding disparate (I mean, the doing Gods service as
the drudgery of our lives, and the doing thereof for this end, to fly from the
wrath to come) nor indeed are these two things consistent: For those, who do
regard Gods service as the assured way, or means of escaping wrath to come, and
do accordingly serve God for that end, cannot in reason possibly be conceived
to look upon, or account Gods service as the drudgery, but rather as the
felicity of their lives, and in such sort as St. Paul did account of all his,
both active and passive service of God in Christ, viz. no way comparable to the
reward of escaping hell, and obtaining heaven, Romans 8.18.

5. It is the Doctors error to insinuate, that they who serve God for this end
to fly wrath to come, do serve him upon the principle of that spirit of bondage
intended by the Apostle in Romans 8.15. Yea by his insinuating the said Principle
to be slavish, base, or unlawful, he does as much as in him lies, bring the
souls of men under a spirit of bondage, causing them to doubt of their being
servants of God, yea to accuse themselves as none of his servants, because they
serve him for this end, to fly from wrath to come; and also provoking them to
such a manner of doing things, as being not required by God in his word, is not
part of true Religion, but mere superstition, yea such things as are impossible
in nature, as if we should persuade men to put off humanity, or not to be men.
So that I may well say to those Readers, or Hearers of the Doctor, who can
swallow, applaud, or approve such sayings as these in his Book, as St. Paul
said of the seduced Corinths, perverted by their false Teachers, 2 Cor. 11.20.
ye suffer if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour you; I may truly
say, That the yoke, which the Doctor would here put upon the neck of Christ's
Disciples, is heavier than the yoke of Ceremonies, and such as neither we, nor
our Fathers, nor successors, were, are, or ever shall be able to bear.

6. The obedience of the Saints may be a free obedience, although they do not
go forth thereunto altogether without fear, and terror; and it is very ill done
of this Author to insinuate the contrary. Noah went forth with fear to the
obedience of God in building the Ark, which he did at Gods command, (...) (says
the Text) to or for the saving of himself and family, Heb. 11.7. And it is not
to be doubted, but that fear (among other considerations) did make David to run
the way of Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.32. for what construction otherwise can
be made of his saying in the same Psalm v. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of
thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments? And so it did holy Job, as appears Job
31.23.

7. Judge Reader, whether it be not a great fault in the Doctor, so to misapply
that Scripture Romans 9.32. and to pervert the sense thereof, as to make a
Christians serving of God to fly from wrath to come, to be a seeking for
righteousness as it were by works of the Law: for to seek righteousness by
works of the Law, is to seek justification or salvation by the external
observances of the Judaical Law, and consequently in a wrong way (opposite to
the true Gospel-way of serving God) and not by faith in Christ, as the Apostle
does plainly interpret the matter in the self same verse. How unreasonably
therefore does the Doctor here insinuate, That those Christians, who seek
righteousness by faith in Christ (the right Gospel-way) that is, do serve God
and live Christian lives, that they may be justified for the righteousness sake
of Christ, or be saved from wrath to come through his merits, that those, I
say, who do serve God like Christians to that end, do take such a fatal course,
as those Jews did, of whom the Apostle there speaks, saying, That Jesus Christ
was a stumbling block to them, That they fell short of attaining the end, they
aimed at (righteousness, justification, salvation) because they sought this
saving happiness in a wrong way, and not by due means, (i.e.) not by faith in
Christ, or works of the Gospel, but by external legal works, as inconsistent
with the faith of Christ incarnate, as is Judaism and Christianity.

8. Forasmuch as the Doctor does in express words assert p. 213. That God has
appointed, that holiness shall be the means, the way to that eternal life,
which as in it self and originally is his gift by Jesus Christ, so with regard
to his constitution of our obedience as the means of attaining it, The Doctor
says well and truly, that well-doing is the way to heaven, but that other
Preacher says no, it is not.
is a reward -- And again Ib. That it is the way appointed of God for us to
walk in, for the obtaining of salvation. These assertions of the Doctor, I say,
being considered, I must needs say these two things:

First, I am not able to reconcile the Doctor with that foresaid Preacher, who
in his Sermon upon Psalm. 98.1. did reprove people for thinking, That well-doing
was the way to heaven.

Secondly, Nor am I able to reconcile the Doctor with himself in his
acknowledging holiness to be Gods appointed way and means for the obtaining of
eternal happiness, and yet making it the part and property of a Gibeonite
(i.e.) a thing reprovable, a slavish, or disgraceful thing in a Christian to
serve God to fly from wrath to come; for what is it to fly, or escape from
wrath to come, but to obtain salvation? And what therefore is it to serve or
obey God to fly from wrath to come, but to serve God to obtain salvation? and
why should we not take the way, or use the means to obtain the end? or why did
God constitute such and such things as means for such and such ends, but that,
as by him they were appointed, so by us they should be used to attain the same?

But for all this the Doctor does so spite at the Gibeonites, who are contented
to do the meanest services, which God puts them to, that so they may escape the
wrath of God in their own Consciences here, and in the slames of Hell
hereafter. I say, he does so detest the whole race of the said Gibeonites, as
to fling another stone at them in a few pages after, whose words I shall
recite, as I find them page 248. and with a few Animadversions thereupon I will
conclude this Chapter.

The Saints motive to obedience is love -- The rule of their obedience (their
walking with God) is the Law of liberty, as divested of all its terrifying,
threatening, damning, cursing power, and rendered in the blood of Christ Jesus,
sweet, tender, useful, directing, helpful as a rule of walking in the life they
have received, not the way of working for the life they have not. These
instances may suffice to manifest that liberty of obedience in the family of
God, which his sons and daughters have, that the poor convinced Gibeonites are
not acquainted withal.

Answ. 1. As hope and fear are well consistent with love, so are those as well
as this the motive of the Saints obedience; and so they ought to be, as in part
has been already proved, as to fear in Noah, Job and David, and as is easily
proveable, even by the current of the Scriptures both of the Old and New
Testament. See Heb. 4.1, and 12, 28, 29. Romans 11.20. Phil. 2.13. And as for
hope, its being a principle or motive of the Saints obedience, see Act. 26.7. 1 John 3.3. 1 Pet. 1.13, 14, 15. To multiply Scriptures for the proof of this,
which is so evident in nature, is as needless as to light a candle at noon day.
As he that ploweth, is moved to do it with hope of a crop, every other labourer
with hope of some gain, 1 Cor. 9.10. so are the Saints moved, and to be moved
with the hope of the Gospel to be steadfast to it, and immovable from such a
conversation as does become it. 1 Cor. 15.58.


2. It is not the Law of God as diversed of all its terrifying, threatening,
damning, cursing power, which is the rule of the Saints obedience. Such
doctrine is a branch of what Dr. More styles that loathsome and pestilential
error of Antinomianism; and indeed it is a root, which (of it self) bears
gall and wormwood, and therefore by all due means to be eradicated out of Gods
husbandry, (the hearts and minds of his people) where the Devil (that envious
one) has planted it. And for the extirpation thereof, or confutation of this
dangerous piece of Antinomianism, what need I say more, than to desire the
Reader to open his Bible and to read the tenor of the Laws of God given by him
as the rule of every ones living (I mean both as the directing and obliging
rule) and then to speak his mind, whether the Law of God (the rule of the
Saints obedience) has not the usual Sanction of Laws (i.e.) a commination of
terror, even the terrible curse of damnation, upon supposition of their
disobedience thereunto. Does not God command the Saints to beware of Apostasy,
and to persevere in faith and holiness upon peril of damnation, Ezekiel. 18.24.
Romans 8.13. Heb. 4.1, and 10.

3. It is the Doctors error (as of many others) to think, that the Law of God
cannot be sweet, tender, useful, directing, helpful to the Saints as a rule of
walking with God, except it be divested of its sanction, as aforesaid: for
although its sanction be supposed, will not the Saints say, as did Hezekiah in
another case, Good is the word of the Lord, which he has spoken? Esa. 39.8.
Yea, are not the very comminations of God useful and helpful (even of their own
nature and proper tendency) to the Saints in their walking with God, as well as
his precepts, or directions? He that denis this, which is so proveable, both by
Scripture and reason, is worthy to be taught as Gideon taught the men of
Succoth, with briars and thorns of the wilderness, I mean, to be confuted with
stripes, rather than with words or arguments.

4. It seems, this Doctor has not sufficiently studied the reason, why Gods
Law (the Law of the Gospel) is styled a Law of Liberty: for if he had, he might
have known, that it is so styled for this reason (among several others) because
it imposes no servile yoaks like those laid upon the Jews, and enjoineth only
such services as are suited and most agreeable to our rational nature, and in
the performance of which consists our truest freedom and liberty.

5. It is another branch of Antinomian doctrine to say, That the Law of God is
a rule of the Saints walking, in the life they have received, not the way of
working, for the life they have not. This is an error, which as it has been
abundantly confuted by Mr. Baxter, in several of his Writings, so I have
already refuted in this Chapter, and more at large in the 28th. Chapter of my
Exercitation, concerning the nature of Forgiveness of sin, wherein is
manifested the consistency of these two (working From and For life) and that
the Saints, from the life of grace they have received, do work and ought to
work For the life of glory, which as yet they have not received.

Lastly, While the Doctor pretends to maintain that liberty of obedience, in
the family of God, which (as he says) the sons and daughters of God have, he
makes them worse slaves, than the Gibeonites were ever made by Joshua. Now alas
for the poor convinced Gibeonites! these poor convinced unconvinced Gibeonites!
convinced in conscience, that it is their duty to serve God, but not convinced,
that it is their sin to serve Him to this end, to fly from wrath present in a
wounded conscience, or from wrath to come, in the lake which burns with fire
and brimstone! Convinced, that it is their duty to love God, but not convinced,
that the love of God, and the love of their own souls, are things inconsistent!
Convinced, that a main motive of their serving God, should be their love of
Him, but not convinced, that love to their souls-safety and salvation, should
be no motive at all unto, or end of their serving of God! I will say to these
poor Gibeonites, who cannot so easily put off humanity, or be persuaded out of
all love to themselves, specially to their souls, Let it be a very small thing
with you, to be judged of this mistaken Doctor, yea to be judged by man's
judgment; for he that will judge you at the last is the Lord, who will judge your
present Judges, who pass such an harsh judgment upon you. But be of good cheer:
For if to be moved to serve God for this end, to fly from wrath present and to
come, be to be made indeed a Gibeonite, then for your comfort be it known to
you, that St. Paul was a Gibeonite; for he was induced to preach the Gospel,
upon consideration of that Woe, that did hang over his head, if he did not
preach it, 1 Cor. 9.16. And he did mortify the deeds of the flesh, lest
himself having preached to others, should at last prove to be a castaway, 1
Cor. 9.27. Yea he professes for others as well as himself, that the end of all
his and their Christian strivings, was to obtain for themselves an
incorruptible Crown, v. 25. Briefly, as David said to scoffing Micol (I will
yet be more vile) so let us resolutely answer to the iterated scoff of this
Doctor, If to do as aforesaid be indeed to be a Gibeonite, In the Name of God
let there be more Gibeonites, Let them be fruitful and multiply, and replenish
the Church.

There are many other dangerous evils, which do naturally flow from the
Imputation of Christ's righteousness, in the sense here opposed; but because I
have enlarged my self in the premises beyound my first intention, I will not so
much as mention them. I will only conclude this long Chapter with the words of
Mr. Truman in his Book styled ( The great Propitiation, p. 94, 95.) wherein he
suggesteth that mischievous consequence of the Imputation of Christ's
righteousness, which has in this Chapter been specified and insisted upon; and
I do the rather think meet to transcribe the words of that Author, because some
Readers may peradventure regard them as proceeding from his Pen, rather than
mine; for notwithstanding every way, whether by means of one Author or another,
(my labor of love in this Treatise, or the labors of any other in theirs) so
the truths of the Gospel be entertained, I desire to be affected as was the
Apostle, saying in another case, I therein do rejoice, yea and will rejoice,
Phil. 1.18.

If Christ (says that Author) fulfilled the Law for us in this sense, so as it
is to be imputed to us, as if we had fulfilled the Law our selves, then we
should be freed altogether from any obligation from the Law to obedience, just
as we are freed from the condemnation of the Law, because Christ underwent it
as a satisfaction for us, we should not then sin in not obeying the Law, and we
could not be pardoned by Christ for our sins in not obeying the Law; for they
are no sins according to this Hypothesis. If there be a Law, that if a servant
hired for a year, shall refuse to serve his years service (if his Master
require) he shall lie in the prison for a year. Suppose one hired did not serve
a year, but another served a year good and faithful service for him, must this
hired man also serve a year for himself, or he is too blame? and must this man
accepted to serve a year for him also, lie in prison for him? What if I did not
serve a year, yet another served for me, and better service than I can perform?
What need is there may he say, that I should serve it my self? Do I think, I
can mend his work, do it better my self, than I have done it in him? I am
almost ashamed to lay open the weakness of them that hold these things, after
such multitudes of learned protestants have shown their absurdity.

The other two Arguments of this Author in the same and the precedent page, are
for the weightiness of them well worthy to be here transcribed; but I shall
refer the Reader to the perusal thereof in his Book it self.

CHAP. XXX.
Q. May Believers be truly or fitly said to be clothed with the Robe of Christ's
Righteousness, or the like form of words? Four Reasons why the said Question is
proposed and answered. The Answer it self. 1. That there are no such express
sayings in Scripture, nor any Scripture, wherein Christ's Righteousness is set
forth under the Metaphor of Raiment. 2. That our own personal Righteousness in
the several branches thereof, does go under the Metaphorical expressions of
Robes, comely raiment, and splendid array. Several Scriptures, objected to the
contrary, answered. In what sense it is true, and in what, false, to say, that
we are clothed with the Robe of Christ's Righteousness: And that it is more
fitly and intelligibly said, that it purchases or procures Clothing for us,
than that it is it self our Clothing.

Q. MAY Believers be truly, or fitly said to be clothed with the Robe of
Christ's Righteousness? To have Christ's Righteousness put upon them? That their
persons, or sins are covered with the Righteousness of Christ, or the like
expressions?

Answ. I have thought meet to propose, and make answer to this Question, for
three or four Reasons;

1. Because such expressions have been very usual in the Sermons and Books of
some Divines. 2. Because the misunderstanding of the true sense, wherein
Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us, and the asserting of a sense contrary
to truth, has been (I doubt not) the sole cause, or occasion of such
expressions, one un-scriptural phrase frequently begetting another, and the
daughter does sometimes happen to be more deformed, than the mother. 3. Because
such expressions have occasioned strange and gross conceptions in the minds of
many people, as if by the Righteousness of Christ put upon them, by Gods
Imputation, all their sins were so covered and hidden from the sight of God, as
that the eye of divine justice sees not the least spot of sin in those, who are
clothed with it. Such sayings as these have been already recited out of
certain Writers. 4. Because several Scriptures have been very frequently
perverted, to contenance or authorize such expressions, which I will therefore
take occasion to vindicate, whereby to restore them to their true sense and
meaning.
I shall therefore return a more copious Answer to the said Question, and say;

1. I do not remember any place in all the Bible, where the said expressions
are used, or where Christ's Righteousness is mentioned under the Metaphor of a
Robe, or Garment, which Believers are to put on, or wherewith they are, or are
to be clothed. I do indeed well remember the Scripture, where Christ is set
forth [his flesh and blood] under the Metaphor of food [meat and drink] but no
place, where his Righteousness is mentioned under the notion, or Metaphor of
Raiment.

2. But on the other side, I find many places of Scripture, where our own
personal righteousness, (even in the several branches thereof) does go under
the said Metaphorical expressions; for which see Job 29.14. I put on
righteousness, and it clothed me. My judgment was as a robe and a diadem. What
righteousness does Job there mean? surely not Christ's Righteousness, but his
own (as appears both by the precedent and subsequent verses, 11, 12, 13, 15,
16, 17. --) viz. Justice, pity, mercy, and the like virtues. Col. 3.12. Put on
as the elect of God bowels of mercies, kindness -- Ephesians. 4.22, 23. Put off
concerning the former conversation the old man -- and v. 24. Put on that new
man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness. 1 Pet. 5.5.
Be ye clothed with humility. Our own righteousness in the several branches
thereof is that, which in many Scriptures is commended to us under the notion
of splendid raiment, which adorns us, makes us lovely in the eyes of God, and
which is in his sight of great price, 1 Pet. 3.3, 5. 1 Timothy 2.9, 10. To this
purpose I might instance in many sayings: out of the Proverbs of Solomon, were
it needful.

But forasmuch as several Scriptures are objected to the contrary, of what has
been here said in the first branch of my Answer, I will therefore specify some
of the chief of them, and reply thereunto.

Object. Rev. 3.18. What else is meant by the white raiment there mentioned,
but the Righteousness of Jesus Christ?

Answ. 1. The Question may as well be demanded, What is meant by the Gold there
spoken of, but the Righteousness of Christ? For we are not otherwise clothed
with the robe or raiment, than we are enriched with the gold of Christ's
Righteousness.

2. By the white raiment, is there meant our own righteousness, consisting of
such gracious dispositions, and works of holiness, which do adorn the Disciples
of Christ in his sight, more than the most Lilly-white, and splendid raiment,
does the greatest Princes in the eye of men. And this I conceive to be meant by
that raiment of needlework, wherein the Bride (the Lambs wife) is said to be
brought unto him, Ps. 45.13, 14. And this is that righteousness of the Saints,
wherewith they are said to be Rev. 19.8.
arrayed, as in fine linen, clean and white; righteous works being that
raiment, wherewith every Christian (man and woman) should be clothed, or
adorned, 1 Timothy 2.10.

Object. Romans 13.14. Are not Christians there commanded to put on the
Righteousness of Christ?

Answ. 1. Whatever be the thing, which the believing Romans are there commanded
to put on, I am persuaded, that the Apostles meaning there is, That we should
put it on not as a garment, but rather as Armor, we being as well said to put
on this, as that. He prosecutes that Metaphor mentioned, v. 12. [Put on the
Armor of light.]

2. Consequently I think, that we have no more reason to conclude, that by the
garment, which we are there commanded to put on, is meant Christ's
Righteousness, than that his Righteousness is it, which under the Metaphor of
the Armor of light, we are commanded to put on in the verse next before. But I
am content, that the Reader judge of them.

3. I know no surer way rightly to understand, what the Apostles true meaning
was [That we should put on] than by considering what we should put off. Now
forasmuch as the things, which he would have us put off, are what he styles the
works of darkness (i. e.) wicked works of all sorts, especially such as are
there named, I may therefore safely (I doubt not) conclude, That by our putting
on the Lord Jesus Christ, he means our putting on the graces, or virtues of the
Lord Jesus Christ, these being the image of our Lord Christ; and it being
ordinary to call the image of a thing, or person, by the name of the person or
thing, which it does resemble. And in this sense the word [Christ] is used,
Gal. 4.19. My little children, of whom I travel in birth again, till Christ be
formed in you.

Object. Gal. 3.27. Does not the Apostle there mean, that the Galatians having
been baptized into Christ, had put on the Righteousness of Christ?

Answ. By Christ there is not meant the Righteousness of Christ; and what is
the very thing there meant by the Apostle, that the baptized Galatians had put
on, I know no surer way to understand, than by considering the scope of the
Apostle in that Epistle, what it was, that he would have them to put off. Now
that, which the Apostle in this Epistle especially would have the Galatians to
put off, was Judaism, in all the parts of it as such. So that as by the Lord
Jesus Christ in Romans 13.14. is meant Christianity, in opposition to Gentilism,
or those heathenish vices there specified, so by Christ in Gal. 3.27. I
conceive is meant Christianity, or the practice of Christian Religion, in
opposition to Judaism. As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have
put on Christ, not Moses, you have taken upon you the profession of Christian
Religion, not that of the Jewish, or Mosaical Law.

Object. Is not Christ's Righteousness the thing it self meant by the wedding
garment? Mat. 22.12.

Answ. No, but those holy qualifications, and gracious dispositions, wherewith
a Christian should attend upon God in his sacred Ordinances, and in his solemn
approaches to God, should be vested with, even as men upon festival occasions,
do apparel themselves in raiment suitable thereunto.

Object. Is not the Righteousness of Christ that garment of salvation, and robe
of righteousness, wherewith God is said Esa. 61.10. to have clothed, or covered
his Church?

Answ. It were easy to name many Authors, who have perverted that Scripture to
such a sense; whereas the truth is, that there is no more cause to think, that
the Righteousness of Christ is meant by the garment there mentioned, than where
mention is made of the same word by the Prophet elsewhere ( Chapter 52.1.) saying,
Awake, awake, put on thy strength O Zion, put on thy beautiful garments O
Jerusalem. The very truth of the matter is;

1. As the words are a promise (although after the manner of Gods speaking by
his Spirit in the Prophets, it is expressed in the preterperfect tense) and as
the good promised is expressed by the name of Salvation and Righteousness
(these in effect being one thing) so by Righteousness is meant Gods beneficence
and bounty, with the several fruits of it conferred upon his Church, in their
preservations, deliverances, restorations -- In this sense the word
[Righteousness] is frequently taken in Scripture, Hos. 10.12. It is time to
seek the Lord, till he come and rain Righteousness upon you. Ps. 24.5. He shall
receive Righteousness from the God of his salvation; so that there is no more
cause to affirm, That by Righteousness in Esa. 61.10. is meant Christ's personal
Righteousness, than to make the same construction of the word in the places
forecited, where God promises to rain Righteousness upon them, or that they
shall receive Righteousness from him, as the God of their salvation.

2. As for the Metaphorical expression, of being clothed and covered with the
garment of salvation, and robe of righteousness, it is an allusion to the
custom of the Jews (and indeed of all Nations) which was to clothe and attire
themselves sutably to their present condition, whether of prosperity, or
adversity, fasting or feasting times, as is expressed v. 3. of that Chapter in
these words (To appoint to them, that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty
for ashes, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness) So that by the
whole of that expression, we can understand no more, than the great goodness
and bounty of God (let the particulars in the retail thereof, whether in
temporals or spirituals, or in both, be what they will) promised, or manifested
to his Church, and manifested by them, in a suitable manner of open and solemn
rejoicing for them.

Quest. May it not be truly said in some sense, that Believers are clothed with
Christ's Righteousness?

Answ. Yes: Yet more fully be it known, that as it may be truly and falsely
said, that Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us [according to the different
senses of the word Righteousness, mentioned in the third Chapter] so it is both
true and false to say, That we are clothed with the Righteousness of Christ, e.
g. Christ's Righteousness being taken properly in its essential nature, it is
notoriously false to say, that we are clothed therewith: For so taken, it is
Christ's own clothing, and not ours, he is glorious in this apparel, and he
will not give this his glory to another; and as Readiness Armor would not fit
David, so neither will Christ's Righteousness [taken in this sence] suit with
any other but himself, who was God and man in one person. As it is a point of
disloyalty in a vassal, to put on the Ensigns of Majesty upon himself (The
Crown Royal upon his head --) so it is a disloyal thought, a most unbecoming
thing, for a wretched sinner to imagine himself vested with the Royal Robe of
Christ's Righteousness, the only begotten Son of God. But as the word
Righteousness is taken improperly, Effective, for the fruits and effects of it,
so it is true to say, That we are clothed with his Righteousness (i. e.) we are
clothed, our spiritual nakedness is covered, we are arrayed with a garment, or
garments, procured or purchased with the Righteousness of Jesus Christ. So
that, if the Question were thus formed, May Christ's Righteousness be truly said
to be a sinners clothing? It must be answered, That this Proposition [Christs
Righteousness is a sinners clothing] is true Praedicatione causali, but not
Essentiali, or formali (i. e.) it it self, or in it self, is not our clothing,
nor are we vested in, or with it, but with the fruits of it, it being the
meritorious cause, that has procured all necessary clothing for the covering
of our nakedness, for our comfortable appearance before God, and our gracious
acceptance with him; which clothing may summarily be referred (I think) to these
two heads, viz. Justification and Sanctification, both which may be said to be
our clothing. Nevertheless I do judge it to be more fitly and intelligibly said,
That our sins are covered with a pardon, rather than with Christ's
Righteousness, the one being verified in an immediate sense, the other in a
sense more remote both in it self, and from common understanding. But it must
ever be remembered, that the pardon which covers our sins, is a blessing
purchased by the Righteousness of Christ; and for that reason, in such a sense
as a ransomed Captive, or bought Servant, is said to be his Masters, or
Redeemers money, because he was bought with their money, in a like sense may
the clothing, wherewith we are clothed, be said to be the Robe of Christ's
Righteousness, because Christ's Righteousness was the price, wherewith that our
clothing (whatsoever it be, be it sanctification or justification, grace or
glory; for even with this Believers are said to be clothed upon, 2 Cor. 5.2,
4.) was dearly bought or purchased. And in this sense the price, or hire it
self, which is given for an House, is used to signify the House, wherewith it
was hired, as appears by Act. 28.30. where the (...), which does properly
signify the hire of a thing (be it of an House, or ought else) and which was
given by St. Paul, or some other in his behalf, is styled, His own hired House.

CHAP. XXXI.
Dr. Owen's mistake in thinking, That when all sin is answered for, all the
Righteousness, which God requires for that time, is not fulfilled; the
contrary whereunto is proved. Several other of his mistakes discovered, and his
mis-interpretations of several Scriptures.

FOrasmuch as there are several passages in Dr. Owen's Book, of Communion with
God, wherein the contrary is asserted, to what has been maintained in the
foregoing Chapters (he asserting, That over and above the taking away the guilt
of sin, it is necessary in order to our being saved, that we should be actually
righteous, and for that purpose, that the Righteousness of Christ should be
imputed to us) I shall therefore think it not amiss, to recite the chief of
those passages, and to reply thereunto, which shall be the subject of three or
four of the ensuing Chapters.

The Doctor having told us, That Christ satisfies for sin, and procures the
remission of it, p. 116. he proceeds to say in the following page;

There is something more required; it is not enough, we are not guilty. We must
also be actually righteous: Not only all sin must be answered for, but all
righteousness is to be fulfilled: By taking away the guilt of sin, we are as
persons innocent, but something more is required, to make us to be considered
as persons obedient. I know nothing to teach me, that an innocent person shall
go to heaven, be rewarded, if he be no more, but so. Adam was innocent at his
first creation, but he was to do this, to keep the Commandments before he
entered into life, he had no title to life by innocence. This then moreover is
required, that the whole Law be fulfilled, and all the obedience performed,
that God requires at our hands. This is the souls second enquiry, and it finds
a resolution only in the Lord Christ: For if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall
be saved by his life; his death reconciled us, then are we saved by his life.
The actual obedience, which he yielded to the whole Law of God, is that
Righteousness, whereby we are saved. If so be we are found in him, not having
our own righteousness, which is of the Law, but the Righteousness, which is of
God by faith, Phil. 3.9. This I shall have occasion to handle more at large
hereafter.

Answ. Somewhat to this purpose being alleged by other Authors, has been
already answered in Chap. 23. Nevertheless I shall here make reply, to every
dictinct passage in the words recited.

1. When all sin is answered for, all the righteousness, which God requires
for that time, is fulfilled: For the Law is fulfilled two ways, viz. Either by
performance of perfect obedience to it, or by suffering sufficient punishment
for the breach of it. Either of these is a satisfaction to the justice of God.
Now Gods Law does not bind to both these Copulative (i. e.) it binds not a
person to both these at once, but Disjunctive (i. e.) it binds him to
obedience, or to punishment, primarily and absolutely to the one, secondarily
and Ex hypothesi (i. e.) upon failure of that obedience, to the other. Neither
was Adam before his fall, nor are we since bound to both at once; not we, I
say, more than was Adam: For satisfaction being made for our crime, we cease to
be sinners, and do become righteous in this sense, that we are no longer bound
to suffer, and we are entitled to a right of being dealt with as righteous: We
are indeed bound to obedience for the future, not to that obedience, for the
not performing whereof, by punishment we have made satisfaction, but to another
new obedience, which if we do not perform, then are we bound by the Law to new
punishment. So that Christ having obliged himself to make satisfaction, by
suffering such punishment as was equivalent to that, which by our sins was
deserved, and our sins being pardoned for the merit-sake thereof, we thereupon
are dealt with as righteous; and for the future we are bound to new obedience,
or to new punishment, not to both at once, no more than was Adam in innocence.
The Law requires not of us both suffering and obedience, in respect of the
same time, and actions.

The consideration of this makes it most apparent, that if sin be pardoned, the
Imputation of Christ's active Righteousness, or the Righteousness of the life of
Christ (as is the Doctor's expression) is needless. And it is to no purpose to
alledg, that the Law requires suffering for the time past, and obedience for
the future, which has been acknowledged: For Christ has made satisfaction for
future sins, and ere long those future sins will be past, and if we do not obey
for the future, we sin, and if we sin, the Law requires only our suffering for
expiation, and forasmuch as Christ's expiatory suffering, or propitiation has
satisfied for that, the benefit whereof a sinner does enjoy in a renewed
pardon, he is no longer obliged to suffer. So that the contrary opinion, to
what I here maintain, does in the consequence thereof deny, that Christ has
satisfied for future sins.

2. It is a palpable error in the Doctor to say, That by taking away the guilt
of sin, we are as persons innocent, but something more is required to make us
to be considered as persons obedient: For forasmuch as sin is as well of
omission, as of commission, it follows unavoidably, that if the guilt of the
former be taken away, as well as of the latter, it is impossible, but that a
sinner so pardoned should be considered, and dealt with as obedient; for not to
transgress the Law, and to fulfill the Law, are the same thing, as is easily
proveable by the contrary: For to transgress the Law, is to violate it by doing
what it forbids, or by omitting what it commands; Ergo, Not to transgress the
Law, is not to violate it, either by committing the one, or omitting the other;
and what is this, but to fulfill the Law? For he, that does neither commit the
evil forbidden by the Law, nor omit the good therein commanded, does fulfill it.

In short I say, 1. That an innocent person shall doubtless go to heaven, and
be rewarded, though he be no more than so.

2. I am not apt to think, that any rational creature can be more than
innocent; for to be innocent, is to be no transgressor of any Law (i.e.) of any
Law which commands good, or forbids evil; and how any one can rationally be
conceived to be more innocent, than to be no transgressor of any such Law, I do
not know, except there be works of supererrogation.

3. It is the Doctor's gross mistake to think, that Adam's obedience to the
divine command, (Do this) was by God constiuted the condition of his having a
right, or title to life (for that right he had already, by virtue of that
habitual innocence or holiness, in which he was created) whereas it was the
condition only of his holding that right to life, which at present he had. And
if Adam could not have had a title to life, before he had kept all the
Commandments, he could not have had right so long as he lived (I mean) not till
his last gasp.

4. The Doctor very absurdly supposes things contradictory in supposing, That
Adam was, or could be innocent any longer, than he did continue to keep Gods
Commandments: For he, who does only forbear the evil, which God forbids, but
does not do the good enjoined, is neither truly, nor reputatively innocent.

5. It is falsely said by the Doctor, That the resolution of the said enquiry,
is found in the Righteousness of the life of Christ, which he lived upon earth,
this being evidently his meaning, for which he quotes two Scriptures, but
abuses both of them.

For 1. By that life of Christ, by which the Apostle says, we shall be saved,
Romans 5.10. is not meant the life of Christ, which in the state of his
humiliation he lived upon earth, but the life of glory, which he (never to die
again) does now live, in his estate of exaltation and session at the right hand
of God, of which his life the Apostle speaks in Heb. 7.25. He ever lives to
make intercession for us.

2. As for that other Text alleged by him, Phil. 3.9. he has often abused it,
as often as in any place of his Book he has handled it: For by the
Righteousness there said to be of God by faith, is not meant Christ's personal
Righteousness (the Righteousness of Christ's life imputed to Believers) but that
Righteousness, which does consist in the faith of Christ, or in being faithful
Christians.

CHAP. XXXII.
That it is no where said in Scripture, that we do receive the Righteousness of
Christ. The Doctor's perverting that in Phil. 3.9. from the true meaning of the
Apostle. That he perverts the sense of 1 Cor. 1.30. utterly beside the meaning
of the Apostle. That he mistakes the sense of Romans 5.10. That Christ has done
no more by the obedience of his life for a sinners salvation, than for his
reconciliation, the contrary whereunto is supposed by Dr. O. His iterated
mistake touching the end of Adam's obedience.

THE Doctor says, p. 186. The Righteousness we receive, is opposed to our own
obedience to the Law; opposed to it, not as something in another kind, but as
something in the same kind, excluding that from such an end, which the other
obtains. Now this is that obedience of Christ to the Law; himself thereby being
made to us Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30.

Answ. 1. By the Righteousness we receive, it is evident, that the Doctor means
Christ's obedience to the Law, performed in his lifetime; whereupon I answer,
That it is neither said in that Scripture, neither is there such a saying in
any other Scripture, That Believers do receive the Righteousness of Christ, or
his obedience to the Law; although it be true, that they do in a passive sense
of the word receive it (i. e.) they by means of their believing, do enjoy the
righteousness or obedience of Christ, in the saving fruits and effects thereof.

2. The Doctor does err^ grossly in thinking, That by the righteousness of the
Law, the Apostle means his own evangelical righteousness, or obedience to the
Gospel-Law, and that this is it, which heopposes to Christ's personal
righteousness, or to Christ's obedience to the Law: For it is plain both by the
Text it self, and Context, That by the Law he means the Jewish Law, and that by
his own righteousness, he means that which was his own, when a Jew (not that
which was his own, when a Convert to the Christian faith) and that the things
there opposed are Judaism and Christianity, or Judaical observances, and the
practical knowledge of Christ. So that our own evangelical righteousness, is
neither in the same kind, nor in any other kind, there opposed to the obedience
of Christ; nor is it either in that Scripture, or in any other, excluded from
such an end, which Christ's Righteousness does obtain, I mean, the salvation of
a sinner: For in order to this end, our evangelical righteousness stands not in
any opposition, but in a due subordination to Christ's. As Christ's Righteousness
does, after a manner peculiar to it self, so does our own righteousness, in its
manner, tend to our obtaining that, which St. Peter styles, The end of our
faith, even the salvation of our souls. Whence that command of the Apostle, So
run, that ye may obtain, 1 Cor. 9.24. It is by running, that (through, by, or
under Christ) we do obtain.

3. The Doctor perverts the sense of 1 Cor. 1.30. that Scripture in no fort
proving the thing, for the proof whereof it is alleged by him: For the Apostle
does not there say (as he would have him) That Christ is made Righteousness
unto us by Gods reckoning, or imputing Christ's perfect and complete obedience
of the Law unto us, this being the thing undertaken by him to be proved by that
Scripture; which as that Scripture does not prove, (for it proves only, that
Christ was of God made Righteousness unto us) so another place of Scripture (2
Cor. 5.21.) does most convincingly disprove it; it being there asserted, that
we are made in Christ the Righteousness of God (i. e.) very righteous by God
(the abstract being put for the concrete, as is very usual in the language of
Scripture, and particularly so used, Esa. 60.17. where God promises to his
Church, that he will make all their Exactors Righteousness (i. e.) very just,
honest, or righteous) it being, I say, there asserted, that we are of God made
in Christ most righteous, by means of his being made sin (i. e.) a sin-offering
for us, not by Gods reckoning to us Christ's perfect and complete obedience to
the Law.

In the same Page again he abuses that Text in Romans 5.10. saying, The issue of
the death of Christ is placed upon reconciliation, that is a slaying of the
enmity, and restoring us into that condition of peace and friendship, wherein
Adam was before his fall. But is there no more to be done? Notwithstanding that
there was no wrath due to Adam, yet be was to obey, if he would enjoy eternal
life: Something moreover there is to be done in respect of us, if after the
slaying of the enmity and reconciliation made, we shall enjoy life; being
reconciled by his death, we are saved by that perfect obedience, which in his
life he yielded to the Law of God.

Answ. 1. I have already vindicated that Scripture, from the same abuse put
upon it by the Doctor, having manifested, that by the life of Christ, is there
meant the life which he now lives in glory, interceding for us at the right
hand of God, not the life which he lived on earth.

2. Had the Apostle meant the life, which Christ lived on earth, it will not
thence follow, that his meaning was, that we are saved, by Gods reckoning to us
the perfect and complete obedience of that his life (i. e.) imputing his
obedience it self unto us.

3. Though being reconciled to God, there is somewhat to be done by us (i. e.)
in order to the continuing of our friendship with God -- nevertheless there
needs no more to a sinners salvation at present, than his present
reconciliation, nor does there need more to his future and final salvation,
than the continuance of his reconciliation and friendship with God: For if
being reconciled to God, he and we do continue friends, we shall as certainly
be saved, as it is certain, that Christ at the right hand of God, ever lives
to make intercession for us.

4. It is salsly insinuated by the Doctor, That Christ has done more, or that
it is needful, that he should do more for our salvation, than for our
reconciliation, I mean, for the beginning, continuing, or perfecting of the
one, than of the other, salvation from the guilt of sin, whether it be initial,
progressive, or consummate, being in effect the same benefit with
Reconciliation with God, in its being begun, continued, and made perfect in the
fruit thereof.

5. If there was no wrath due to Adam, nothing could ever have obstructed his
entrance into life, the contrary whereunto is presumed by the Doctor.

6. As it was once already said, so I say again, That Adam was to obey, not
that he might enjoy a right to eternal life, which he had not antecedently to
that his actual obedience, but that his title thereunto might be continued, and
he thereupon might be brought at last to the full enjoyment thereof.

The Doctor proceeds in the same Page, to abuse the Scriptures by whole
clusters, which I will endeavor to manifest in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XXXIII.
The Doctor's allegation of several Scriptures, to no purpose. That we are no
otherwise justified, than we are reconciled, or pardoned through the Imputation
of Christ's Righteousness, the contrary whereunto is pretended by Dr. O. That
none of those Scriptures alleged by him, to prove the Imputation of Christ's
obedience it self unto us, do evince the same. His error in attributing our
justification to the Life of Christ, whereas the Apostle does (Romans 5.9.)
expressly attribute it to his Death, however it is not to be understood, as
excluding the obedience of his Life.

HE says, p. 186. There is distinct mention made of Reconciliation, through a
non-imputation of sin, as Psalm. 32.1. Luke 1.77. Romans 3.25. 2 Cor. 5.19. and
justification, through an Imputation of righteousness, Jer. 23.6. Romans 4.5. 1
Cor. 1.30. although these things are so far from being separated, that they are
reciprocally affirmed of one another, which as it does not evince an identity,
so it does an eminent conjunction. And this last we have by the life of Christ.

Answ.

1. There is no mention at all so much as of the word Reconciliation, in three
of the four recited Scriptures, viz. Psalm. 32.1. Luke 1.77. Romans 3.25. And by
perusing the places the Reader may know, whether he should believe the Doctor,
or his own eyes.

2. Much less is there mention of Reconciliation, through a non-imputation of
sin, as distinct from justification, in any of those three Texts of Scripture.

3. Though there be mention of Reconciliation, and a non-imputation of sin, in
one of the forecited Scriptures, 2 Cor. 5.19. yet neither is the one, or the
other there mentioned, as distinct from justification, through an Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, as the Doctor says.

4. We are no otherwise justified, than we are pardoned, or reconciled to God,
through the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, Christ's Righteousness it self
being no more necessary, nor acting any otherwise for the effecting of the one,
than of the other, the agency thereof being that of a morally efficient, or
meritorious cause, toward our remission, reconciliation, and justification.

5. If by the Doctor's confession, reconciliation and justification are
reciprocally affirmed one of another, I am apt to think, that Philosophy will
warrant us from thence to conclude an identity. And by the last forecited
Scripture, the identity, which the Doctor denies, may undoubtedly be evinced:
For the non-imputation of sin, together with our reconciliation with God, is
there mentioned as all one, even the self same thing, with our being made the
Righteousness of God in Christ, which may be truly paraphrased, with our being
justified by the Righteousness of Christ; but is falsely glossed, as the Doctor
would have it, with the Imputation of the perfect and complete righteousness,
or obedience of Christ to the Law of God.

As for the other three places of Scripture alleged by him, he does manifestly
wrest them: For

1. Though it be said in Jer. 23.6. That this is his name, whereby he shall be
called, The Lord our Righteousness (let who will be there meant by the Lord,
whether God the Father, as Mr. John Humfreys thinks, or God the Son, as many
others, it matters not here to make enquiry) yet there is no such thing there
either mentioned, or meant, as Justification, through an Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness unto us. 2. Although in Romans 4.5. there is mention made of Gods
Imputing Righteousness unto us, yet by Righteousness is not there meant the
Righteousness of Christ (i. e.) his perfect and complete obedience to the Law,
nor are we by that expression of the Apostle given to understand, that the said
righteousness, or obedience of Christ is imputed to us, but by it is meant a
certain righteousness, which is the effect and fruit of Christ's Righteousness,
and which for the sake of Christ's Righteousness, is imputed to us, or conferred
upon us. 3. There is not the least sound, or whisper, of a sinners
justification, through the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, in 1 Cor. 1.30.
although the Doctor has endeavored several times, to pervert that Text to
such a sense, as was never intended by the Apostle. 4. Whereas he says (as he
has said often) that this last (i. e.) justification, through an Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, we have by the life of Christ, he does expressly
contradict the Apostle, who affirms, That we are justified by the Blood of
Christ (i. e.) by his bloody death.
The Doctor proceeds in his perverting the true sense of certain other
Scriptures, as after the recital of his words, I will demonstrate in the
following Chapter.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Doctor Owen's mis-interpretation of Zech. 3.3, 4. That remission of sin is no
more the proper fruit of Christ's death (as the Doctor would have it) than is
Justification. That there is not required a collation of Righteousness, over
and above remission of sin (as he asserts) in order to a right to heaven. His
allegation of Esa. 61.10. to no purpose.

P. 187. THIS (that is, the distinct mention of Reconciliation, through a
non-imputation of sin, and Justification, through an Imputation of
righteousness) is fully expressed, in that Typical representation of our
justification before the Lord, Zech. 3.3, 4, 5. Two things are there expressed,
to belong to our free Acceptance before God, 1. The taking away the guilt of
our sin, our filthy robes: This is done by the death of Christ, remission of
sin is the proper fruit thereof; but there is more also required, even a
Collation of righteousness, and thereby a right to life eternal; this is here
called fine change of raiment: So the Holy Ghost expresses it again, Esa.
61.10. where he calls it plainly the garment of salvation, and the robe of
righteousness: Now this is only made ours by the obedience of Christ, as the
other by his death.

Answ.

We are now come to Visions and Revelations of the Lord, in the Expositions
whereof, I do confess my self to have little exercised my talent; nevertheless
I reply;

1. In a flat gainsaying his interpretation, and denial, that this (i. e.) that
reconciliation with God, and justification, through the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, as things distinct, is fully expressed, in that Typical
representation of the matter in Zech. 3. For although I do yield, that
remission of sins is represented by that visible sign, ( I have caused thine
iniquities (i. e.) in the guilt and punishment of them, to pass from thee (i.
e.) I have pardoned them) nevertheless I deny, that by the fine change of
raiment, is there meant the Righteousness of Christ, or justification, through
the Imputation of it unto us; but I rather think, that by it is meant our own
personal righteousness, or holiness, which does oft-times in Scripture, go
under the Metaphorical expression of a splendid vest, fine linen, robe, or the
like, as I have already manifested.

Briefly, My opinion is, That in the said vision of the Prophet, there is a
representation of justification (or remission of sin) and sanctification, as
distinct things, but not (as the Doctor will have it expounded) of
reconciliation (or remission) and of justification, through the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness.

2. Remission of sin is no more the proper fruit of Christ's death (as the
Doctor says) than is our justification; for as the Apostle somewhere says, (We
have redemption through his Blood, even the Forgiveness of our sins) so he does
elsewhere say, We are justified by his Blood, Romans 5.9. I doubt not to say, It
is a great mistake in this Doctor (as in many others) to assign our
Reconciliation, or remission of sin, and our Justification, to several distinct
causes, the former to Christ's passive obedience (his death) the other to his
active (the obedience of his life imputed) whereas the truth is in these two
things;

1. That reconciliation, or remission of sin, and justification, are the self
same thing in effect, as was aforesaid. 2. Being the same thing in effect,
although they are expressed by diverse names, yet they are wholly to be ascribed
to the whole obedience of Christ (both of his life and death) as jointly
constituting the meritorious cause thereof; so that neither is remission of
sin, to be more said to be the proper fruit of Christ's death, than
justification, nor justification, more properly the fruit of Christ's life, than
remission of sin. 3. I deny what the Doctor here affirms, viz. That over and
above remission of sin, there is required a collation of righteousness, in
order to a right to heaven. This has been at large already disproved in Chapter
23. 4. Whether the Doctor does here assert Christ's Righteousness it self, or a
right to eternal life thereby conferred, to be the fine linen spoken of in
Zech. 3. is questionable: For it is doubtful, what construction he would have
his Readers to make of the Relative This, (he saying, This is here called fine
change of raiment) I mean, whether he would have it understood concerning the
Righteousness of Christ, or concerning the right to life eternal by it. This
latter construction is of the two more obvious and rational, because right to
eternal life, is in the order of his words the nearest Antecedent, the other (a
collation of righteousness) being a little more remote. But let him be
understood of either, as I said before, so I say again, That by the fine change
of raiment, neither of these are to be understood, but the righteousness of
sanctification, or fine vestment of holiness. 5. In the Exposition of Esaias
61.10. I perceive a great difference betwixt the Doctor, and very many of the
Brethren of his mind in this controversy: For they undertaking to show the
meaning of the Holy Ghost therein, do confidently say, That the Holy Ghost, by
the robe of righteousness, and garment of salvation there mentioned, does mean,
The Righteousness of Christ himself; and thence it is, that they do
rhetorically set forth the properties thereof, under the notion of a Vest, how
that it is Fine, Pure, White, Rich, Splendid -- But the Doctor tells us, That
the Holy Ghost says not so; for that, which the Holy Ghost does there mean by
the garment of salvation, is not the Righteousness of Christ, but a right to
eternal life collated upon us, by the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us.
Upon this occasion, I call to mind what is charged upon the false Prophets of
old, Ezekiel. 13.7. They said, the Lord says it, albeit the Lord never spoke it.
In like sort may it be said, concerning the Authors of both the said
Interpretations, They say, The Holy Ghost means this and that by the garment of
salvation, and the Robe of Righteousness, whereas the truth is, the Holy Ghost
in the Prophets words, did mean neither this, nor that, but some other thing
(as I have already demonstrated in Chap. 30.) 6. Whereas the Doctor concludes,
saying (This is only made ours by the obedience of Christ) and whereas his
meaning therein is, that the other, viz. Remission of sin, or reconciliation,
is made ours by the death of Christ, I shall still deny it Toties Quoties, even
as often as the Doctor shall affirm it.
The Doctor proceeds to answer an Objection, which in his sagacity, he foresaw
would be made against the doctrine by him maintained, touching the Imputation
of Christ's perfect obedience to the Law (even it it self) unto us, viz. That it
will follow from thence, that we are as righteous as is Christ himself. But
this Objection, together with the Doctor's unsatisfactory Answer thereunto, I
have already mentioned, and made a reply to upon a fit occasion, in Chap. 25.
to which I shall refer the Reader.

There is only a passage or two more in p. 193. (wherein the Doctor speaks to
the same purpose as before) which I will recite, and make reply unto.

CHAP. XXXV.
That our deliverance from a state of rejection, or un-acceptation, and our
Acceptance with God, are not two things, and to be ascribed to two several
causes, as the Doctor pretends. That in 2 Cor. 5.21. mis-alledged by him for
his purpose, retorted to the purpose against him. His unreasonableness in
supposing, the old quarrel betwixt God and us to be taken away, and yet no new
friendship contracted. His senseless contradiction in supposing, That Adam was
guilty of no sin, and yet not to have had thereupon a positive as well as a
negative holiness. That the nonimputation of sin, and the Imputation of
righteousness, are not two things, but one and the same thing. That Christ's
Righteousness is not our righteousness before God, otherwise than in a causal
sense, and that our righteousness it self before God is our own personal
righteousness. That in Romans 5.18. vainly alleged by the Doctor, to prove his
purpose. That the non imputation of sin, and the Imputation of righteousness
(as they are the same thing) so they are to be ascribed to one and the same
cause.

P. 193. BY his death Christ bearing the curse, undergoing the punishment, that
was due to us, paying the ransom, that was due for us, delivers us from this
condition (that is, a state of rejection, and our un-acceptation) and thus far
the death of Christ is the cause of our Acceptance with God, that all cause of
quarrel and rejection of us is thereby taken away; and to that end are his
sufferings reckoned to us: For being made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. he is made
righteousness unto us, 1 Cor. 1.30.

Answ.

1. The Doctor does most unreasonably make a sinners deliverance, from a state
of rejection or unacceptation, and his Acceptance with God, to be two things,
whereas they are indeed but one and the same thing, and done at the same time,
by one and the same divine act: For as the Physician does not remove the
disease by one act, and restore health to the Patient by another act (healing
the disease, and restoring health, being but two different names, or
considerations of one and the same thing) in like manner God does not deliver
from a state of un-acceptation by one act, and restore us to a state of
Acceptance by another, these two being but two different names, expressions,
notions, or considerations of the same thing.

2. As our deliverance from a state of un-acceptation, and our Acceptance with
God, are the self same thing, and done by one and the same act of God, so they
are to be ascribed to the self same cause, and not unto different causes, as
the Doctor would have them to be assigned, to wit, the former precisely to the
death of Christ, or the Imputation of Christ's sufferings to us, the latter to
the life of Christ, or Imputation of the obedience of his life to us, neither
of which indeed (whether his doings, or sufferings) are properly, and in
themselves reckoned to us, but only is the effects thereof, as has often upon
occasion been before said.

3. The whole of our reconciliation to God, (our deliverance from enmity, and
restoration into divine favor, or friendship, if any one list to divide it
into those two parts) our Acceptance with God, or Justification before God, is
ascribed to the death of Christ, as has been already proved from Romans 5.9. the
same being also proveable from Col. 1.20.

4. As one of those Scriptures alleged by the Doctor (1 Cor. 1.30.) makes
nothing for him, so the other (2 Cor. 5.21.) makes point blank, and most fully
against him, as has been already demonstrated.

The Doctor goes on, saying, in the same Page, and in the words immediately
following;

But yet farther, This (that is, the removal of our guilt, or deliverance from
a state of rejection, or unacceptation) will not complete our Acceptance with
God. The old quarrel may be laid aside, and yet no new friendship begun. We may
be not sinners, and yet not be so far righteous, as to have a right to the
kingdom of heaven. Adam had no right to life, because he was innocent, he must
moreover do This, and then he shall live. He must not only have a negative
righteousness, he was not guilty of any thing, but also a positive
righteousness, he must do all things. This then is required in the second
place, to our Complete Acceptance, that we have not only the non-imputation of
sin, but also a reckoning of righteousness. Now this we have in the obedience
of the life of Christ. This also was discovered in the last Chapter. The
obedience of the life of Christ was for us, is imputed to us, and is our
Righteousness before God: By his obedience are we made righteous, Romans 5.18.

Answ.

All this in effect has been already answered, the repetition whereof being
needless, I add, that,

1. It is here contrary to sense and reason, supposed by the Doctor, that the
old quarrel betwixt God and us may be taken away, and yet no new friendship
begun: For it is alike as to suppose darkness to be expelled, and yet no new
light to be introduced, or sickness removed, and no health brought in place.
And as for the word (Reconciliation) I have always hitherunto understood the
meaning of the word (passively taken) that it is To be made friends; and I
cannot reconcile it to sense or reason, to make any other construction of it,
as if persons could be Reconciled, and yet not made Friends.

2. It is a senseless contradiction for the Doctor to imagine (as he does) that
Adam was not guilty of any thing, and yet that he had not a positive as well as
a negative righteousness: For to imagine, or suppose this, is to suppose him to
be guilty of no sin at all, and yet to suppose him guilty of some sin (i. e.)
of sin, or sins of omission.

3. Suppose that Adam must have a positive as well as a negative righteousness,
in order to his right to life, yet it will not follow from thence, That in
order to our right to life, we must have the positive righteousness, or perfect
obedience of Christ's life, in it self imputed to us for that end, the
Imputation of Christ's positive Righteousness unto us for that purpose, being no
more necessary, than the Imputation of his negative Righteousness.

4. A non-imputation of sin, and a reckoning of righteousness, are the self
same thing in effect, as appears evidently by Romans 4.5, 6. and so likewise is
reconciliation, or a non-imputation of sin, all one with righteousness, or our
being made the righteousness of God in Christ, as appears by 2 Cor. 5.19, 21.
That act of God, whereby he does perfectly pardon our sin, is interpretatively
nothing else, but an Imputation of a perfect righteousness, or a fulfilling of
the Law, even as that act, by which the Sun dispels the darkness, does fill the
air with light.

5. The obedience of Christ verily was for us, but it may not therefore be
truly said in it self to be imputed to us, nor is it our righteousness before
God otherwise, than in a causal sense.

6. Nor does that Text here alleged by the Doctor ( Romans 5.18.) prove in the
least, that the obedience of Christ's life is imputed to us, it having been often
times for this purpose alleged by him, but still I must say, to no purpose.

7. The Imputation of righteousness (which is indeed all one with the
non-imputation of sin) we have from the joint obedience of Christ's life and
death, but not from both of them, or from either of them, in themselves imputed
to us.

CHAP. XXXVI.
The difference betwixt Dr. Owen and Mr. Ferguson in their opinion, concerning
the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, or Obedience unto us, plainly laid
open in their own words, recited. That the Doctor denies Christ's death to have
been in our stead, but only as it was penal. The Author's opinion plainly and
expressly declared, in opposition to the Doctor's. That satisfaction was no
otherwise the effect of Christ's death as a penalty, than as a price, and as a
sacrifice.

I Shall close what I have to say, concerning the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness unto us, by acquainting the Reader, that the forenamed Authors
(Dr. O. and Mr. F.) do to my seeming, so plainly differ betwixt themselves,
touching that Righteousness of Christ, by them asserted to be imputed to us,
that I am not able to reconcile them, Mr. F. asserting the Imputation of all
Christ's Mediatory Obedience unto us, but the Doctor only one part thereof: And
that what seems thus to me, may appear to others, I will more at large recite
the words of them both, and thereupon leave the judgment thereof, to every
indifferent and intelligent Reader.

God (says Mr. F. p. 558, 559.) having admitted the interposure of Christ on
our behalf, and having inflicted sufferings upon him, as a punishment for our
sins, and having accepted those sufferings, as a sacrifice of atonement for the
expiation of our guilt, and having also agreed with his Son, and declared in
the Covenant of grace the terms, on which we are made partakers of the benefits
thereof, we upon the performance of these conditions, come to have all that
Christ did and suffered as our Mediator, Imputed to us in a Law-sence. And this
being all, that we do intend by a Legal Union with Christ, namely, That by the
Covenant of redemption, Christ so becomes our Surrogate, as to have our sins in
a Law-sence imputed to him, and we through fulfilling the terms of the Covenant
of grace, have all that Christ did and suffered as our Mediator, Imputed in a
Law-sence to us: He must not only disclaim Christ's being Mediator in any proper
sense, but renounce the whole Gospel, that donies it.

Thus we perceive plainly, that Mr. F. is for the Imputation of all Christ's
Mediatory obedience unto us (as of our sins to him) in a Law-sence, that is,
and as that phrase is usually explained, in such sort, as if we had done all
that he did, and suffered all that he suffered, or as if God did repute, that
we in and by Christ had done and suffered the whole thereof: Thus Mr. Rols in
his Prodromus explains the sense, saying ( p. 86.) God reckons Believers in and
by Christ their Surety, to have satisfied divine justice. And we perceive also
by the words forecited, what a dreadful sentence Mr. F. passes upon all those,
who gainsay the said Imputation of all Christ's Mediatory obedience; which (for
ought I can perceive) will light heavily upon Dr. O. himself, as well as any
others: For the Doctor does distinguish concerning a double Law, to which
Christ as our Mediator did perform obedience;

1. General (i. e.) the Law of nature, or moral Law, comprizing every Law of
God, whereto we were subject and obnoxious.

2. Special, or the peculiar Law of Mediatorship, which respected himself
merely; and to this peculiar Law he refers Christ's obedience in dying, Joh.
10.18. Thus he does distinguish in his Book, ( Comm. p. 178, 179.) Now what
obedience of Christ is imputed to us, or to which of those Laws [to one, or
both] as he does there determine, so he does fully explain in his late
Vindication, p. 213, 214. whose words I shall transcribe, as follows;

Plainly (says he) I have showed, that there was an especial Law of
Mediatorship, which Christ was subject unto, as the commandment of the Father,
That he should be incarnate, that he should be the King, Priest and Prophet of
his Church, that he should bear our iniquities, make his soul an offering for
sin, and give his life a ransom for many, were the principal parts of this Law.
The whole of it I have lately explained, in my Exercitations unto the second
part of the Exposition, on the Epistle to the Hebrews. This Law our Lord Jesus
Christ did not yield obedience to in our stead, as if we had been obliged
originally unto the duties of it, which we neither were, nor could be; although
what he suffered penally in any of them, was in our stead, without which
consideration he could not have righteously suffered in any kind. And the
following trivial exception of this Author, about the obligation on us to lay
down our lives for the Brethren, is meet for him to put in; seeing we are not
obliged so to die for any one, as Christ died for us. Was Paul crucified for
you?

But secondly, Christ our Mediator, and as Mediator, was obliged unto all that
obedience unto the moral Law, and all other Laws of God, that the Church was
obliged unto; and that, which I have asserted hereon is, That the effects of
the former obedience of Christ are communicated unto us, but the latter
obedience it self is imputed unto us. And as for the former obedience, his
express words are, ( Comm. p. 181.)

It is not Imputed unto us, as though we had done it, though the (...) and
fruits of it are.

Thus by comparing the words of the said Authors together, we may palpably
perceive the difference betwixt them, reconcile them, who can for me; for I
cannot; so that, how the Doctor can avoid coming under the said terrible
censure, or sentence of his Brother Mr. F. I know not. But the comfort truly
is, That as the curse causeless shall not come, and is not therefore to be
dreaded, so Mr. Ferguson's sentence being groundless, need not therefore to be
feared, whether by the Doctor, or by any other: For he, who denies the
Imputation of our sin to Christ, and of all he did and suffered (all his
active, and all his passive obedience) to us, in Mr. Ferguson's Law-sence, does
not disclaim Christ his being our Mediator, in any proper sense, nor does he
renounce any part, or tittle of the Gospel, as has been already manifested in
this Treatise; nor does the said denial impeach any such Union of Believers
with Christ, which the Scriptures do assert, by what name soever it be
entitled, whether Legal, or Moral, or any other name of man's imposing: Nor does
it properly belong to the office of Mediation, or to a proper Mediator, that
what is done by him in person, should be in it self (properly and formally
considered) imputed unto, or reckoned as done by the person, in whose behalf he
does mediate. Yet if instead of the word Mediator, Mr. F. had used the word
Surety, I would have yielded, That Christ is not in any place of Scripture said
to be our Surety, in a strict and proper sense of the word: For so far as
hitherto I have apprehended the sense of the word, in the propriety thereof, a
proper Surety is bound to the Creditor in the self same Bond or obligation,
with the principal Debtor: Now the case betwixt Christ and us is otherwise; for
he is not bound in the same Bond with us, nor was our obligation translated
upon him, or assumed by him, but he took upon him an obligation peculiar to
himself, which obligation was not only individually, but also specifically
different from ours, ours being Obligatio Criminis, and his only Contractus, as
has been before said, and proved. Moreover, Christ is not our Surety in any
more proper sense, than our sins are proper debts, or God a proper Creditor,
which expressions are not proper, but Metaphorical. And withal I will say, That
although I should deny, that Christ is in any place of Scripture said to be our
Surety in a proper sense, yet it will not from thence follow, that I do deny
the whole Gospel, or any the least scruple of the Gospel.

I shall now return to the words of Dr. O. forecited, whereupon I desire it may
be observed;

1. That having asserted Christ's dying for our sins, to be a principal part of
the Law of Mediation peculiar to himself, he does both affirm and deny his
obedience thereunto to have been in our stead.

1. He does simply deny, that his obedience thereunto, or dying for us, was in
our stead. 2. He does affirm it in some respect to have been in our stead, viz.
as his death was penal, and so likewise that all which he suffered penally, in
what pertained to the peculiar Law of the Mediator, was in our stead; and this
he affirms for this reason, viz. because otherwise he could not have
righteously suffered in any kind.
To which I reply;

1. To the reason of his affirmation, and that by denying the force of it, and
by asserting the contrary, viz. That although Christ's death as penal, had not
been in our stead (i. e.) imputed to us, in the Law-sence as aforesaid, as if
we had suffered in and by him what he suffered (which is the Doctor's meaning
of the word [instead] nevertheless he might righteously suffer, and he did
righteously suffer in that kind, and in many other kinds besides death it self:
For he did no less spontaneously, than at the will of his Father, take upon him
an obligation so to do (i. e.) to be obedient, even unto death, for the
expiation of our sins; whereupon the Doctor may remember the old and true
saying, Volenti non fit injuria.

2. As to what was both affirmed and denied by the Doctor, I reply;

1. What he denies simply, I shall simply affirm, That Christ's death was in our
stead, yea in all manner of considerations of it, it was in our stead. 2. What
he affirms concerning the death of Christ in one respect, or under one
consideration of his death, I shall deny under consideration of the sense of
the phrase [instead] as by him intended, saying, Christ did not either in that,
or any other consideration of his death, die in our stead, (i. e.) strictly,
and in a Law-sence, In persona nostra, as if so be God had reckoned his death
to be our death, or that we had suffered death in and by him, or as if our
obligation to suffer punishment, had been transferred upon him. 3. Forasmuch as
the Doctor does simply deny, that, which for my own part I never did, but do
simply and positively affirm the contrary, viz. That the death of Christ was in
our stead, I may well think it strange, that he has hitherto escaped the
charge of Socinianism; whereas if my self, or any of my Brethren, who maintain
what I have professedly asserted in this controversy, should simply deny, That
Christ's death was in our stead, I am much afraid, that we should not so escape,
but that rather our names would be enrolled in that black List. But that it may
farther appear, what a great gulf there is fixed betwixt us and the Socinians,
I do here profess in my own (and I do not know, but that I may sincerely make
the same profession, in the name of all those my Brethren) saying,
After all this Dispute, I do freely and plainly confess and acknowledge, and
this I do without any of Dr. Owen's distinctions, That All Christ's Mediatory
Obedience, To Any Law Whatsoever, [Common To Us, Or Peculiar To Himself]
Especially His Obedience To The Death Of The Cross, Was Under All
Considerations [Both As A Penalty, As A Price, And As A Sacrifice] In Our
Stead; And Forasmuch As The Dignity, Or Value Of All His Obedience, Did Depend
Upon The Dignity Of His Person (He Being Both God, And Man) I Do Confess, That
All His Obedience Was In Our Stead (That is) To Bestead Us, And That It Did
Bestead Us, In The Purchasing Of A Pardon, And Life Eternal For Us, Upon Terms
Expressed In the Gospel, Promised To Us, And Upon Performance Thereof, To Be
Conferred Upon Us; And That the Said Obedience Of Christ (Both Active, and
Passive, As It Is Usually Styled) Is Imputed To Us, Although Not Immediately,
And In It Self, Yet To As Much Purpose, And Real Benefit, As If It Were
Actually, Or Could Possibly Be So Imputed, (that is) That It Is Imputed To Us
In All Its Saving Fruits, And Blessed Effects, All That His Foresaid Obedience,
Making Up One Entire Meritorious Cause Of All The Said Benefits, And Blessings.

Hereupon as God makes his appeal, saying, (And now O Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and men of Judah, judge I pray you between me and my vineyard, what could have
been done more, than --) in like sort shall I make my appeal to all, saying,
And now (Men, Brethren and Fathers) judge I pray you betwixt us, who do make
the said Confession of our faith in this matter, and our adversaries, who
notwithstanding will clamor against us, and stigmatize us with that odious
name of Socinianism; what need we? what can we [sa^va veritate] say more,
whereby to acquit our selves from all cause, or color of being accused as
Socinians.

Lastly, I reply upon occasion of the Doctor's forecited words, That forasmuch
as he does acknowledge Christ's death to have been in our stead, only as it was
penal, or a punishment, it is therefore justly enquirable, under what
consideration, or in what respect his death was not in our stead; and by
observing what he says concerning the death of Christ ( p. 188. Comm.) it seems
to me, That he denies it to be in our stead, as it was a Price, and as it was a
Sacrifice; and that this may appear to others as well as to my self, I will
recite his words, as follows;

The death of Christ is in Scripture proposed under a threefold consideration,
Of a Price, of a Sacrifice, and of a Penalty.

1. It is a Price, 1 Cor. 6.20. 1 Pet. 1.19. 1 Timothy 4.6. Now the proper effect
and issue of the death of Christ as a price, or ransom, is Redemption -- 2. P.
189. It was a Sacrifice also, Heb. 10.5. Esa. 53.10. Ephesians. 5.2. Now the end of
Sacrifices, such as his was, bloody, and for sin, Romans 4.3. Heb. 2.17. was
Atonement and Reconciliation, Ephesians. 5.2. Esa. 53.10. Dan. 9.24. Romans 5.10. -- 3.
It was also a Punishment, a punishment in our stead, Esa. 53.5.6.12. 1 Pet.
2.34. -- Now bearing of punishment tends directly, to the giving satisfaction
to him, who was offended, and on that account inflicted the punishment -- His
substituting himself in our room, being allowed of by the Righteous Judge,
satisfaction to him does thence properly ensue.
To this I reply, saying,

1. Redemption and Reconciliation are not at all distinct benefits of the death
of Christ; for they are one and the self same saving benefit, they being but
distinct or several names, given in several respects to one and the same thing:
And the very truth is, That Redemption (i. e.) redemption from the guilt of sin
(I mean the word Redemption passively taken) and Reconciliation with God, even
as also forgiveness of sin, and justification, with many other words which
might be named, are Synonimous expressions in Scripture, importing in effect
the self same thing, as may appear by the current of the Scriptures, many
whereof have been already named, to which, more, were it needful, may easily be
added, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. Romans 5.9, 10. and 4.24, 25. Gal.
3. 13, 14. with v. 8.

2. As Redemption and Reconciliation are one and the same saving benefit of
Christ's death, so much less do they flow from any such nice, or distinct
consideration, as the Doctor affirms (i. e.) the one from the consideration of
Christ's death, as a Price, and the other as a Sacrifice: But as they are in
effect one saving benefit, so they flow from one cause, the death of Christ,
our reconciliation flowing no more, or otherwise from the death of Christ as a
Sacrifice, than as a Price; nor does our redemption more flow from the death of
Christ as a Price (however it may be thence denominated) than from it as a
Sacrifice, but entirely from the death of Christ, as a meritorious cause, it
being all one in effect to say, it follows from it as an expiatory Sacrifice,
as to say, it follows from it as a valuable Price.

3. I know no more reason to say, That satisfaction is the issue of Christ's
death, considered as a Penalty, than as it was a Price, or Sacrifice; for
Christ's death was as well a Price satisfactory, and a Sacrifice satisfactory,
as a Punishment satisfactory: For the end of paying a Price, and the end of
Sacrifices, was satisfaction of its kind, and to say, that Christ's death was a
Propitiatory, or Expiatory Sacrifice, is all one (I ever thought) as to say, it
is a Satisfactory Sacrifice. So that I am altogether dissatisfied, as to the
fountain, or rise of the Satisfaction here mentioned by the Doctor, God being
as well satisfied by the death of Christ, under the notion of a Price, or
Sacrifice, as of a Penalty.

4. In what sense the death of Christ was, or may be said to be a Punishment, I
have already declared in answer to Mr. F. and it will not be needful here, to
repeat what has been there said.

5. Finally, Whereas the Doctor does only affirm, That Christ's death was in our
stead, under the consideration of a Penalty, I have already in the third Branch
of my Reply, showed, That it was under all considerations in our stead (both as
a Penalty, as a Price, and as a Sacrifice) and I have explained moreover, in
what sense it was in our stead; and I desire the Reader, that he would again so
peruse it, as if it had been in this place [together with my said Appeal] again
inserted.

I will conclude with that Prayer of Calvin, which Beza his Scholar tells us
was his constant form, before his Lectures in the public Schools; Det nobis
Dominus in Coelestis suae sapientiae mysteriis cum verae pietatis profructu
versari, in gloriam suam, and aedificationem nostram. Amen.

Books Printed for, and Sold by Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard.
H. Mori Opera Theologica, Folio. Price 1 l. 10 s. Dr. More's Reply to a late
Answer to his Antidote against Idolatry, with the Appendix, Octavo. Price 4 s.
Spencer dissertatio de Urim and Thummim, Octavo. Price 3 s. 6 d. Frederici
Lossi Observationes Medici, Octavo. Price 2 s. 6 d. Epigrammata Juvenilia in
quatuor parts divisa, Encomia, Seria, Satyras and Jocosa, per Gulielmum Speed.
Price bound 9 d. Dr. Smyth's unjust man's doom: as examined by the several kinds
of Justice, and their obligation with a particular representation of Injustice,
and danger of partial Conformity, Octavo. Price 1 s.
(...)
