A BOOK Of some of the SUFFERINGS AND PASSAGES OF Miles Halhead OF MOVNT-JOY in
VNDERBARROW in the County of Westmorland. As also, Concerning his Labor and
Travel in the Work of the Lord: And how the LORD supported him, and delivered
him by his mighty POWER out of the Hands of his Enemies.

Printed and Sold by A. Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in Holloway-Lane, in
Shoreditch; And at the Three-Keys in Naggs-Head-Court, in Grace Church Street,
1690.

A true and faithful Testimony of the tender Love and Fatherly Care of the
Lord, in keeping and preserving me by his Eternal Arm and Power, in all my
Straits and Hardships, and making good his Promise unto me, from time to time,
even unto the End of my Days.
IN the Year 1652, in the 4th Month, I being about the Age of 38 Years, it
pleased the Lord to reveal the Light of his Son in me, and I saw him whom I had
peirced, and my Sins and Iniquities were laid before me, and I went all the day
long; and in the Night season I could find no rest: I traveled many days in
Sorrow in this condition, and no pleasure could I find in any thing I had in
all the World, neither in Wife nor Children, in House nor Land, in Gold nor
Money, nor any thing I had about my Habitation, till it pleased the God of my
Life to blot out my Sins and Transgressions; and then that which had condemned
me, and showed me my Sins and Evil Deeds, even the same does now bear witness
for me, that the Lord does love me, and that his Countenance does shine upon
me, which made my Heart more glad than Corn or Wine, or all the Treasures of
the whole Earth; so that the same Word which had been to me as a two edged
Sword, and a Hammer, is become to me by the love of God, sweeter than the Honey
or the Honeycomb: Then I heard the Voice of the Lord in me saying, I have
Loved thee from thy Mother's Womb, I have chosen thee to do my Work, my
powerful presence shall be with thee, in the Fire and in the Water: I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee, but I will be thy God, and thou shall serve
me all thy days. Oh this Voice! Oh this Voice! this heavenly Voice did make my
Heart leap with Joy! for I was filled with the sweet incomes of God's eternal
Love, which is of more worth and value, than all the Honor and Glory this
World can give.

And in the 6th Month, in the Year 1652, in the Government of Oliver Cromwell,
the Word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Go to the Steeple-House in Kendall,
and speak to the Chief Priest in that place, and say unto him, Friend come
down, thy Covering is too narrow, the Lord God of Heaven and Earth will plead
with thee, thou painted Hypocrite. After these Words I was taken away, and
brought before John Archer, one of the Justices of the Peace so called, for
that time being, who committed me to Prison in the Common-Goal of Kendall: And
the very first Night as I lay in Prison, the Word of the Lord came unto me,
saying, fear not, for I will be with thee, according to my Promise, and will
make thee a burthensom Stone unto the Town of Kendall, and to thy Persecutors,
and I will send my Servants, my Sons and my Daughters, from the East and from
the West, from the North and from the South, to bear witness to the same Truth
that thou suffers for; yea, against the Justice that committed thee: therefore
be thou faithful, for I have chosen thee to be the first that shall suffer for
my Names sake in the Town of Kendall. And the Lord God made his Promise good
unto me; for before I was released out of Prison, there was committed of my
Brethren and Sisters, for the same Truths Testimony, by the same Justice
Archer, two of my dear Brethren, Francis Howgill and Thomas Holme, with thirty
more of the Lords Servants, with whom I continued about one quarter of a Year;
at the end of which, the Justices being confounded in themselves, set me at
liberty.

Again, the Word of the Lord came unto me in my Bed, saying, Arise, and put on
thy Clothes, and take thy Horse and ride to the Town of Kendall, and put on
thy great Coat, and speak through the Streets of the Town the Words that I
shall give thee; As the Lord lives, you painted Hypocrites and Dissemblers, as
you have seen the Lords Servants, both his Sons and his Daughters, go naked and
barefooted, so shall your Covering be rent from you, and your dissembling
shall be laid open to all men: Therefore repent, and take warning while you
have time. And so having cleared my self of the Town, James Cock Mayor, sent
for me, and committed me to Prison; and the said Mayor being one of the
chiefest Professors in the Town of Kendall, had little Peace from the Lord in
what he had done, till he had released me. Then I returned to my House again,
and had great Peace with the Lord.

In the same Year 1652, in the Government of Oliver Cromwell, the Word of the
Lord came unto me, saying, Go thy ways to Swarthmore, where my Lambs and Babes,
and Children of Light will be gathered together to wait upon my Name: I will
feed them with the finest of Wheat, and with Honey out of the Rock; and with
the Dew of Heaven I will refresh them, that they may grow as Plants of my right
Hand planting, that above all the Families of the Earth I may rejoice to do
them good. So I freely gave up, and took my Journey toward Swarthmore, and as
I was going between Carptmell-Town and Howker-Hall, I met with Thomas Preston's
Wife, and one man with her on foot; I passed by her very quietly, and had
nothing in my Heart to say to her, but she being full of Wrath and Envy toward
me, commanded her man to go back and beat me, and so he did; and then the
mighty power of the Lord did arise in me, I spoke these Words to her; Oh thou
Jezabel! thou proud Jezabel! can thou not permit and suffer the Servant of
the Lord to pass by thee quietly, that had nothing to say unto thee? Then she
fell upon me in great Rage, and held forth her Hands, as though she would have
struck at me, and spitted in my Face, and said, I scorn to fall down at thy
Words. Then I said, Jezabel, thou proud Jezabel! thou that hardenest thy Heart,
and brasenest thy Face against the Lord and his Servant; as the Lord lives he
will plead with thee in his own time, and set in order before thee things that
thou have done this day to his Servant. So I parted with her, and went to
Swarthmore, where I found the Lords People gathered together, to wait upon his
Name, and the Lord was very good unto that Family in feeding them with the Dew
of Heaven, and with the sweet incomes of his Love, according to his promise;
Glory and Honor, and living eternal Praises be given to the Lord God for
evermore.

About three Months after this, I was moved of the Lord to go and speak to her
again; and when I came to Houlter-Hall, I asked for Thomas Preston's Wife, and
she came to the Door her self, but I knew her not; I asked her if she was the
Woman of the House, and she said, No; but if you would speak with Mistress
Preston, I will entreat her to come to you. So she went into the House, and
brought another Woman with her and said, Here is Mistress Preston. Then the
Lord made it known unto me that she was the Woman; then I said, Woman, how
dare thou Lie before the Lord and his Servant: Thou art the Woman I came to
speak to. She was very quiet and did not open her Mouth. Then I said, Woman,
hear what the Lord's Servants has to say unto thee: Oh Woman! harden not thy
Heart against the Lord and his Servant; for if thou do, he will cut thee off
in his sore displeasure; therefore take Warning in time, and fear the Lord God
(...) Heaven and Earth, that thou may end thy days in Peace. So I parted
with her very quietly, and returned to my House in Peace.

About three Years after this, as I was riding from Swarthmore near to Halkor
Hall, I met with a young Man, who said unto me, Friend, I have something to say
unto you, which has lain upon me this long time: Truly, Friend, I am the Man
that about three Years since, at the command of my Mistress, did beat you very
sore, for which I have been very much troubled, more than any thing that ever I
did in all my time: For truly, Night and Day it has been often in my Heart,
that I did not well in beating an innocent Man, that never did me any hurt or
harm: I pray you forgive me, and desire the Lord to forgive me, that I may be
at peace and quiet in my mind. And I said unto him, Truly Friend, from that
time to this day, I never had any thing in my Heart against thee nor thy
Mistress, but I Love; the Lord forgive you both; I desire that it may never be
laid to your change, for ye knew not what ye did. So I parted with him, (...)
Heart being exceedingly broken with the true Love of God, who has pleaded my
Cause in the Hearts of my Persecutors; Glory and Honor, and Living Praises be
given to the Lord my God for ever, of all the Children of Light.

Again, the Word of the Lord came unto me, in the 10th Month, in the Government
of Oliver Cromwell, in the year 1652, when I was walking among my Sheep,
saying, Thou shall not eat nor drink for the space of 14 days any thing but
Water: But fear not, for I will feed thee with the Dew of Heaven, and with the
sweet Incomes of my Love; and my Word shall be unto thee sweeter than the Honey
or the Honeycomb, and I will make thee to know, that I am able to keep and
preserve thee fresh and strong, and able to do my Work without the Creatures,
as well as with it. And so in the Name of the Lord I set on, and fasted
fourteen days, without any Meat or Drink, save only Water: And indeed the Lord
was good unto me; for in all that time I was kept very fresh and able of Body,
so that no Friend nor other could discern that I wanted either Meat or Drink.
So the Lord has made me a true and faithful witness, that the Lord God is the
Life and Substance of all the Creatures, who is able to support our Bodies with
them, and without them; Glory and Honor be given unto his eternal Name for
ever, of all the Children of Light.

Again, the Word of the Lord came unto me, in the Year 1653, in the 2d Month,
saying, Set thy House in order, and go thy way into Cumberland, for I have a
People there, which I have loved from the beginning. Whereupon I freely gave
up, and left my Wife and small Children, House and Land, and all that I had in
this world; And as I was going, I met with a dear Friend and Brother, James
Lancaster, and I told him what was laid upon me by the Lord, and he told me,
that it was much in him to go with me; so we concluded to go together, and
declared the Lord's eternal Truth in those parts: So we went into several Towns
and Villages and Steeple Houses, and spoke the Word of the Lord as we were
moved; and much Persecution fell to our share in that County; but many were
Convinced of the eternal Truth about Cockermouth and Pardsaw; for the Lord's
eternal Word was with us, according to his Promise; and when we were free and
clear of Cumberland, we returned to our own Houses again, and had great Peace
with the Lord.

Again, the Word of the Lord came unto me, in the year of our Lord 1653. in the
fourth Month, in the Government of Oliver, saying, Go thy way into Yorkshire,
and declare my Word freely that I shall give thee; and fear not the Face of my
Man, for I will be with thee according to my Promise, and speak to the Mayor of
York, the Word that I shall give thee. Then I went, as I was commanded of the
Lord, into Yorkshire, and came to a Town, called Setle, from thence to
Scripton, where I suffered much Persecution, for declaring there the Word of
Truth, and was sorely wounded, and laid up for a dead Man; nevertheless the
Lord was good unto me, and healed me by his Eternal Power of all my sore
Bruises; for within three Hours, I was a sound Man to the great astonishment
of my Persecutors, and the convinceing of many that beheld me, this working a
very good Effect in the Hearts of the People: Thence I went, as I was moved of
the Lord, to Bradford, Leeds and Hallifax, and declared the Lord's Truth
amongst them, and much Persecution fell to my lot in those parts, but the Lord
was good unto me according to his Promise: From thence I Traveled to the Town
of Doncaster, and was moved to go on a first Day to a Steeple-House in that
Town; and when their Worship was done, I spoke as I was moved of the Lord, to
the Priest and People, and they were in great rage, and Persecuted me much, and
drove me out of the Town; and being sorely Wounded and Bruised, they left me
for dead, notwithstanding, by the Power of God, I arose up, and got to a
Friends House, about a Mile from the Town, and lay me down upon a Bed, and
immediately the Word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Arise and go thy way to
yonder little Chapel and speak my Word freely, that I shall give thee, and I
will make thee a sound Man. Then I got up on my Feet, as well as I could, and
came down out of the Chamber, taking hold of the Walls to support me, and
setting on freely toward the Chapel, I began to mend by little and little,
and coming to the Chapel, I spoke the Word of the Lord freely, as I was moved;
and when I was clear of the Place and People, I went back again to the Friends
House, and Lord made me sound of all my Blows and Bruses, according to his
Promise. Thence I went to the City of York, as I was commanded of the Lord, and
spoke to the Lord Mayor of York, as I was moved, and to the Rulers in that
City; and being clear of it I left it, and labored in the Work of the Lord, as
I was moved in Towns Villiges, and Steeple Houses, and sore Persecution fell to
my share and lot in that Shire; yet for all that, the Lord God of my Life was
with me, in all my Straits and Hardships, according to his Word and Promise. So
when I was free of that great Shire, I returned to my House again, and had
great Peace with the Lord.

For the space of twelve Months, after I had received the Truth in the love of
it, my Wife Ann Halhead was very sore troubled and displeased in her mind,
because the Truth in my Heart had so much dominion in me, that I was made
willing by the Power of God, to do his Will, who had promised that he would
never leave me, nor forsake me in all my straits and hardships; insomuch as she
grew and became greatly discontented concerning me, and often said, I would to
God I had Married a Drunkard, I might have found him in the Alehouse; but I
cannot tell where to find my Husband. And in this manner she was sore grieved
and troubled in her mind, for the space of twelve Months; But the Lord God of
my Life, pleaded my Cause according to his promise, for my Wife said unto me
one time, Truly Husband, I have something to tell you; One Night being in my
Bed, when I was mourning and lamenting with Tears in my Eyes, I heard a Voice
saying, Why art thou so discontented concerning thy Husband? I have called and
chosen him to do my Work; my right Hand shall uphold him: therefore be thou
content and pleased that he serve me, and I will bless thee as his Children for
his sake, and all things shall prosper that thou shall take in Hand: But if
thou will not be content, but grudge, and murmer, and repine against me and my
Servant, whom I have chosen to do my Word, as I live, I will bring a greater
cross upon thee. These Words were fresh in my mind, both Night and Day; I often
said within my self, what cross can this be that the Lord will bring upon me,
that is greater than the want of my Husband? But for all this I could not be
contented, but mourned both Night and Day; all the joy I had, or could find in
all the World, was in one little Child, a Boy about five years old, who would
often take me about my Neck, when he saw me Weeping and Mourning, and say, My
dear Mother, I pray thee be contented, for my Father will come home in a little
time. And in this manner he did often refresh me; but for all this I could not
be content in my mind, but mourned Night and Day. Then in a little time it
pleased the Lord to take from me my only Son, Miles Halhead, all the Joy and
Comfort I had in all the World: Then the Voice which I heard, came into my
mind, that this was the cross the Lord had said he would bring upon me; Then I
smote upon my Heart, and said within my self, That I was the very cause why the
Lord had taken away my only Son: Then a great fear ceased upon me, and I said
within my self, O Lord my God! give me Power to be content to give up my
Husband freely to do thy will, lest O Lord, thou take away from me all my
Children. So from that time I never durst oppose thee my Husband any more in
the Work of the Lord, for fear the Lord's Judgments do fall upon me and my
Children. Thus has the Lord pleaded my cause according to his promise; Glory
and Honor, and living eternal Praises be gvien unto the Lord my God for ever.

Again, in the same year 1653, in the Government of Oliver Cromwell, when I was
walking in my Garden at Mount-Joy in Vndebarrow, in the County of Westmoreland,
the Word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Go thy way to Stanely Chapel in
Lancashire. So in Obedience to the Word of the Lord I set on, and consulted not
with Flesh and Blood, but went to Staneley Chapel, as the Lord had commanded
me, and there I found a great company of Professors gathered together in a
pretense to Worship God; but truly they proved very cruel Heathens to me, for
all their Profession, for they would not suffer me to come into the Chapel,
but with great force and violence turned the Door of me: So I walked quietly in
the Yard, till their Worship was done, and then they came forth from their
Worship, and fell upon me in very great rage; and one Captain William
Rawlingson, being one of the Chiefest Professors amongst them, came to me in
great rage and fury, even like Cain, his Father, that fell upon his Brother
Abel and slew him, and in the same Spirit took hold upon my Arms and Shoulders,
and called of another man, to take me by the Feet and Legs, and in great Wrath
and Fury they threw me over the Wall, and I was sore bruised, and much I had to
do to get to my House again; and as I was going home, the Word of the Lord came
to me* saying, Be thou content with that which has befalen thee this day* and
be faithful unto me in what I will command thee to do, and I will make thee a
sound Man of all thy sore Bruises. So I waited upon the Lord my God, to know
his Will; so within six days the Word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Go the
next First Day to Windermore Steeple-House, and fear not the Face of any Man,
but speak my Word freely, that I shall give thee; and I will make thee a sound
Man, according to my Word and Promise, of all thy sore Bruises. So I went to
Windermore Steeple-House, as the Lord had Commanded me, and spoke to the Priest
and People the Word of the Lord, freely as I had received it. So the Lord was
very Good unto me, for in that day I was made a sound Man of all my sore
Bruises, according to his Word and Promise; Glory, Glory and living Eternal
Praises be given to the God of my Life for ever.

Again, in the same Year 1653, about the sixth Month, being in my Bed, waiting
in silence, the Word of the Lord came to me, saying, Arise, and take thy Horse,
and go thy way into Furneiss in Lancashire, to Captain Sand's House, and there
thou shall find a People gathered together, in a pretense of my Name; go, and
fear not, but be faithful, and I will make thee a Terror unto them, and their
Wisdom shall be confounded. And presently I rose, and took my Horse, as I was
Commanded, and went into Furneiss to Captain Sand's House, and there I found a
great number of Professors gathered together, and two Priests with them, one
Lampitt, and one Camdford; when I came into the House, Lampitt was preaching,
but presently he was silent, and within a pretty time Captain Adam Sands said,
Sir, what is the matter? Are you well? And the Priest answered, I am well; but
I shall speak no more as long as this dumb Devil is in the House. A dumb Devil,
(says the Captain) where is he? This is he, says the Priest, (pointing with
his Hand) that stands here. Then the Captain said, This Man is quiet, and
says no thing unto you: I pray you Sir, go on in the Name of the Lord, and if
he trouble or molest you in my House, I will send him to Lancaster ^astle. The
Priest answered, I shall not Preach as long as this dumb Devil is in the House.
Then the Captain said, Mr Camelford, pray you Sir stand up, and exercise your
Gift, and I will see that you be not disturbed. But the Priest answered, as the
other, I shall not speak as long as this dumb Devil is in the House. Then the
People cried, Lord rebuke thee Satan; Lord rebuke thee Satan: What manner of
Spirit is this that stops our Ministers Mouths? Then the Captain came to me,
and took me by the Hand, and put me out of his House; and in all this time I
had not opened my Mouth, for the Lord had made his Promise Good unto me, in
confounding their Wisdom, when never a Word was spoken: So I took my Horse, and
came to my outward being again, and had grear Peace with the Lord my God.

Again, the Word of the Lord came unto me, in the sixth Month, in the same year
1653, saying, Go thy way into Bishopric, and New Castle upon Tine, and declare
my Word freely that I shall give thee; and be not afraid, for my Powerful
Presence shall be with thee, and my right Hand shall uphold thee; and speak
thou to the Mayor, and Priests, and Rulers in that Town, and tell them, My
Anger is kindled against them, because they have shut my Kingdom against Men,
and will neither enter in themselves, nor suffer them that would. So I went as
I was commanded of the Lord, and spoke to the Priests, Mayor and Rulers of
New-Castel, where I suffered much Persecution, and was Imprisoned by them;
notwithstanding the Lord made his Promise good unto me, for he made me a
burden some Stone to the Priests and Rulers of that Town; for the Mayor was
much troubled, and sent for the Sheriff; for it was they two which committed me
to Prison, and the Mayor said unto the Sheriff, We have not done well in
Committing an Innocent Man to Prison: I pray your let us release him. Then they
caused the Jailer to set me at Liberty; so I Labored in the Work of the Lord
in these parts, and declared the Word of the Lord, as I was moved, and many
were convinced of the Truth: Then being free of these People and Places I
returned to my own House again, and enjoyed my Wife and Children, and had great
Joy and Peace with the God of my Life.

Again, the Word of the Lord came unto me, as I was walking in my Feilds, in
the year 1654, in the first Month, saying, Set thy House in order, and go thy
way into Ierland, and declare my Word that I shall give thee, to speak, in the
Cities, Towns and Villages in that Nation; and go to the Heads and Rulers in
that Nation, and declare my Word freely that I shall give thee to speak; and
fear not the Face of any Man, for my Powerful Presence shall be with thee, and
uphold thee in all thy Straits and Hardships, according to my Word and Promise.
Then said I, Lord, I am an unleaned Man, and not versed in the Scriptures; and
for Wisdom I have but little. Then the Lord answered me, My Honor and Glory
shall be the more; for when the wise Men of the World, shall see thy Boldness,
thy Courage and Manhood that I shall give thee, and though an unleaned Man,
they shall be made to confess and acknowledge my Powerful Presence to be with
thee of a Truth. Then I went toward Ierland and meeting with my dear Brother,
and old Companion, a faithful Man, and my fellow Labourer in the Truth, James
Lancaster, the Lord made him very free to go with me; and while we were
speaking of it, old Myels Bateman of Vnderbarrow, heard, and the Lord made him
also very free to go with us; so we took our Journey, and went for Ireland, as
the Lord commanded, and declared the Word of the Lord, as we were moved, in
Cities, Towns and Villages in that Nation, and the Lords Presence was with us
of a truth; and we went to the Heads and Rulers of that Nation, and declared
the Word of the Lord to them freely, as we had received it, and many received
our Testimony: So when we were free of that Nation, we came for England again,
and had great Peace with the Lord.

Again, the Word of the Lord came unto me, in the same year 1654, in the 3d
Month, saying, Go thy way into Scotland, and declare my Word that I shall give
thee, to the Heads and Rulers of that Nation, and fear not, for my right Hand
shall uphold thee, and I will be with thee in all thy Straits and Hardships,
according to My Promise, and speak thou unto the Soldiers in Cities and Towns,
and unto the Commanders; and tell them My Anger is kindled against them, for
they have done very deceitfully with me, and not performed their Promises with
me, which they made to me in the day of their deep distress, even when their
Enemies encompassed them on every side; for then I del^vered them, and gave
them Power over their Enemies, yet they have rewarded me Evil for my Good Will
to them, and have drawn their Swords against me, and done Violence Against my
Sons and my Daughters, whom I have sent to declare my Word amongst them;
therefore I wall cause them to flee before their Enemies, and their Hearts shall
fail them for fear. Then I went toward Scotland, as the Lord had commanded me,
and as I was going I met with my dear brother James Lancaster, who was very
free to go with me; so we came to Dumfreece and on a first Day went to a
Steeple-House in that Town, where many People were gathered together in a
deceitful manner, Howling and Crying and making a great Lameniation, as though
they had been touched with a sight of their Sins; but my Soul was sore grieved
with their Deceit and Hypocrisy, and when their Worship was done, I spoke as I
was moved of the Lord, and many of them were in great rage, and we were
persecuted by them very sore, and they drove us out of the Town, near a great
River side, where Vessels from Sea may come up near to the Town's Bridge; so
the Priests and People being in great rage against us, had concluded together
that the Women in the Town should Stone us; and as I was walking by the River
side, the Word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Put off thy Clothes, and wade
the River, and fear not, for I will be with you both, and bring you safe to
Land. So I told my Brother, and straight way we put off our Clothes, and waded
the River very safely, and so we Journied further in Scotland, till we came to
the City of Edenborrow, and Town of Leeth, and there we staid about ten Days,
and spoke in the City and Town as we were moved of the Lord; and I went to the
Garrisons of the City, and to the Town of and Leeth, and to the Captains and
Officers of the Army, and spoke to them as the Lord had commanded me; they were
much struck down for that present, and confessed that the Lord had been very
good unto them; So I cleared my Conscience of the Lord's Word unto them: From
thence we passed to Glasco, and Sterlin, and spoke as we were moved of the
Lord; so when we were free of that Nation, we came for England again, but in
our Passage we were moved to come to Berwick upon Tweed, and spoke the Word of
the Lord in the Streets thereof, and were taken up and carried before the
Magistrates of the Town, and they sent us to Prison; but the Lord pleaded our
cause, and made us a burden some Stone to our Persecutores, so that in a few
days we were released, and came from thence through Northumberland to
New Castle and to Durham, and spoke the Word of the Lord as we were moved, and
many received our Testimony; so being freed, and free of those places and
People, we came to our own Houses again, and had great Peace with the Lord,
even more than I can speak or declare.

Again, the Word of the Lord came unto me, in the year 1654, in the 7th Month,
saying, Take thy Horse, and go into Northumberland, into the Town of Berwick,
and speak to the Chief Magistrate of that Town the Words that shall give thee,
and fear not the Face of any Man, for I will uphold thee with my right Hand in
all thy Straits and Difficulties, according to my Word and Promise. So I took
my Horse, as I was commanded, and went into Bishopric, and there I met with my
dear Brother, Robert Withers, I told him what was upon me from the Lord, and he
was made by the Power of God willing to go with me, and so we came to the Town
of Berwick; and I went to the Mayor of that Town, and spoke to him in his own
Shop, as the Lord had commanded me; Friend, hear what the Servant of the Lord
has to say unto thee, Give over the Persecuting of the Lord's Servants, whom
he does send in Love to this Town of Berwick, to show you the way that leads to
Life Eternal: I charge thee, O Man, touch not the Lord's Anointed, nor do his
Prophets no harm, lest thou procure the Anger of the Living Eternal God against
thee. So he was sore moved, and sent me to Prison, and my dearly beloved
Brother Robert Withers went with me to Prison; and so we parted, and he took my
Horse and sent him Home: So the Lord made me a burden some Stone to that Town
of Berwick for the space of ten Weeks, or thereabouts, and then I was brought
to the Sessions, and a Bill was drawn against me, and read in open Court; I
answered, and said, I deny that Bill; but what I said to the Mayor of this Town
of Berwick, I will not deny. Then the Words came fresh in my mind, and I
declared them openly in the Court. Then the Recorder of the Town of Berwick
stood up, and said, that I had confessed as much as was in the Bill; so he
said, Sirs, as I understand by his own Words, if he cannot prove the Mayor of
this Town a Prosecutor, in my Judgment he has wronged him. Then I answered,
and said, If the Mayor of this Town of Berwick, dare say in the presence of the
Lord, whose presence is here, that he is no Persecutor, but the persecuting
Nature is slain in him, I will be willing to abide the Judgment of the Court.
The Clerk of the Court said, Mr. Mayor, if you will say, that you are no
Persecutor, but the persecuting Nature is slain in you, he is willing to abide
the Judgment of the Court. The Mayor answered, and said, I know not what to do,
I would I had never seen him: I pray you let him go, and let us be no more
troubled with him. Then I answered, and said, That I would prove this Mayor of
Berwick the greatest Persecutor in Town or Country; I was once committed to
Prison in this Town before, for speaking the Word of the Lord in the Streets,
by some of the Justices that are now in this Court; but thou, O Man! have
exceeded them all, thou have committed me and kept me in close Prison for the
space of ten Weeks, or thereabouts, for speaking to thy own Person, in thy own
Shop: Now I make my appeal to the Recorder of this Town of Berwick, as I am a
Freeborn Englishman, whether my Imprisonment be Legal, according to the Law
of this Nation, or not? Then the Recorder of the Town stood up, and said, It is
not very Legal for any Minister of the Law to Imprison any man in his own
Cause. Then the Court cried, Take him away: For the fear and dread of the
Living God was upon them. Then the chief Priest of the Town stood up, and
desired the Court, that he might ask me one Question. Then I answered, and
said, The Lord knows thy Heart, O man, and at this present has revealed thy
Thoughts to his Servant: I know thy Heart, thou high Priest, and the Question
thou would ask me; and if thou will promise me before the Court, that if I
tell thee the Question thou would ask me, will thou deal plainly with me, and
I will not only tell thee thy Query, but I will answer it. Then the Priest
said, That he would. Then I answered and said, thy Question is this, Thou
would know whether I own that Christ that dyed at Jerusalem or not? Then the
Priest said, Truly that is the Question. Then according to my promise I will
answer it before this Court: In the Presence of the Lord God of Heaven, I own
no other Christ, but the Christ which dyed at Jerusalem, and made a good
Confession before Pontious Pilate, to be the Light and Way that leads fallen
Man out of Sin and Evil up to God Eternal, blessed for evermore. So no more
Questions were asked me, but the Jailer was commanded to take me away, and
within a little time the Court gave order to release me, so I returned to
New Castle; and when I was free of that Town, I returned to my Wife and
Children at Mount joy, and had great Peace with the God of Life.

Again, the Word of the Lord came unto me, as I was following the Plow, in the
Year 1655, in the first Month, saying, Go thy way to the City of London, and as
thou passes, speak my Word freely that I shall put into thy Heart, to the
Judges and Rulers in this Nation, and fear not the face of any man, for I will
be with thee in the Fire; and in the Water, and in all thy Troubles and
Hardships and I will uphold thee by my eternal Arm and Power, according to my
Word and Promise. Then I went into Yorkshire, and traveled up and down as I
was moved, and came to the City of York, and from thence to Hull, and so to
Beverley, and spoke the Word of the Lord to the Heads and Rulers, as the Lord
commanded me, and the Lord's hand did uphold me in all my Travels. Thence I
passed through Leicestershire and Lincolnshire, and spoke the Word of the Lord
as I was moved, to the Priests, People and Rulers, and so came to the City of
London, and there I found many of my dear Brethren, where I staid about ten
days; and then my dear Brother Thomas Salthouse and I passed for Bristol, and
so to Excetter and Plymouth, where we suffered much Persecution, and were
Imprisoned at the Town of Plymouth and Excetter about one year, but the Lord
God was with us in all our Troubles and Imprisonments, and made us a
burdensome Stone to all our Persecutors, as may be readmore at large in a
Book, entitled, The Wounds of an Enemy in the House of a Friend. So the Lord
in his own time freed us of all our Bonds and Imprisonments, according to his
promise; Glory and Honor, and Eternal Praises be given to his Name forever.

A Copy of a Letter I was moved to write to my Wife.
Ann Halhead,
My deart Heart! my dear Love! in the Bowels of Love, in the Lord Jesus Christ,
salutes thee and my Children: My Soul, my Soul is poured forth in love to thee
daily, and the Breathings of my Soul to my Father is for thee, that thou may be
kept in the fear of the Lord, and in his counsel daily, that thou may come to
Rest and Peace, that is laid up for all that fear him, and walk in obedience to
the Light that Jesus Christ has enlightened them withal. So my dear Heart, I
declare to thee, in the presence of the living God, who is Lord of Heaven and
Earth, and before Men and Angels: There is no other way that leads to Peace and
Eternal Rest, but walking in obedience to the Light that comes from Jesus
Christ; and of this Light thou have received a measure. Therefore my dear
Heart, be faithful to the Lord in what is made known to thee, that thou may
come to witness true Peace and Rest, that Eye has not seen, nor Ear has not
heard, neither has is entered into the Heart of Man what is laid up for all
them that fear him. So my dear Heart, as I have found Peace and Eternal Rest to
my Soul from the Lord; so am I moved of the Lord in love, in love to thy Soul,
to show thee the way that leads to Peace and Eternal Rest, which Way is Christ,
who is the Light and the Way that leads to the Father, from whence all Light
comes; and of this Light which comes from Christ I bear record thou have
received a measure: Therefore in dear love, I exhort thee to walk in obedience
to thy measure, which thou have received from the Lord. So in the presence of
the Lord God do I declare, that walking in obedience to this Light that comes
from Christ, is the way that leads to eternal Rest and Peace; therefore as thou
tenders the eternal good of thy Soul, be faithful to the Light that comes from
Christ, which Light bears witness against Lying, and Swearing, and vain
Talking, and all manner of Evil. So my dear Wife, in bowels of dear Love to thy
Soul, which is more precious than all the World, have I showed thee the way, if
thou will walk in it, it will lead thee into the eternal Covenant of Life and
Peace. So my dear Wife, in love, in love I have cleared my Conscience to thee,
in the presence of the Living God, as a true and faithful Husband to thee,
desiring thy eternal good and welfare as my own, the Lord God is my witness.
Dear Wife, remember my dear Love to all my Friends and Countrymen, according
to the Flesh, for I desire the eternal good and welfare of you all, and that
you may all come to believe in the Light in your own Consciences, which Jesus
Christ has enlighted you withal which Light bears witness against Lying, and
Smearing, and all manner of Evil, This is the Light of Christ, and walking in
obedience to this Light, is the way that leads out of Sin and Evil, up to God
eternal, blessed for evermore; and he that acts contrary to this Light in his
own Conscience, it is his Condemnation. Now dear Friends, while you have time
prise it.

Thy Husband, and a Lover of thy Soul, Miles Halhead,
Wiltshire, the 7th day of the 3d Month, 1655.

An Epistle of Love to Friends.
DEarly beloved Friends and Brethren in the North of England, even to the
South, the Land of our Nativity, whom the Lord God of Heaven and Earth has
called and chosen in this the day of his eternal everlasting Love, to serve him
in Truth, and in Righteousness, who has received the Lord's Truth in the love
of it, not only to believe in his Name, but to suffer Bonds and Imprisonments,
and hard Sentences for the Testimony of Jesus and Word of God. Dear Friends and
beloved Brethren, my Prayers to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, and Soul's
desire is for you all, that you may all dwell together as Children of one
Father, in the eternal Bond of Love, and Oneness of the Spirit, that you may
all grow in the eternal living Truth of God, to be established upon the Rock
and sure Foundation, that the Gates of Hell and Death cannot prevail against
you, that under the shadow of the Wings of the Almighty, you may all be kept
and preserved in Peace and Rest, now in the day of Trial and hour of Darkness,
when Hell has opened her Mouth, and the raging Sea cast out her proud Waves,
even like to overflow the Banks; Glory, Glory, and eternal living Praises be
given to the Lord God, and to the lamb for evermore, of all the Children of
Light, who has found out a resting place for all his dear Ones, Lambs and
Babes, and Children of Light to flee unto in the needful time of trouble, where
none can make them afraid, nor take away their Peace as they abide faithful to
him, who is our way, our Light, our Life, our Strength, and eternal Portion
forever. My dear Friends and Brethern, I beseech you in the Bowels of dear and
tender Love, that you walk as dear Children, faithful to him, who has called
you with an honorable calling and loved you from the beginning with an
Everlasting Love, that all your Friends and Neighbors, and Men of this World,
that see your Life coupled with fear, may be made to confess and acknowledge,
to the Honor and Glory of the living Lord, that the God whom ye serve and
fear, is the only true God of Israel; and herein you become a precious savor
unto the living eternal God, and sweet smelling savor unto all the Children of
Light, and no good thing will the Lord God withhold from you; the Mouth of the
Lord God of Hosts has spoken it, whose Promises are Yea, and Amen, to his own
Seed for evermore.

Given forth the 14th day of the 6th Month 1655, when I was Prisoner at the
Prisonhouse at the City of Exceter, in the County of Devnoshire, for the
Testimony of Jesus, and the Word of God, Miles Halhead.


IN the year 1663, in the Reign of King Charles the second, I was Summoned to
appear at one of the Bishops Esclesiastical Courts, before his Chancellor,
Doctor Cradict, holden at Kendal, and I was free in the Lord to go, with many
of my dear Friends and Brethren, who were likewise Summoned to be their, I
waited in the Court obove three hours, and at length I was called to give my
answer, why I came not to the Steeple-house to hear the Priests? Then I desired
the Court they would hear me, and I would give them a plain answer in the fear
of God, and uprightness of my Heart, and they promised me they would be quiet
and still, I told them I was about fifty years of Age, and I had spent thirty
of it in hearing the Priests, and in all that time I had not profited by them,
but finding them preaching one thing one year, and another year preaching quite
the contrary, therefore I cannot now hear them. Then I said to the Doctor, now
I appeal to that of God in thee, and to all moderate Men that hear me this day,
if I have not given thee a plain answer, in the fear of the Lord, to thy own
Question? He answered, I had come as near him, as any had done that day. So
this is recorded in the Bishop's Court against me, That I went thirty years to
the Church, and in all that time I had not profited at all* So I stand
Excommunicated in the Bishop's Court.

Again, the Word of the Lord came unto me, in the year 1667, in the fourth
Month, in the Reign of King Charles the second, Saying, Go thy ways into the
City of Bristol, and Glostershire, and Wiltshire, and Summersetshire,
Devonshire and Cornwall, where thou have been formerly, and declared my
Eternal Word amongst them, and suffered hard and sore Imprisonments for my Name
sake, and speak to my own People, my Sons and my Daughters, whom I have called
and chosen in this the Day of my Love out of the World, and the barren Mountain
thereof, to serve me in Truth, and in Righteousness all their days; and bid
them prepare themselves, for I am coming to take account upon them all, my
Sons, and my Daughters, even from the greatest to the least of my Children, and
he whom I have given Ten Tallents shall count for Ten, and he to whom I have
given five Tallents shall count for five, and be to whom I have given two shall
count for two; so every one, both Man and Woman, shall count for what he has
received; So I command thee to go and speak to my own People, whom I have
chosen to serve me, the Words that I shall give thee; and though thou be weak
and feeble of Body, yet fear thou not, for I will uphold thee in all thy
weakness, by my eternal Arm and Power, and I will put my Word into thy Mouth,
what thou shall say unto my chosen People, my Sons and my Daughters, whom I
have called in this the Day of my Love, and they shall receive thee as my
Servant, and confess and acknowledge, that I have again sent thee, in dear and
tender Love, and Fatherly Care unto them. So I took my Horse, and went to the
City of Bristol, and into those other Counties, as the Lord had required, and
spoke to the Churches, as I was moved; and though I was but very weak of Body,
yet the Lord made his Promise good unto me in all my weakness; Glory and
Honor, and Living eternal Praises be gvien to the Lord my God for ever, of all
the Children of Light.

And when I was about ten Miles off Plymouth, I was brought before the chief
Rulers in Devonshire and Cornwall; and they asked me my Name, and from whence
I came: I said, out of the North. They asked me, Out of what Country in the
North? And I said Westmorland. Then they asked me, What business I had in
Devonshire. I answered, to see my old Friends, whom formerly about ten Years
since I had acquaintance with. One of the Rulers answered, I am a Devonshire
man; I pray you what are the Names of your Friends you had acquaintance with
ten Years since in Devonshire. I answered, one Sr John Coplestone, who was then
High Sheriff of Devonshire, and one John Page, who was then the Mayor of
Plymouth, and one Justice Vowell, who was then the Judge of the Sessions of the
City of Exceter, and one Colonel Buffit, who was a Justice at that time. Then
one of the Rulers said, Truly, Gentlemen, though this man call these men his
Friends; surely they have been his Persecutors? Then another of the Rulers
said, Would you know how it is with these your old Friends: No man in all
Devonshire nor Cornwall can give you a more perfect nor truer Account than I
can: Your old Friend Sr. John Coplestone has sold his Land, and I know not
where he may be found. And as for your Friend John Page, who was the Mayor of
Plymouth, he is become a broken Merchant, and is fled out of his own Country,
and as I hear, is gone for the Barbados. And as for your Friend Justice
Vowell, he is gone to his long home. And as for your old Friend Colonel Buffit,
he was committed to Prison at Bridge water in Summersetshire for high Treason,
and is stolen away from the Jailer, and is quite gone, and dare not be seen in
his own Country. And so Friend, I have given you a true Account of your old
Friends: And truly Friend, if these men were your Persecutors, you may be sure
that they will trouble you no more; for if they that trouble you, and persecute
you, have no better fortune than these men, I wish that I, nor none of my
Friends may have any Hand in Persecuting of you. So I took my leave of these
moderate men, and traveled to Cornwall.

Thus has the Lord pleaded my Cause, according to his Word and Promise, who
will give to every man a just Reward, according to his Work; Glory and Honor,
and living eternal Praises be given to the God of my Life for evermore, who is
the good Shepherd of my Soul, who has enabled me to do his Work and Service,
and has brought me by his eternal Arm and Power, safely to my own House again,
and has given me Joy and Peace, that all the Persecutors in all the World
cannot take from me, as I dwell and abide faithful unto him, who is the good
Shepherd and Bishop of my Soul, who is my Light, my Life, my Joy and Peace, and
eternal Portion for evermore; Amen.

Again, in the Year 1669, in the Reign of King Charles, about the 5th Month,
the Word of the Lord came to me, saying, Go thy way into Cumberland,
Northumberland, and Bishopric, and Yorkshire, where I have sent thee formerly
to declare my Word, and to show them the Way, as thou had received it of me,
that leads to Life and Peace, that all the World are but Talkers of; and many
in that day did receive thy Testimony with gladness of Heart: Go thy way, and
take thy Horse, and pass into these Countries, and speak my Word freely to my
own People, my Sons and my Daughters, whom I have called and chosen out of the
World, and the barren Mountains thereof, to serve me in Truth, and in
Righteousness all their days: Lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, and speak to
my own People, and charge them in my Name to prepare themselves, for I will
come and take account of them, even from the greatest to the least, and he that
has ten Tallents given him, shall count for ten; and he that has five
Tallents given him, shall count for five; and he that has two given, shall
count for two; and every one of my Servants, Sons and Daughters, shall count
for what they have received of me. So I was very free in my Spirit, to tell my
dear Brother Robert Withers, a faithful man, a fellow Labourer in the Lord's
work, what lay upon me from the Lord, and he was made free to go with me: So in
obedience to the Lord we were made very willing to go into these Countries, to
speak to the Lord's People, who had received the Lord's Truth in the love it;
and many of our dear Friends and Brethren were exceedingly broken, and their
Hearts tendered with the Lord's Testimony, and with the true sense of God's
everlasting Love, and tender fatherly Care to them, who has sent his Servants
to give them warning, that the Lord God of Heaven and Earth will come and take
account of every one of his Servants, both Sons and Daughters, from the
greatest to the least, that they may be prepared to meet the Lord with Joy and
Rejoicing, that they may give their Account with gladness of Heart, and so
receive the blessed Sentence that the Lord has prepared for all the Faithful
and Upright in Heart, that they may finish and end their days in Peace, and
lie down in the Bosom of the Father, with all the holy Men of God. So when we
had been in all these Counties, and had many good and precious Meetings amongst
our dear Friends and Brethren, to the strenthening and refershing one another
in the holy Faith: Being free of the Lord's burden, we returned to our
outward* beings again, and had great Peace with the Lord.

A true Account of Miles Halhead, of Mount-Joy, concerning the Payment or
Non-payment of his Tithes, from the first I was Convinced of the Truth, which
was in the Year of our Lord 1652, to this present Year 1673.
WIthin one year after I had received the Lord's Truth, I was moved of the Lord
to speak to Tho. Wilson of Hevershamhall, he coming to my house to demand
Tythe-Wooll and Lamb; I said unto him, Friend, I have paid thee thy Tithes for
Wool and Lamb, as truly as any man has done, ever since I had Goods of my own
to this day; but now the Lord God of my Life, has out of his eternal Love to
me, opened my Understanding, and let me clearly see the Unjustness and
Unlawfulness of Tithes, therefore I dare pay them no more, lest I grieve and
provoke the God of my Life; therefore, Friend, do what thou please with me;
for I cannot pay thee Tithes any more. The man was very quiet and moderate, and
said, He did believe that I had paid him very truly; and he thought, that I
denied them not out of any self end; therefore if it were not for the Example
of others, I would not have any Tithe of thee for my time.

And when I had freed my self of this Testimony, I was moved and made willing
by the Power of the Lord, to leave my House and Family, and go, as I was
commanded, to declare the Word of the Lord in Ireland and Scotland, and in my
own Country; and stayed two years together in the Lord's Service, and was very
little at my own House for many years; but what my Wife did then, being not
convinced of the Truth, it is very likely she paid or agreed with him.

And now of late years, when I grew old, and infirm, and my Eyesight fails
me, I have been sometime at my own house, when Jo. Archer sent his men to
demand Tythe-Wooll and Lamb; I desired his men to let their Man know, that he
might do what he pleased with me, for I could pay him none, no more then I
could do to Tho. Wilson of Heversham-hall, which was in the same place before
him.

Given forth by MILES HALHEAD of Mount-joy.

IN the year 1673 in the Reign of King Charles, I being in my Bed at a Friend's
house in Plymouth, in the County of Devonshire, the Word of the Lord came to me
saying, Arise, and go thy way, and speak to John Lambert the words that I shall
give thee; so I went to a Friend to desire him to procure a Vessel, that I
might pass over to a little Island near to the King's great Fort in Plymouth,
that I might speak to John Lambert, who was Prisoner in that Island, and a
Vessel we procured, and passed to the Island the same day, and there we found a
strong Guard of Soldiers: a Lieutenant asked me, What was my Business to the
Island? I said, I desire to speak to John Lambert: and then he asked me, If I
was ever a Captain under his Command? and I said, No: the Soldiers were very
quiet and moderate: I desired the Lieutenant to bring me to John Lambert; and
so he did; and when I came before him, I said, Friend, is thy Name John
Lambert; and he said, Yea: then I said unto him, Friend, I pray thee hear what
the Servant of the Lord has to say to thee.

Friend, the Lord God made use of thee and others for the Deliverance of his
People; and when you cried to him, he delivered you in your Distresses, as at
Dunbar and other places, and gave you an opportunity into your hands to do
good, and you promised what great things you would do for the Lord's People;
but truly, John Lambert, you soon forgot your Promises you made to the Lord in
that day and time of your great Distress, and turned the Edge of your Sword
against the Lord's Servants and Handmaids, whom he sent forth to declare his
eternal Truth, and made Laws, and consented to Laws, and suffered and permitted
Laws to be made against the Lord's People.

Then John Lambert answered and said, Friend, I would have you know, that some
of us never made Laws, nor consented to Laws to persecute you, nor none of your
Friends; for Persecution we ever were against.

I answered and said, John Lambert, it may be so; but the Scripture of Truth is
fulfilled by the best of you; for although that thee and some others have not
given your Consent to make Laws against the Lord's People, yet ye suffered and
permitted


