The Blessed Advantages OF Peace and Peacemakers. IN A SERMON Preached at The
Savoy in London UPON The Fifth of St. Matthew;

Ver. IX. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children
of God. By ANTHONY HORNECK, D. D. Late Preacher at the Savoy.

LONDON, Printed for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill, 1697.

Price Six Pence.

The Bookseller's ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Late Worthy and Pious Doctor Anthony Horneck, the Author of this
seasonable Discourse, has left behind him fairly Writ, many Excellent Sermons
upon most Practical Subjects in Divinity, particularly on all our Blessed
Savior's Sermon on the Mount; contained in the Fifth, Sixth and Seventh
Chapters of St. Matthew's Gospel; having been preached to his Beloved People at
the Savoy with great Approbation; which will be Printed with all convenient
Speed by the Consent of his Widow. Fifteen Sermons, being the first Volume,
upon part of the said Fifth Chapter (of which this is one) is now in the Press.
But for the Seasonableness upon the happy Conclusion of the Peace, 'twas
thought convenient to publish this alone.

B. A.

St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 9. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be
called the Children of God.
AS in this divine Sermon of our Savior, Men and Women are pronounced blessed
and happy, with respect to things which the dull sensual World spies no
felicity in; or as here, those are counted happy whom the World counts
miserable, and those miserable whom the world counts happy; so it fares with
the persons mentioned in the words before you, and the Blessedness which
attends them; the world, you know, magnifies great Generals, and Soldiers, and
Martial Men who can fight well, and are very skillful in besieging Towns, and
in scaling Walls, in bombarding Castles, and surprising Forts, and defeating
Armies, and slaying Men; and he, that with Saul has killed his thousands, and
with David his ten thousands, is cried up, and the Bells ring at his entrance
into a conquered Town, all sing his Praises, Flowers of Rhetoric and Applause
are strow'd in his way, public Intelligences are filled with his
Commendations; and who so much talked of, as the man who is very expert in
making, maintaining, and managing a War.

Our blessed Master over-looks all these partial verdicts of the World, and
knowing that Nature, and Vice, and Profit, and Honor, Ambition and Lust are
enough to inspire a man with Courage and Wisdom to fight, and to cause
Disorders and Disturbances among Men, instead of commending Men, who are
skillful in making War, set a peculiar mark of favor on those who are skillful
in making Peace in the words I have read to you, Blessed are the Peacemakers
for they shall be called the Children of God.

Blessed are the Peacemakers; what? All Peacemakers? Then Turks, and
Infidels, Heathens, and Pagans, and the most licentious of Christian Princes do
all come into the number of the blessed, and all must be Children of God. For
there is no Prince, though never so great a Tyrant, though he has spilt Blood
like Water in his Conquests, though he has made no more of destroying men's
Lives, than Tarquinius did of taking off the heads of Poppies, or Domitian of
killing Flies, yet makes Peace sometimes, and tired with the Toil and Fatigue
of the War, concludes a Truce at last with his Enemy; and what? Do all these
come into the society of the blessed?

To give you light into this affair, I shall enquire,

I. Who these Peacemakers are that are pronounced blessed here.

II. I shall examine the reasons of the supposition, or the thing supposed and
implied here, that those who have an aversion from this Peacemaking, cannot be
blessed.

III. I shall take the blessedness of these Peacemakers into consideration,
and show how, and upon what account they are, and shall be called the Children
of God.

I. Who these Peacemakers are, that are said to be blessed here.

The word in the Original is (...), which as Interpreters observe in Greek
Authors signifies and denotes strictly those who make or procure Peace among
Persons who disagree, and unite those who are at variance, but in Scripture the
expression is of a larger extent, and includes a great deal more than a bare
reconciling of Enemies, and the persons here aimed at are as follows.

1. Such as do make Peace with God and with their Consciences. To this purpose
is the exhortation, Job XXI. 22. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at
Peace, and great good shall come unto thee: And from this Peace with God,
arises that Peace in believing, we read of Romans XV. 13. Man naturally is at
Enmity with God, Romans V. 10. to be sure, an Enemy of the Cross of Christ, for
the Law of the Cross is directly opposite to the Principles and Dictates of
sinful Flesh, Phil. III. 18. and this Enmity still grows greater and greater,
as corrupt nature is improved or abused into more corrupt practices, and from
hence flows Man's misery. So that to be happy, a Man must be at Peace with God,
which is a Maxim so natural, that Heathens do not think themselves safe without
appeasing their angry Deities, and this puts them upon offering Sacrifices to
them. But this does not take with the true God, who delights not in
burnt-offerings. The Sacrifices of God, which unite the Soul to him, and
establish a Peace betwixt God and the Sinner, are a broken and a contrite
Heart, and laying aside voluntarily and deliberately, and from a sense of the
madness of the attempt, even of resisting and clashing with an Omnipotent
Being, those things which God professes and declares his Hatred and Abhorrency
of, and a cheerful Compliance with his revealed Will; and you all know that
the things he hates are our sinful customs, practices and inclinations, for
your iniquities have separated betwixt you and your God, and your sins have hid
his Face from you, says God, Isa. LIX. 2.

To be at Peace with God, a man must be at war with his sinful Inclinations.
To live in Peace with these, is to fall out with God, and the longer we
maintain Friendship and Familiarity with these, the greater becomes the
distance betwixt God and our Souls, the breach is still made wider, till we sin
away at last all hopes of Reconciliation; where the Soul has any reasonable
assurance that God is at Peace with her, there Joy, and Gladness, and Serenity
flows naturally into her Bosom, and that is the Peace of Conscience St. Paul
speaks of, Romans XIV. 17. And indeed there are no persons more likely to be
successful in making Peace among Men, than those who first make Peace with
God, and with their own Consciences.

2. Such as make it their business to live peaceably in humane Societies, and
seek to maintain that Peace, which either Nature, or Religion, or Friendship,
or Neighborhood have settled among Men, with whom we live; and concerning this
sort of Peacemaking, St. Paul speaks, Romans XII. 18. If it be possible, as much
as in you lies, live peaceably with all men. To maintain Peace, is part of
Peacemaking, for this is to make that Peace which is begun, and which we find
settled in our hands to continue and flourish; in a word, to preserve it, and
according to the old saying, Non minor est vertus, etc. It is as great a Virtue
to preserve the good thing which we have purchased, as to purchase it; and
while we behave our selves inoffensively, unblameably, and keep a Conscience
void of offense toward God and Man, we take the readiest way to live peaceably.
It Is granted, that the most inoffensive Actions, nay even Acts of Duty and
Devotion may stir up the wrath and fury of choleric and prejudiced men, as we
see the Apostles by preaching the Gospel, and attempting to reclaim men from
their Vices, and telling them their Duty, raised all the World against
themselves; but this is not our fault, as long as we give no just occasion to
men to quarrel with us, or give no just offense; while we are ready to do good
offices, do by others as we would have others do by us, and in our Discourses
and Behavior observe the rules of Modesty, Decency, Sobriety, and Charity; if
after all, men will speak ill of us, and be angry, because we will not run out
with them into excess of riot, as it seems those did St. Peter speaks of, 1
Pet. IV. 4. We have discharged a good Conscience, and may comfort our selves
with this, That we have given no just occasion to break the Peace.

3. And here comes in the stricter signification of the word, such as from a
sense of Christian Love and Charity endeavor to reconcile disagreeing Persons,
and Neighbors, and their fellow Christians that are at variance: And
concerning this peacemaking, St. Paul gives this grave and serious Admonition,
1 Cor. VI. 5, 6. I speak to your shame. Is it so, that there is not a wise man
among you? no not one that is able to judge between his Brethren. But Brother
goes to Law with Brother. And this must needs be his meaning in that other
Exhortation, Romans XIV. 9. where he bids us follow after the things which make
for Peace. And indeed, where there is true Christian Compassion, a man will not
only be ready to run to make up differences, when he is entreated, but of his
own accord, and before he be entreated, especially, where either Friendship and
a long Acquaintance, or some near Relation gives the Invitation. It was
barbarous language of Cain, Genesis IV. 9. Am I my Brother's keeper. Such a word
must not drop from the Hearts and Mouths of those who are adjured by Bowels of
Mercy, not to look every one on his own things, but every man also on the
things of his Neighbors, as all Christians are, Phil. II. 4. The common laws
of humane societies, require this Peacemaking, much more the Laws of
Christianity; and since we are bound to love our Neighbors as our selves, how
is it possible to obey that Law, without endeavoring to soder and join the
clashing and dis-jointed Members of Christ's mystical body; in doing so we love
our Neighbors as our selves, even in endeavoring to keep others from
disagreeing, as we would keep our selves from being at variance with others.
How good and how pleasant a thing is it for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity; it is like the precious ointment that ran down from Aaron's head into
his Beard, and so on to the skirts of his clothing, says the Royal Psalmist,
Psalm. CXXXIII. 1, 2. As Christians we are all Brethren, and then it must be our
Duty to see the Beauty, Order and Harmony of that brotherly society preserved,
which is impossible to be done, without actual and personal endeavors of
reconciling those who are at difference, and this argument Moses made use of,
when he saw two Israelites striving together, and would have set at one, Why do
you wrong one to another, seeing ye are Brethren? Act. VII. 26.

4. Such as endeavor to make others like themselves, and do instill this
Christian Principle of reconciling Persons, that quarrel and live in Enmity,
into others. This is still making Peace, when we labor to make others
enamored with this duty of Peacemaking, which is done either by Exhortation
or Entreaty, or Representing to others the Nobleness, Excellency, and
Profitableness of this peaceable and peacemaking Temper. It Is natural for men
to endeavor to make others of the same Temper and Principles with ourselves,
which is the reason that men of all Persuasions do what they can to make
Proselytes. A truly good man cannot forbear saying with St. Paul, I wish that
all men were even as my self, 1 Cor. VII. 7. I mean with respect to the good
things the Grace of God has infused into him: And as no man can be sincerely
good, without endeavoring to unite, and reconcile his disagreeing Neighbors,
so that Goodness will farther prompt him to bespeak those of his Acquaintance
in St. Paul's language, Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them
that walk so, as you have us for ensamples, Philip. III. 17.

And from hence it will be an easy matter to give a just answer to the
Objection I proposed at first; whether all Peacemakers are indifferently
concerned in the blessedness of the Text; It Is plain from hence, that not every
one that makes Peace either by force, or of necessity, or for profit and
interest, or being tired with a long and tedious War. Not every one of these
comes into the number of those blessed men. All the four Qualifications I have
mentioned are requisite to entitle a man to this happiness; making Peace with
God, and our Consciences, living peaceably, and from a sense of Christian Love
and Charity, endeavoring to reconcile disagreeing Neighbors, and instilling
this reconciling Principle into others.

And having thus laid down the true Characters of these Peacemakers, whereby
you may examine your selves, let us go on, and,

II. Enquire into the reasons of the supposition, or that which is implied
here, that those who have an aversion from this Peacemaking, cannot be blessed
or happy.

The reasons are,

1. Selfishness is plainly predominant in such persons, and that is no good
character of bliss, so far from it, that the Apostle reckons it among the
Plagues of the last days, 1 Timothy III. 1, 2. This know also, that in the last
days perilous times shall come, for men shall be lovers of themselves. It Is
true, to love our selves is a natural principle, but to love our selves so as
not to be concerned for the good of others, is a sinful self-love, which
renders us contemptible to God, and despicable to rational men. He that matters
not whether his Neighbors fight or agree, whether they live in love or wrath,
and sees a fire kindled in their Breasts, a fire lighted by the Flames of Hell,
a fire which breaks forth, and threatens to lay their Consciences wast, and
does not offer his helping hand to quench it, has a Soul base and low, a poor
pitiful Spirit, guilty enough to suffer in Hell, but alienated from that life
which must give him a title to Heaven.

2. He that does not make Peace with God or with his own Conscience, and cares
not for it, robs himself of the greatest comfort; and surely that man can never
be happy. To be at Peace with God, is to be at Peace with our Judge, with him
who has the same power over us, that the Potter has over his Clay, and is
able to destroy both Soul and Body into Hell; with him whose voice breaks the
Cedars, divides the Flames of Fire, shakes the Wilderness, and makes the
Mountains tremble, and who has a Prison to tame men in, a Prison from whence
there is no coming out till they have paid the uttermost Farthing. To be at
Peace with this Almighty and Sovereign Being, must needs be a mighty
satisfaction to the Soul that knows what God is, and looks beyond this world:
To enjoy his Friendship, to be sure of his Favor, to be secured of his good
will, this establishes the Soul, and gives her courage in the time of the
greatest Danger. He that is indifferent, whether he be at Peace with God or
not, not to mention that he is a Sot and a Fool, and understands not his true
interest, he deprives himself of that which ought to be the greatest stay and
staff of his life, and therefore whatever his outward Conveniences, and
Accommodations may be, he is unhappy.

3. He that does not or will not live peaceably with his Neighbors, I need not
tell you that he is unhappy, for he himself finds by sad experience, that he is
so. The Disorders and Tumults he finds within, the uneasiness of his condition,
the danger he is in from without, and the vexation and discontent he runs into
are sufficient Items that he is as far from being happy, as he is from being
wise: His lusts war within his members, as St. James speaks, Jam. IV. 1. His
Soul is like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, Isa. LVII. 20. He is no kin
to God, for he is the God of Peace, Romans XVI. 20. No kin to Angels, for they
rejoice in Peace on Earth, Luke II. 14. No kin to good men, for they seek Peace
and ensue it, 1 Pet. III. 11. If he be related to any thing, it is to the
Prince of Darkness, who delights in wrath and envy, Rev. XII. 17.

4. Such men are no Children of God, and therefore cannot be blessed; that is
the argument of the Text, Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be
called the Children of God; therefore those that have an aversion from this
Peacemaking are not blessed, because no Children of God; surely no Children of
God, when so much of that Spirit reigns in them, which rules in the Children of
Disobedience: He particularly that seeks not to be at Peace, or to live
peaceably with his Neighbor, most certainly does not love his Brother, and he
that loves him not, is by the Holy Ghost in Scripture put into the number of
strange Children, for so we read, 1 John III. 10. Herein the Children of God
are manifest, and the Children of the Devil: he that works not righteousness is
not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother. Not to love our Brother, and
to hate him in Scripture are equivalent, different expressions for the same
sin; and if any man say, I am in the light, and hate his Brother, he is in
darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes, because the
darkness has blinded his Eyes, 1 John II. 11.

So that true Blessedness lies altogether in the opposite temper, viz. the
Peacemakers, and of these it is that it is said, They shall be called the
Children of God; and how, and upon what account they shall be called the
Children of God, is the III. And last particular, I am to speak to.

And here I must premise, that in Scripture Language, to be called so, is very
often as much as to be so; And thou Child shall be called the Prophet of the
most High, i. e. thou shall be a Prophet, Luke I. 76. and after the same
manner, That holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of
God, i. e. shall be the Son of God; so Matthew. I. 23. They shall call his name
Emanuel, i. e. he shall be so, God with us, God and Man. And after this style,
you are to understand the Phrase of the Text, They shall be called the Children
of God, i. e. they are and shall be so.

Children of God! Why? What great blessedness is there in this title, beyond
what other men enjoy? Are not Princes and great Men, who are commonly none of
the best, called the Children of God, Psalm. LXXXII. 6. and is not God the
Father of all mankind? It is very true, but still there is a very great
difference between Children and Children. All rational creatures, both Men and
Angels, are God's Children, as they are the works of his hands, and with this
respect, even Devils come into that number, because they owe their Being to an
Omnipotent God. Princes and great Men particularly are the Children of God upon
the account of Power and Grandeur, and Authority God communicates to them, but
for all these respects, they may be everlastingly miserable. To be a Child of
God by Regeneration, to be born again, to be born of God, to be begotten again
through a lively hope, by the Word and Spirit, this is it that makes the title
truly comfortable, and such Children are the Peacemakers commended here. To be
a Child of God in this sense, is more, and a greater honor, than to be related
to all the greatest Princes in the World. For,

1. Such Children of God have higher marks of favor set upon them. They enjoy
the Blessings of God's left hand in common with the rest, but besides these,
they have Blessings of the right hand heaped upon them. Besides the
Preservation, Protection, Provision for their bodies, and common Deliverances
from dangers, they participate of with the greater number, their Souls are
visited by very magnificent Guests; For if any man love me he will keep my
words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our
abode with him, says our Savior, Joh. XIV. 23. God governs them by his
Spirit, and feeds them like a Shepherd, gathers the lambs into his arms,
carries them in his bosom, and gently leads those that are with young, Isa. XL.
11. They are made partakers of the divine nature, love what God loves, hate
what he hates, desire what he desires, and aim at the same end God himself aims
at, to wit, the Glory of God, blessed for evermore.

2. To such Children of God belong the Promises of the everlasting Covenant;
and there is no condemnation in them. They are delivered from the wrath to
come, and Christ intercedes for them in Heaven. For them the balm of Gilead
flows, and when their Souls are sick, Physic is administered to them from the
Clouds. They are washed, they are justified, they are sanctified, and shall at
last be glorified. To such power is given to tread on Serpents, and upon all
the powers of darkness: For their sakes God spares whole Nations. To go no
farther than our own: All sober men believe we are ripe for God to put in the
Sickle of Vengeance. The Atheism, Prosaneness and Hypocrisy, the dull
Formality we are sunk into under the greatest encouragements, together with
other crying Sins, which are among us, are enough to make a rational man
wonder, that the Viols of the wrath of God are not yet poured out upon us, but
it is for the Children of God's sake, who are among us, that we are spared thus
long; for their sakes it is that God brings the strangest things about, and
though they are tried often by affliction, yet the Fire that proves them, does
only cleanse, not crush the Frame. To protect them, God sends his own Guard, a
Troop of Angels to surround their persons and habitations; and if so, the
blessedness of such must infinitely exceed the happiness of those, who are
called Children of God, upon the account either of their Creation, or Power and
Authority.

But to come closer to the words, the Peacemakers are in a very special manner
the Children of God, if you consider them either with respect to this life, or
with regard to that to come, for to both these states, as I have told you
often, does the recompenses mentioned in these Beatitudes relate.

As to this present life.

1. They are Children of God, because they are like him. They express his
Nature in their own: For God is the God of Peace, Philip. IV. 9. His Divine
Essence is the true Pattern of Peace and Order. The ever-blessed Trinity is the
grand Exemplar of Concord and Unity. It Is God that makes Peace within thy
Borders, says David, Psalm. CXLVII. 14. He speaks Peace to his people, Ps.
LXXXV. 8. He creates Peace, Isa. LVII. 19. And calls to Peace, 1 Cor. VII. 15.
And is the Author of Peace, 1 Cor. XIV. 33. And is the Lord of Peace, 2 Thessalonians.
III. 16. The peaceable, and such as are of a peaceable Temper, resemble this
God of Peace; He lives in them: There is a great similitude betwixt that
inexhausted Spring, and these little Rivulets; a great Conformity betwixt these
Copies, and that Original. The features and lineaments of Peace, that appear
upon their Souls, discover that they are the Children of God.

2. They are the adopted Children of God in Christ Jesus. Christ is the true,
natural, and only begotten Son of God. The peaceable, and such as are of a
peacemaking Temper, tread in the Steps of Christ, imitate his peaceable
Nature, and upon that Account are admitted to the Honor of his Filiation, and
Sonship. The Spirit of Peace, which dwelt in Christ Jesus, dwells in them,
Col. III. 15. Christ is the Prince of Peace, so he is called, Isa. IX. 6. Nay
he is our Peace, who made both one, and pulled down the middle Wall of
Partition between us, having abolished in his Flesh, the Enmity, even the Law
of Commandments, contained in Ordinances, making in himself of twain, one new
Man, so making Peace, Ephesians. II. 14, 15. And he came and preached Peace to them
that were a far off, and to them who are nigh, verse. 17. He is the great
Peacemaker, who made Peace betwixt Heaven and Earth, which makes the Angels
sing at his Nativity; Glory be to God on high, and on Earth Peace, Luke II. 14,

Nor does Christ's Saying, Matthew. X. 34. Think not that I am come to send Peace
upon Earth, I am not come to send Peace, but a Sword. I am come to set a Man at
variance against his Father, and the Daughter against the Mother, etc. I say,
this Oracle does not at all invalidate, or weaken the Character, or Title given
him, which is Prince of Peace; for in so saying, he only describes the natural
Events and Consequences of his Gospel.

1. When a Man is truly converted to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, there
is immediately infused into him a mighty hatred and indignation against sin,
and vice, wherever he meets with it, though it be in a Father, or Mother, or
Brethren, or Sisters. To find it in such Relations, does not make him like it
the better, nor can all their persuasions make him have any good opinion of it;
and therefore if the Father be carnal and wicked, he will hate his Son for
being so holy and precise, and keeping such a stir about Religion; or if the
Father be good, and the Son naught, the Son will be either secretly, or openly
angry with his Father, for having so strait-lac'd a Conscience. Hence arise
quarrels and dissensions, which are not the natural Effects of the Gospel, but
of Men's vicious humors, which hate to be controlled by the Gospel; and hither
must be referred the Persecutions that befell the Primitive Believers, when
they would not offer incense to the Heathen Gods, whereupon they were
imprisoned, harrass'd, persecuted with Fire and Sword. The Son rose against his
Father, if he were a Christian, and the Daughter did her best to throw the
believing Mother into the Fire, and the nearest Relations became mortal Enemies
one to another; not that Christianity made the Christians hate their Heathen
Relations, but it made the Heathen Relations hate their Christian Kindred.

2. This Christ speaks with relation to those Carnal and Hypocritical
Professors of his Religion, who in After-ages pusht on by Pride and by the
Devil under a pretense of Zeal for his Honor and Glory, would kill, butcher,
burn, massacre thousands of their Brethren, who retained the Substantials of
Christianity, only differed from them in things which Carnality, and Pomp, and
Superstition, and Ambition to regulate the Church by the Court of Princes,
should add to the ancient Faith delivered unto the Saints, and of this we have
seen very sad instances: But still, these are only accidental Effects of Men's
Pride and Passions, not the natural Products of the Design and Tendency of the
Gospel; so that notwithstanding all these quarrels and dissensions ill Men
raise about the Gospel, Christ is still the Prince of Peace, and the Peaceable,
and such as are of a peacemaking Temper, are upon that account his Brethren,
for he is not ashamed to call them Brethren, Heb. II. 11. and therefore the
Children of God.

As to the Life to come.

These Peacemakers shall be, and shall be treated like darling Children of
God. This St. John assures us of, 1 John III. 2. Beloved, now are we the Sons
of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know, that when we
shall appear we shall be like him. Like him! How? Like him in Eternal Glory and
Honor, and Splendor. They were like Christ in their peacemaking Temper here,
and they shall be like him in a glorious Immortality. Their Father which is in
Heaven will let Men and Angels see, that they are his Children, that they are
so not in Name only, but in Deed. He will give the unbelieving World a visible
Demonstration, that they are so in the last Day, in the great Day of Account;
he will place them at Christ's Right Hand, and the Men that would not believe
and repent, shall behold how dear they are to him; for the great Redeemer shall
carry them up into his Father's Kingdom: If Sons then Heirs, Heirs of God, and
joint Heirs with Christ, says the Apostle, Romans VIII. 17. Christ as Man, and
Mediator, became Heir of his Father's Royalty, and Power; so shall they in the
right of adopted Children. As Christ ascended into Heaven so shall they; as
Christ was exalted so shall they; as Christ was enthroned so shall they; as
Christ was advanced from a low Estate to the highest Dignity so shall they; as
Christ lives for ever so shall they; as Christ cannot be hurt by the second
Death no more shall they; as Christ had power given him over the Nations, over
Hell and Devils, so shall they reign over all their Enemies; as Christ shall
judge the World, and the Apostate Angels so shall they; being Fellow-Sons,
Fellow-Heirs, they all share in his Authority and Grandeur: It Is true, all this
must be believed, for it is not seen yet; but who can forbear to believe it,
when we have the Word of the living God for it?

In a word, They shall be Possessours of Heaven and Earth; for not only their
Father, but their Elder Brother is so. Crowns and Diadems are preparing for
them; Crowns which fade not away, Crowns which the Moth cannot corrupt, nor
Thieves break through and steal; Crowns made of Beams of Eternal Light; Crowns
which not only adorn their Heads, but fill their Faces with incomparable
Beauty; Crowns such as Angels wear; Crowns which cannot be viewed, cannot be
thought of, without Eternal Admiration.

Inferences.
1. It is easy to guess what Tempers and Actions are contrary, and directly
opposite to the admirable Qualification recommended, and commanded in the Text.
Peace being either public or private, and the public either Political, or
Ecclesiastical, either of Church or State; whoever they be that wilfully pusht
on by Pride or Passion, or some worldly carnal Design, without a just, lawful,
or warrantable cause, disorder or disturb that Peace, cannot be true Disciples
of Christ, because they have an Aversion from that peaceable, peace-keeping,
and peacemaking Temper, which Christ with all the pathetick Adjurations
imaginabe has enjoined his Followers.

I shall not here reflect on secular Estates and Princes, who either begin or
maintain an unjust War, either to enrich themselves by the Spoils of their
Neighbors, or to advance their own Glory, or to enlarge their Empire and
Dominion; for the very Light of Nature confutes these Practices, and he that is
but a Novice in Religion, may see nothing is more contrary to the Design of the
Gospel. However, I cannot but spend some considerations on the sad Divisions
and Quarrels that are among those who call themselves Christians upon the
account of Religion.

I wonder not to see Mahometans and Jews scandalized at these Divisions, the
Jews especially, when they read such lofty Promises of the Peace and Unity of
the Church that was to be under the Messiah, as Isa. II. 4. They shall beat
their Spears into Plough-shares, and their Swords into Pruning Hooks. Nation
shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more;
and Isa. XI. 6. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard lie down
with the Kid, and the Calf, and the young Lion, and the Fatling together, and a
little Child shall lead them. Though these Prophecies have been in a great
measure fulfilled, not only in the Apostles times, when the Jews and Gentiles,
who were mortal Enemies before united into one Church under their common Head
Christ Jesus; but afterward when the Empire became Christian, and the Heathen
Powers, who had most violently persecuted the Christians, submitted to the
Gospel, and embraced those whom they had burnt before; and though these
Prophecies may moreover be said to be exactly fulfilled, partly with respect to
the Design and Tendency of the Christian Religion, the design and intent of
Christ's Laws being to make Men peaceable, and partly with respect to the
signal change that is actually wrought upon those who are truly, not only in
profession, and outwardly, but inwardly too, converted to the Faith of Christ;
for upon this Conversion their former Hatred and Enmity to others is laid
aside, and they are all for Peace and Concord; though I say these Prophecies
are actually accomplished in despite of all the Sects, that profess Christ's
Religion; yet the Jews, a dull, hard, inconsiderate sort of People, and who are
guided much by their Senses; seeing the everlasting quarrels that are among
Christians, and how one party persecutes and abuses the other, and upon what
slight occasions they quarrel and fall out, and break Peace and Communion one
with another; I wonder not to see them offended at these doings, and hardened
in their Unbelief; for not to mention the Divisions, Heresies and Schisms in
the ancient Church, at this day the Eastern Churches stand divided against the
Western; the Western is broke into several Parties; the Church of Rome against
the Protestants, and the Protestants against the Church of Rome, and the
Protestants are divided among themselves.

In these Divisions the Church of Rome erects her head, and pretends she is the
only true and Catholic Church, because they are united among themselves. But
to show the weakness of this boasting:

1. At this rate every particular Church must be the Catholic Church, because
the Members of every particular Church are united among themselves. So in the
Church of England, her Members and Pastors all subscribing to the Articles of
her Communion, and professing the same Doctrine, Ceremonies and Worship,
whether they be in Europe, or Africa, or Asia, or America; and there is no
particular Church, that is constituted by any public Authority, but may boast
of this Unity.

2. It is not a bare Union of Men that makes a Church a true Church, but that
Union must have Truth for its Foundation; else you know, Thieves, and Robbers,
and High-way-men, and Pirates, and Buccaneers, because they agree among
themselves, might lay claim to this Title, and the most perverse Heretics,
because they agree in certain points, might say they are the true Church, and
Heathens and Pagans, because they agree in Superstition, and in believing a
Multitude of Gods, might bid fair for this character. However,

3. The Unity the Church of Rome boasts of, is only a pretense; for all the
World knows the mighty differences that are within her own Bosom, of the
Scotists and Thomists, of the Franciscans and Dominicans, of the Jansenists and
Jesuits, who stick not to call one another Heretics; not to mention the late
Divisions betwixt the Disciples of Molinos, and their Opponents; and were it
not for fear of Fire, and Prisons, and the Inquisition, some of these would
break out into open War against their Adversaries and Competitors. Nay,

4. There is no Christian Church that has been more guilty of breaking the
Peace of Christendom, than the Church of Rome; and because several Churches
would not satisfy or gratify her Ambition, would not put their Necks under
her Yoke, nor believe the falsest and idlest thing in the World, her Supremacy
and Infallibility, she has boldly separated her self from their Communion;
this was the reason why she separated from the Eastern Churches, and by this
insolence she has forced the Protestant Churches from her Communion, and not
he that is forced away, but he that forces is the Schismatic.

And indeed, that which justifies the Protestant Churches separation from her,
or breaking Peace and Communion with her, is

1. Because she would impose that upon the Consciences of Men, which Christ and
his Apostles never imposed.

2. Because she has turned the Spiritual Worship of the Gospel, into carnal
and mechanical Devotion, and introduced innumerable Superstitions, which have
no foundation in the Word of God, and would have them believed as firmly as the
Gospel it self.

3. Because she has brought in a Worship, which with all the favorable
Interpretations imaginable, cannot be excused from Idolatry; even the Worship
of dead Men and Women, of the Bread in the Eucharist, of Images and Pictures,
and Relics, etc. contrary to the Design of the Gospel.

4. Because, though she has been often entreated, admonished, and exhorted to
reform these Abuses, for some hundred Years together, yet she is obstinate, and
instead of reforming, has hardened her self in them, and thinks to hector Men
by her Power and Authority into a Belief of that, which cannot be defended with
solid Arguments.

5. Because rejecting the Supreme Authority of the Scriptures, which are the
sole Rule of Faith, she has made her pretended Head, and such Councils as he
shall call, or approve of, the sole Dictators, and Expositors, of the Doctrine
of Christ, requiring blind Obedience to their Decisions, contrary, not only to
the Word of God, but to the Sense of all true Antiquity: So that there can be
no peace, I mean no Peace of Communion with Rome; for though we are commanded
to live peaceably with all Men, yet we are withal to have a due regard to
Truth, Ephesians. IV. 15. Nor must Peace be bought at so dear a Rate, as to comply
with Men in their Sins and Errors, which is the Reason why Peace and Holiness
are joined together in that known Exhortation of the Apostle. Follow peace with
all men, and Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb. XII. 14.
Indeed an external Peace we are to maintain with all Mankind, but this differs
much from Peace of Communion in Divine Worship and Sacraments.

The Divisions among Protestant Churches are to be deplored so much the more,
because the Points they differ in are inconsiderable, and might easily be
composed, if Men had but peaceable Tempers, and were resolved to lay aside
Interest, and carnal Respects, and Punctilio's of Honor, and Credit, etc. for
they all agree in Fundamentals, all are satisfied that the Church of Rome has
notoriously deviated from the simplicity of the Gospel; and the matters in
difference, are things in which Salvation is not concerned. And upon that
account their labors deserve great Commendations, who heretofore, and very
lately have endeavored to reconcile the Protestant Churches into a perfect
Union: A blessed Work. Blessed are the Peacemakers, that endeavor to make
Peace among the jarring Members of Christ's Body; and though they may fail of
Success, yet they shall not lose their Reward.

In the mean while those who widen, or heighten these differences, and incite
the respective Parties to hatred, and wrath, and animosities one against
another, to be sure are no Children of the God of Peace, and had need at least
before they die, make public Satisfaction for the dreadful Effects, their
Heats and Passions do produce.

But as this Peace among Protestant Churches is very much to be wished and
prayed for, so I despair to see so glorious a Work take effect, except the
differing Parties would resolve to stand to the Rules following.

1. That the respective Parties which agree in the chief Points of Religion do
not make any of those Points they differ in, fundamental, as if the Fortune of
Religion depended upon it, or as if those different Points were so many
different Religions.

2. That the differing Parties do not damn one another for those differences,
there being nothing that has done Religion more hurt, than Men's damning one
another for things, which Christ and his Apostles have affixed no Damnation to.

3. That notwithstanding the little differences that are among them, they make
one Church, and endeavor after the Welfare and Prosperity of it, and join
together in public Prayer, and in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which is the
Badge and Symbol of Fraternity, and Amity.

4. That one Party be not presently jealous, and suspicious of the other, as if
the opinion which one Party espouses were embraced, or maintained in a Humor,
or for worldly Ends, but that they charitably believe, it is Conscience, that
puts them upon it, at least, till either the Party espousing that opinion
confesses, that Conscience is not at the bottom of it, or that it appear by
undeniable Evidences, that a worldly or sinister design is the foundation of it.

5. That the differing Parties do not multiply the controversies, which are
amongst them, make them neither more numerous nor greater than really they are,
and that they do not interpret an accidental unwary expression, that may drop
from the Pen, or Mouth of one party, as a new controversy.

6. That one party do not charge the other with consequences, which they do not
own, nor with Doctrines and Positions, which they detest from their hearts.

7. That each party defending, or proving their opinion do it with great
modesty, without provoking or exasperating, or approbrious Language, and
revilings, or bitter reflections on the other.

8. That of these differing parties none do vye with the other, except it be in
living up to the Precepts of the Gospel, particularly those of patience,
long-suffering and charity.

These rules I apprehend to be the foundation of Peace and Concord of
Protestant Churches, that differ in points of no great concernment; and were
these Maxims once put in practice, the particular controversies might soon be
compromised. To this purpose is that saying of the Apostle: Nevertheless,
whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the
same things; and if any be otherwise minded, God will even reveal that unto
you, Phil. III. 15, 16. But however,

II. If we cannot mend the Public, let us endeavor to reform particular
Persons. It is a sad sight to see Christians divided among themselves, but it
is as dismal a spectacle to see so many of us at war with God. This I know will
hardly be believed by the guilty, and because they do not blaspheme God, or do
not trouble their heads much about God, or Religion, they know nothing to the
contrary but that they are at peace with God, and that they and God are very
good Friends. This is true stupidity, and were the stupidity invincible as it
is in Beasts, such Men would be safe, safe as the wild Ass, or the Dromedary in
the Wilderness, safe I say from the Danger of God's Wrath. But this cannot be
the case of any of you, that live in a Country where the Gospel is preached,
where you are told, that not to love God, is to hate him; and that not to
delight in his ways, is to incurr his displeasure; that to live in those sins,
which exclude from the Kingdom of Heaven, is to bid defiance to him; that to be
neglectfull of his Will, is to wage war with him; that to slight the
admonitions, and entreaties of his Messengers, is to be at enmity with him; and
that to mind the World more than his Service, or to seek to please Men more
than him, is to provoke him to anger.

And has not this been the temper, and is not this the complexion of many of
you? How many years have some of you born Arms against God? Your wilful sins
are the Weapons whereby you fight against him; and though like the Giants in
the Fable, you do not heap Mountain upon Mountain to pull him out of his
Throne; yet by espousing that life, which is odious to him, you affront his
Sovereignty, and by living contrary to the Gospel, you despise and dishonor
him who has the greatest right to command you. And is it not high time to make
peace with him? If God be not at peace with you here, he will never be at peace
with you hereafter. What peace while the Whoredoms of thy Mother Jezabel, and
her Witchcrafts are so many? said Jehu, 2 Kings IX. 22. So here, what peace can
there be betwixt God and you, while you continue in that pride and vanity, and
intemperance, and other sins, against which the wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven? Do you think you are at peace with God, because you thrive and prosper
in the World? Do not the wickedest of Men do so, and is that an Argument that
God is their Friend? Will you make his patience a sign of his being reconciled
to you, when it is only a motive to a reconciliation? There is no peace, says
my God, unto the wicked, Isa. LVII. 20. Let them be never so potent, never so
rich, never so wealthy, their impiety takes away all peace betwixt God and
them. He has declared so much, and will not you believe him? Will you give no
credit to his word, till with Dives you lift up your Eyes in Hell, and see that
God is not your friend? If you do thrive and prosper in the World, cannot those
Blessings move you to be at peace with him? Do you believe he is kind to you,
and shall his kindness provoke you to be his Enemies? Nothing can settle a
peace betwixt God and you, till you change your lives, and make conscience of
your ways, and abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good.
Then indeed were your sins as crimson they shall be as wool, were they of a
scarlet Dye, they shall be as white as snow; but till then, your sin, like that
of Judah, is written with a pen of Iron, and with the point of a Diamond, as it
is said, Jer. XVII. 1. and you do as good as say to God with those Desperadoes,
in Job, Chap. XXI. 14. Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.
Till then you can never be at peace with your own consciences, carnal security
you may have, but peace of conscience is another thing, for this can never be
at rest, while it has reason to believe God frowns upon it; but being sure of
the light of his loving kindness, a Man walks in Paradise, and dwells in the
Garden of God. But,

III. When Christ in the Text professes and declares how pleasing and
acceptable a peaceable, and peacemaking Temper is to God; would not one think
that every one that believes the Gospel, should be ambitious of those
qualifications, which God not only approves of, but promises to reward with the
highest Honor and Dignity? Yes, did Men love God indeed and in truth, they
would not only be glad to know what is pleasing to him, but even run to do it,
as good natured Children that observe their Father's temper, and endeavor to
gain his love by a deportment and behavior they know he delights in.

Peace among men God delights in, peace among Christians especially; to whom he
has vouchsafed a higher dispensation. Among these, no noise, no clamor, no
railing, no quarrelling, no Swords, no Cannon should be heard; these profess
themselves Disciples of Christ Jesus, the Prince of Peace; and there is no
command that is more strictly, or more frequently enjoined, than that of Peace.
This they are to pursue, to follow, and to endeavor after by all possible
lawful means. This is their livery, and the very mark whereby they are to be
distinguished, even their peaceable Behavior. This is the Salt which is to
keep them sweet, as Christ calls it, Mark IX. 10. But you all know, how
contrary to this character the generality of Men live, upon the least
provocation they break the Peace, and all friendship is renounced; especially
where they have a Purse to maintain the dispute; many a Man that was humble and
peaceable before, when poor; no sooner does he find his Purse swell, but his
Temper alters; and now if his Neighbor does displease him, though there be no
malice in the case, presently he talks high, and big, and he cares as little
for his Neighbor, as his Neighbor does for him. This is the humor of the
Age, and instead of repenting of their heats, and divisions, they justify their
contentions, and oppose the reasons of flesh and blood, and the circumstances
of their birth and quality, of their honor and grandeur, to the laws of that
Savior, by whose Blood they say, they are redeemed. Strange Christians these
that will be so, in despite of Christ, though they have nothing of the
character in them. And let us but consider what trifles they are Men quarrel
about, and how frivolous the things for which they break forth into flame, and
fury, and break the Peace which they should maintain and keep, things, which a
Philosopher would put by with a smile, and a wise Man think below himself to
take notice of. But what shall we say? Till men come to stand in awe of the
Gospel, more than of the laws of the Land, and the threatenings and punishments
of the Magistrate, thus it will be, and when opportunity serves will be carried
away with the stream of their passions, and sinful inclinations; and upon such
I cannot hope to do any good, though the Arguments were never so convincing, or
powerful.

But if there be any here, as I hope there are several, that look upon this
peaceable, and peacemaking Temper as their duty, are persuaded that they are
in danger of God's displeasure, if they want this qualification, and are
concerned about it, and desire to be informed of the way and method they are to
take, how to compass it; to such I shall recommend these following Directions.

1. Be injurious to no man, wrong no man, defraud no man, oppress no man, speak
evil of no man. This is the way to make peace, and to keep peace. It Is the
wrong that men apprehend is done to them by another, that causes quarrels and
dissensions. Remove the cause, and you remove the effect, a remedy prescribed
by the Apostle, in order to a quiet and peaceable Life, Tit. III. 2.

2. Love to do good. This strangely obliges, and wins, and charms, and moves
even our Enemies to be at peace with us, and makes People desirous to live in
friendship with us, and not only so, but hereby we weaken our quarrelsome
disposition, and become more tractable, and gentle, and heap coals of fire upon
the heads of our Enemies, i. e. melt them by kindness into a better nature,
Romans XII. 20.

3. Watch against selfishness, and covetousness, for it is greediness after
profit, and an over fondness of our temporal Interest, that puts us into heats,
if we are crossed in it. Moderation in our desires after these outward things
composes the mind, quiets the passions, and keeps the blood from boiling over.
The Apostle therefore very much insists upon this Virtue, 1 Timothy VI. and Phil.
IV. 5.

4. Believe not every ill thing that is said of you, for we see daily how
little credit is to be given to reports. A too easy belief of ill things said
of us, is an instigation to break the peace, to harbor hatred, and secret
grudges, and tempts to strangeness of behavior, to revenge, to moroseness, and
watching opportunities to be even with the supposed offendour; charity believes
the best, 1 Cor. XIII. 7.

5. Be not ashamed to confess your faults, when it is evident you are in the
wrong; an obstinate defense of a fault, is apt to make Persons, who take notice
of it, angry and furious, because it argues a very ill temper of mind; whereas
an ingenuous acknowledgment of our errors, reconciles and prevails with
Persons of ingenuity to be friends with us, and that is the reason why St. James
is so earnest for it, James V. 16.

6. Bear with infirmities in others, with such particularly, which appear to be
invincible. I do not say, bear with wilful sins, and habits of vice and folly,
but with failings and imperfections, which cannot well be remedied; either when
the understandings of your Neighbors are shallow, or not so quick as yours, or
when their Wisdom and Sagacity does not reach so far as yours, and this
according to the Command of the Holy Ghost, Romans XIV. 1.

7. For peace sake be content to recede sometimes from your own right: Where
two parties are stiff, and neither will yield, or abate any thing of their
demands, the quarrel must needs continue. But concessions and relinquishing
part of our right prepares for peace, and so did the Father of the faithful,
to prevent dissensions betwixt him and Lot; though upon the account of
seniority, it belonged to him to determine where he should pitch his Tent, yet
he leaves it to Lot to choose, which part of the Country he would go to, Genesis
XIII. 8, 9.

8. In order to promote peace in Families, David's method must be taken, Ps.
CI. 6. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land.

One great means to promote, and preserve the public Peace of the Nation, is
to do our own business, to be followers of that which is good, to do our own
duty, and not to speak evil of dignities; for it is written, Thou shall not
speak evil of the Rulers of thy People.

Consider after all how your Interest is bound up with this peaceable, and
peacemaking Temper; for as Christ says of a Kingdom divided against it self,
that it cannot stand; so if by quarrels, and clamours, and dissensions, you
divide the Society you live in, you undermine your own ease and happiness. To
this purpose Solomon, Prove. XVII. 1. Better is a dry morsel, and quietness
therewith, than an house full of sacrifices with strife. Besides, by this you
avoid innumerable sins, such as ill language, odious names, envy, hatred,
malice, and revengefull sins, and desires, and engaging other Men in sin with
you, and doing mischief to men, etc.

But is not the Title in the Text, given to the peaceable, and peacemaking
Christian, enough to make you endeavor to attain to this Character? What?
Children of God? And do you feel no desire to be so? Did you ever seriously
examine the privileges which attend the Children of God, and are these no
motives to you to come into the number? Suppose the Children of God are not
much regarded here, but is there not a time coming, when they shall be honored
before the whole World? Is there not a life to come, which shall manifest their
Dignity, and their Glory? The Peace of Heaven shall fall to their share: Do not
you reflect sometimes on that Peace, which the Children of the everlasting
Kingdom shall enjoy? Or is that Peace so inconsiderable, that it deserves no
consideration? What is the future felicity, but perfect Peace, everlasting
Peace, uninterrupted Peace? The peaceable Christian shall feel it, feed upon
it, possess it, live upon it, peace with God, peace with the Prince of Peace,
Christ Jesus, peace with all the Angels of God, peace with all the Spirits of
Men made perfect. No war shall disturb it, no tumult discompose it, no sedition
annoy it, no rebellion disfigure it. The God of Peace shall live in him, and he
in the God of Peace; God will tell him that he is his friend, and one with him,
and that no Men, no Devils shall pluck him out of his hands. There Rivers of
Peace shall flow upon him, Rivers where no Wind does blow, no Storms do come,
no Tempests rise, no Hurricanes molest. I conclude with St. Paul's Obtestation,
Colos. III. 15. And let the Peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also
ye are called in one body: and be ye thankful.

Amen.
FINIS.

