DELIGHT AND JUDGMENT: Or, a Prospect of the Great Day OF Judgment, And its
Power to damp, and imbitter Sensual Delights, Sports, and Recreations. By
ANTHONY HORNECK, D.D.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills Jun. for Mark Pardoe at the Sign of the Black
Raven, over against Bedford House in the Strand, 1684.

The PREFACE.
THough Practical Writers have this advantage of Controversial, that they do
not make themselves so many Enemies, as the other, yet I know not, what the
fate of the ensuing Discourse may be: For though the subject relate to Manners,
and the Behavior of Men, as Christians; yet it is to be feared, that not a few
who think themselves Religious, and notwithstanding their pretended Piety,
securely bathe themselves in Delights, this Book condemns, may put no very
favorable construction on such endeavors, as being levelled against things,
they are used to, and the Humor of the Age has allowed of, and rendered
unquestionable; and such it is like will call these attempts, pragmatical, and
bid us, as Constantine did Acesius in another case, Socrat. Eccl. Hist. l. 1.
c. 7.
erect a Ladder to Heaven, and climb up thither by our selves.

But it is God's Mercy, that while Christianity is decayed in the Glory and
Brightness of its Life, the Bible is still among us, and that we are not to
regulate our Religion by the sickly Fancies of half Christians, but by the
standing Laws of that Jesus, whose Disciples we profess our selves to be, and
whom the Primitive Believers thought themselves obliged to follow in external,
as well as internal simplicity.

It Is true, the Church is not now under Persecution, as it was in former Days*
when Men made those mighty Progresses in Self-denial, but it is to be observed
that when the Saints of the first Ages pressed those Severities, they did not
lay the stress on their persecuted Condition, and the necessity of the dismal
Times they lived in, but on the Laws of their great Master, which they looked
upon to be as immutable, as the God that gave them: Nor can prosperity make any
alteration in those Lessons, which Christ required as Essential to his
Religion; Prosperity indeed was intended to prompt us to a more cheerful
discharge of our Duty, but not to a neglect of those Austerities, which are the
best Ornaments of the best Religion in the World.

As Men have managed Prosperity, it has been the greatest Bane of Religion,
and the wisest Men have taken notice, how Christianity since it has crept out
of the Thorns and Briars of Barbarous Tyranny and Oppression, has been
unhappily decreasing in its Zeal, and Fervor; whether it is Fable, or History
that tells us, that a Voice came from Heaven, saying, This Day Poison is poured
out into the Church, when Ease and Plenty, and Rivers of Gold flowed into it, I
shall not now enquire; Certain it is, that external Felicity has smilingly
undermined the Foundations of that admirable Doctrine, and that which was
formerly built on the greatest Innocence, has since changed its bottom, and
stands too much on show, and formality.

Prosperity at this Day, to the great Sorrow of all considerate Persons, gives
Law to Men's Religion, and whatever crosses Prosperity, is thought to cross
Religion too. What is consistent with our ease, is allowed of as good Divinity,
and whatever runs counter to our sensual Satisfaction, appears so awkward, that
we fancy it no Religion, because Flesh and Blood would not have it so: all
which must necessarily arise from Unbelief, or a wavering Faith of a Life to
come; either that future Life, the Son of God has purchased, and promised, is
not looked upon to be so great, as it is represented in the Gospel, or it is
not seriously thought of; for if it were, the Pleasures of this Life would grow
pale, and their Beauty vanish, if compared with the glorious delights
hereafter, and the Satisfactions of this World would soon lose their Charms, if
viewed by that Light, which irradiates the Holy Cherubim: If that Life deserves
not Self-denial in the Pleasures of this present, Christ and his Apostles must
needs have been out in the lofty Descriptions, they have given of it, and our
Faith is vain, and in vain did the Son of God take all those pains, and suffer
all the Agonies, he did, to purchase a thing so trivial, and inconsiderable.

If it were a thing of no great moment, the but moderately Pious, would not be
excluded from its Glories, and when nothing but Heroic Virtue can promise it
self a share in that Felicity, it cannot be otherwise, but that the Prize does
answer the difficulties in the pursuit of its attainment. They are Great and
Masculine Acts, that Christianity prompts us to; and wherein can this Heroic
Virtue be expressed better then in a Noble contempt of what foolish Mortals
count pleasant and tickling to their Flesh, and Fancy? Such acts are arguments
of a brave and generous Mind, and signs that our understandings soar above the
Moon, and rely more on what God has promised, then on what the World for the
present pays. This shows that our Souls do act like themselves, and not to be
biassed by vulgar Sentiments, is that which gives a Man Reputation with the
Best of Beings.

Christ in pressing these Lessons, has only made a clearer Revelation of what
the Philosophers of Old guessed at by the glimmering light, which Nature gave
them, and what can be more for a Man's Credit, then to do that, which both
Nature and Grace have judged to be most honorable and glorious.

There is no Question, but if that, Eternal Life hereafter, were shown in all
its Glories, and Riches, and Contents to a sensual Man at the same time, that
he beholds the most charming delights of the Flesh, and had he as lively a view
of the one, as he has of the other, the infinite brightness of the one would
so eclipse, and darken the feebler splendor of the other, that he would not
only be content to quit his inferior delights for the enjoyment of the other*
but would very much wonder at that Monster, that should refuse the greater for
the lesser pleasures; so that all the difficulty is, how to make that Eternal
Life so visible, that it shall move, and affect, and preponderate above all
Earthly satisfactions. And the way to do this, is the same with the Method,
that must be taken in making the Day of Judgment visible to us, which is the
attempt of the following Discourse, in which I hope I have said nothing but
what is agreeable to the Doctrine of the Primitive Church. If any shall find
fault with some passages in it, because they contradict the Vanity and Luxury
of the Age we live in, or charge me with meddling with things, which do not
belong to me to determine, all I shall reply, is this, that I have done no
more, but what I have excellent Precedents for, even some of the best Divines
of our Church since the Reformation, whose Example as I am not ashamed to
follow, so since they thought it their duty to discourage such Vulgar Errors,
it cannot be a Crime in us to follow their Faith, knowing the end of their
Conversation.

THE SUMMARY Of the whole DISCOURSE.
THe Explication of the Text, Page 1 -- 6. The Proposition; That the Prospect
of a future Judgment is enough to imbitter all the Sensual, and Carnal delights
of Men, particularly of young Men, and to bring a damp upon the most Youthful,
and most Jovial Temper imaginable, p. 6, 7. The illustration of this
Proposition, p. 7 -- 12 The Heads of the Discourse: I. What Reason we have to
believe, that there is a Day of Judgment. The Reasons drawn: 1. From the
Universal consent of the wiser sort of Mankind. 2. From the Being, and Justice
of God.
II. What there is in that future Judgment, that is able to cast a damp on the
Mirth, and Jollities of Men, especially the younger sort. 1. In the Prospect of
this Judgment there appears a very serious Judge, the mighty Jesus, the Son of
God, p. 22. 2. A very strict Examination of what we have done in the Flesh, p.
34. 3. A very wonderful Scene; The Person that is the Judge is the Lawgiver
too, the Party offended, the Witness, and his own Advocate, p. 51. 4. The
unspeakable anguish, and misery of those, who have been most jolly and merry in
this life. p. 71.
III. How the Prospect of that future Judgment must be managed, that it may
actually damp, and put a stop to these Carnal delights? 1. By thinking,
reflecting, and ruminating, upon that future Judgment, p. 83. 2. By applying
the particulars of this future Judgment to our selves, p. 94. 3. By seconding
all this with earnest Prayer, p. 103.
IV. Whether every Man is bound to imbitter his Carnal delights with this
Prospect? Aff. 1. Because if not embittered they will infallibly lead the Soul
into innumerable dangers, p. 112. 2. Because to imbitter such delights to our
selves is a thing of the greatest concernment, p. 116. 3. This imbittering our
sensual delights with such a Prospect is that, which men will certainly wish
they had done, when they appear at the Great Tribunal, p. 120.
V. Whether a Christian, that would be saved, is upon this account obliged to
forbear, and abandon all Sensual and Worldly delights, and recreations
whatsoever?

The Answer to this Query laid down in several Articles:
1. Spiritual delight is and must be the chief delight of a Christian, p. 127.
2. Worldly delights, as are neither sinful in themselves, nor apparent
occasions of evil, are allowable, p. 129. 3. Delight in Gardens, Rivers,
Orchards, etc. considered, p. 131. 4. Of delight in Music either Vocal, or
Instrumental, p. 133. 5. Of delight in Books, p. 135. 6. Of delight in Drinking
and Tippling, p. 138. 7. Of delight in Cards, and Dice, p. 141. 8. Of delight in
Feasting, and going to Feasts, p. 147. 9. Of delight in fashionable Clothes and
Habits, p. 154. 10. Of delight in Painting and Patching, and artificial
Meliorations of the Face and Skin, p. 176. 11. Of delight in Dancing, p. 192.
12. Of delight in Seeing and going to Stage Plays, p. 205.
Inferences drawn from the Premises.
1. How far sorrow is better then laughter, explained, p. 127. 2. How
differently Spiritual things affect men, as they either attentively, or
inattentively think upon them, p. 290. 3. How much the greatest part of the
World is to be pitied, that can delight in nothing, but what they can grasp
and feel, p. 300. 4. How unreasonable it is to harbor any hard Thoughts of
Religion, because it debars us of dangerous, sensual delights, p. 313. 5. How
necessary it is to prepare for the Great Day of Account.
DIRECTIONS.
1. To pity those inconsiderate Men that live, as if there were no future
Judgment, p. 329. 2. To spend some time every Day in reflecting upon this Day,
p. 330. 3. To walk circumspectly every Day, and to use, that conscientiousness
we would use, were we sure, we should be summoned to Judgment at Night, p. 337.
4. To reflect and think on this Day, when ever we see, or hear of the judicial
Process of a Malefactor. p. 339. 5. To reflect on this Day, whenever we
converse with sick, and dying men, or are present, when their Breath leaves
their Bodies, p. 343. 6. To refle^t on this Day, whenever we go to a Funeral.
p. 346. 7. To judge our selves here on Earth, in order to avoid the terror of
God's future Judgment, p. 351. 8. In our actions to regard not so much how they
are relished with Men, as whether they will endure the Test before the Judge.
when our Souls shall appear before him. p. 354. 9. To bear injuries patiently
out of regard to this Day of Judgment, when God will set all things to rights,
and take care, that we shall lose nothing by our sufferings, p. 359. 10. To
consider particularly, that it will be more tolerable for Heathens, and
Professed Infidels at this Day, then for Christians, p. 362. 11. To make this
Day a Motive to Christian Charity, and Compassion, p. 368. 12. Not to suffer
our selves to be discouraged from admiring those men, who have always lived in
the Thoughts and Contemplations of this future Judgment, p. 374.
Eccles. xi.9. Rejoice, O young Man, in thy Youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee
in the days of thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thy Heart, and in the sight
of thine Eyes; but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee
into Judgment.
THERE is no Man certainly better able to give us so true an account of the
nature, extent, danger, exit, and end of sensual pleasure, as Solomon; he
walked through the whole Garden, tasted of all the Fruits, smelt to every
Flower, and I believe many times sinned, not so much out of fondness to the
sin, as for trials sake, to acquaint himself with the nature of the folly, and
to see, whether there was really that satisfaction in it, which the brutish
part of the World said, there was: But while he tried experiments upon the
Viper the Beast flew into his Face, and Poisoned the Empirick. He went on in
these slippery ways, and walked on this sea of Glass a considerable time,
spread the Sails of his sensual desires, and bid his carnal mind ask, and crave
whatever it could fancy, and if either Love or Money, or Force could procure it,
it should have it. He hugged all the little shooting flames he met with, and
kissed every thing, that had the name, and reputation of Mirth and Jollity.

But see the sad Catastrophe, and woeful turn of that pleasant Wheel, when he
thought himself in Paradise, he found himself in Hell, and that which tickled
his senses at the first, proved after some time his greatest torment, and
vexation; Providence can be silent for a time, but at last the sleeping Lion
wakes, and roars so, that all the Beasts of the Field do tremble, and Solomon,
on whose head the Candle of the Lord had shined so long, found that light at
last go out in a snuff, and himself the object of Gods wrath, and indignation,
and that makes him impart this sad memento, to the Man, who has Blood, and
Youth, and Strength enough to be vain, and foolish; Rejoice, O young Man, in
thy Youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the days of thy Youth, etc.

By way of Explication, I must take notice of these few things:

1. That the words young Man, (...)
and Youth in Scripture, especially in this Book are not only meant of that
time, we commonly allow to Youth, which is from Ten or Fourteen to Twenty or
Five and Twenty, but include all that Age which is fit for action, and the
Hebrew words import so much, being derived from a Root, implying choice, and
election; so that the time here aimed at, is the chiefest time of our life, or
that time, which any Man of sense would choose for action.

2. That those sentences, which sound like exhortations, are perfectly
Ironical, or spoke by way of derision, as if we should say to a Man; Go play
the Fool, burn thy Finger in the Candle, and see, what thou will get by it,
whereby we do not mean that he should do so, but do rather express the
silliness, and simplicity of the thing, to make him avoid it; and such Ironical
expressions, or mocking exhortations, are very frequent in Scripture, as 1 Reg.
18.27. Cry aloud, for he is asleep, which is a kind of mocking the stupid
Priests of Baal, that called on a Stock or Stone, so Jer. 49.11. Leave thy
Fatherless Children, and let thy Widows trust in me, i. e. Ay, go, comfort thy
self with this, that I will take care of thy Fatherless Children, and provide
for thy Widows, but thou shall find thy self egregiously mistaken; so here,
Rejoice O young Man, etc. i. e. go play the Madman, let thy sensual Appetite
rove, gratify thy Flesh, please thy besotted Heart, fix thine Eyes on what
Beauty thou think fit, sing care, and reason, and thy wits away, and see
what the Issue of all will be, and so much is evident from the following words,
which are a bridle to all these extravagancies, and the gall that embitters all
these sweets, and therefore the Chaldew Paraphrase justly turns these
mock-exhortations into a serious Admonition, walk in humility, let not thine
Eyes gaze upon that which is evil, but be exceeding cautious; and so the
Septuagint; walk spotless in the ways of thy Heart, and not in the lust of
thine Eyes.

3. God brings a Man into Judgment two ways, either by causing his Conscience
to awake with horror in this life, and laying some other heavy affliction upon
him, and there is mercy in this process, for this may yet lead the forlorn Soul
to serious thoughts of repentance, bring the pangs, and throws of the New Birth
upon her, and deliver her into a New Creature; Or where God intends a higher
degree of wrath, and indignation, he lets the jovial sinner alone on this side
Hell, and the burden shall not fall on him, till he comes to look the angry
Judge in the Face, at which time, as the Surprise will be greater, so the
horror and anguish of mind, which will seize on the sinner, will like
Nebuchadnezzars Furnace, prove seven times hotter than ordinary, upon which
follows eternal despair, and endless howling, and gnashing of Teeth.

The result of all, is this Proposition:

That the prospect of a future Judgment, is enough to embitter all the sensual
and carnal delights of Men, particularly of young Men, and to bring a damp upon
the most Youthful, and most jovial temper imaginable: Not only the sense of the
Text, I have already laid down imports so much, but there is this farther in
it, that the wise Man seems to couch his argument plainly thus; do but take a
view of that dreadful Judgment, God is resolved to bring thy guilty Soul to,
and thou will not dare to indulge thy self in the mad rejoycings of thy Youth,
nor walk in the ways, and after the fancies of thy corrupted Heart, nor suffer
thy wanton Eyes to fix on those objects, from which God has bid thee turn thy
Face away.

You know the story of the Young Gallant, who riding by a lonely Hermits Cell,
and finding the solitary Man very devout and fervent in Prayer, and looking
with a severe and mortified countenance, called to him, Father, Father, what a
fool are you to debar your self of the charming refreshments, and pleasures of
this life and live here immured, within Walls of Mud, and Clay; What if there
should be no other World to what purpose is all this rigor, and mortification?
The Hermit heard him, and replied, Ay but Friend, What if there should be one?
Where are you then? What a Fool will you be then? How will you wish, that you
had been in my condition? The youngster startled at these words, went home,
left his Women, and his Swine, his Lusts, and dry Husks of brutish delights,
and like the Prodigal became another Man.

The truth is, we have seen this prospect of a future judgment have very
strange effects upon a Man, who was not apt to be frighted with sad
Prognostications, and that was Felix, a Person; who had drunk as deep of the
stolen Waters of sensuality, as any Man then living, for he lay in the embraces
of Drusilla, who was another Man's Wife, and enjoyed that Beauty, which his
lustful appetite desired without let or control, yet behold when St. Paul
reasoned of temperance, righteousness, and judgment to come, the Text says;
Felix trembled. Act. 24.25.
The Sermon awakened the notions of Divine justice, that were engraven on the
Tables of his Heart, made him uneasy, put him into consternation, and for the
present forced him to loath the Bed, where his abomination was wrought.

We are told of a custom in some Kingdom, that the night before a Condemned
Malefactor is to die, a very shrill Trumpet sounds before the Prison Door,
which is a certain sign that he is to die next day, and before whose Door
soever the fatal Trumpet sounds over night, no Prayers, no Tears, whatever
condition he is of, or whatever Figure he makes in the World, can save him from
being Executed.

It happened in process of time that the King, who had made this Law, after he
had streamed out a considerable part of his life in extravagant actions, on a
sudden became serious, was often seen to retire into his Closet, gave strict
order for extermination of all vices, and though before he had doated on Mirth,
and Jests, and sensual Satisfactions, yet these were now all abandoned and
turned into a scene of gravity, and sobriety; such an alteration, we must think
must be a very strange surprise to Courtiers, who impatient of this change, and
supposing it to be a fit of Melancholy, took the freedom to ask him, what the
reason of this Reformation was; The Kings Brother especially, none of the most
Religious, sought often to divert him, tempting him to see Shows, and Plays,
and Women, and such baits as served either to plant, or cherish vanity in his
mind, and affections, but all in vain.

One Night, the King desirous to bring his Brother to a better sense of
Spiritual things, bids the fatal Trumpet to be sounded before the jolly Princes
house, who sensible of the meaning of that noise, that he was to die next
morning, starts out of his Bed, throws by his stately Robes, puts on a ragged
Garment, weeps Rivers of Tears, and a mighty horror seizes his mind, and as soon
as it was day comes to the King in this posture, and intercedes for his Life,
to whom the King said, O Brother, are you frighted with the sound of this
Trumpet, which foretells my Subjects approaching, and inevitable Death, and
does this noise force you into Tears, and Sackcloath, and humble supplications,
and can you blame me for being serious, who know not how soon the Archangels
Trumpet, of far greater consequence, and importance than this, will sound in
mine ears, and summon me and you, and all my Subjects to the Judgment seat of
God, and perhaps to eternal despair, and agonies. Go home, said he, and by my
example learn to despise the World, and prepare for that Day.

But this subject will invite us to a larger discourse, and therefore it will
be necessary to enquire,

1. What reason we have to believe, that there is a Day of Judgment.

2. What there is in that future Judgment, that is able to cast a damp on the
Mirth, and Jollities of Men, especially the younger sort.

3. How the prospect of that Judgment must be managed, that it may actually
damp, and put a stop to these carnal delights.

4. Whether every Man is bound to embitter his carnal delights with this
prospect.

5. Whether upon this account a Man be obliged to mind nothing, that savours of
Worldly delight and sensual satisfaction.

1. What reason have we to believe, that there is a day of Judgment.

Having to deal with Christians, at least with Men that profess themselves
such, this query seems needless, for the Scripture which the Christian World
pretends to believe to be derived from God, is full of passages of this Nature,
and assures us, that this belief of a future Judgment is as ancient, as the
Creation of the World; For Enoch the seventh from Adam, who in all probability
had it from his ancestors, Prophesied of these, saying, Behold the Lord comes
with Ten thousand of his Saints, to Execute Judgment upon all, and to convince
all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have
ungodlily committed, and of their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him, Jude v. 14, 15. And this Faith has been followed by all
the succeeding Saints, Patriarchs, Prophets, and judicious Men, was confirmed
by the great Messiah, the Lord Jesus, and his Apostles, who gave us a more
lively description of it, and has since been entertained by all the Christian
World, at least in profession, though there are but few, that act, and live
like persons influenced, or overaw'd by that belief, so that, if Christians
keep close to their principles, it can be no difficult thing, to persuade them
to believe that, which they imbibe with their Mothers-Milk, and education
advances into an open profession, and daily declaration.

But we have seen and do see a strange degenerateness in most Christians, and
not a few that go under that name, though they do not openly question this
truth, yet they either live as if they did, or infidelity reigns secretly in
their Hearts, and it is to be feared, that whatever their Tongues may speak, in
their minds they are not fully persuaded of it.

And were such Men willing to be persuaded, it should be no contemptible
argument to convince them, one would think, that the greatest part of the World
is of that belief, not only Christians but Jews, Mahometans, and the Heathens
themselves; that it is a grand Article of the Jewish Faith, none can deny that
ever conversed with them; that the Mahometans are steadfast and sincere in their
assertion and clear in this point, any one may see, that has read their
Alcoran; and that the Heathen World is no stranger to it appears from what
their Sybilline Oracles, their Philosophers and Poets have professed.

The Sybilline Oracles indeed are suspected by learned Men, and looked upon, as
Pious frauds, used by the Fathers, thereby to convince the Heathens the better
of the Mysteries of Christianity, though it will not enter into my head, how
the Fathers could have confirmed any of their Doctrines from these Oracles, if
the Heathens they had to deal withal either were not satisfied that those
things had been spoken by their Prophetesses, or had believed that the Fathers
had foisted those Oracles into the Sybils writings, which either were not, or
had never been there, for this would have been so far from being an Argument
against the Pagans, that the Chrisitans would have laid themselves open in
nothing so much, as in these Quotations, had they been false or supposititious.
Plat. in Phaed.


However Plato's writings have been conveyed to us, without any signal
corruption, and he gives us a very accurate account of this great Day, as
Hydaspes an Ancient King of the Medes had done before him, and the Heathen
Poets, though indulging their fancies in somethings; yet have delivered many
excellent truths to us, whereof this future Judgment is not the least; we need
go no farther, then the Sixth Book of Virgils Aeneis, where the Opinions of the
Ancient Heathen Sages are collected and expressed in Verse, and it is worth
observing, that he makes his Judge Rhadamantus inflict particular punishments
on those Souls, that have differred their Repentance to their Deathbeds.

And how can we imagine, that the whole World, at least the wiser part of it,
should so unanimously believe a future Judgment after this Life, if either
there had not been a great propensity in their Nature, to believe the notion,
or reason had not convinced them of the certainty and reality of the thing; If
we grant, that God has given a Law to Man, we must necessarily grant, that
there must be a Judge to call those to an account, who have violated and broke
those Laws. Man we see is capable of being governed by a Law, and without a Law
to govern him, would run wild and become a mere bruit, we must therefore
necessarily believe that God has given us a Law; and what Law more suitable to
his Nature, or the principle of reason, than what we have in the Bible, which
is indeed the Law of Nature, expressed in livelier and more legible characters?
it is fit therefore, there should a time come, when the Obedience and
Disobedience of Men may be taken notice of, and the Obedient rewarded, and the
Disobedient punished. God has made Man his Viceroy here on Earth, to which
purpose David said, Thou have set him over the Works of thy Hands, Ps. 8.6.
and have put all things under his Feet, and experience shows, that Man has a
dominion over all irrational Creatures; and is it not convenient, that at the
end of the World, when all Men have acted their part on this Stage, this
Viceroy should be examined, and asked, how true he has been to his Sovereign
King? What he has done with the Creatures which have been given him for his
use? And whether he has not minded his own business, more than his Masters?

If there is no Judgment to come, there can be no God, for without a future
retribution this God cannot be just, and a God, that is not just, is imperfect,
and if imperfect, he cannot be God; so true is that saying of Averroes, that
whatever is most Noble and most Praiseworthy in Man, must be attributed to the
best, and greatest Being, God blessed for evermore: But Justice we see, is
that, which makes a Prince on Earth great, and is one of the highest
Perfections he is capable of, which was the reason that when Ptolomy asked the
Seventy Interpreters of the Jewish Law, What King lived freest from Fear and
Violence? He was Answered, He that exercises Justice; punishes the Bad, and
rewards the Good; and consequently this Justice must be ascribed to God, as the
most perfect Being; it would be the most unreasonable thing imaginable, that
those, who love and fear him most, should be most oppressed, and go without
reward, and those, that abuse, and dishonor him, slight, and undervalue him,
should live prosperously, and never feel his displeasure, or indignation. If
God be wise, and just, this cannot be; and since this reward of the Innocent,
and severity on the Wicked is not administered, and dispensed in this World, it
must needs follow, that it must be in another and the day of this future
recompense, we call, the day of Judgment.

And though the apprehensions of that vast multitude of Men, which believe or
profess it, about the manner, and method of this day, be very different, yet it
is enough, that all agree in the thing, even those, who have not the revealed
Scriptures of the Old, and New Testament; from whence we may justly fetch the
truest, and exactest description of it, those Revelations, and Writings, the
Christians have, and what is said in them concerning the righteousness of God,
being most agreeable to the Nature of God, and the Actions of Men, and the
Rules, the Supreme Architect has engraven on our reason;

That there are some Men, who deny a future Judgment, we need wonder no more
than we do, that the Fool should say in his Heart, there is no God. That which
makes a Man deny the one, tempts him to be bold in disbelieving the other. It Is
the interest of a sinful life, there should be no Retribution, and how can a
Man act against God with any cheerfulness, or alacrity, except he puts him out
of his thoughts, and to complete the folly, fancies, that he will never call him
to a reckoning. It Is Men's vices, that are the cause of their Atheism, and were
it not, that they are inamoured with their lusts, their reason would soon join
issue with these verities: It Is not for want of Arguments that Men are
unbelievers in this knowing Age, but for want of sobriety, and consideration,
and while they suffer themselves to be drawn away by their sensual appetite, no
marvel, if in time, their Flesh encroaches upon their Understanding, and their
brutish desires corrupt their very Reason, and they begin to think, that God
is altogether such a one, as they themselves. But let us see

2. What there is in the prospect of this future Judgment that is able to damp
the greatest Mirth and Jollity.

1. In the prospect of this Judgment, there appears a very serious Judge, even
the mighty Jesus, the Son of God, who was seen to weep often, but to Laugh
never; even he that came into the World to teach Men self-denial in sensual
pleasures not only unlawful, such as wantonness, Effeminacy, Fornication,
Adultery, Uncleanness, Drunkenness, Feeding our Eyes with Lustful Objects, and
which produce ill desires in us, deriding and jeering our Neighbors for their
infirmities, luxury in clothing, eating and drinking, mimick gestures, filthy
jesting, lovetricks, talking loosly, etc. But in some measure in Lawful also,
especially, where a greater good is to be promoted, and has bid us use these
outward comforts, as if we used them not, and rejoice in them, as if we
rejoiced not, with fear and cautiousness, that they draw not our hearts away,
and with a generous indifferency, as Persons, who have laid up their Treasure
in another World, and look for the Blessed hope, and the Glorious appearing of
the great God.

Such a Judge appears in this prospect; one who descended into this valley of
Tears upon the most serious errand imaginable, even to call sinners to
repentance, to make them sensible of what God expects at their hands, to
convince them, that they have Souls to be saved, to assure them that though God
is patient, yet he will not be everlastingly affronted by bold, and daring Men,
and Judges otherwise of things, than besotted mortals, and is in good earnest,
when he bids them set their affections upon the things which are above; one who
will not be put off with fooling, nor spare a Malefactor for a jest, one who
gave Mankind a being, and habitation here, not to play, but to work, not to
mind trifles, and rattles, but the concerns of a tremendous Eternity; a Judge,
whose Eyes are like flames of Fire, and his Feet like Brass glowing in a
Furnace, who was indeed a Lamb, when he had his conversation here on Earth, and
like one was led to the slaughter, not opening his Mouth, and his still so to
all those, that take his Yoke upon them, and learn of him to be humble and
meek, but will at last appear in all the Robes of Majesty, which the Clouds of
Heaven and a guard of Ten thousand times ten thousand Angels, and all the light
of the Throne of God can furnish him with.

This Judge knows all the secrets of our hearts, and before him all things are
naked, and open, and no creature can hide himself, he is one who cannot be
imposed upon by sophistry, nor wheadled into a wrong Judgment of things by
equivocation; whose presence will shake the World, and put the greatest
Captains, and stoutest Soldiers into fits of trembling, and make them cry to
Rocks, and Mountains, Fall on us, and hide us* from the Face of him, that sits
upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb.

This Judge is not to be corrupted, nor to be bribed, cannot be carried away
with outward respects, which make Judges here on Earth pervert Judgment; these,
Judge too often according to affection, and call white black, and black white,
good evil, and evil good, defend vice under the notion of virtue, rashness
under the name of fortitude, laziness under the color of moderation, and
timorousness under the title of cautiousness; these do too often become
advocates for the prodigal, and call them liberal and generous, the Covetous
with them pass for frugal, the Lascivious for Courtiers, the talkative for
affable, the obstinate for Men of resolution, and the dull and idle for
persons, who act with great deliberation; Love to their kindred, and Blood
makes them extenuate faults in their relations, and that which appears an
inexpiable crime in strangers, seems but a peccadillo, or infirmity in a Child
or Brother; Herod hurried away with his Amors to Herodias, beheads the
Innocent Baptist; Flaminius out of Love to his Harlot violates the Public
Faith; Julius Caesar out of fondness to Cleopatra, gives Sentence against her
Brothers; Davids's inordinate affection to a Rebel Son, gives the Army charge
to take care of the Young Man Absalom;

But the Judge we speak of is of another temper; it was his Character here on
Earth, that he was no respecter of Persons, nor could the Sons of Zebedee
prevail with him to place them, one at his right hand, the other at his left:
and it was not kindred he would advance to that dignity, but such for whom it
was prepared by his Father; Hence it was, that his Mother, and Brethren found
no farther acceptance with him, then they were obedient to his word, and he
delivered it as his Eternal rule, They that do the will of my Father, they are
my Mother, and Brethren, and Sisters, and with this motto he gave a reprimand
to the Woman that cried, Blessed is the Womb that bare thee, and the Paps which
thou have sucked; Yea blessed are they said he, who hear the word of God, and
do it; and he that here on Earth could not be wrought upon by Kindred, or
Consanguinity, nor blinded by Affection, sure will not be misled by these false
Fires, in the great day of Judgment.

Judges here on Earth, if passion, or hatred to a Man reigns in their minds,
are too often tempted to pass wrong Sentences; what the effects of Prognes
hatred to her Husband Tereus were, and how the innocent Son suffered by it; how
dire the hatred of Medea to Jason was, and drew the death of their Children
after it, how Joseph's Brethen condemned that guiltless Soul, merely because
they hated and envied him, and how the Jews dealt with our great Master the
Lord Jesus upon this principle, both civil and sacred Histories do sufficiently
manifest. But this impotent passion cannot light upon on him, who is to be the
Judge in the Last day. He hates nothing, that he has made, and is so great a
lover of all Mankind, that he would have all Men to be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth, and would give them all Eternal life, if they would but
take the way, he prescribes them. The Devils themselves, could they be
penitent, would be received into favor, and let a Man be born of a Jew or
Turk, if he do but bring forth fruits meet for repentance, neither his odious
Name, nor loathsome kindred shall exclude him from his bosom.

He has no secret spleen, or pique against any Person living, and though God
under the Law seems to vent a particular displeasure against the seven Nations,
and especially against the Amalekites, yet it was for their monstrous and
unnatural sins, that his just displeasure rose against them, not any private
grudge, or envy he bore to them as Men, above other of his Creatures.

Such imperfections are not incident to our Judge, who detests and abhors no
person, but what makes himself deformed, and odious to his purer Eyes, and in
every Nation, whosoever serves him, and works righteousness, is accepted of him.

Fear very often prevails upon Governors, and Men in Office here on Earth,
that they dare not speak their mind in passing Sentence; fear of offending a
Favorite, or losing their places, or being accounted pragmatical, or missing
such a Preferment, distorts their Judgments, and makes them take wrong measures
of things. This makes Laws Cobwebs for great Men, and traps to catch lesser
Animals; this tempted Pilate to crucify the Holy Jesus, and though he was
sensible of his Innocence, yet the word, If thou let this Man go, thou art not
Caesar's Friend, turns the Scales, and makes him comply with the fury of the
People; But such fears cannot not fall on this Judge of the whole Earth; Whom
should he fear? Of whom should he be afraid? He is omnipotent; will a Painter
be afraid of his Picture, or a Man of his Shadow? Man is but Gods Picture, and
his Shadow, and shall the Almighty be afraid of his own Creature, whom he can
crush into Atoms, into nothing with a frown? Who can make this Judge happier
than he is already? What place can any Creature promise him, who does what he
pleases in all the Armies of Heaven, and among all the Inhabitants of the Earth?

There is no carressing him with Gold, for all Men and Women will appear before
him poor, and miserable, destitute of that pomp, and grandeur, and finery, on
which here they doted; and suppose, they could carry their Wealth with them to
the great Tribunal, What can they give him, who commands all the Treasures of
the World, whose is the Earth and the fullness thereof, and who is himself the
giver of those things, which Mankind preposterously place their happiness in?
Here the greatest Emperors and Princes must appear without their Guards without
their Armies, without their Swords and Spears; Here Popes must leave their
Triple Crowns behind them; Kings their Diadems, Bishops their Mitres, Noblemen
their Lacqueys, and all stand naked, and unarmed before the Throne; and suppose
that Men were permitted to come with their former retinue and attendance into
the presence of the Almighty, yet this would cause no fear in our Judge, who
will come attended with an innumerable company of Angels, one of which did once
slay One hundred fourscore and five thousand Men in the Assyrian Camp.

Such a serious, such a magnificent Judge appears, in the prospect of that
future Judgment even Jesus, the Son of the living God. He who was once despised
and rejected of men, will at this time sit on the Throne of Glory, and all Eyes
shall see him; and though God himself is sometimes said to be the Judge,
sometimes Christ as Man, sometimes the Apostles, sometimes the Saints in
general, sometimes even Wicked men; yet this implies no contradiction. In God
no doubt lies the Sovereign Power, and no Creature can either absolve, or
condemn without his Will and Order; and this his Power of judging in the last
Day he has committed to the Son of Man, or to Christ as Man, whom he has not
only made Heir of all things, but for a reward of his Sufferings given a Name
above every Name, and delegated him to be Judge of the Quick and Dead; and this
glorious Commissioner calls in the Apostles in the first place, and all other
Saints after them, to sit with him on the Bench, and by their suffrage to
applaud the Sentence he shall pass on the stubborn, and obstinate; wicked men
shall be Judges only comparatively as the means of Grace they had, were less
powerful than those of their Neighbors, and yet went beyond them in Goodness
and Holiness, at least were not so bad as they; and consequently shall be
Witnesses against them, and in a manner judge and doom them to unspeakable
anguish; because they trampled on the Grace, which was offered to their Souls,
in which sense the men of Nineveh, and the Queen of Sheba shall rise in
Judgment with that Generation, who saw the Miracles of Christ and repented not,
and condemn them, because a greater than Jonas, a greater than Solomon was here.

2. In the prospect of this Judgment there appears a very strict examination of
what we have done in the Flesh, not only of visible Actions, but of Words
spoken in secret, and Thoughts, Desires, Intentions, and Resolutions of our
Hearts; an Examination, which will be a very great surprise to the Sinner, who
has made light of things of this Nature; for there is nothing covered, that
shall not be revealed, neither hid, that shall not be brought to light, says
he, that understood this Day better than any Man living, Luke 12.2.

Not only the bigger Crimes, such as Murder, Adultery, Fornication, Blasphemy,
unnatural Lust, Stealing, Perjury, Atheism, Idolatry, Apostasy, Cursing,
Swearing, Drunkenness, Extortion, Covetousness, Contempt of God, and of his
Word, etc. will here be manifested and censured, aggravated and searched into,
but the secret lustings of the Soul, the hidden things of Dishonesty, the
cunning craftiness of men, whereby they lay in wait to deceive; the Mines, and
Pits, men have privily dug for their Neighbors, their underhand dealings,
their Chamber practices, their sinful contrivances in the dark, or in their
Closets, their Sailing to the Port of Vainglory by a side-wind, their speaking
Truth for ill ends, their misinterpretations of their Brethrens words and
actions, their reporting things to another prejudice; all these will be laid
open before the whole World.

Sinner, thy unchaste Embraces, thy impure Wishes, thy wanton Glances, thy
lascivious Looks, thy delight in amorous Songs, thy acting thy Lust over in thy
Mind again, thy ruminating upon thy last Nights revelling, thy tempting thy
self to sin, and being thine own Devil, and thy committing impurity with thy
self, will all be set in order before thee, and the Judge will demand, how it
was possible for thee, who did profess thy self a follower of the Chaste, and
Holy Jesus, to dishonor him, and his Religion, with such extravagant actions,
and irreligious proceedings? Thy slovenliness in Devotion, thy Hypocrisy, and
seeming to be better than really thou were, thy inattentive Prayers, the
willful wanderings of thy Thoughts, when thou wast speaking to God, thy not
redeeming the time, thy neglecting to observe the greater, and weightier
matters of the Law, thy mispending thy precious Hours, thy idleness and
laziness in Gods Vineyard, thy not giving to the Poor according to thy Ability,
thy Pride, and secret Envy, and desire of Applause, and sinister ends and
designs in Preaching, Praying, Administering, and receiving of the Holy
Sacrament, and in other good Works, thy flattering, and dissembling, and
unwillingness to do good, when thou had a fair opportunity; these will all be
laid open to thy sorrow, and confusion. Thy not being led by good Examples, thy
slighting wholesome Admonitions, thy laughing at excellent Counsel, thy scorning
Reproof, and hating him, that gave it, thy resolvedness to do that again, for
which thou wast reproved, the delay of thy seriousness, thy suffering the
convictions thou had to be choked with the cares, and Riches of the World.
Thy being at an Alehouse, when thou should have been in thy Closet, thy
being at a Play, when thy Hand, and Heart should have been lifted up in holy
Supplications, thy being in Bed, when thou should have been upon thy Knees,
and neglecting a greater Duty for a trifle, or impertinence, the Supper of the
Lamb for Farms, and Oxen, and thy preferring the silliest, and most ridiculous
Discourses, before a conference about the momentous concerns of Eternity; these
will all be rehearsed at large, for I say unto you, that every idle word, that
men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the Day of Judgment says
Christ, Matthew. 12.36. Not having repented of things of this Nature, either
through unbelief, or carelessness, when these points shall come to be examined,
and thy Soul interrogated upon these Particulars, and so many too, it stands to
reason, that it must necessarily cause very great astonishment; for these
things were most certainly forbid in that Gospel, thou did profess, and that
notwithstanding, as if such things had never been spoken of, thou should
slight them, undervalue them, not think them worth thy care to shun them; what
sad reflections will this Examination cause?

In vain do thou hope, that Eagles catch no Flies, and that God will never
mind such small trivial, and inconsiderable Errors. He that minded these
smaller faults, as they seem to carnal men, and took notice of them in this
life, may justly be supposed resolved to call men to an account for them in
that Solemn Day of Reckoning, for indeed God's proceedings, here are an Emblem
of his process in Judgment hereafter.

Eating of the forbidden Fruit in Paradise seemed but an inconsiderable
oversight, yet did God curse the very Earth for that Fact, made it bring forth
Briars and Thorns, for the future condemned Adam to the eating of Bread in the
Sweat of his Brows, and threatened the Woman his Partner in the Error, to
multiply her pain and sorrows. It does not appear from Moses, that the Children
of God or Professors of the true Religion did any more, then Marry with the
Daughters of the profaner Crew, a small fault, a brutish Man would think, yet
was the insolence lashed, and the inordinate Fire quenched with a deluge of
Waters; Lots Wife looks back to Sodom, out of curiosity perhaps, a venial
folly, natural to Women, it seems to be, and no more, yet for doing so is
turned into a Pillar of Salt; Achan as a Soldier, (and that sort of men we
know, live much upon Prey) takes in a time of War a golden Wedge, and
Babylonian Mantle (no great matter one would think) yet God orders him to be
stoned; Vzzah out of his over-care that the Ark might not fall, lays hold on it,
to support it, yet for doing so, is struck with Death immediately; the Prophet,
who came from Judah to Prophecy against the Altar of Bethel, in suffering
himself to be persuaded to eat Bread, by another Prophet, who pretended Visions
too, to ones thinking committed no great Crime, yet God revenged his
Disobedience with a violent Death, for a Lion sent by God, slew him. Moses
grows impatient at the Waters of Meribah, who would not have done so that had
to deal with so stubborn a People? yet that act of mistrust, and impatience
cost him the loss of the Land of Canaan, he had so long desired to behold; the
People of Israel murmured in the Wilderness, a thing that People might easily
do, who were kept so long in a barren Desert, without seeing an end of their
Travel, yet of that vast Number of Six hundred thousand men not one enters into
the promised Land, save Caleb, and Joshua; Ananias and Sapphira seemed to be
guilty of no great misdemeanour, for they were content to give half of their
Estate to the Poor, but kept the other to themselves, yet is God so angry, that
he punishes their violating of their Vow to give all, with sudden death. Go now
Sinner, and fancy, that God will not call thee to an account for faults, the
World makes nothing of, because he does not do it here, he will certainly do it
hereafter, and the Examples of the Bible are Items that he will do so.

It Is no matter, whether the thing, in which the offense is committed seem
inconsiderable or no; the disobedience is all in all; if God commands thee to
avoid a thing that is trivial, it is the easier task to do according to his will,
and because it was so easy to obey, and thou would not, it is that which
makes thy disobedience grievous, and heinous, though the matter of the offense
seems trivial, and contemptible. Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, and
Stubbornness is as Iniquity, 1 Samuel 15.23.
and Idolatry, said Samuel in a case much like this, where the thing done by
Saul was so far from seeming ill, that it appeared like a a work of mercy, and
an act of gratitude, for he spared the best of the Sheep, and brought home Agag
the King alive in Triumph, yet this excused not the Fact, but rather aggravated
it; for has the Lord as great delight in burnt Offerings, and Sacrifices, as
in obeying the Voice of the Lord? Behold to obey is better than Sacrifice, and
to hearken, than the Fat of Rams, as the Prophet tells him, v. 22.

This confirms the Method of Christ's proceeding in tha last Day; and indeed
how could that Judgment be perfect, if the lesser, as well as the greater
Errors were not to be accounted for, and men's disobedience against the lesser,
as well as the greater commands of the Gospel were not to be manifested, and
proclaimed before the World? and though this is chiefly to be understood of
men, who die without sincere Repentance, yet it is more than probable, that even
the sins of those who were justified and sanctified will be brought to light,
and discovered before the vast Assembly, that shall appear before the Throne of
God in that Day, not that they need fear any hurt or disadvantage, that will
arise from that examination, and publication, but by these means both the Glory
of God, and the Glory of these true Converts will appear more illustrious; the
Glory of God, who has snatched such Persons like Brands out of the Fire,
pulled them out of the miry Clay, in which they were ready to perish, and taken
them out of the Devils clutches, than which, there cannot be a greater sign of
the power and goodness of God; and who sees not how much it will be for the
Credit and Honor of the Saints themselves?

(...) to let the World see (...) the Bands, and Ropes, that once held them,
and how like Sampson, they broke them all, and carried away the Gates of Gaza,
and escaped out of Hell in despite of all the Devils, that raged, and stormed,
and domineered there, What can be said more for their renown and glory? What
hurt does the Penitent Mary Magdalen receive by the Evagelists recording, or
our speaking of her former Whoredoms? No more will the revealing of Holy men's
faults, and errors in the last Day eclipse, but rather advance their goodness,
because they extricated themselves from the Snare of the Fowler, and generously
rouzed themselves from their fatal slumber, and in despite of Temptations
would press toward the Mark of endless Glory. Their Errors being published
with their true Repentance, and change of Life, justifies God in accepting of
them, while he refuses others, and proclaims their Wisdom in choosing the
better part, and condemns the impenitent, and discovers how justly they are
left to God's Vengeance, who would in despite of all the offers of God's
favor, prefer their dirt and trash before an invisible, lasting, and solid
felicity: And though it is true, that Holy men's Sins are said in Scripture to be
covered, and God is brought in, promising to remember their Sins no more, but
to drown them all in the depth of the Sea, yet can the meaning of such passages
be no other than this, that God will not remember them, so as to make use of
their Errors against them to their ruin and condemnation; notwithstanding
this, he may justly publish them, that their Wisdom being compared with their
Folly, may appear to go beyond it, and themselves from the Thoughts of their
former Sins may reap the greater comfort, as Agathocles being advanced from the
Trade of a Potter to a Throne, at his Meals would still make use of Earthen
Pots, not only to remember his Original, but from the Contemplation of his
former poor an miserable condition to increase his present satisfaction; for as
in our fall from a high Degree of Prosperity to the greatest poverty and
misery, nothing torments the Mind more than the remembrance, that once it was
otherwise with us, so where Provividence is so kind, as to bring us out a
horrible Pit, and sets our Feet upon a Rock, the remembrance of our former
misery signally increases our joy, and comfort in the present Mercy.

So then, in this great Day all men's Sins will be examined, and published,
though with different effects, the Penitents, to their Absolution and Glory:
The Impenitents, to their Terror and Condemnation; for to be presented there
with a list of innumerable Offenses and Affronts of the Divine Majesty which
their own Consciences know, and must acknowledge, which yet they either never
seriously thought of, or never seriously attempted to forsake, or if they
repented, discovered only a mock-repentance; what effects can this be supposed
to cause but monstrous confusion, and horror of mind? Enough to put men into
the greatest rage and distraction, to think, that they should neglect
purchasing the Pearl of Price, when it was offered to their choice by God and
Man.

Here particular enquiry will be made, how we have discharged the Duties of our
several Relations; it is not the purple of Princes, nor the Rods, and Axes of
Magistrates that will make the Almighty afraid of demanding of them, whether
they have ruled their Subjects in the fear of God, shown them a good example,
and punished the obstinate, and encouraged the good, and made it their business
to advance God's Glory, and to maintain the true Worship of the Living God; nor
will Subjects be excused here, neither must they think to come off, without
making distinct answers to these Interrogatories, whether they have obeyed not
only for Wrath but for Consciencesake, whether they have behaved themselves
peaceably under the Government, they have lived under; whether they have paid
Tribute, to whom Tribute was due, Honor to to whom Honor, and whether they
have not used their liberty for a cloak of maliciousness.

In the same manner, Parents will be strictly examined, whether they have
brought up their Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord; Children,
whether they honored their Parents as became Persons who under God owed their
being to them; Servants, whether they served their Masters according to the
Flesh in singleness of Heart, as unto Christ, and likewise all other Persons
according to the relations, and Offices they stood in, for in all these
relations, men are Stewards, and both Reason, and God's Justice, and his Word
require, that all should give an account of their Stewardship.

At this time the Soul being thoroughly a wakened from her former Lethargy,
every sin will appear more dreadful, every error more red, every fault more
bloody, every offense blacker than ordinary, for the Fire of that Day does not
only scorch, but enlighten, and elevate the Soul into a thinking state, and
none of the former Impediments will now be able to divert her Thoughts, which
will be fixed upon an offended God, and his Majesty, Greatness, and Holiness,
and make at this time more sensible impressions on her, while every thing,
especially, what has been committed against God, will appear in more lively
colors, and consequently, if the Conscience has not the remembrance of a
former sincere Repentance to support her self withal, the frights must
necessarily be great, and the whole frame sink into inexpressible confusion.

There are innumerable sins, which neither Prince, nor Magistrate can take
notice of; how many Poor are oppressed! how many innocent men wronged daily! A
Socrates is abused, and has no helper; but neither this Man's misery, nor the
others oppression shall escape the Eyes of that allseeing Judge, who will
infallibly publish both the one and the other, and make good the Type St. John
speaks of, Revel. 6.5. And I beheld a black Horse, and he that sat on him had a
pair of Balances in his Hand; Balances to weigh every Man's evil works, which
if they be found to prepondenrate above the good, or to be pure sins, pure
offenses, without a godly sorrow to take off either the color or the the
weight, all will be turned into blackness and desolation.

3. In the prospect of this Judgment, there appears a very wonderful Scene; the
Person that is the Judge, is the Lawgiver too, the Party offended the Witness,
and his own Advocate: He that shall sit on the Tribunal in that Day was the
Person, that came down from Heaven, and blessed the World with the equitable
Precepts of the Gospel; it is he that went up into a Mountain, and from that
Pulpit pronounced, Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted; Blessed are
the Meek, for they shall inherit the Earth, Blessed are they which hunger and
thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be filed, etc. Matt. 5.1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6. It Is he that came to undeceive both the Jewish and Heathen World in the
false Notions, they had imbibed concerning their duty, and cleared the Moral
Law of Moses, of the false Glosses, the Pharisees had put upon it, explained
the will of God, set it naked, and pure before the People, he came to call to
Repentance, and let them see what were the proper preparatives for the
everlasting joys of Heaven: It Is he who guarded the Law, which he promulged
with Sanctions suitable to his Majesty and Greatness, and as he made the
rewards Eternal, so the punishments he threatened to the stubborn, and
impenitent were endless too; So it became him, who appeared in the World to
offer infinite Mercy to poor Sinners, to reveal to them God's infinite Love to
their Souls, and to acquaint them with the infinite condescension of the Son of
God, who would humble himself to the Death of the Cross, to redeem them from
the Bondage of the Devil.

He that came into this Valley of Tears with so much love and light about him,
might justly enjoin reformation of the whole Man, and a transformation of the
Mind, and temper of the Soul, and require a conformity to his own life, and
insist upon men's becoming patient, and humble, and charitable, and contented,
and peaceable, and watchful over their Thoughts, and Words, and Actions, and
Heavenly minded; How could this Grace, which appeared to all men, challenge
less then self-denial, and contempt of the World, and living in the Thoughts,
and Expectation of a better life, and seeking earnestly for Glory, and Honor,
and Immortality?

And as he, that will be the Judge in that day, is the Lawgiver too, so he
understands best the meaning of his Laws, nor will tricks, and evasions, and
false constructions of those Laws signify any thing before him, who will not
depart from the sense his Eternal Wisdom put upon them, and which by his
Prophets and Ministers he once caused to be proclaimed in the Ears of men.

The Sinner in that day will no^ have to do with Deputies, and Lieutnants, and
Delegates, who too often make the Law a Nose of Wax, an^ can turn, and
interpret it to what sense they please, and their Interest dictates, are
sometimes unskilful, and apt to mistake the Law of their Superiors, and these
Laws not being of their own making, are the colder, or the more remiss in
executing them; but here men shall see the Lawgiver himself, who will not be
put off with pretexts, and pretenses, as ordinarily Deputies, and such Persons
are, (...) who employed by the Supreme Lawgivers in a Commonwealth, or Kingdom.

Even here on Earth, where the Lawgivers themselves sit Judges, the Malefactor
must expect severer dealings; in this case, even Lycurgus's Wife shall not
escape, that durst break her Husbands Law against riding in a Chariot during
the time of Divine Service; and Zaleucus his Son must lose his Eye for
slighting his Fathers Orders against Adulterers, not to mention the Severities
of Epaminodas and others on their own Children where the Legislators have sat
Judges of their Crimes, and Errors.

The Almighty Judge in that day will justly resent the affront done to his Laws,
and indeed none is better able to declare the heinousness of such contempt than
he, and this must necessarily increase the Terror of that day.

And as he is the Lawgiver, against whose Precepts the Sinner has offended,
so he is the Party offended too.

Sinner, This is he, whose Body, and Blood, thou have so often received
unworthily in the Sacrament; this is he, to whose Cross, thou have been an
Enemy so many years, on whose Merits thou have trampled, whom thou have so
often Crucified afresh, whose House thou have dishonored, whose Gospel thou
have been Ashamed of, and therefore wonder not if such thundering fueries come
forth forth from the Throne at last; do not thou remember, how often thou have
broke through the Guards and Fences I have set betwixt thee and sin? how
could thou find in thy Heart to afflict, and grieve me so often, who have
endured such agonies already for thee on the Cross? why would thou forsake
me, the Fountain of Living Waters? How is it that thou wast not afraid to make
thy Belly, thy Gold, thy Harlot, and such a great Man thy God: Did ever any
Person oblige thee more than I? Did thou ever receive such Favors at any
Man's hand, as thou have received at mine? and why could not I have thy Heart,
and thy will and affections? Why must a sottish Lust and Passion engross thy
desires, and my Law be cast behind thee?

If ever Lawgiver had reason to be offended, This Judge in the last Day has;
for his Commandments were not grievous, his Yoke was easy, and his burden
light, all that was required, was love, and it is hard, if so small a Tribute
for his ineffable and incomprehensible Mercies, must not be paid him. It Is
true, this love must extend, and branch it self into various acts of Meekness,
and Patience, and Humility, etc. but still where love is the Principle, none of
all the other things, which are required, can seem tedious, or difficult.

Nor is this all, for the same Judge will be Witness against the Sinner too:
Indeed no Creature can be so true a Witness against him, as the Judge himself:
There are many sins, no Creature ever saw, but he, and therefore who so fit a
Witness against those Crimes, as he? I will come near to you to judgment, and
I will be a swift Witness against the Sorceres, and against the Adulterers, and
against the false Swearers and against those that oppress the Hireling in his
Wages, the Widow, and the Fatherless, and that turn aside the Stranger from his
Right, and fear not me says the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 3.5. This Judge sees all,
nor will the Sinner be able to elude this Testimony of the invisible God. When
thou wast under the Fig Tree, I saw thee, said Christ to Nathanael; his
Conscience knew, he had been there, and he believed. But this was in love.

In that Day, we speak of, such Language as this will be pronounced in wrath,
and indignation, and therefore will cause other Thoughts in the Hearts of the
Wretch, that shall hear it; Thou careless Creature, could thou imagine that
any thing was hid from me? Did not I see thee at such a time, in such a place,
in such a Garden, in such a Chamber playing the Rebel, and the Wanton? Did not
I see thee treating with mine Enemies? Did not I see thee conspiring against
me? Had not thou such base thoughts, such wicked intentions, such impure
desires in such Company? I opened the Windows of Heaven, and looked upon thee,
when thou wast committing Fornication with such a Woman? Wilt not thou believe
me, who looked within the Curtains, and saw thy abominations? Could thou
think, I would look on, and not set thy sins in order before thee?

There will be no contradicting of this Testimony, for thy Conscience, O Man,
will immediately, join issue with it, and say, as Nathan to the guilty King:
Thou art the Man. For, besides this grand Witness, there will abundance of
other Witnesses come in, which will all help to cast thy impenitent Soul; thy
Conscience here will have a great share in the Accusation; that Conscience
which once thou did smother, and curb, and put by, when it pulled thee by the
sleeve, and bid thee be wise, and serious; that Conscience that once boggled
and winced, when thou offered'st violence to it, and said to thee, as the
Baptist to Herod, it is not lawful for thee to espouse this sin; that
Conscience, which was aware of this judgment, and gave thee warning, and could
not with all the strongest arguments it used prevail with thee to stand in aw
of God; this like one of Job's Messengers when the House falls, and all these
out-ward things are gone, alone escapes, to tell the Sinner of his folly.

Conscience even in this life does sometime force the guilty, to make
confession of their sins: It forced the the Multitude that came to St. John,
Matthew. 3.6. It forced Judas to cry, I have betrayed Innocent Blood, when no
Creature prompted him to the confession. It forced those who had used curious
Arts, Act. 18.18, 19. to bring their Schemes and Figures, and Astrological
Tables, and burn them before the Apostles of our Lord. How much greater then,
may we suppose, will the force of it be in that day, when terror will surround
it, when it will be readier to speak, and to accuse, then God to ask, and when
no noise, no tumult, no crowd, no business will be able to divert it?

With the Conscience, the Devils themselves will join, who are therefore
emphatically called, The Accusers of our Brethren, Rev. 12.10. These cannot but
know our sins, for they were the tempters, and remember how we yielded, and
consented to their suggestions. These were the constant, and indefatigable
Observers of our lives. These watched our going out, and our coming in; these
were about us, when we lay down, when we rose, when we walked, and when we sat,
and whatever we did; these were still at hand to take notice of our doings, our
words, and our behavior: nor is their Memory so frail, as to forget it, nor
their malice so little, as so let it slip, without making publication of it.
These rejoice in our ruin, and will be sure to make the worst interpretation
of our deportment. These are they, that presented us with charming Objects, and
were restless till they had made us enamoured with them, first drove us into
the Snare, and now will be ready to accuse us for being taken. And therefore
the Fathers in their Discourses concerning this day, do justly bring in the
Devil, arguing, and pleading with the Almighty Judge; Behold these men! it is
true, they were thine by Creation, but they became mine by imitation of me;
they had thy Image upon their Souls, but see, they have defaced that, and
chosen mine; thou did breath on them by thy holy Spirit, but they were more
fond of my suggestions, then those motions. Thou did indeed draw them with
Cords of Love and by Temporal and Spiritual Mercies soughtest to make them in
love with thy will, but they turned a deaf Ear to thy call, and invitation; I
never gave them any nor promised them any thing, yet they served me like
Slaves; thou courtedst them, and did oblige them to love thee, yet they had
rather be my Favorites, then thy darlings; it thou did command them any
thing, that was against their Lusts, either they did nothing, or would be sure
to provoke thee with their inventions, I did but becken to them, and they flew
to my Camp; nay, they were more impudent than I, believed less, than I, found
out sins I did not dream of, durst do more than I bid them; I bid them deny a
thing, they had done, and they not only denied it, but swore to it by all
that is good, and holy; I bid them take their ease and be merry, and they made
themselves Swine; I bid them neglect God's Service on the Lord's day, but they
profaned it besides, by playing, and drinking, and other enormities; I bid them
keep, what they had got, but they went beyond what I prompted them to,
oppressed, cheated, dissembled, and made way to their Wealth through oppression
of the Widow and Fatherless. These therefore have my Image and Superscription,
and consequently must be mine. I claim them as mine own. I challenge them as
they are Apostates and Traitors to thee: It is thy Statute which like the Laws
of Medes and Persians is irrevocable, that those shall be despised, who did
lightly esteem thee. Nor can God be worse than his Word, but must deliver up
the Sinner, whom no Mercy could reform, to these tormentors.

Nay, if we have oppressed any Persons, those very Persons will be Witnesses
against us. Abel will in that Day bear witness agaisnt Cain his Murderer;
Naboth against Ahab, whole Countries against their Tyrannical Princes; Israel
against Pharaoh; in the same manner, those whom we have corrupted with Gifts or
Moneys, or some other way will stand up against us; Herodias against Herod;
Drusilla against Felix; the Harlot against her Inamorato; Helena against Paris;
Danae against Jupiter; and Men and Women perverted by Heretics against the
broachers of false Doctrines; and how can there be want of Witnesses when our
Schoolmasters, our Parents, and other good Men, whose Counsels we rejected,
whose Admonitions we despised, and whose frequent Exhortations we laughed at,
will be forced to speak what they know against us. Sinner, The Ministers of the
Gospel, those who followed thee with checks and entreaties to be reconciled to
God, will be obliged to speak of thy stubbornness, and impenitence: Nay, this
Pulpit, these Walls, these Stones, these Pews, will cry out against thee! Es.
1.3.
Heaven and Earth are even in this life called in as Witnesses against the
Monsters, who were more inconsiderate then the Ox, or Ass; much more in that
Day, when God will bring every thing into Judgment, not only the sinful
actions, but the very places in which those actions were committed.

Such Witnesses will be the Riches and Goods, thou have abused; the Gold thou
have spent upon thy Luxury, the Silver, thou have thrown away in a frollick,
the Garments, thou have abused to Pride, the Corn, and Bread thou have played
withal, the Hungry whom thou have not fed, the Thirsty to whom thou have not
given Drink; the naked, whom thou have not clothed, when it lay in thy power;
the Prisoners whom thou have not visited; these will all be accusers of thy
abuses, and uncharitableness. But the accusation of all these might yet be born
with; it is the Testimony of the Judge, who shall approve of all, that these
Witnesses averr, which appears most dreadful, and terrible, and therefore
certainly, the prospect of this Judgment is able to damp the greatest mirth,
and sensuality.

And as this Judge will himself be Witness in that Day, so he will be his own
Advocate too. To this purpose says the Pathetick Nazianzene. What shall we do
my Friends, what shall we say, what Apology shall we make, when this Judge
shall plead for himself in that Day; Though disobedient Wretch, I made thee of
Clay with mine own Hands, and breathed the Breath of Life into thee; I made
thee after my Image, I gave thee Reason, and Understanding, and Power, and
Dominion over the Beasts of the Field, a mercy which if I had not vouchsafed
unto thee, those Creatures, which are stronger than thou, would have mastered
and destroyed thee; I placed thee among the Pleasures of Paradise, made thee a
happy Inhabitant of Eden, and when thou would needs hearken to the false and
treacherous suggestions of thy sworn Enemy, behold in pity and commiseration to
thee, I resolved to be Born of a Virgin, and accordingly took Flesh, and became
Man for thy sake, was Born in a Stable, lay unregarded in a Manger, swadled in
Rags and Clouts, endured all the reproaches and injuries, that Childhood is
subject to, bore thy griefs, and assumed thy infirmities, and was made like thy
self, that thou might be like me in Felicity at the end of thy Race. I suffered
men to trample on me, to buffet me, to spit in my Face, to give me Gall, and
Vinegar to drink, to Scourge me, to crown me with Thorns, to Wound, and Nail me
to the Cross, and all this, that I might deliver thee from Eternal contempt and
torments. Behold the mark of the Nails which were struck into my Flesh. Behold
my wounded side; I suffered, that thou might Triumph, I died, that thou
might live, was buried, that thou might rise, and made my self a scorn of
the People, that thou might reign in Heaven; and why would thou throw
away this Mercy? Why would thou refuse this Treasure! What evil Spirit did
possess thee to make light of these kindnesses? Why would thou pollute that
Soul, which I redeemed with mine own Blood? Why would thou make thy Heart a
habitation of Devils, which I intended for my Throne? Why would thou lose
that which I purchased at so dear a rate? What pleasure could thou take in
doing that which cost me so many sighs and tears, and a bloody sweat; why
would thou make a mock of so great a Mercy! How could thou undervalue a
Favor of that importance and consequence? Can any Hell be thought too much for
such stubbornness? Either thou did believe, that thy God did all this for
thee, or thou did not: If thou did not believe it, why did thou make
confession of it with thy Mouth? If thou did, how could thou be so
ungrateful? How could thou abuse a Friendship of that worth and value? Thou
love a Friend, a Neighbor, a Man, a Woman for kindnesses, which are mere
shadows, and bubbles to my love, and had not thou reason to love me beyond
all earthly comforts? Had not thou reason to prefer my Favor before the
smiles of a transitory World? How did I deserve such preposterous doings at
thy Hands? Could thou have dealt worse with a Slave, or with an Enemy, than
thou have done with me? Did this condescension deserve, do thou think, such
affronts, and injuries, such contempt, and disobedience, as thou have returned
to me? Therefore, as for those mine Enemies, which would not have this Man to
Reign over them, bring them hither, and slay them before me.

All this appears in the prospect of a future Judgment, and therefore there
must be Virtue in it, to check that mirth and jollity, which infatuates Souls,
and leads them into ruin.

4. In the prospect of this future Judgment, there appears the unspeakable
anguish and misery of those who have been most jolly, and merry in this life.
Dives, who clothed himself in Purple, and fine Linen, and fared sumptuously
every day, appears there quaking, and trembling, and crying, Father Abraham,
have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his Finger in
Water, and cool my Tongue; his Tables which were over-laid with Silver, his
richer Beds, his Tapestry, his Ornaments, his Ointments, his Balsams, his
Cordials, his delicate VVines, his various Dishes, his Cooks, his Flatterers,
his Parasites, his Retinue, his Servants, and all the Noise, and Pomp that
attended him, are not only extinct, and turned into Ashes, and Dust, and Dirt,
but his naked Soul is dragged and carried before a tremendous Majesty, to
endure intolerable torments, and before this terrible God he appears with his
Eyes cast down, blushing, and ashamed, trembling, and fearful, and all his
former comforts seem to have been but dreams to him.

See how the Scene is changed; he to whom the poor Man formerly supplicate for
relief, nor is forced to supplicate to the poor Man to be relieved of him, and
would be glad of Lazarus's Table, who once scorned to let Lazarus gather the
Crumbs that fell from his; when Lazarus was near him, he slighted him, now he is
afar off, he adores him, and himself now is the poor Man, while Lazarus swims
in Riches; such a discovery does that last Day make, who are the Rich, and who
the Poor, who the Wise, and who the Fools.

In this judgment Nimrod, Senacharib, Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, Fiberius,
Nero, Domitian; men who would be thought Goods, and denied themselves in no
pleasure, their Fancies craved, stand all ashamed, and confounded, flames of a
guilty Conscience burning in their Breasts, and forcing their voices into
bitter lamentations; there Sardanapalus, Croesus, Cambyses, Herod, and all the
Mighty men that spared no Woman in their Lust, and no Man in their Anger,
appear all like guilty Malefactors, their Hearts failing them for fear, and
they chattering like a Crane, and mourning like a Dove, and bewailing their
airy, short, and transitory satisfactions, and cursing the Hour, and the Minute
when the first temptations courted them to those dangerous embraces; there
Cleopatra, that sailed in a Vessel glistering with Gold, a Vessel fitted for
Pride, and Luxury, and magnificence, and tried how far Sensuality might be
improved, and to what height brutish pleasure might be advanced; there the
wretched Woman is seen not so much with Serpents clasping about her Breast, as
with a Worm within, that dies not, tormenting her awakened Conscience with
shapes of Death, and Images of Ruin, and all the Beasts, that here could not
be satisfied with pleasure, there cannot be eased of gnawing Vultures, and
Agonies, for these the Just God must at last inflict, to make them sensible
that his threatenings were no Fables, and to let them see, that the advices of
wise men, and Philosophers, who exhorted them to the study of Virtue, were
grounded on rational Foundations.

These tortures, and vexations must not expire till the Ancient of Days, was
affronted by their sins, does die, and that is never, he being the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever: Thus their sweet Meat must have sour Sauce,
and if they will have their pleasures, they must feel the sting too, that is
inseparably affixed to them. The Bait cannot be swallowed without the Hook, and
as pleasant as the Honey is, the Gall which is part of it, must be tasted too.
God will not be always mocked, and they, that durst in despite of his will and
prohibitions feed upon that luscious Fruit, shall feel the smart of the
prickles too.

In this judgment their postures, gestures, and behavior, and deportment
appear in another Figure, and they that before laughed at the Thunders of the
Law, made light of the threatenings of the Gospel, and let the warnings of the
Ministers of the Gospel go in at one Ear, and out at another, now call
themselves Fools and Sots for doing so, and they that before thought of no
after reckoning, now fall a wishing, but in vain; O that I had been wise! O
that I had bethought my self! O that I had looked beyond this World! O that I
had believed! O that I had retired, and considered, what these satisfactions
would end in! Fool that I was, to think, that God would prove a Liar! Where was
my Reason to think, that all that the wisest, and holiest Men have said, were
but Dreams and idle Tales! I that might have been a terror to Devils, how am I
become their scorn! I that might have been a Favorite of God, how am I become
his Enemy! I that might have triumphed with other Saints, how am I fallen from
their bliss! O what would not I give to be rid of the torment, I feel! Help,
help, ye Souls, that have any pity in you: I sink under the weight of my
former pleasures! They are loathsome to me! They appear Monsters, Furies,
hideous things to me! Cursed be that Lust, I cherished! Cursed be that Bed, on
which my wickedness were wrought! O that my Tongue had dropped out of my Head,
when I pleased my self with lascivious discourses! O that I had been deaf, when
I was tickled with hearing a smutty jest! O that I had been struck blind, when
with joy and satisfaction I be held that charming beauty! O that my Feet had
failed me, when I was going into that Jovial Company! O that I had locked my
self up, that I might not have seen those temptations which enticed me! O that
I had spent those Hours, I threw away in carding and dicing, and drinking, and
revelling! O that I had spent them in holy Contemplations of the Vanity of
these sublunary Objects! Now I would do it, and it is too late! Now I would
repent, and it profits me not! Now I would be serious, and it signifies
nothing! My time is lost! The day of Grace is gone! The opportunities are past:
O that I could tear out this Heart! O that I could pull out these Eyes! O that
I could dispatch my self! O that I had a Sword, that I might put a period to
this miserable condition! I see nothing, but ruin before me, nothing but
darkness, nothing but confusion, nothing but horrors, and no Creature will
help me to annihilate my self! I am not able to endure this torture for a
moment, how shall I be able to endure it to infinite Millions of Ages! I see no
end of it, the farther I look, the more of my misery I see! Wherever I cast
my Eyes, I see nothing, but Terror, Devils, and miserable Souls in the same
condition with my self, all howling about my Ears: A thing so far from
affording comfort, that it fills me with greater horror! Whether shall I flee
for remedy! Heaven is shut up! There is a vast Gulf betwixt me, and that;
there is no passing from hence thither, nor from thence to this doleful place!
I swim in a Sea of Sorrow, I swim, and see no shore, I labor, and not a Plank
appears on which I may save my life, here are no Hills, no Mountains, no Rocks,
I can cry too, and if there were, they are all deaf! God has forsaken me, and
good reason, for I left him for a Lust, and undervalued him for Trifles! I
pleaded, I could not withstand the Charms, the World offered to me! Mad Man! I
could withstand them now, why could not I have withstood them then? I might
have considered of this place, and of this state, and of these vexations, and
checked my self: O that I were but to live again in the World! O that God would
but try me again! How would I scorn the very thoughts of Mirth, and raillery!
How would I run away from the very mention of these Impostures! Break my heart,
Break! If God will not kill thee, call upon the infernal Spirits, and see what
they will do! But, Oh they delight in these groans! Themselves lie under the
same Condemnation, banished from the gracious presence of God! They would die,
as well, as I, if they were able! O what a torment is it! I see the everlasting
Joys before me, and cannot reach them! They are over my Head, and I cannot come
near them! Paradise I see, but cannot enter into it! I knock my Head, I smite
my Breast, I stamp with my Feet, but am never the better! That Jesus, on whose
Blood I trampled, I see rejoicing with his followers at the Right hand of God,
and not a drop of comfort drops from his Lips, on mine! I feel Flames within,
which no Waters can quench, a drop of Water would be some refreshment, and give
me some hopes of ease, but here is none: All the Rivers of Consolation are
dried up to me! I walk in darkness! I see no light! O God, tear the Heavens and
come down! Can thou hear these shrieks, and be unconcerned! Can thou see
this poor Creature lie in torments, and give no relief! Have thou no mercy
left! O then my state is desperate! I shall not be able to refrain from
Blasphemy! For I see none can help, but thou, and thou will not! I rave, I am
distracted with fear! I tremble! I quake! stand off Devils! I have Furies
enough within! Ye damned Pleasures, whither have you brought me! Ye have made
me lose the favor of him, who alone is able to give me ease! I might have been
happy, if it had not been for you, I might have escaped these Regions of
anguish, if you had not tempted me! But why do I accuse you! This brutish Heart
of mine was in the fault; my devilish Lust hurried me into ruin; I had reason,
and would not use it, means of Grace, and would not apply them, offers of
Mercy, and would not accept of them; O all ye, that pass by, behold and see, if
there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the
Lord has afflicted me, in the Day of his fierce anger, Lam. 1.12.13.14
from above he has sent a Fire into my Bones, and it prevails against them, he
has spread a Net for my feet, he has turned me back; he has made me
desolate, and faint all the Day, the Yoke of my transgressions is bound by his
hand, they are wreathed, and come up upon my Neck, he has made my strength to
fall, the Lord has delivered me into their hands from whom I am not able to
rise up.

All this certainly appears in the prospect of that future Judgment, and
consequently is enough to check, and damp the greatest Jollities on this side
Hell, and though it is true, that it does not cause the least disturbance in
thousands of men, that drink of these stolen Waters, for men in this Age are as
jovial, as ever, and a judgment to come frights them no more, than a House on
fire a Thousand Miles off; but sure this is for want of taking the proper way
and method, which God, and Reason does prescribe, and what that way, and method
is, shall be shown in the following Paragraph.

3. How the prospect of that future Judgment must be managed, that it may
actually damp, and put a stop to these carnal delights.

This is to be done, no other way, but,

1. By thinking, reflecting, and ruminating upon that future Judgment. This
stands to Reason, for except things be made visible to us, how shall they move
or fright us? This future Judgment being out of sight, and afar off, it must be
brought near, and set before us; and there is no way to do it, but by thinking.
Our thoughts are the Picture-Drawers, which make the Landscape of that judgment
so lively, that our faculties can not but be signally affected with it. These
are the Divine part within us, which can make things past, and future, as
present, and summon the remotest Objects to become familiar and palpable. These
are the Glasses in which all that God has said, or promised, and threatened,
becomes visible, and with the help of these we may make that substance, which
seemed but Air before, and condense that into solid Notions, which to a carnal
Man seemed but Fancy and Wind before. These can make us in a manner grasp and
feel that which was out of our reach before, and make us concerned about things
which we neither see, nor hear, nor feel with our grosser Organs. These can
transplant the other World into this, and make Eternity appear before us,
though we live in Tabernacles of Clay; to prove this, we need only appeal to
experience. Behold those pious Souls, that take a course contrary to that of
the World; what makes them afraid of sinning? What makes them afraid of running
with their Neighbors into Riot? What makes them, that they dare not do, what
some of their carnal acquaintance and Relations do? What makes them mourn? What
makes them rejoice in Spirit; You see nothing, that they have reason to mourn
for? They have a competency, they want nothing in the World, they have
necessaries and conveniences, and they prosper in their lawful undertakings;
and under some of their greatest afflictions, you see nothing that should make
them cheerful, no outward cause of their joy, but rather all that is about them
is an invitation to sorrow and dejection: Why? They are invisible things, that
make them mourn and rejoice, and by thinking of them, they make them visible,
and so visible, that they are affected with them as much, as other men are with
Objects that incur into their Senses; by thinking they see the Terrors of the
Lord, and the Affronts they have offered to the Divine Majesty, and the wounds
they have given to their own Souls, and that makes them weep; by thinking, they
see the Glory, that is set before them, and the recompense which is promised
them, and the right, and title they have to it, and that makes their Souls
rejoice; so then by thinking, this future Judgment may be seen, and if it be
seen in in any lively colors, there is no sinner so stout, no Man so perverse,
no creature so dull, and stupid, but it will startle him, and put Wormwood into
his Cup. When I eat, or drink, or whatever I do, the last Trump sounds in mine
Ears, and I think I hear the terrible Voice of the Archangel, Arise ye dead,
and come to Judgment, says St. Hierome: These thoughts made him eat, and
drink with great moderation: These brought a Holy fear upon him in all his
actions: These kept him from going beyond the bounds, God had set him: These
struck seriousness into him in all places: These made him as circumspect in the
Marketplace, as if he had been at Church, and as devout in the Street, as if
he had stood at the high Altar. And therefore I do not wonder at that Hermit
that he became so serious a Man as Antiquity reports him, who carried a little
Book about him, consisting only of four Leaves in which he was always seen
reading, and after reading, meditating; in the first leaf was expressed
Christ's passion, and what that darling of Manking suffered for poor Mortals,
during his abode in the World; in the second, was represented the process of
the future Judgment, with the Terrors, and Constureations, that guilty men
will be in at that time; in the third were described the Glories of Paradise,
and of that third Heaven, which all Holy Souls shall enter into, there to
possess the Inheritance of the Saints in light; in the Fourth was drawn to the
life, the Picture of Hell, and of the Miseries, which shall await the stubborn,
and impenitent in the next life; these four Leaves were soon read over, but
they afforded infinite matter for thoughts, and meditations, and by these his
Soul was so warmed, that he cared not what became of him here, so he might but
enjoy the promised Glory and that Life, and Immortality, Christ, had brought to
light by the Gospel. Chrysostom. Homil. 2. in 2 Thessalon.


So true is that saying of St. Chrysostom; There is no Man that thinks much of
Hell, that will ever fall into it, as indeed there is no Man, who makes light
of it, that will ever escape it. For as it is among men, they that are afraid
of the Penalties of the Law, seldom or never feel them, for their fear makes
them shun those actions, which deserve them: This keeps them from Theft and
Rapine, from Murder, and Adultery, from Burglary, and Wrong, from Violence, and
Oppression, and consequently from the punishments, the Law inflicts in such
cases: The Plagues and the Stripes they fear, make them cautious, and whatever
their inclination may be, the Rods, and Axes they fear, restrain them, whereas
those that are regardless of the Mulct bring it upon themselves; so it is here,
the frequent thinking of it, is the best Antidote against the Terrors of that
future Judgment; if the Ninivites had not feared their overthrown, they had
certainly been overthrown, and how could they have feared it, if they had not
thought of it? If the men, that lived before the Flood, had thought of it, and
been afraid, they would not have been drowned; nor would the People of Sodom
have been consumed by Fire, if they had taken this course: It Is a great
misfortune not to think of the fulfilling of Gods threatenings, for he that
thinks nor of it, of all men, will be the first, that shall have woeful
experience of it.

It is reported of Agatho, that in his last sickness falling into a Trance, for
three Days together, he lay with his Eyes fixed upon Heaven, and all that time
looked very ghastly; recovering out of the ecstasy, and being asked by his
Friends, where he had been, and what his thoughts had been during those three
Days, and what made him look so strangely? O my friends, said he, do you ask
me, Where I have been? alas! I have been these three Days standing before the
great Tribunal, and seen how the most just Judge sentenced diverse Souls to
Eternal darkness, and who would not stand amazed at the dreadful spectacle? It
was therefore a very good Prayer of St. Ambrose: I do most vehemently desire, O
Lord, that thou would be pleased to imprint and very deeply imprint the
Landscape of the future World, the Miseries of the Disobedient, the Groans of
the Stubborn, the Agonies of the Impenitent, the Shrieks of the Profane, the
Vexations of Hypocrites, the Fears of the Careless, the Destruction of the
Covetous, the Perdition of Worldlings, the Flames of the Revengeful, the
Terror of Damnation, and Eternal Torments, and the future Felicity of thy
Kingdom, upon my Mind, for it is impossible that he that thinks much of these
things, should not become thy Child, and Servant, and one of those, whom thou
have predestined to Eternal Life.

Do thou laugh, said the Old Man in Ruffinus to a youngster (whose behavior
was very light) when you and I are to be judged before Heaven and Earth, and
indeed that Person, that surveys, what the Divine Jesus has said of this
future Judgment, thinks how in that Day the Powers of Heaven will be shaken,
the Sun turned into Darkness the Moon into Blood, and the Stars forbear to give
their Light, how the World, and all the Elements will be on Fire, the Universe
melt like Wax, the Earth be burnt up, the Seas dried, and the Rivers consumed,
and with what Glory and Bravery the once afflicted Son of God will then appear,
with an Army of Angels about him displaying their Banners, and carrying the
Sign of the Son of Man before him; how before him all Nations will be assembled
and all that are in their Graves, upon hearing the Voice of God, loud as
Thunder, and more dreadful too, will be summoned to appear before his Bar, the
Judge shining in his Meridian Glory, brighter than Moses, clearer than the Sun,
and how the Consciences of Guilty men will quake at this sight, their Hearts
misgiving them, that their Portion will be in outward Darkness, how formidable
all the transactions will be, how immutable the Sentence, after it is once
passed, not to be altered, or deprecated by Saints, or Angels, how all
evasions, and subterfuges will be out of doors there, and all possibility of
transferring our Errors upon others who have been partners with us in our
sins, will vanish, how those that make themselves fools for Christ's sake in
this life, were reproached, reviled, derided, and laughed at for their
severities, would not lose their Souls for a trifle, nor sell their Birthright
to Eternal Bliss for a Morsel of Meat, would held fast their Integrity, though
solicited by innumerable losses, and crosses, and by their nearest Relations to
curse God, and die, how these who were here made the off-scourings of all
things, will then be absolved, and quitted, and have Seats appointed them in
the Mansions of Glory, there to reign, and sing the goodness of God to all
Eternity. I say, he that seriously surveys these things, if he be a Person who
has not debauched or lost his reason, cannot but be affected by passages of
this Nature, and think it time to curb himself in his sensual delights, and
satisfactions. But,

2. Bare thinking is not enough, but the particulars of this future Judgment
must be actually applied to our selves; general things, and what is done to
others though they may touch the Heart, yet do not subdue it will particular
applications give them force, and power. A Fire, that is a Mile off from me,
though it causes in me some sense of the calamity, yet if it threatens the
House I live in, my Faculties soon bestir themselves, and I fall to work, and
secure my self in good earnest; so here when I behold the tremendous process of
this Judgment, I must reflect, that as God deals with others, so he will
certainly deal with me, that I have no greater privilege than others, but must
stand, and fall by the same Law, that they stand, and fall by, that to fancy
any more favorable proceedings toward me, than God intends to others, is but
a dream and contrary to the impartiality of the Judge; that as I have a Soul to
be saved as well as my Neighbor, so God will expect I should live here, as he
bids my Neighbor live, that neither my Estate, nor Dignity, neither my
Offices, nor Friends, neither my Riches, nor my Greatness will excuse my living
more carelessly than my poorer Friends, nay, that my outward advantages make my
account greater, and as I have had greater Talents bestowed upon me, so more
will be required of me than of them who have not had those opportunities of
being good, and holy, which I have had; that as God has advanced me in the
World, placed me in a higher station, given me a consideradle figure here on
Earth, made his Candle to shine upon me, caused my Root to spread out by the
Waters, and the Dew of Heaven to lie all Night upon my Branch, and afforded me
credit, and respect among men, so he looks for greater fruitfulness in good
Works, and more than ordinary exemplariness to advance his Glory, and to spread
the Power of Religion among my inferiors, and dependants; and therefore upon a
View of this future process, I must needs rouse my Soul, by such Questions as
these;

If God be resolved to judge the secrets of men's Hearts according to his
Gospel, what will become of me? Should God call thee to Judgment O my Soul,
this Night, or this Hour, art thou in a condition to appear before so great, so
dreadful a God? Is this foolery, thou please thy self with, this wanton
dress, this jolly life, these merry, Hours, this gaming, this carrousing, this
extravagant laughter, this fondness of the humor of the Age, this immodest,
and frothy talk, this foolish garb, this fantastic fashion, this mispending
thy time, this keeping of vain Company, this unprofitable way of living, this
thy being intent altogether upon the profits and pleasures of the World, this
indifferency in Religion, these faint resistances of Temptations, this neglect
of known Duties, this unfaithful discharge of the Duties of thy Relations, this
unwillingness to mind any thing that is serious, this aversion from Spiritual
Discourses, and Actions, this want of Gravity, etc. Are these fit wedding
Garments to come before the King of Heaven in? Thou may be summoned to come
to his Bar within this Day or two; think what an infinite Majesty thou must be
presented to! Should God speak the word within a few Minutes, Come away, come
away, and give an account of thy behavior; how unprepared art thou? So great
is thy danger, and can thou loiter? So near art thou to a tremendous
Eternity, and Oh wilt not thou be clean? Thou stand upon the brink of Hell,
and wilt not thou step back, thou art within a Bows shot of the great Tribunal,
and does not thy Countenance change? Thou art within hearing of the Thunders,
that come forth from the Throne of God, and do not thy Thoughts trouble thee?
Thou see the fatal Hand upon the Wall, and do not they Kness smite one
against another? Thou must shortly appear before all the Host of Heaven, and
art not thou got farther yet in Holiness? Do not thou quake, to think, that
the Revenger of Blood is upon thy Heels?

As thou art a Christian, thou art a Son of God, and do thou express that
filial disposition in thy gate, and looks, and face, and Life? Art thou born of
God, and can thou degenerate from his Nature? Art thou made after his Image,
and by Grace renewed after his similitude, and can thou be contented, under a
temper so different from that Holiness, which is thy great Fathers Perfection
and Glory? Does God expect thee at his Tribunal with the qualifications of a
Child, and will thou appear before him as a Rebel? Has he given his Son on
purpose to adopt thee, and think thou to present thy self before him in the
shape of a Prodigal? Thou art designed for a Citizen of the Celestial
Jerusalem, and will thou appear before him as an Inhabitant of Hell? Thou art
one of God's Family, and will thou appear before him, as a Traitor? Thou art
purchased by his Blood, and will thou live, as if that Blood had been spilt in
vain? Thou art washed in the Laver of Regeneration, and can thou wallow with
the Swine in the Mire? Thou have known the way of Righteousness, and will thou
with the Dog return to the Vomit? Rev. 22.15.
Or art thou not afraid of that saying, that Dog must stand without?

Thou art called to be faithful, and have given thy Faith to God; will thou
break thy Faith, and hope to be guiltless at this Bar? Will not God revenge
this breach, or can thou think, he will let thee go unpunished for thy
Treacheries? How can thou expect the performance of his Promises, while thou
art so false to thy engagements? Thou have vowed thy self to him both in
Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, and can thou imagine, that thy Perjuries
will not be remembered, when thou come to look the Judge in the Face? By
giving thee opportunity of becoming a Christian, God has made thee a King, and
will thou run to the Bramble, and say, Come thou and Reign over me? As a King,
thou have power given thee to vanquish Flesh and Blood, to tread upon Lions and
Adders, to defy Principalities, and Powers, and to crush Devils, and will thou
make thy self a Slave to those Enemies, over which God has given thee power to
trample them under thy Feet? As a King thou art to apppear before him, and will thou come in the posture of a miserable Vassal? Shall those Passions rule over
thee, which thy God has given thee for Servants, and Handmaids? and what a
dismal fight will it be, when thou art to come before the Throne laden with
Conquests, to appear fettered with Chains, and the Devils Trophies? God designs
thee to be his Priest; This is one of the Privileges, that came by the Blood
of Christ: But where are thy Sacrifices? the Sacrifice of fervent Prayer, the
Sacrifice of an humble contrite Heart, the Sacrifice of Praise, and delight in
God? And will thou come without the Mark of thy Office before the great
Shepherd, and Bishop of Souls? Thou art enlightened by the Spirit of God, and
do thou think to live in Darkness, and after all to share in the boundless
Inheritance with the Children of Light? How unlike thy self will thou appear
before God, if thou come without these qualifications? Thou art a Christian,
but where is the Life of Christ that should be in thee? Will the Judge ever
take thee for his Sheep, when it is evident, thou do not hear his Voice? How
ridiculous is that Man, that hangs out a Bush, and yet has no Wine to sell?
And how foolish is that Apothecary, that writes glorious Names upon his Pots,
when the rich drugs that are named, have no being in his Shop? And will it not
tend to thy everlasting confusion that thou have had the Name of a Christian,
and done nothing like a Christian?

Thus the particular proceedings of that future judgment must be applied to our
selves, if we resolve that the prospect of a future Judgment shall damp our
carnal delights, and satisfactions, and without using this method, we do but
trifle, and talk of breeding Mountains, and bring forth ridiculous Mice, play
with Religion, and are not in good earnest, when we say, we believe a future
account.

3. But neither the Reflections aforesaid, nor the Application, we have spoken
of, will make any deep impression, except all be seconded with earnest Prayer,
that God by his holy Spirit working in our Minds, would make the attempt
effectual; this must set to its Seal, drive in the Nail, and clench it. The
Eternal Spirit must give success to these enterprises, and in vain do we plant
or water, except he gives the increase. He is that anointing, which must supple
the Soul, and Crown all with Laurels and Victory. By strength of thought, and
application, the Fort of sin may be assaulted, but without this Spirit lends
his helping Hand, it will never be taken, or subdued. His Power must overcome
the Oppositions, our Flesh and the World will certainly make in this case, and
if he blows upon our Hearts, the strong Holds of Iniquity, like the Walls of
Jericho will fall, and nothing can stand before him, and he will certainly come
in to our assistance, if our Prayer, and Addresses be fervent and importunate.
Upon such Devotions, the frequent Discourses of this Day of Judgment, we read
or hear, will be so far from bringing the thing into contempt with our Souls,
that our Hearts will be awakened more, and it is impossible we can miscarry in
the pious design, if with strong cries, we apply our selves to him, who has
appointed a Day, in the which he will judge the World in Righteousness, by that
Man, whom he has ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in
that he has raised him from the Dead, Act. 17.31.

That which we are chiefly to insist upon in these Addresses is, that we may
get lively apprehensions, of that Day, and such apprehensions, as no pleasure,
no folly, no temptation of the World may darken, or destroy; and here let the
Soul break forth into such Ejaculations:

O God, Great, and Glorious, make me deeply sensible of that Day, and of that
Hour, when the Son of Man will come, when the Goats shall be separated from the
Sheep, the Tares from the Wheat, the Good from the Bad; when neither Prayers,
nor Tears shall be able to deliver the guilty and polluted Soul from the
impendent danger; when it shall be said to the humble, Friend sit up higher,
and to the proud Fool, Give place to him, that is more Honorable, than thou
art; when the Book of Conscience shall be opened, and the Dead Judged by the
contents of that Book; when the Sinner will not know where to flee, and his
Spirits will fail him for fear of him, that sits upon the Throne.

O God! Fix these considerations in my Soul; strengthen my Faith, that I may
believe these things unseen without wavering. How apt is the World to get
between this tremendous Day, and my sight! Quicken thou mine Eyes, that I may
see through all impediments into that process, and reflect, what manner of
Person I ought to be in all Holy conversation, and Godliness! Lord Jesu! Great
Judge of the World! Let the Lines of that Judgment be written so legibly in my
Mind, that my Soul may delight to read them, that nothing may divert me from
studying, and considering them; let this be my chief study, and let me feel the
same effect, that those men did, who were converted at thy Apostles Sermon; let
me be pricked at the Heart, and cry out, What must I do to be saved? Let the
thoughts of this Day make a Reformation in my outward, and inward Man, that it
may appear, that thou have touched me with a Coal from the altar. O God to whom
Vengeance belongs, show thy self, and disperse my foolish desires. Let my Soul
feel the transactions of that day as well as believe them. Clear my
Understanding and enlighten my Mind, that I may have a livelier prospect of it.
I will not let thee go except thou bless me: Look down from the Habitation of
thy Holiness, and visit my Soul. Expel the prejudices I have against severity
of Life, and with the Thoughts of this Day destroy them utterly. Let the
consideration of this Day so work upon me, that my Ambition, Covetousness,
Pride, and Anger may tremble at the sight, and leave their Habitation, and may
be ever afraid of returning. Oh tell me, that this Day will certainly come, and
that the Day of my Death, will be the Emblem of it. Oh assure me of the Terror
of that Day, that shall burn like an Oven wherein all that do wickedly shall be
Stubble, and the Fire shall burn them up, that it shall leave them neither Root
nor Branch; let me not take example by the careless World, that put this evil
Day far from them. Let it be always before me! Let my Mind be never free from
the contemplations of it. Let it mingle with my Business, with my Meals, with
my Converse, with my Sleep, and with all my Undertakings. In every sin I am
tempted to, let it frighten me, in my going out, and in my coming in, let it
continually beat upon my Mind. Oh my Lord! let me muse upon this Day of
Retribution; this Day of Recompense, this Day of Trouble, this Day of Terror,
this Day of Joy, this Day of Comfort; this Day wherein thy Promises, and
Threatenings, will be fulfilled; this Day, which must decide the controversy of
my Life, and Death; this Day which will bring to light all hidden things; this
Day, which will revive the good, and confound the bad; this Day of Consolation;
this Day of Consternation, let me ruminate upon it, till thoughts of this
Judgment prevail with me to become a new Creature; thy Grace must melt my
stubborn Heart; without thee I can do nothing. O relieve me! O come in with the
light of thy Countenance! Stir up my Soul, and rouse it from its carelessness!
Call to me as thou did to thy People of Old; let that Voice sound in my Ears,
Zephan. 1.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
The great Day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hastes greatly, even the
Voice of the Day of the Lord; the mighty Man shall cry bitterly; that Day is a
Day of Wrath, a Day of Trouble, and Distress, a Day of Wastness, and
Desolation, a Day of Darkness and Gloominess, a Day of Clouds, and thick
Darkness, a Day of the Trumpet, and Alarm against the fenced Cities, and
against the high Towers, and I will bring Distress upon men, that they shall
walk, like Blind Men, because they have sinned against the Lord, and their
Blood shall be poured out, as Dust, and their Flesh, as the Dung, neither their
Silver, nor their Gold shallbe able to deliver them in the Day of the Lord's
Wrath.

O let me not lose the sense of this Day! Oh let me consider, how much better
it is to be humble and contemptible, and to hunger, and thirst, and to suffer
here, and afterward to enter into my Great Masters Joy, than to be a Slave to
my Lusts, and Pleasures here, and to be bound at last with everlasting Chains
of Darkness, Chains which never wear out, Chains which always bind, are always
grievous, always painful; Oh let me consider, how much better it is to Mourn
here, and to Water my Couch with my Tears, and to Afflict my Soul, and after
this, to triumph with the Spirits of men made Perfect, than to feed upon
Pleasures, which at the best are but like the crackling of Thorns under a Pot,
and then to be sent away, to howl with Devils: Help Lord, help, that my Soul
may be concerned at her danger, and despise the World, and prepare against that
Day, and encounter with Powers, and Principalities, and Spiritual wickednesses
in High Places; if by any means I might attain unto the Resurrection of the
Dead.

Such Prayers offered from a Heart, that has no reserves, from a Heart,
resolved to do any thing rather than miss of Salvation; such Prayers, I say, if
they express the very desires of our Souls, will certainly put Death and
Paleness into our sensual Pleasures, and oblige us to entertain other Thoughts
of the Gauds, and Gaieties of the World, than now we have, and make us
sensible, that this casting such a damp on the foolish satisfactions of the
Flesh with a prospect of that Day, is not only a task fit for Hermits, and
Melancholic Scholars, and contemplative men, but a duty incumbent on all, that
carry immortal Souls in their Breasts, which calls me to the fourth Point.

4. Whether every Man is bound to embitter his Carnal delights with this
prospect?

To this I must answer in the Affirmative* For though the young Man be
particularly mentioned here, yet since the expression in the Text reaches all
men, who are fit for action, all such must necessarily fall under the
Obligation of this duty, and all that are capable of such delights, are bound
to make use of the aforesaid consideration, in order to this self-denial; if
the young Man is obliged to this seriousness, much more Older men; if God will
not allow of these delights in Youth, they must necessarily be intolerable in
Years of greater Maturity; and if the tender Age be concerned to embitter them
with this prospect, when it meets with any temptation to them; without all
peradventure the stronger cannot be excused. And the Reasons are these
following:

1. If they be not embitter'd with such Thoughts as these, they will infallibly
lead the Soul into innumerable dangers and there is no Man, but is obliged to
preserve his Soul from danger: It is said of the Prodigal, Luke 15.13. That he
took his Journey into a far Country; these sensual Pleasures alienated his
Soul from God drove it away far from him, made him travel as far as Hell; the
Truth is, the Soul is lost in such sensual Pleasures, they wear out the bright
Notions, the Soul had of God, and Religion; as it is said of the Sicilian Dogs
that running through the sweet, and floury, Fields, they lose their Scent in
huntting; so the Soul, where these pleasures, these white Devils become her
Familiars, loses the Noble apprehensions, it once had of God's Omniscience, and
Omnipresence, of his Holiness, and Goodness, and of the Truth of his Promises,
and Threatenings; and these Characters like Letters written with bad Ink,
vanish, and consequently the Life of the Soul; for which reason the Prodigal,
who drowned himself in these delights, is said to be dead, v. 32. These choke
the good Seed that is sown in the noble Ground, and as you have seen a Field of
Wheat, where the red Poppies spring up as fast, as the richer Grain, though the
proud Flowers are pleasing to the Eye, yet they retard and hinder the growth of
the more useful Blade, and suck away the moisture that should have fed the
other; so sensual delights where they are taken in as Partners, and suffered to
grow in the Soul, in which some Fruits of the Spirit do appear, in a short time
blast those excellent Fruits, the Effects of the Holy Ghost, or Education, or
the Ministry of the Word, and prove Briars and Thorns, which will not suffer
any of the better Corn to grow under them.

Man's Soul and Body, are like two Buckets, while the one comes up full, the
other goes down empty; Carnal delights advance the brutish or fleshly part,
make it grow strong, lusty, and vigorous, whereby it wrests the Scepter out of
the Hand of Reason, and the Soul looses her strength, and power, and Sagacity
in Spiritual things, grows weak, and faint, and at last expires and dies, I
mean the virtuous Principles, which either kind Nature, or kinder Grace, or
Afflictions, or some other means, and Instruments have incorporated with the
Soul, which indeed are the life of that excellent Creature; and the Soul being
thus dead, it falls a Prey to Devils, who rejoice over so great a Prey, and
lead it in Triumph, take it Prisoner, and make it draw in their Victorious
Chariot; and now all the Curses of the Law are in force against it, the
threatenings of the Gospel become her Portion, and there is nothing left to
stand betwixt her, and Eternal grief and anguish, but the slender Thread of this
Mortal Life, which if it chance to break, or tear, the Soul sinks irrecoverably
into the Gulf of Perdition, from whence there is no returning; so fatal is the
influence of these flattering Guests, which in time starve their Keeper, and
finding the House empty, swept, and garnished, like the Evil Spirit spoken of,
Matt. 12.45. go and take with them Seven other Spirits more wicked than
themselves, and they enter in and dwell there, and the last state of that Man
is worse than the first; and thus they plunder, and boldly rob the Soul of her
Riches, and hinder her from that Holiness which is her Food, her Cordial, and
her greatest support, and without which no Man can see the Lord; they had need
therefore be embittered with something that is sour, and unpleasant to Flesh and
Blood, can smite the Stream, and turn those sweeter Waters into Blood, which
nothing will do more effectually, than the aforesaid prospect.

2. This embittering of sensual and carnal delights is a thing of the greatest
concernment, and therefore must be necessary and all must be concerned in the
Virtuous enterprise; the greatest blessings, (the want of which make a Man
perfectly miserable) depend upon it, even God's love of complacency, and the
Application of Christ's Merits, and the Benefits of his death, and Passion;
these belong not to the Soul, that is enamoured with sensual delights, no more
than they appertain to Dogs or Swine; nay, they are useless, and insignificant
to such a Soul, as much as the Mathematics are to an ass, or idiot. There is a
perfect antipathy betwixt these, and the comforts we speak of; for they are
intended only for humble, broken, contrite Hearts, which temper a Person that is
fond of sensual delights is not capable of, nor can such a man relish them,
they are as Hay, and Straw, and Stubble to him, and like a Person, whose
Appetite has been spoiled by a raging Fever, he looks upon them as unsavory,
and insipid food, and though he may talk of them, yet it is only as blind men
do of colors. As it is in Nature, the Meat we eat must be agreeable to our
Stomachs, so it is in Grace. There must be a Holy Principle within, that makes
these Spiritual comforts agreeable to it, but sensual delights destroy that
Principle, and as Darkness drives out Light, so these two are incompatible; and
indeed our blessed Savior is very peremptory in his Assertion, That he, who
does not deny himself cannot be his Disciple, Matthew. 16.24. And what
self-denial can there be, where we do not deny our selves in that, which is
most pernicious to our better part? For so are these sensual delights: Not to
be Christ's Disciple, is to have no part in him: Not to have any part in him,
is to be none of his Sheep, and not to be of his Sheep, is to be placed with
the Goats at the left hand in the last Day, and what the consequence of that
is, you may read, Matthew. 25.41.

Its true, maugre all that we can say to the contrary, men who are resolved to
indulge themselves in their brutish delights, will notwithstanding the
contradiction they must needs be guilty of, believe that they are Christ's
Disciples, and Favorites of Heaven, and that Christ has purchased Eternal
Life for them, and that at last they shall enjoy it; but alas! they know not,
what Eternal Life, nor what believing means; as well may a Man in Bedlam fancy
himself to be a King, as such Persons, that they are the beloved of God, while
they live in that, which is most contrary to his Nature, and like Enemies to
the Cross of Christ, like Persons that have nothing but Body, nothing but
flesh, nothing but sense about them. If men may be saved contrary to Christ's
Word, contrary to his Declaration, contrary to all the most solemn
Protestations, he has made in the Gospel, then such men may be saved, not
else; who can reflect upon these doings without indignation, or grief, or
sorrow, or wishing for Rivers of Tears! That men should pretend to own the
Gospel, and yet live directly contrary to the Laws of it, argues either malice
or distraction, or stupid ignorance; yet with such men for the most part we
have to deal, which makes St. Paul's exhortation highly reasonable, Finally
Brethren, pray for us, that the Word of the Lord may have free course, and be
glorified, and that we may delivered from unreasonable, and wicked men, for all
men have not Faith; 2 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2.

3. This embittering our carnal, and sensual delights is that which men for
certain shall wish, they had done, when they come to stand before the great
Tribunal. In that Day men's Eyes will be opened, and things will appear to them
in other colors, than now they do. Their understandings will not be clogged
with this World or divertisements. They will have other apprehensions of the
Nature of Virtue, and Holiness, and the Truth of what Christ has delivered in
the Gospel: The reasonableness of his Precepts, the Equity of his Commands, the
excellency of his Doctrine, the Divinity of his Miracles, the infallible
certainty of his Promises and Threatenings will all shine bright in their Eyes;
of all these they will be thoroughly convinced, and no doubt, no scruple, no
ambiguity will remain as to any of these points; the vileness of their
pleasures, the brutishness of their satisfactions, the rashness of their
delights, the baseness of their enjoyments, the brightness of those Virtues
they have despised, the Glory of that Grace, which they might have had and
would not, and the trivialness of the things, they preferred before these, will
then appear so plain, so legible, that there will be no room left for ignorance.

It Is true, these things might be known here, and would men take the right way,
they might come to be convinced, and persuaded of them on this side Eternity,
for some we find are fully satisfied as to these particulars, and walk suitably
to them, and therefore it cannot be impossible for others to attain to it, but
their insensibleness is rather an argument of stupid negligence, and willful
laziness; and so it must be, where People are not, or pretend not to be
satisfied in things of this nature. It is therefore necessary there should a
time come, when they shall be able to make no excuse, nor to evade the force of
these Truths, and when they shall behold, how wise a choice the self-denying
Soul has made, and what her mortifications, and severities do end in, what
applauses they receive in Heaven, what kind looks from the Everlasting Father,
what Honor, what Dignity, what preferment is designed and appointed for her,
how such a Soul Triumphs at this time over Hell, and Devils, dares all the
Furies of the Burninglake, scorns those foes, which led the sensual Sinner
captive, makes her Nest among the Stars of Heaven, is placed in the Quire of
Angels, meets with all the Carresses of a Gracious God, is encircled with
Laurels, and Crowns of Joy, and all her misery, and sorrows, and fears are at
an end. Reason tells us that the sensual Sinner when he shall behold all this,
will wish, he had followed her example, for that is the necessary and eternal
Consequence of all imprudent actions, Prove. 5.11, 12.
especially those that are grossly so, for after them men do as naturally wish,
that they had acted the part of wise men, as Balaam, that he might die the
Death of the Righteous. Thus men become wise after the Fact, and when they
find, what Fools they have been, would be content, that they had foreseen the
evil, and hid themselves; who would not wish in that Day he had embittered his
sensual delights, that finds he is undone by eating of those luscious Apples?
And I need not tell you, that it is every Man's Interest not to do that, which
he will wish he had not done, when it is too late* But of this I have said
enough before. The next Point follows, and is a Case of Conscience, how far
sensual delights must be embittered with this prospect.

5. Whether a Christian that would be saved, is upon this account obliged to
forbear, and abandon all sensual and worldly delights, and recreations
whatsoever?

So not a few have thought in the Primitive times which made them retire from
the World, and deny themselves in all the comforts of this life and put
themselves to very great hardships, and self-denials, being of Opinion, that
they who laughed here would mourn hereafter, and such as enjoyed the good
things of this life, would be miserably poor hereafter. They looked upon the
two Worlds as opposites, and consequently believed, that the means to arrive to
the happiness of the future, were directly contrary to all present
satisfactions; they concluded, that they who would be happy hereafter, must be
unhappy here, and that they who would be happy here, could not be so hereafter;
from hence rose their selling all they had, and giving it to the poor, and the
strange severities they used upon their Bodies, whereof I have discoursed
elsewhere, and indeed the Gospel, Happy Asectick, p.425. and Seqq.
gives very little encouragement to any thing, that savours of wordly pleasure,
nor do the Apostles allow much liberty in this particular; whether it were,
that they thought that all sensual delights were improper for a state of
persecution, in which the Church then lived, or whether it was, that they were
afraid, such delights would damp their Spiritual fervor; this is certain, that
there is little to be gathered from their Writings in favor of Sports, and
Recreations.

Yet as strict as the Gospel is, it grants, that we have Bodies, as well as
Souls, and that if the Bow be not unbent sometimes the String will crack, and
become useless, and though it is possible for our Minds to soar so far above the
World, as to know, and care for no other delights, but what savor of God, and
the Glories of another Life; yet those Spiritual delights will not be of any
long continuance without the Body be allowed suitable refreshment and has its
fits of ease, and relaxation. Were not some Divertisements lawful, Christ would
scarce have vouchsafed his presence at the Wedding-feast in Cana, much less
provided them Wine to encourage temperate cheerfulness; and hither may be
referred, St. John the Evangelists playing sometimes with a Bird, and going
into a common Bath, whereof Ecclesiastical Histories give us an account; yet
since there is nothing more common with men, than to confound their sinful
delights with lawful Recreations, it will be necessary here, to explain the
Point in these following Particulars:

1. This must be laid down, as a grand Principle of our Religion: Philip. 4.4.
That a Spiritual delight in God, in a Crucified Savior, and in the Blessed
Effects, and influences of the Holy Ghost, in the Graces and Fruits of the
Spirit, in feeling the Operations of the Divine Power and Glory upon our Souls,
in the precious Promises of the Gospel, in the Revelations, God has vouchsafed
to Mankind, in the good, we see wrought in our selves, and others, in the
Providence of God, and in Contemplation of his various dealings with the
several states, orders and degrees of Men, in Psalms, and Hymns, and Praises of
the Divine Majesty, in the Thoughts and Expectations of a better Life, in the
Treasures God has laid up for them that fear him, in another World, and in the
various Privileges, Prerogatives and advantages of Holy men, etc. It Is
certain, I say, that delighting, and rejoicing in such Spiritual, Objects is
the Chief, the Principal and Sovereign delight, which a Christian is with
greatest application of Mind to labor after, and in comparison of this, is
obliged to count all these outward comforts, Dross and Dung, and Dogs-meat;
this is the delight which must engross his Desires, affections, and
Inclinations; this must rule in his Soul, this must be Mistress and Queen
Regent in his Mind; to this all must stoop and then things cannot but go well,
if this be secured and established. Without worldly Pleasure, Thousands of
Saints have arrived to Everlasting Bliss, but without this, none; sensual
delights are no part of a Christians comfort, but this Spiritual delight is the
one thing necessary; and till a prospect of a future Judgment causes this
delight to rise in our Souls, whatever impression it may make, the Plant is not
of our Heavenly Fathers planting. Such must be the temper of our Souls; in the
aforesaid objects our Souls must delight more, then in all Riches, and this
delight being once settled in us, such Worldly delights as are subservient to
this, and do neither diminish nor darken, nor hinder, nor quench it, may justly
be said to be Lawful.

2. This being premised, we do not deny but such Worldly delights, as are
neither sinful in themselves, nor apparent occasions of evil, are allowable.
And of this nature are all those masculine exercises, whereby the Body is
preserved in health, and rendered more capable of serving the Soul in her
Religious severities; as walking or riding abroad to take the Air, Planting,
Gardening, Raising curious Plants, and Flowers, running, Wrestling, Fowling,
Hawking, Hunting, Fishing, Leaping, Vaulting, Casting of the Bar, Tossing the
Pike, Riding the great Horse, Running at the Ring, and such divertisements
which stir the Blood, make us Active, and Vigorous, fit us for greater and more
useful enterprises, and promote cheerfulness, and liveliness; such cannot be
supposed to be forbid by the Gospel, provided that they be used, 1. Seasonably,
not on those days and hours, which are appointed, either for Devotion, or more
weighty business; and therefore these cannot be proper exercises of the Lords
day, or days of Fasting, and Abstinence, or days of Mourning. 2. With
moderation, so that much time be not spent upon them, and our love to them may
keep within its due bounds and limits. 3. For a good end, which must be to
render our selves fitter for the discharge of our Duty to God and Man. 4. With
purposes of self-denial, so that we can leave or quit them for a greater good,
when either a work of Piety, or an act of Charity is to be performed, or
scandal to be prevented; where these limitations are not observed the Honey
turns into Gall, and that which deserved only our civility and transient
respect becomes our Idol, and our Souls receive considerable hurt, which, had
these divertisements been used with circumspection, might have been beholding
to them in some measure for their welfare, and edification.

3. From this Rule we may rationally infer, that delight in Orchards, Gardens,
Rivers, Ponds, either Natural or Artificial; and in the comforts of Wife,
Children, Friends, in our Trades, and Relations, Houses, Buildings and
Possessions, the bountiful hand of Heaven has bestowed upon us, is consistent
with a serious prospect of a future judgment, not but that excesses may be
committed in this delight, as the best and most harmless things may be abused;
yet where we delight in them, as they are the gifts of God more, than as they
are satisfactions to the Flesh, and build not upon them, rest not in them, but
still look upon them as things volatile, and transitory, and are ready to part
with them, whenever providence shall think fit to remove them, without
grumbling or murmuring, and do let the World see, that in these delights, we
forget not the rules of gravity, modesty, decency and charity, they may
lawfully be called inoffensive, and as a Snake whose Teeth are pulled out,
handled without danger: Eccl. 2.4, 8; 10, 11.
And though Solomon calls these delights Vanity, yet that which made them so,
was the immoderateness of his love toward them, and his setting his heart, and
doting upon them, and placing felicity in them, making them his mark, which
should have been only a passage to nobler enjoyments, and fixing there, where
he should have lodged only as in an Inn, and so marched on to the City, which
has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. Delight in things of this
nature may soon run beyond its bounds, if either too much cost be spent upon
them, whereby the poor are robbed of their due, or Men forget to employ their
thoughts upon sublimer objects.

4. The same may be said of delight in Music, whether Vocal or Instrumental; a
delight harmless enough, if used as Salt, not as Meat, as Sauce, not as Food,
as a bit on the By, not as a standing Diet, and though the Men the Prophet
speaks of, Es. 5.12. are severely checked for the Harp and the Viol, the
Tabret, and Pipe in their Feasts, yet it was because they made their Music an
Appendix to their Drunkenness, and as it is said in the same verse, regarded
not the work of the Lord, neither considered the operation of his hands.
David's playing upon the Harp was no sin, while it was not to encourage
wantonness, but with an intent either to Praise God, or to divert Saul's
Melancholy; nor can I discommend the Pythagoreans, who before they went to
sleep, composed their minds with Music. We read in Gellius, Aelian, and
others, how men have been cured not only of irregular passions, but of very
strange distempers of the body by Music; and what is signally conducing to the
good, and benefit of Mankind, we must suppose is allowed by that God, who
himself consults the health and welfare of his Creatures; Genesis 4 21.
and this made Jubals profession lawful, who was the inventer of Musical
instruments, and therefore called the Father of all such, as handle the Harp,
and Organ. The end, for which such delights are used, makes them either
tolerable, or impertinent, and as he that designs them to refresh either his
own, or other Men's weary Spirits, and to Glorify God by them, deserves
commendation, so he that makes them instrumental to feed Men's Lusts, or to
promote Lasciviousness, and lightness in conversation, renders himself unworthy
of the name of a Christian, and therefore those Fiddlers and Musicians, who show
themselves at merry meetings, or Promiscuous Dancings, which serve only to
pamper the Flesh, and to encourage extravagance and luxury, will be able to
give but a very sad account of their profession, and if ever they come to take
a serious view of their past lives, will have reason to wish that they had
spent that time in Mourning for their sins: Christianity, which allows us
moderate recreation, bids us abhor all delights which serve to render the mind
vain, and foolish, and alienate the Soul from her true center, or tempts us to
mispend the precious hours, the Almighty has lent us to work out our salvation
with fear and trembling.

5. Delight in Books, and natural Sciences, such as Astronomy, Physic,
Philosophy, Mathematics, Histories of all sorts, and in searching into the
Nature of Plants, Stones, Minerals, Fruits, Juices, Herbs, Gums, Birds, Fishes,
Beasts, etc. as it is a thing useful, so it cannot be contrary to the rules of
Christianity; and though Astrology, as it is abused into telling of Fortunes,
and good or ill success in businesses, discovering of thefts, and stolen goods,
and knowing future events, is no proper object of this delight, partly because
the rules are uncertain and imaginary, partly because it tempts people to
unlawful curiosities, partly because the Scripture forbids these fears and
hopes, which are grounded upon the aspect of the Signs of Heaven, and looks
upon them as mistrusts of the Divine Providence, yet that is no Argument but
that a Man may lawfully with some delight inquire into the nature, and
influences of the Stars, to see, whether what the World has talked of them, is
grounded upon any scientifick principles. I need not say here, that delight in
Magic or the Black-art, as they call it, is as great abomination in the sight
of God, as the sin it self; nor can I give any favorable judgment of delight
in Palmestry, because that art seems to interfere with that self Resignation
and dependence upon the wisdom and goodness of God which is required of us; and
even delight in lawful Arts, Books and Sciences, must have its rules, whereby
it must steer its course: for the affections may stick too close to delights of
this nature, and the delight justle out our warmer desires after that
knowledge, wherein consists Eternal life. An inordinate delight in knowledge was
the cause of our first Apostasy; and it is too often seen that our ambition to
know, slackens our endeavors after a practical love of God, and while we dote
upon speculation, we forget to do that which would make us like our Father
which is in Heaven.

6. Delight in Drinking and Tippling, must needs be as odious to God, as delight
in Wantonness, or Uncleanness, or Lasciviousness, or Lechery, or impure Kisses,
Touches, Glances, Passions, Desires, Thoughts, Gestures, Postures and
Imaginations, or Feeding our Eyes with obscene sights, and spectacles, or
Filthy, Smutty, and lewd communications, discourses, jests and expressions,
etc. For this is to delight in things God has forbidden, and to take pleasure
in that, to which he has threatened the burning lake, and the Worm that dies
not; and though custom has made delight in drinking fashionable and he that
does so is not at all reproached, or thought the worse man for it, yet who
knows not, that Gods thoughts are not as our thoughts, nor will the Almighty
make the Customs of this World, his rule in passing sentence in the last day.
Not but that a Man may delight in a Cup of Drink, as it is the gift of God,
when he is dry, and nature requires it, and necessity calls for it; but there
is a vast difference betwixt satisfying the mere necessities of Nature, and
gratifying the desires of voluptuousness and idleness; to delight in the former
is to preserve, but to delight in the other is to weaken and destroy Nature:
and where Men are at a loss, how to spend their time, and therefore make
drinking their delight and sport, they act like Solomon's Madman, who cast
Firebrands, Arrows, and Death, and says, Am I not in sport? Prove. 26.18, 19.
Nor is it the example of Gentlemen, and persons of Wealth and Quality, that
will justify this dangerous delight at the great Tribunal; since believing the
word of God is a greater duty, than to regard our Neighbors practices, and did
the whole World espouse a vice, this would not absolve a Man from his
obligation to obey that known Law, Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a
Multitude to do evil. The pretense Men have in this case that they have no
Calling or Employment, or have nothing to do, and therefore must some way or
other divert themselves, is as vain and sinful, as their delight, and the time
will come when they will be convinced, that they were under no impossibility to
employ themselves in useful exercises, there being innumerable opportunities of
doing good, of exhorting, teaching, admonishing, helping, assisting and
encouraging our Neighbors, and improving our own minds, and far better ways of
spending our time, then in drinking, pledging of healths, talking idly,
censuring our Neighbors, pleasing our appetite, keeping ill company, and
throwing that away upon our lusts which might with greater satisfaction have
been given to Christ's distressed members.

7. Delight in Cards and Dice is a sport, which very few Divines and wife Men
do approve of, and those that have allowed of it, have given such restrictions,
and limitations, as makes it evident, that they wish it were rather totally
left then practiced with so much danger, as this delight is commonly attended
with. Council. Eliber. c. 79.
The Council of Eliberis would not admit any person to the Holy Communion, that
played at Tables; and if the offender did repent of his sport, it was a whole
year after his repentance, before they would admit him to the Holy Table; and
to this purpose speaks the Sixth Council General of Constantinople. Council.
Constantinop. 6. c. 50.
The truth is, this delight is a manifest occasion of evil, and where there is
one that comes off without sinning, there are forty that involve themselves in
various transgressions. What wise Man would stand upon a Precipice, when he can
walk in a beaten Road; and where Men love to go to the utmost limit of what is
lawful, they commonly fall, and engage themselves to commit errors, they did
not think of; the Holy Ghost, therefore has not thought fit to reveal to us
these utmost bounds, that we might keep within the compass of known duties, and
by a due distance from what is sinful, preserve our Innocence, and Gods Favor.
We blame Children for meddling with Knives, and Swords, they know not how to
use, and why should we be guilty of a folly, and imprudence, we condemn in
them? He that abstains from Cards and Dice, most certainly does not sin, and
who would not take the surest side of the Hedge.

Those Casuists who do allow of this recreation, make it lawful only with these
proviso's. 1. Provided, that Men play without eagerness, or being much
concerned. 2. That they give no occasion to Men to quarrel. 3. That they give
all the Money they win to the poor, or some pious use, else it is a sign they
do not play for recreation, but for gain. 4. That they spend but very little
time in it, not above an hour or two. 5. That they avoid all light, vain and
Foolish words, jests and expressions. 6. That the end they propose to
themselves, be only to exhilarate their spirits; that they may with greater
cheerfulness apply themselves to more useful labors. 7. That they play without
using any fraud, or deceit. 8. That they give no offense to them, who are weak
in faith. 9. That they do not comply with the sinful actions, speeches, and
behavior of those they play with.

And with these restrictions, I question not, but this recreation may be
lawful; and the same may be said of Bowling, and some other divertisements of
this Nature. What some Divines object here, that playing at Cards and Dice is a
thing of the Nature of Lots, and these being things sacred, ought not to be
made Jocular, has not that substance in it, which at first sight, it seems to
have, for though these Games and the events of them, be things casual, yet
every thing that is casual, is not therefore of the Nature of a Lot, else a man's
putting his hand in his Pocket, and taking out what Money comes next to his
hand, and dropping it among People that stand underneath, whereby one gets a
Shilling, another Sixpence, a third a Groat, must be called a Lot to; But
however, Let Us grant, that these Games are of the nature of Lots, how does it
follow from hence, that all Lots are things sacred; because sometimes there is
a sacred use made of them, must therefore the use of them be sacred at all
times? There is a sacred use made of dreams, of Bread and Wine, of Clay and
Spittle, etc. but must these things therefore be sacred at all times and in all
places? As well might a Man infer, that all Worship is Religious because some
is such; if it be said, that in Lots there is either a tacit or express
imploring of a Divine determination; I answer, that in some Lots there has
been such a thing practiced, but that therefore the same must be practiced in
all Lots whatsoever, is absurd to imagine. The Apostles indeed Act. 1.24. when
they cast Lots add a Prayer to it, but the additional Prayer is not therefore
necessary in all Lots, because some persons upon special occasions have made
use of it. A Lot or casting of Lots is properly an action of mere Contingency,
used to determine a question by the event, which action, if it be used in
things sacred and of great consequence, may justly be seconded with formal
Prayer, and imploration of the Divine direction, but if used in things civil,
ordinary and trivial, there is no need of any such sacred Rite or Ceremony;
That God has a hand in all Lots, is no argument, that no Lot may therefore be
jocular, for God has a hand in our laughter, and in other contingent things
which are jocular, yet does it not follow from thence, that they are therefore
absolutely unlawful, but only as circumstances, and the abuse of them may make
them so. However, my intent is not to turn advocate for Gamesters, who abuse
these recreations, as much as the Drunkard does his Wine, and strong Liquor. I
have therefore limited the sport, which limitations show, how dangerous the
recreation is, and how he that plays at these Games walks in a manner upon
Thorns, and had therefore need walk very cautiously, that some mischief do not
befall him.

If the aforesaid restrictions be observed, it is a sign we make some conscience
of our ways, and with David, set the Lord in all places before our eyes. I am
sensible, Men will plead impossibility of keeping to these bounds, and pretend
that this way they shall have no sport; but if it be so, and they cannot play
without greater liberty or licentiousness, it is not only far better, but
necessary totally to abstain from it. He that knows such a diet will not agree
with him, by a natural instinct forbears, and refuses to meddle with it; and if
we know that by such recreations our Souls cannot live according to the strict
Rules of conscience, what can be more reasonable than to shun and avoid them?
wisdom is as necessary in spiritual things as in temporal, and he that does not
practice it in the concerns of his Soul, as well as in those of his Body,
cannot be supposed to be a man of any ardent devotion.

8. Delight in Feasting, or in going to Feasts, though this seems to be
harmless, and some will wonder, why this should be brought upon the Stage, and
the lawfulness of it questioned, yet there are Rocks even in this delight,
which if the Soul does not shun, it may be in danger of Shipwreck, and though
it is true, that Eating and Drinking, and Sleeping, and using Physic, where the
body is in danger, are necessary delights, and such without which nature cannot
be kept in its due order and health, and aptitude for working, yet Intemperance
may be committed in all these, and consequently, these delights deserve to be
taken notice of, and fenced with suitable cautions, that we do not exceed our
measure.

And as nothing is more certain, than the voluptuousness of Cleopatra,
Heliogabalus, Apicius, and other Gluttons, is a most detestable vice, so it may
justly be demanded, whether Feasting, which borders upon that voluptuousness
especially if a man take delight and pleasure in it, may not deserve very great
circumspection. Plato looked upon Dionysius as a Monster, because he did eat
twice a day, yet cannot this be a rule, whereby we may give judgment of this
delight, since the Constitutions, Climates, Countries, and the complexions and
necessities of Men require various applications of food and nourishment.

That Feasts are things lawful in themselves, no man of sense or reason can
deny, for not only the examples of Holy men in Scripture but Gods Command, or
Permission to the Jews, Deuteronomy. 4.26. are a sufficient demonstration; and the
Love Feasts, the Primitive Christians used, St. Jude approves of, v. 12. not to
mention that they are bonds of Union and preservatives of Friendship and
Respect, and that the universal consent of Nations does warrant them.

These Feasts, as they are usual either at Inaugurations, or at Nuptials, or
upon some other solemn occasions, or among Friends and Relations, so the
delight a Christian takes either in making them, or in going to them, must be
regulated by these following observations.

As to the Party that makes them; 1. That he do not confine his invitation to
the Rich and Wealthy, and who are able to Feast him again, but extend it withal
to the Poor and Naked, to the Blind and to the Lame, according to Christ's Rule,
Luke 14.13, 14. 2. That he do not make any Feasts for ostentation sake, but
with a pious intent of preserving and augmenting Friendship, and Love and
Charity; for ambition to be talked of and commended, is against the general
prohibition of desiring vain Glory, Gal. 5.26. 3. That he do not Feast on those
days on which a Nation Fasts, or Humbles it self, to deprecate Gods wrath and
anger, for this is expressly forbid, Amos 6.4, 5, 6. 4. That he do not study too
great curiousness, or delicacy in his Dishes, nor bestow too much cost upon the
entertainment, for this looks like expecting of applauses, and catching the
Praises, and admirations of men, which is below a Philosopher and therefore
much more a Christian. 5. That he leave every Guest to his choice and liberty,
and press no person to Eat or Drink more than satisfies nature, in which
particular, Ahashuerus his practice is to be commended, Est. 1.5. 6. That he
suggest unto his Guests opportunities to discourse of Subjects grave, and
serious either Divinity or History, or something useful to the Public, or
Philosophy whereby his Friends may receive some Edification, and this seems to
be the purport of St. Paul's admonition, 1 Cor. 10.31. 7. That he encourage
nothing of ribald talk, no promiscuous Dancing, no Ballads, no vain drinking of
Healths, no Apish actions of Fools, and Jesters, and give no occasion by word
or deed, to contention or unseemly behavior in any man, for this were to make
himself accessory to other men's sins; a thing contrary to the Law of Christ, 1 Timothy 5.22.

As to the Party that goes to a Feast; his delight deviates from the rule of
the Gospel, if, 1. He goes to it with no higher intent than to please, and to
fill his Belly with the good cheer he hopes to find there. These are base ends,
differ not from those of bruits, and discover a temper that has not yet tasted
of the Powers of the World to come. It Is true, whoever goes to a Feast, goes
with an intent to eat there, but to a Christian Philosopher this is only a
subordinate end, in this he places no felicity, with this he does not greatly
please himself, but a desire to express his respect and affection to his
Friend, hopes of hearing or doing some good at such times, and a design by his
own temperance and sobriety to teach, or invite others to their Duty, these are
the principal ends, which make him go; and this is most agreeable not only to
the rules of his faith but to reason too. 2. His delight grows irregular, and
sinful, if he fits very long at it, for hereby much time is lost, and God
expressly Condemns it. Es. 5.11. Time, as it is one of the richest Talents God
vouchsafes us, so care must be taken, that much of it be not spent upon carnal
satisfactions, which are things too mean, to throw away so great a treasure
upon, and though that time at Feasts and entertainments is well spent, which is
spent in serious and profitable discourses, and conferences, yet since these
are altogether out of Fashion, and people think they are not welcome, except
they may laugh at every trifle, and speak whatever comes next, this makes
spending but little time at such meetings necessary, for the longer this
unprofitable spending lasts, the greater grows our account, and with the
account our inexcusableness. 3. His delight degenerates, if at such times he be
not a strict observer. of the rule of temperance. Feasts as they require
guests, so they require self-denial in the guests too; and though I cannot much
commend the Custom of the Pythagoreans, who would come to a Feast, and to let
men see their victory over their appetite, depart from it without eating any
thing, yet to eat and drink with great moderation, is at such times the more
necessary, by how much the temptations are greater; and St. Hieroms rule in
this case is, so to eat and drink, as not to indispose our selves after it, for
Prayer and Meditation.

9. Delight in fashionable Clothes and Habits, though the great liberty Men and
Women take in things of this nature, has infected peoples minds with that
stupidity, that few do think it worth questioning, whether it be lawful or no,
yet notwithstanding all this, he that shall impartially examine the various
invectives the Holy Ghost makes against this delight, Es. 3.18, 19* 20, 21. 1 Timothy 2.9, 10. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4.
will think himself concerned to be more inquisitive into this point; Clothes
as they were given, 1. To cover our nakedness. 2. To keep out cold and other
injuries of the Air. 3. To make a difference betwixt Men and Women. 4. To
consult the health of our Bodies, which being subject to sweats and
perspirations, are hereby refreshed. 5. To distinguish Men in Places, Offices,
Dignities from the meaner sort, the Noble from the Ignoble, and consequently to
keep up order in a Commonwealth, or Kingdom: as they were designed by the
Almighty for such uses, so we see that where persons suffer their affections to
delight in the fineries and fashions and modishness of them, their minds are
too often drawn away from more excellent satisfactions, vanity enters into
them, and whatever formality they may keep up in matters of Religion, Spiritual
things begin to be dull, and insipid to them, at least their relish, and
admiration does in a great measure decay and vanish.

I know not how it comes to pass, but experience assures us, that simplicity in
Clothes does very much cherish seriousness, as vanity and excess in such things
does strangely weaken and debilitate its force and power; and though Clothes
seem to be foreign to Religion, and small, inconsiderable trifles, yet so it
is, that the smaller and the more trivial some things appear, the more
insensibly do they incroach upon the Spiritual part, the Soul, and render it
earthly and sensual, and therefore deserve our greater cautiousness and
circumspection. De Sermon. in monte lib. 2.
St. Austin therefore is very peremptory. He that is fond, says he, of outward
splendour, whether in Clothes, or other things soon betrays himself that he is
in love with the Pomp and Glory of the World, nor can such a person deceive any
serious man with a show of holiness.

As it was part of our Saviors Province to reduce things to the primitive
institution, so if we reflect, how God when he clothed our first Parents did
not study splendor, but necessity, not gayety, but convenience, and made them
Coats of Skins, and by so doing warned us against Pride and extravagance; we
shall find but little reason to be fond of over curious, and fashionable
habits, especially if we cast our eyes upon the Original of Clothes, for sin
caused shame, and shame produced Clothing.

I do not deny, but that it is lawful to make use, not only of a plain and
homely suite, but of richer Vestments and Habiliments, for since God has
allowed us not only Bread and Water for our sustenance, but variety of food if
used with moderation and thanksgiving; so I doubt not but richer habits,
especially if our Places, Offices, and Stations, and Ranks oblige us to it, may
be allowable; but it is one thing to go rich and gaudy merely because our
condition requires it, another to delight and take pleasure, and great
satisfaction in it; for this insensibly emasculates the mind, depresses it, and
renders it vain and enamoured with the World.

Every Man that strives for mastery, is temperate in all things says St. Paul,
1 Cor. 9.25. It Is evident that we all profess striving for an incorruptible
Crown, and if temperance in all things be necessary in order to it, this
temperance must necessarily appear in our Clothes, as well as Diet, else the
temperance is partial, and consequently no part of that wisdom which is from
above.

A Christian should be the humblest, gravest, and modestest Creature living,
and who can be so irrational as to think, that delight in imitating every
fashion, is agreeable to this gravity, modesty and humility; and though what
Judas said, Joh. 12.5. was spoke with an ill end, yet it may justly enough be
applied to the case in hand, Why might not such things purely superfluous be
sold, and given to the poor? That by such things there is injustice done to the
poor, who might be fed with these superfluities, wise Men have complained in
most Ages; In the Primitive Church, when Men prized Religion at a higher rate,
it was a thing very common for persons who were converted, for Women
especially, when God was pleased to give them a vehement desire after the
felicity of the next life, to sell all their richer Garments and feed Christ's
poor Disciples with the Money, and for the future, to give that away to
charitable uses, which formerly they used to bestow upon their luxury in
Clothing. They knew they had nobler things to mind, then adorning of this Lump
of Flesh, which was shortly to be meat for Worms, and to putrify in the Grave,
and thought, that while they were curious in dressing, and covering their
Bodies, they should forget to trim their Souls, and while their better part and
its beauty engrossed their desires and affections, they were the less curious
in the setting out and garnishing of the other.

Women, as they are naturally more prone to this delight, so the Apostles in
giving precepts about Clothing, do in a peculiar manner address themselves to
them, 1 Timothy 2.9. 1 Pet. 3.3.
justly supposing that if it be unlawful for them, men, who have not ordinarily
that inclination nor those temptations to it that they have, ought to think
themselves obliged to live above it; and though I do not think, that in those
places broidered Hair, and Gold, and Pearls, and costly Array, are absolutely
forbidden, yet they are so far forbid, as they are impediments to Godliness, to
shame-facedness, sobriety, modesty, good works, and the growth of the hidden
man in the Heart, and to that Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in
the sight of God, of great price, as is evident from the opposition the
Apostles make between the one and the other; and that delight in such Clothes
is a great Enemy to all these, I need produce no other Argument, but what is
drawn from common experience.

That which is usually pleaded for peoples going rich, and splendid, that by
doing so, they set poor men to work, who would be at a loss for a livelihood,
if they did not take off their commodities, such as modish Laces, Ribbands,
Silks, Velvets, Embroideries, etc. is a pretense rather than an argument, and
seems rather invented, as a salvo for Peoples vanity, than a testimony of the
sincerity of their intentions; for not to mention, that at this rate men might
argue, that Players, Fencers, Bull-baiters, Jugglers, etc. would want
employment, if men did not go to see their sports; were there no persons to
take off such things at their hands, men would betake themselves to other
Trades and Callings, and Professions. However in these cases, it is worth
examining our consciences, whether we wear these things out of compassion to
the poor workmen, or out of Pride and delight in the Pomp and Splendor of the
World; and if we deal faithfully with our own hearts, we shall soon find, that
the pity we pretend to the workmen, is only a Cloak to cover the secret
satisfaction, we take in conforming to the World; and this is evident from
hence, that let the workmen work never so hard, if the thing they make, be not
exactly in the fashion, I see no person so charitable as to take it off of
their hands.

There is no doubt but a Woman, who is married is in a great measure obliged to
please her Husband, and the Apostle seems to allow so much, 1 Cor. 7.34. and
from hence this conclusion is commonly drawn, that if it be the Husbands
pleasure, that the Wife shall go fine and gaudy, it is her duty to obey; nor do
I perceive, that Divines do ordinarily find fault with this conclusion, for
fine Clothes being things in themselves indifferent, lawful, or unlawful,
according to the end and design, Men and Women have in them, and the use they
make of them; if the parties conscience that wears them, bears her witness,
Vid, Cyprian. de Habit. virg. Ed, Oxon. p. 95.
that not out of any delight, or satisfaction, or secret pleasure in such
gauds, and empty things, but merely out of obedience to her Husband, she both
buys and puts them on, much may be said in her justification, for though this
desire in her Husband may be irregular, and an argument that he has no very
great sense of Religion, yet the thing being in it self indifferent, the Wife
in this case may lawfully comply, as Mothers and Nurses please froward Children
by whistling or singing a childish tune to them. It was from hence, that Queen
Esther professes to God in her Prayer, Esth. 14.16.
that it was not any fondness to that rich habit she wore, or any delight she
took in it, that made her put it on, but a desire to comply with the King, and
that as to the Clothes themselves, she looked upon them as menstruous rags. So
that the result of all is this:

Rich Clothes may be worn, 1. Provided that we do not wear them out of
emulation, with an intent to vye with our neighbors, or to let them see, that
we have as much Money, and can afford it, as well as they. 2. Provided that all
Pride and Ostentation in things of this nature be laid aside, and that we do
not think our selves the better men for these accoutrements, nor despise
others, who either will not, or cannot imitate us. 3. Provided that we do not
make them allurements to Lusts, or baits of Vanity, nor wear them to attract
the applause and courtship, and commendations of spectators, nor hope to be
therefore admired by the crowd, or Men of little consideration, nor seek to
deceive others by this outside, thereby to obtain our base and sinister
designs. 4. Provided that the Place, Calling, Office and Dignity in the
Kingdom, or Commonwealth, we live in, require it. 5. Provided that we spend but
very little time in putting on such habits. 6. Provided that in the putting of
them on, or wearing of them, we reflect much on the nobler Garb of the Kings
Daughter, which is all Glorious within, and how far greater satisfaction it is
to be Clothed with the Garment of righteousness and humility. 7. Provided that
we do it only to please those whom God has made our Superiors, and
Governors, whether in the Civil or Oeconomick State. 8. Provided that in these
habits we behave our selves with that modesty, gravity, and gentleness, as
becomes Christians. 9. Provided that we do not go to the extreme of every
fashion, but keep within the compass of these modes, and imitate the most
Religious, and the most moderate persons. 10. Provided that we do deny our
selves in the number of them, and bestow the superfluous upon those that want
them more than we, or give something equivalent to such, as are in straits and
necessities; in a word, that we do not forget to Clothe the naked, nor hide our
selves from our own flesh, as God speaks, Es. 58.7.

With these restrictions I doubt not, but rich Clothes may lawfully be wore,
though still I say, that the plainer and more modest our outward habit is, the
nearer we approach that Christian simplicity, which God has the greatest value
for. But for any delight in splendid habits, or being pleased, or tickling our
fancy and imagination with them, that is a thing which no serious Christian can
allow of, and the Primitive believers were so peremptorily against it, that
they scarce looked upon such persons as Christians.

To this purpose St. Cyprian does very pathetically address himself to the
Virgins of that Age, Some of you, says he, are Rich, and abound in Wealth, and
these pretend that they may lawfully make a show of their Riches in their
outward dress, and use those blessings God has given them. Cyprian de Habit.
Virgin.
But be it known to you, that she is properly Rich that is Rich toward God, and
she only Wealthy who is Wealthy in Christ Jesus; these are the true Riches
which are Spiritual, Divine, and Heavenly, which lead us unto God, and are like
to continue with us in the presence of God for ever; But as to other things
which are pleasing to the World, and remain in the World, those ought to be
despised as much as the World it self, whose Pomp and Glory we then renounced,
when in our Baptism we gave our selves up to God. St. John therefore adjures
us; love not the World, nor the things that are in the World, for if any man
love the World, the love of the Father is not in him, for all that is in the
World, the lust of the Flesh, and the lust of the Eye, and the pride of Life,
is not of the Father, but is of the World, and the World passes away, and the
lust thereof, 1 John 2.15, 16.
but he that does the will of God abides for ever.

Therefore Divine and Eternal Objects must be pursued, and all things done
according to the will of God* that we may tread in our great Masters steps.
Thou say thou art rich, but St. Paul answers the objection, and confines thy
Garments and Habit to certain bounds, and so does St. Peter, and if they oblige
even Wives to the observance of this rigor, and Ecclesiastical discipline, who
have somewhat to plead for themselves, because they must please their Husbands,
how much more is a Virgin tied to live up to these holy rules who has no
excuse for her gaudy dress; Thou say, thou art rich and can afford it; but
all that thou can do, is not therefore lawful to do, nor must the luxurious
desires of the Flesh, which rise only from ambition, go beyond the limits of
Virginity, since it is written; All things are lawful, but all are not
expedient. Thou say, thou art rich, and therefore think thou may use
what God has bestowed upon thee; use it in the name of God, but then use it to
such things, as God has commanded. Let the poor find that thou art rich, let
the needy feel that thou do abound; gain thy God by thy patrimony, feed the
hungry Jesus, and lay up thy treasure there where Thieves cannot break in and
steal; get thee possessions, but let them be Celestial, such as the Moth cannot
corrupt, nor Rust eat away, nor the Hail destroy, nor the Sun dry up, nor the
Rain melt away: Thou sinnest against God, if thou think thy riches are given
thee not to make a wholesome use of them: God has given man a voice, must he
therefore sing amorous, and undecent, and obscence tunes with it: God has made
Iron, must thou therefore murder men with it; and because he has vouchsafed
unto us Frankincense and Wine and Fire, must we therefore sacrifice to Idols;
or because thy Herds and Flocks are great, must thou therefore commit Idolatry
with them? Riches are great temptations except they be employed to pious uses.
Rev. 17.4.
In Scripture the Whore of Babylon is brought in, arrayed in Purple and Scarlet
colors, and decked with Gold, and Precious Stone and Pearl, and her Judgment
is said to be great and terrible, and the Prophet Esaias threatens a fatal
humiliation to the Daughters of Sion, because of their bravery; when they were
exalted thus, they fell, being trimmed thus, they deserved to have their
perfumes turned into a stink, being decked with Silk and Purple, they could not
put on Christ, being adorned with Bracelets and Jewels, they lost the true
Ornament of their hearts and consciences; who would not shun that whereby
others have perished? Who would desire that which has been a Sword and Arrow
to others? If a man should drop down dead upon drinking of a Cup, we should
conclude it was Poison that killed him; and what stupid ignorance of the truth
must it be? what madness, to be fond of that, which has always done, and still
does hurt, and to imagine thou shall not be undone by that, whereby thou know
others have been ruind?

Thus far St. Cyprian, who lived about the year of our Lord 248, an eminent
Bishop, and who afterward died a Martyr in Christ's cause, and in all
probability spoke not only his own sense, but the judgment of the universal
Church in this point. Tertull. de cult. Faemin. lib. 2, c. 13.
I will conclude this subject with a passage out of Tertullian, St. Cyprians
Master, who thus reasons the case with the Women of his Age:

What means that saying, let your light shine before men; Why does our Lord
call us the light of the World? Why does he compare us to a City seated upon a
Hill, if we shine not in darkness, or do not stand up among the drowned part of
the World? If thou hide thy candle under a Bushel, thou must needs, being left
in the dark, be subject to numberless assaults. These are the things which make
us lights of the World, even our good works. True goodness is not enamoured
with darkness, but rejoices to be seen, and is glad to be pointed at. A modest
and shamefaced Christian does not think it enough, that he is so, but he
delights lights to appear so too; for such must be the fullness of his virtues,
that it may burst out from the mind within, to the habit without, and press
from the conscience to the outward man, that men from without may see what
store, and treasure he has in the secret recesses of his Soul. Voluptuousness,
and Wantonness must be renounced, for by these the Virtue of Faith loses its
masculine vigor. I doubt the hand, that has been used to Bracelets, will never
endure the sturdiness of a Chain for Christ Jesus; nor can I apprehend, how the
Knee used to a soft Garter will be able to endure the Stocks, or Racks for the
Gospel, and I very much question, whether that Neck which glistered with
Pearls, and precious Stones, will ever yield unto the Sword of persecution;
therefore my beloved, let us choose hard and uneasy things and we shall not feel
them, let us forsake the pleasant things of this World, and we shall not desire
them; these are the Anchors of our hope; let us lay aside these outward
gayeties, if we aim at the Wedding Garment in Heaven, let not Gold prove the
object of our love, by which the sins of Israel are expressed; let us hate that
which has undone the Patriarchs, and was adored by them after they had
forsaken the fountain of living waters. Come forth beloved, and set before you
the rich attire of the Prophets and Apostles of our Lord; take your fairness
from their simplicity, your blushes from their modesty, paint your eyes with
their shamefacedness, and your lips with their self-denial in speaking; instead
of Pendants insert in your ears the word of God, and let your necks bear the
yoke of Christ Jesus; submit your heads to your own Husbands, and then you will be
dressed like Christians, employ your hands about Wool, and as much as you can,
keep at home, and this will render you more amiable than Gold; Clothe your
selves with the Silk of Innocence, with the Velvet of Holiness, and with the
Purple of Chastity, and thus adorned, God will fall in love with you.

10. Delight in Painting and Patching, and artificial meliorations of the Face
and Skin, to please and delude spectators, or to draw others into admiration of
our persons, Vid. Celada commentar. in Judith, c. 10

Plutarch. in Apophthegm. Aelian var. Hist. l. 8.


as it is a thing which the very Heathens have condemned for reasons drawn from
the light of nature, so it is almost needless to discourse of it, or to batter
it with Arms and Weapons out of the Magazine of the Gospel. This delight has
in most Ages been infamous and the thing it self counted incongruous with the
Law of our very Creation. The Fathers of the second, third and fourth Centuries
derive the Original of it from the Devil, and will allow nothing of this nature
in any person, that looks like a Christian. It Is a sign that the Spirit of
Christ does not dwell in a person that dares delight in such vanities, for that
Spirit inclines the Soul to other things, makes her regardless of beauty and
external comeliness, obliges her solicitous about inward accomplishments, and
how she may please him, that died, and has purchased an eternal Salvation for
her; and it is enough, Romans 8.9.
that he that has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his. A Soul that has
the Spirit of Christ, has other things to do, then spend her time and care in
mending the Face; for they that are after the Flesh, do mind the things of the
Flesh, Romans 8.5.
but they that are after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit. And what are the
things of the Spirit, but setting our affections upon the things which are
above, meditating of the purchased possession, longing after the light of Gods
countenance, despising the World, self-denial, taking up the Cross of Christ, a
transcendent love of God, a burning zeal to his Glory, laying up in store a
good foundation against the time to come, growing strong in the Lord, and in
the power of his might, resisting temptations, growing in grace, laboring
after a greater hatred of sin, a greater fortaste of Heaven, a greater
conformity to the will of God, a greater sense of the love of God, etc. and he
that in good earnest minds these things will have no great desire to busy
himself about such pitiful, trivial, and impertinent things, these will be
trash and dirt to him, and his soul will soar above them, and scorn them, as
the Devils lime-twigs whereby he lies in wait to deceive. And though I will not
deny but that a man in case of danger, and when his life is in jeopardy, or
when he would pass through a party of his enemies, may lawfully disguise
himself, and by art change and alter his countenance, that he may not be known;
and though a man who has lately had the small Pox, or has been Sunburned, or
whose face has been parched with Wind, may lawfully take care by ordinary
helps to reduce his face to his former, or native color, and complexion; and
though we do not judge it against the law of God, to hide some great blemish or
defect in the Face whereby spectators may be offended, and particularly Women
that are with Child, frighted; and though it is not inconsistent with the rule
of the Gospel, to wash the Face when dirty; yet all those paints and additional
washes, and artificial black spots, whereby Men and Women endeavor either to
set off their complexion the better, to give themselves a more pleasing color
or to mend their mien, or to make themselves look more beautiful, or to attract
the eyes, and admiration, and sometimes the unlawful Amors of those they
converse withal, are things which a Christian must be a stranger too.

When I say men, it is not without reason, Platin. in Paul. 2.
for we read of such a beast as Paul, the Second Pope of Rome, who whenever he
went abroad, painted himself, that the beauty of his Face might in some measure
be answerable to the comeliness of his stature, which was procere and tall, and
it is to be feared, that this effeminacy dwells in too many persons of the
masculine Sex at this day; However, as Women are usually more faulty, this way
then Men, so they give us but small hopes to believe, that they are heirs of
Heaven, while they are so industrious to please men and others here on Earth.

St. Paul would not please Men no not in the Ceremonies of the Law, which were
things formerly commanded by God, thinking it unworthy of a Christian, that had
been freed from that Yoke by the Son of God; and how unworthy must it be then
to please Men in things, which God has never commanded, nay by many hints and
places discovered his dislike of? How justly may God look upon it as
presumption, to alter that Face which he thought fit to create in that shape it
is of? and what is it but contending with our Maker, and expostulating with the
Potter, Why have thou made me thus? and controuling his art and wisdom, while
not content with the countenance he has given, we seek to appear in a better.

As we are Christians sincerity must be our character, not only in heart but in
the outward behavior, and what sincerity can there be in cheating Men with our
Faces, and to make them believe that to be natural, which we know is
counterfeit and artificial? We that are naturally prone to pride, and levity,
and lightness of deportment had not need encourage it by such incentives, and
put Oil to that fire which without great help is apt to burn into Hell. We
shall meet with impediments enough from the World, and the Devil, in our
spiritual race; it is madness therefore to increase those obstacles by new
inventions of our own, and we that know how apt every thing is to damp our holy
fervours had not need add such vanities to extinguish them.

In the whole Scripture we read of no Women that ever painted themselves, but
one that was cursed to a Proverb, even Jezabel, Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 15.
2 Kings 9. 33. and Eusebius makes mention of a great instrument of the Devil
whereby, he sowed heresies in the Church, that used this trade, viz. Maximilla.
Even among the Heathen, those that did so, were none of the best fame and
credit in the World, such as Poppaea Nero's Wife, and others and in Holy writ
for the most part this delight is described as meretricious, and a quality of
Strumpets and Harlots, as we see, Ezech. 23.40.

And certainly neither these examples nor descriptions can be any great
inticement to a Christian to imitate such infamous patterns, who is to remember
those who have spoken to him in the name of the Lord, and to follow their
faith, Gregor. Naz. in laudem Gorgon.
considering the end of their conversation Heb. 13.7.

It was an excellent Character St. Gregory Nazianzene gave of the pious
Gorgonia, No Gold, says he, adorned her Temples, no flaxen hair, no borrowed
locks, no artificial curles flew about her sacred Head, no flowing Mantles, no
transparent Vails, no looser garb hat wantoned in the Air, no costly stones
vying with the brightness of the Stars, no Painters arts helped to grace her
noble frame, no operator assisted her to countermine the work of God in her,
and by deceitful colors to hide the curious fabric of her Face, or to
prostitute the Divine shape that was in her, to wanton, and impurer eyes, or to
vitiate her natural image, which was reserved for God, and another World, by an
adulterous, fictitious beauty. But even then, when she was acquainted with all
the tricks and modes of ornaments, she would acknowledge and own none but
whather piety, and the harmony of her soul did give her. No other Red pleased
her, but what her modest blushes caused, no white but what fasting and
abstinence brought into her cheeks, and as for Painting and modish looks, and
borrowed Beauty she left those impertinencies, and vanities to actors and
Ministers of the Stage, persons who have forgot to blush, and are ashamed of
nothing so much as of sobriety and gravity.

This is an example for all Christian Women, to write Copies by; and though the
age we live in, has long ago learned to despise this self-denial, as a starcht
formality and precise niceness, yet that does not make it of less value before
Almighty God, who sees with other eyes, and is resolved to rectify these
willful mistakes, if other means here on Earth will not do it, with E^e^^al
Vengeance.

To this purpose St. Cyprian, Art not thou afraid, De Habit. virg, p. 100.
vain Woman, who make use of Paint, and Washes, and such other curious
fooleries about thy Face, art not thou afraid that thy Creator, when thou
come before him, will not know thee, but exclude thee rather from the
promised Inheritance? May not he reasonably use the language of a Censor, and a
Judge, and say, This is not my Creature, here I see nothing of my Image; Thou
have polluted thy skin with false applications, the hair I gave thee is changed
by Adulterous colors, thy face is nothing but a lie, the figure of it is
corrupted, it is another thing, than what it was; how can thou see God when
thou have not the looks God gave thee, but infected rather by the Devil? Him
thou have followed, thou have imitated th^^^d Serpent, thou had borrowed thy
Ornaments from thine enemy, and with him thou must burn. O my Friends, are not
these things to be considered by Gods servants? are not these things at which
they may justly tremble day and night? Let those who are married, and flatter
themselves, that they do it in complisance to their Husbands, look to it, and
see whether they do not in making such excuses, accuse themselves of being
partners in the sin; and as for Virgins and Maids who use these, unlawful arts,
I cannot reckon them in the number of true Virgins, but judge rather, that they
ought to be removed from other young Women, like so many rotten sheep, that
they do not infect others by their corruption.

In vain do people plead here, that the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.23. allows us to
bestow more abundant honor on those members of the Body, which we think to be
less honorable, and therefore a homely Face may be tricked up with suitable
paints, and spots, and washes; for not to mention that the Apostle by those
members does not mean the face and cheeks, but such as modesty bids us conceal;
The honor there spoken of, cannot be understood of paints and washes, for they
are no Ornaments, but dissimulations, and deceptions, and the honor that is
allowed to such uncomly parts is hiding of them from the sight of Men, which I
suppose such vain persons will never practice on their Faces.

And what if the ingredients of such Fucus's be Gods Creatures, so is poison
too and yet we see few persons so mad, as to make use of it so as to drink it,
nor does it signify much, that persons may have a good end in all this, since
we are not to do evil, that good may come out of it. It Is granted, that natural
beauty may provoke spectators to lust, and lascivious desires as well as
artificial, yet from thence it follows not, that therefore the artificial ought
to be allowed of, as well as the natural, for there is not the same reason for
the one that there is for the other; the natural, God bestows and cannot be
blamed, nor did the person, that has it, spend time and pains, and care to get
it; the artificial as people cannot endeavor after it, but their corrupt minds
and affections must prompt them to it; so it argues discontentedness with what
God has thought fit to give them, and an itching desire to deceive the unwary
spectator. And suppose natural Beauty allures and tempts voluptuous Men, must
therefore more evil be added to the former? must people therefore increase
temptations with artificial Beauty? Is not the World bad enough? And must it be
made worse? Must sin be therefore multiplied, and the sickly minds of carnal
men, more and more distempered? Is it not enough that natural Beauty is so
dangerous? and shall we increase the danger by tricks and artifices?

St. Chrysostomes advice here is very seasonable; Homil. 31. in Matthew.
Consider I beseech you, Sarah and Rebekah, and such Matrons, who have all
undervalued this vanity, and Leah, though she was not handsome, nor so well
beloved as Rachel, yet used no art to make her so, but the lineaments, and
features of her face remained as nature had disposed them, nor was she at all
concerned at her homeliness, though educated by Parents who were Pagans and
Idolaters; and shall thou, whose head is Christ, and who pretendest to be a
Believer, approve of these inventions of the Devil? Do not thou remember the
water that was sprinkled upon thy face in Baptism, nor the Sacrament whereby
thy lips and tongue were blessed? Did thou seriously think of this, whatever
fond desires thou might naturally have after such dangerous Ornaments, thou
would not dare to fulfill them; Remember, thou did vow to be conformable to
Christ Jesus, and thou will hate this deformity, for he delights not in these
deceitful colors, but requires a sublimer Beauty, even that of thy Soul and
Spirit; why should thou attempt a thing so vain, so needless and superfluous?
There is no defect in any of Gods works, nor is there any thing that stands in
need of thy making it better then it is; none dares add any new strokes to the
Picture of a King, and if he dares, he smarts for it; when thou dare add
nothing to the workmanship of Man, art not thou afraid to make Gods work better
then it is? Does not the fire of the burning lake come into thy mind, and do
not thou think how thy soul will one day be totally forsaken, whose concerns
thou must needs neglect now while thou appliest all thy care and study and
thoughts to thy body? Why do I say, thou neglectest thy soul; thy very body
does not enjoy what thou wishest for, which is evident from hence, because,
while thou seek to be handsome, thou do really appear homely; thou
seek by this to please thy Husband, whereas it cannot but be a grief to him,
nor is it he only that blames thee, but others also do despise thee. Thou
would fain appear young, but thy very paint hastens old Age, and whereas
thou fanciest that this will make thee look glorious, thou do but prepare for
thy shame. But why do I mention things of this nature, while I forgo the
greater arguments, as that thou offendest God, underminest modesty, raisest
jealousy, and make prostitute Women thy patterns. All which being laid
together, I beseech you despise these hellish Ornaments and unprofitable arts,
and renouncing this formosity, or rather deformity, learn to be ambitious of
that Beauty, which angels do desire, which God is enamored with, and which
cannot but be pleasing to your Husbands too, that having spent and led your
life honorably here, you may attain at last to everlasting Glory.

11. Delight in Dancing is another common Recreation, and though Dancing in it
self, as it is an agility or motion of the Body, whereby the body is preserved
in health, and vigor cannot be said to be unlawful, no more than singing and
exercising the tongue (not to mention that agility of body is a gift of God,
and if it be moved and exercised with observing time and measure, there is
nothing in the word of God directly or indirectly against it) yet the manner
and use, and the ends, and designs of it, make a very great difference in the
lawfulness and unlawfulness of it.

That David Danced before the Ark of God, to testify his joy, and exultation
at so great a blessing, we read, 2 Samuel 6.14. and Michals despising him for it
is noted as an error, for which by a Divine judgment she was doomed to be
childless; v. 2.3. which shows, that God approved of that expression of his
joy, and the Prophets of Israel permitted the Women to Sing, and Dance, and to
answer one another, Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands,
sands, 1 Samuel 18.6, 7. a custom which in all probability they had learned of
Miriam the Prophetess, the Sister of Aaron, who after the victory over the
Egyptians took a Timbrel in her hand, and all the Women went out after her
with Timbrels, and with Dances, Exodus 15.20. But then this Dancing was still
upon a Spiritual account, with an intent to praise God, and to glorify him not
only in their souls, but bodies too; and besides, the Women Danced by
themselves, and the Men by themselves without mixing one with another, and only
upon extraordinary occasions, when Gods power and goodness was to be
Celebrated, and the younger sort were to be encouraged to cheerful
Hallelujah's, which is an argument, that Dancing out of wantonness, or
promiscuous Dancing, Men and Women Dancing together to please spectators, and
to divert themselves, has no warrant from the sacred Oracles.

This is the reason why mixed and lascivious Dancing has been condemned, not
only by the Primitive Fathers, but by almost all the Reformed Churches; nay the
more serious sort of Papists look upon it as a thing intolerable among
Christians. He that will not wilfully blind his eyes, must necessarily see,
that this mixed Dancing had its original from the Heathens, who Worshipped their
Gods by such extravagant motions, and there are not a few precepts in the
Gospel, which forbid us to work the will of the Gentiles, and to live in the
Flesh, to the lusts of Men, as St. Peter phrases it, 1 Pet. 4.2, 3. And indeed
he that will impartially consider the extent of that Chambring and wantonness,
St. Paul speaks against, Romans 13.13. must confess, that this mixed Dancing, as
it is usually practiced, is comprehended under it. To any man that reads the
Scripture with attention and soberness, it will appear very evident, that
nothing is pressed more by the Apostles, then gravity, modesty and great
decency in our postures, actions, speeches, clothing, and behavior; and how
this mixed and jovial Dancing, is agreeable to all this, no sober man can easily
imagine.

That this mixed Dancing, though not necessarily, and naturally, yet for the
most part through the vitiousness and corruption, that is in the generality of
mankind, is an apparent occasion of lasciviousness, and levity, and impurer
lusts, and an incentive to effeminateness, pride and vanity, is a thing past
controversy, and then sure Christianity can give no encouragement to it. The
usual concomitants of this sport are drinking, foolish, and frothy talk, and
other immodest postures and actions, so that to plead for it, is to plead for
an accumulation of sins, and enormities. And what does this sport betray but a
weak, soft, easy, vain and empty mind? What snares are hereby laid for
spectators to entertain evil, and dangerous thoughts, which too often hurry
them on to impurer enterprises, and when so many Councils, Synods, and wife,
and learned men have apprehended the danger of it, writ against it, preached
against it, made it their business to enquire into the nature of it, and upon
examination of its tendencies, and consequences, have both publicly and
privately represented it, as improper for Christians, and an enemy to that
seriousness, which ought to be their essential character; it must be either
pride or stupidity, that makes men stubborn or careless under such censures.
And is it probable, that people who never studied the point or, at the best,
surveyed, and looked into it negligently, should be so well able to judge of
it, as those who upon weighing what can be said for and against it, have at
last concluded and inferred the undecency, and unlawfulness of it.

The Romans when they were yet Heathens, counted Dancing a very dishonorable
thing, Vid. P. Martyr. loc. com. class. 2. c. 11.
and Salust tells us of Sempronia, that she was more than ordinarily versed in
Singing and Dancing, which says he, was more then became a grave and honest
matron; To this purpose Cicero affirms of a good man, that rather then dance
before spectators, he would lose a very considerable Legacy; it was laid to
Lucius Muraena's charge, as a crime, that he had Danced when he was in Asia;
and Cicero observes upon that passage, that no mansure would Dance, that was
any way sober, it being, the Quality of a Madman, and therefore among the
errors, and misdemeanors he objects against Anthony, he brings in Dancing for
one. These were the thoughts of the Heathen Sages, before the floodgates of
debauchery were opened, and while Rome retained somewhat of her ancient
sobriety; and what witnesses will such Men be against Christians, who are
taught to go beyond Heathens in gravity, and sobriety?

What it this mixed, and promiseuous Dancing, be not expressly forbid in
Scripture, no more is the belief of Mahomets riding upon his Alborach or white
Steed to Heaven, no more is the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and the Mass,
and the Popes Triple-Crown, Purgatory, and the Immaculate Conception of the
Virgin Mary; yet what serious Protestants will infer therefore, that these are
lawful Doctrines and Positions? It Is enough, that there are such lessons set
down there, which any rational Man may easily conclude to be inconsistent with
such recreations. It Is enough that the Apostle forbids all those things which
the Greeks call (...), which signifies Feasting mixed with Dancing, Gal. 5.21.
we translate the word revelling, but it includes the extravagant action of mixed
Dancing, whereby lusts and vanities are kindled, or encouraged in the minds of
men, and he asserts that they that use such things or delight light in them,
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

Nor will it avail here to say, that if any lascivious and impure desires be
raised by this mixed Dancing, Men and Women one with another, that this is only
by accident, the thing it self may be harmless enough, for in things of
Morality, and where conscience is concerned, we must not always take our
measure by the nature of the thing, but very often by the humor and temper of
sinful Men, P. Mart. loc. cit.
that make use of it, as the learned Peter Martyr very well observes, for let us
grant that here and there a sober Man may be found, who can with the greatest
chastity of mind be both a spectator, and an actor of such promiscuous
Dancings, but what becomes all this while of the multitude, and of the greatest
part of Men and Women, which are present at such sports, who cannot, will not
keep within bounds, so that in this case we are not to respect what may
possibly be done, but what for the most part uses to be done; In things of a
moral nature, we must not go to the very edge of that which is lawful, but keep
within a considerable distance of it, for the nearer we come to the utmost
bounds, the nearer we approach to that, which is unlawful, which is the reason,
why the Apostle bids us avoid the very appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.

I do not deny, but Men may do worse, but what necessity is there for their
doing that which is bad, to avoid that which is worse? Must I therefore slander
and abuse a Man, because it is a less sin then to murder him?

I know such Doctrines are usually branded with the name of foolish
preciseness, but sure I am, they are agreeable to that wisdom which is from
above, and he that means to arrive to this wisdom, must of necessity become a
fool, a fool in the eyes of the World, and that must be a Christians greatest
glory; for know ye not that the friendship of the World is enmity with God,
whosoever therefore will be a friend of the World, is the enemy of God, Jam.
4.4. Sum. Part. 2. tit. 6. c. 6. 3.
upon which words Antonisnus thus paraphrases; A friend of the World is he that
loves the pomp, the lasciviousness, the pride and vain glory of the World, and
he that will please Men in things of this nature, things usually found in
promiscuous Dancings, becomes an enemy of God.

Ludovicus Vives tells us of some poor Indians, that were brought from the
farther parts of Asia, who seeing some of our Europeans Dancing together,
wondered what madness, and fury had possessed them; indeed he that should stand
upon a Hill afar of, without hearing any Music, and see people skip about, and
sometimes beat the Earth with their feet, sometimes lift themselves up into the
Air, sometimes in such a posture, sometimes in another, could think no less,
then that they were forsaken of their reason. I will not here allege any
examples of Men and Women, who have found by sad experience, what a sad Exit
their Dancing and revelling has had, how in the Ball, which Lodowick the
designed Archbishop of Magdeburg gave his kindred and relations, the house
fell, upon the Dancers heads, and crushed the Burgemaster and his friends to
death, De Bell. Belg. l. 1.
nor how that virtuous Virgin in Famianus Strada was ravished in a Ball. The
misfortune that befell John the Baptist through the jocular Dancing of
Herodias, ought to fright devout persons from having any esteem and veneration
for it; Hom. 49. in Matthew.
upon which passage St. Chrysostom thus comments, Where there is Lascivious
Dancing, there the Devil is always present; God has not given us feet for
Dancing, but to walk modestly, not to skip like Camels, but that we might be
fit to stand one day in the Quire of Angels; If the body be deformed, or
disfigured by such leaping, how much more the soul? such Dances make the Devil
Dance, and this way men are cheated by the Ministers of darkness. It were
endless to rehearse here, what Men of learning, and wisdom have said against
this sport; De vanit. scient. c. 18.
one passage out of Cornelius Agrippa may serve for all Nothing can be more
ridiculous then promiscuous Dancing; This lets loose the reins of wantonness,
is a faithful friend to sin the great incentive to uncleanness, an enemy to
chastity, and a recreation unworthy of rational Men. Here many a matron has
lost her honor, here many a Virgin has learned that which she had better been
totally ignorant of; From hence many have come away worse then they were, but
none better.

12. Delight in seeing Stage Plays must not be omitted here; and how far this
delight may be allowed of, and how far detested, I cannot show you better, then
by giving you the contents of a Letter, I formerly writ to a young Gentleman
upon this Subject.

Sir,
THough you did pitch upon none of the best Casuists, when you sent your case
to me, yet since you have thought fit to ask my opinion, whether it be lawful
to go and see a Play, a thing, our Gallants are so exceeding fond of, I must
crave leave to tell you, that in the Primitive ages of the Church, such a
question from one who professed himself a follower of the Holy Jesus, would
have been looked upon with novery pleasant aspect, they supposing that every
Christian, who knew, or was sensible into whose name he was Baptized,
understood, that things of this nature, are as foreign to Christianity, as
lasciviousness and wantonness, and as contrary to the design of our noble
Religion, which is to plant a Spiritual Life in us, as wallowing in
voluptuousness or luxury.

But the times are altered, and our Virtuosi have allowed of it, and what men
in former ages scarce thought fit to be named among Christians, this has made
not only convenient, but in some respect necessary, and essential to a person
of Quality; so that this Question as the case stands, may with some justice be
asked, and even a very sober person may now with some reason demand, whether
there be any harm in beholding these dramatick representations? And here I
would not be thought so rigid, or foolish rather, as if I believed no
representation of History, or Men's actions in the World lawful, for that would
be directly contrary to Christ's own practice, who instituted a Sacrament to
represent his death, and passion by, and to keep up the remembrance of it to
the Worlds end, and though this is not acting things to the Life, yet it at
least imports so much, that something Historical may be represented in lively
and significant Characters, the management of which must be left to the
prudence and discretion of sober Men.

But then these representations must be restrained altogether to virtue and
goodness, and such accomplishments of the Soul, which the wisest and holiest
Men in all ages have been desirous and ambitious of, and though virtue cannot
be well either discoursed of, or represented without its opposite vice, yet
such is the nature of vice, such the unhappy consequences of it, that if either
the pleasure, or ease, or prosperity and success of it be shown and acted,
though but for a few minutes, whatever Fate it ends in, it is so agreeable to
the corrupted tempers of Men, that it leaves a pleasing impression behind it;
nor is the after-clap or doleful Exit of it strong enough, to prevent a liking
or satisfaction especially in the younger sort, who are generally more taken
with its present content and titillations, then frighted with its dull and
muddy conclusion; for while its present success, and sweetness is acting, the
Cupid strikes the heart, and lays such ae foundation there, as mocks all the
death, and ruin, it after some time does end in; I doubt not, but the joys of
Angels, and the triumphs of glorified souls might be acted to the life; and
great good might issue from the gaudy Opera, and if justice, patience,
sobriety, humility, and contempt of the World with all the garlands, and solid
joys that attend them, were represented with their future recompense, in a
serious way, without jesting or raillery, not a few Men and Women might be
signally edified by it, their affections raised above their ordinary level, and
their courage kindled to press toward the noble prize; but then there must be
nothing of the present amiableness of vice mingled with the Scenes, for though
vice must almost necessarily be named in these living Landskips, yet it should
be only named, and never named but with horror, and the generosity and grandeur
of virtue only acted the the life, for indeed nothing is fit for action, or
imitated but virtue; vice should never appear but in its ugly shape, for if you
dress it in its shining Robes though it be but for a quarter of an hour, such
is the venom of this Basilisk, it breaths a poisonous vapor both on the Actor,
and the Spectator, and while the one comes to see sport, and the other to get
money, both go away from the Theater worse then they came; and though both come
away laughing, yet both prepare for bitter mourning and lamentation.

I have shown you what Drama's may be useful and commendable, but Sir, all this
differs very much from the modern plays, the aforesaid question relates to,
these being things fitted for vanity, and luxury, for in these, though the
punishment of vice, and rewards of virtue are represented to the life, yet it is
done rather with advantage to the former, then to raise the credit of the
latter, and the effect shows it, viz. the corruption and debauchery of youth,
and persons of all sorts and sizes which I shall more largely speak of in the
sequel.

The Plays speak of, are suited to the loose humor of the age, which seems to
hate all things that are serious, as much as Rats-bane, and delights in nothing
so much, as in jests and fooleries, and seeing the most venerable things turned
into ridicule. Here no Play rellishes but what is stuffed with love tricks, and
that which makes people laugh most, is the best written Comedy; wantonness is
set out in its glittering garb, and the melting expressions that drop from its
lips, are so charming to a carnal appetite, that the young lad wishes himself
almost in the same passion, and intrigue of Love, he sees Acted on the Stage,
it looks so pleasant and ravishing.

Here Religion is too often traduced and through the sides of Men that differ
from our Church, the very foundation of Christianity is shaken, and undermimed;
not but that Hypocrisy in Religion ought to be severely lashed, but then it
must be done in a grave, becoming, and serious way; such as Christ, and his
Apostles used against the painted Sepulchers, the Pharisees. The Stage has
that unhappy character, that it is looked upon by the generality, as the grand
place of divertisement, Men come thither not to learn, but to be merry, and
since acts of hypocrisy look so very like acts of true Religion, the danger
is, that while you raille, the counterfeit, you hurt the Original, and while
you dress the Image in a fools Coat the substance suffers in the ridiculous
representation.

So that here Men and Women are insensibly poisoned, and the good thing they
see made awkward in an enemy, in time looks but odd and strange in a friend,
and by degrees the virtue is hated in good earnest, because one that was in the
habit of an hypocrite, did practice it.

Here few sacred things are spared, if they serve to make up the Decorum of the
Act, and Heathenism is reduced into Christian territories in a pleasant way.
the Pagan Gods must make the Drama great, and while these are in all the Actors
mouths, the licentious spectator in time applies that to the true, which the
fond Poet ascribed to fictitious Deities. Here the supreme Creator is too often
reviled through the ill language that is given to Heathen Numens, and things
that savor of real piety rendered flat, insipid, and impertinent; here all,
that may raise the Flesh into action and desire, is advanced, and whatever
serves to lay reason asleep, and to exalt fancy and imagination, and the glory
of the World, is made the proper object of admiration; Here all the wanton
looks, and gestures, and postures that be in the mode, are practiced according
to art, and you may remember, you have seen people when dismissed from a Play,
strive and labor to get that grace and antic mien they saw in the mimick on
the Stage; Here Men swear and curse, and actually imprecate themselves, and
though they do it under the name of the person they act, yet their own tongue
speaks the sin, and their body is the agent that commits it, and thus they damn
themselves for a Man in imagination.

And are these things fit for a Christian to behold! a Christian, who is to be
new Creature, a candidate of Eternity, an heir of Heaven, an enemy to the
World, a spiritual Prince, a King over his lusts, and Emperor over his carnal
desires? Is this a sight agreeable to the strait way, and the narrow gate,
which leads to life? Can you or any man reconcile such darkness with light,
such Idols with the Temple of God? Is there any thing in the Gospel more
plainly forbid, then conforming to the World? and what can that prohibition
import, if conformity to the World in beholding these dangerous sights be not
in a great measure meant by it? We may put forced glosses upon the words, but
does not this look like the natural sense of them?

Holiness for without it no man shall ever see the Lord, is the very Character
of men, who name the name of Christ, if they bear not that name in vain, and
will any man of sense be so bold as to say, that Shows, which have so much sin
in them, are suitable to that Holiness? We know who said, Turn away mine eyes
from beholding Vanity, Ps. 119 47.
and who sees not, that he who delights in such shows, neither dares pray that
prayer, nor can have any desire to imitate David in his holiness, for he is
pleased with vanity, fixes his eyes upon it, makes it the pleasing object of
his sight, and consequently instead of turning his eyes away from it, turns
them to it, and would not for a World lose that pleasure.

If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee, for it is
profitable for thee, that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy
whole body should be cast into Hell, said he, who has protested, that not the
least tittle or jot a of his words shall perish, Matthew. 5.29. If there be any
sense in this passage, the meaning must necessarily be, that if the eye, or
beholding an object, prove an occasion of evil, the eye must be so carefully,
and so totally withdrawn from that object, as if it were actually plucked out,
or were of no use in the body; what an occasion of evil the beholding of such
Scurrilous shows is, none can judge so well as he who takes notice, how by
these sights, the horror, which attended some sins, is taken off, and men are
tempted to entertain a more favorable opinion of them, how apt upon these
occasions they are to laugh at those sins which require rivers of tears, and to
smile at the jest they hear, which deserves their most rigid censures; how
natural is it to be affected with these representations? and if there be any
thing of evil in them, how readily is it imbibed or if not imbibed, yet
excused, if not totally excused, yet qualified, and construed as a thing of no
great hurt, and thus its dreadfulness abates, and it is afterward left out in
the Catalogue of errors.

God was either so jealous of his own glory, or so render of the spiritual
welfare of the Israelites, Exodus 23.13.
that he would not suffer them to take the names of the Heathen Gods in their
mouths, nor suffer them familiarly to mention them, for fear their frequent
naming of them should lessen their awful apprehensions of the supreme Deity, or
they be tempted through that familiarity to think, there was no great harm in
worshipping of them; this was no ceremonial precept, nor judicial: The
substance is moral, and consequently cannot be supposed to be abolished by the
death of Christ; and since God would not permit it to the Jews, how should he
be supposed to give leave to Christians, of whom he requires greater
strictness, to be lavish in such expressions? How in our modern Plays in most
prayers, wishes, and imprecations the Heathen Deities are brought in, I need
not tell you, The Actors indeed swear by God in the singular number, but in
their entire Harangues, or witty sentences or expressions, which they intend
shall move most, the Gods are called in, and that is the grace of their part; if
it be said that this is done out of a reverential respect to the true God, who
is too great to be mentioned in such trival speeches; it is a mavelous thing,
they are not afraid to swear by him, and to take his name in vain, and though
they mince their Oaths sometimes, yet that does not excuse the crime, as long
as it shows their willingness to act it; but the truth is, such men seek to
turn Religion again into Paganism, so the style they use in their respective
speeches about things above, is fitted for that purpose.

I know that it is commonly alleged, that the stories which are Acted, relate
to transactions among the Gentiles, and that it would be incongruous to
represent their actions, and not to mention their Deities, or to speak in their
language; but not to mention, that there is no necessity of representing
passages of this nature, there being as noble things among Christians, that
deserve remembrance, why cannot the virtues of Pagans be represented without
mentioning their Gods, or the sins and extravagancies of their Gods, whereby
corrupted nature is so easily debaucht into a mean opinion of the great
Sovereign Being, and tempted to believe the powers above either subject to the
same infirmities, that we are, or at least not much displeased with our
irregularities here below. He that makes bold with false Gods, does very easily
slide into contempt of the true, and while men are brought in to dare the
supposed Deities above, they will be more ready to affront him, that is the same
yesterday, today, and forever. Nor will it follow, because Books that treat of
Heathen Gods may be read, that therefore those Deities may be Acted, and
mentioned on the Stage, for there is a great difference between reading of a
thing, and seeing it acted with all the vanity and boldness, that usually
attends it. In reading, a man's serious thoughts are not dispersed or scattered,
but keep within the compass of modesty, and weigh things in the balance of
reason, whereas being Acted to the life, they naturally strike vanity into the
mind, affect the sensual part, drive away seriousness, and leave an unhappy
tincture behind them.

And if it be against the Divine law, familiarly to mention or talk of these
fictitious Deities, it cannot be very agreeable to the sense of it, for
Christians to go and hear that idle talk, for as in other concerns the receiver
is as bad as the thief, so he that with delight hears that which another is
forbid to speak, makes himself accessory to his sin, and draws needless guilt
upon his Soul.

Flatter not your self, Sir, with a fancy, that these Plays are no where forbid
in the Bible, and that therefore it may be lawful to see them, for the word
(...), Revelling, I mentioned before, and to which the Apostle threatens
exclusion from the Kingdom of Heaven, Gal. 5.21. and from which the word Comedy
in all probability is derived, though I know others fetch it from (...) a
village, because in ancient times, they did sing Songs about Country Towns, I
say this word includes all such vain, lascivious, Ludicrous, and Jocular
representations, Vid. Gerh. Joh. Voss. de Idol. l. 2. c. 8.
not only Dancing and luxurious Feashing, but wanton, light and amorous
Interludes and all that belongs to the pampering and satisfying of the Flesh,
such as amorous Songs, Complementing of Mistresses, Love-tricks, and immodest
parts, and speeches, which make the vainer sort of the company merry, for the
word is very comprehensive, and being so, one would think should fright every
serious person from coming within the guilt of that, which has so severe a
threatening annexed to it.

And is it worth losing Heaven, and eternal happiness for the sight of such
jocular Shows? Are the pleasures arising from hence, of that consequence, that
they will counterballance so great a loss? Had you rather forfeit Gods savor,
then these ludicrous transactions? Are these momentary satisfactions of that
value, that you would run the hazard of being for ever deprived of the
beatifick vision for them? That usual exception, that God will not be so cruel,
as to condemn Men for such harmless sports, is of no weight at all, for God
has no where declared, that he will govern himself by Men's fancies, but his
eternal wisdom is the rule he will go by; if men will have their pleasures, he
has thought fit to forbid, they must thank themselves, if they go without his
favor, and since they were warned of this danger, they can have no excuse, but
are as the Apostle speaks (...), condemned of themselves Tit. 3.11.

Let Us but consider the Nature, scope and drift of our Religion; it commands us
decency, modesty, sobriety, vigilance, or watchfulness over our thoughts, and
words, and actions, simplicity in the inward, and outward man, redeeming the
time, employing the hours God has lent us, in profitable discourses, and
things useful and tending to edification. It bids us abstain from fleshly
lusts, which war against the soul; it condemns all, Rioting, chambering,
wantonness, and making provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof:
It commands us to walk after the Spirit, to be heavenly minded, to have the
same mind and temeper in us, which was also in Christ Jesus, to grow in grace,
to advance in goodness, to grow strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might; it bids us stand up for the glory of our God, and to be concerned when
his Name, or Religion, or things Sacred are abused; it bids us avoid Scandal,
and take heed we do not by our example, either draw people into errors, or
confirm them in their sins; it bids us take heed of discouraging our neighbors
from goodness, and of laying a stumbling block in the way of weaker Christians;
it bids us exhort one another daily, and beware lest any of us be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin; these are some of its principal rules, and I
need not add, what our great Master has told us, ye are my friends, if ye do
whatsoever I command you, Joh. 15.14. how these rules can be observed by
persons that delight in these shows, I cannot apprehend; is it modesty to be a
hearer of that ribaldry and filthy communication, which some Plays are stuffed
with? Or to be a spectator of so many undecent and wanton gestures, postures,
and actions, which in some Comedies make up the greatest part of the show? Is
this sobriety, to stand by and hear men curse and swear, and talk of things
which should not be so much as named among Christians? Is this decency to
afford your presence in a place, where the most debauched persons assemble
themselves for ill ends and purposes? Is this your fear of God to go and hear
the most solemn ordinances of God railled, and undervalued, such as marriage,
and living up to the strict rules of reason and conscience? Is this your
watchfulness over your thoughts, and words, and actions, to go and expose your
selves to temptations, to run into the Devils arms, and give him an opportunity
to incline your heart to sinful delights, and being pleased with things which
God abhors? Is this that Godly simplicity, the Gospel presses, to pay for your
being affected with the vain shows of this sinful World, and to take liberty to
hear and see, what men of little or no Religion shall think fit to represent to
you? Is this redeeming of your time to throw away so many hours upon fooling,
and seeing men's ridiculous postures, gestures, and behaviors?

Is not this making war against your soul? Is not this fighting against your
happiness? Is this the way to grow in grace, and to advance in goodness, and to
abound more and more in the love of God, which your Christianity obliges you
to? Is not this to clogg your soul? Is not this to throw impediments in her way
to felicity? Is not this the way to make her enamored with the World, from
which a Christian is to run away, as much as he can? By your Saviors rule
though you are in the World, yet you are not to be of the World; These shows
alienate other men's affections from the best of objects, and what security have
you, that they will not alienate yours? Or have you a peculiar exemption from
that danger? If you have, show us your warrant, let us see your parent; if you
take the same way that profane persons take, to dull their Religious desires,
how can it be otherwise, but it will have the same effect in you? if you use
the same means, why should not you fear the same unhappy influence? Why should
you shut your eyes against a thing, as clear as the Sun? Do not you see, do not
you perceive, how sin grows upon you by frequenting these places? Do not you
find, how under these shows, the brutish part in you grows strong and vigorous,
how the Flesh distends its plumes, grows easy and pleased, and in time
engrosses all the nobler faculties of your Soul? As you are a Christian, you
are to bring your Flesh into subjection, and to keep under your Body; and do
not these shows signally help toward its power and dominion over the nobler
part, and promote its Soveranity, and triumph over the reasonable appetite?
What pampers it more then such sights? What feeds its preposterous longings
more then these? Do not these evidently make this slave usurp Authority over
her Mistress? And is this fit to be done by Christians, who are to crucify the
Flesh with its lusts and affections?

Who sees not, that these sights are mere incentives to lust, and fuel to feed
the impurer fire in our breasts? And is this to walk after the Spirit, as we
are commanded? If they that walk afer the Flesh cannot please God, how can you
hope to please him, while you allow your self in this work of the Flesh? Is
this to promote a lively sense of God? Is the Stage likely to produce vigorous
apprehensions of Gods grace and favor? you know it damps and obscures them,
you know it is an Enemy to them, you know, it is the worm that hinders your
Spiritual growth, and yet will you fancy a necessity to frequent it? Men may
count it necessary to be drunk, and to kill a person, they do hate, but will
this necessity hold water when the great Judge comes to examine it? The Flesh
may count that necessary, which reason apprehends to be absurd, and impious,
and he that hearkens to the dictates of the brute within him, will call any
thing necessary, though never so contradictory to the Oracles of Heaven, and
the lessons of our great Master Jesus? Is this to have the same mind in you,
which was also in Christ Jesus; I hope you do not question the duty, and if you
believe it incumbent upon you, can you imagine, that in frequenting the Stage,
you imitate his example? Did he ever encourage such empty things? Is there any
thing in all the History of his life, that may be said to countenance such
doings? Could he applaud these follies, do you think, whose life was a perfect
pattern of holiness, nay, are not all his precepts levelled against these
scurrilities? Is it possible to live up to his precepts, and feed our eyes with
these Shows? Is it possible to be his friend, and a friend to these vanities?
He whose life was a perpetual selfdenial in the pleasures of this life, could
he give the least color, or shadow of approbation of them? He who preached up
the Doctrine of the Cross, could he have any liking to that, which is directly
contrary to that Doctrine? Would any man that looks upon the jolly assembly in
a Playhouse, think that these are Disciples of the crucified God? Do they not
look liker Mahomets Votaries, or Epicurus his Followers? Would not one think
that they had never heard of the Cross, and that whoever their Master was, they
were disciplined only to live merrily: Would not one think that these persons
are very different in their tempers from those Christians, the primitive
Fathers do describe, who trampled on the World, and were afraid of any thing
that savoured of its satisfactions? Would not one think, that they are rather
disciples of some Heathen Jupiter, or Venus, or Flora, or some such wanton
Minion, then of the grave, the austere, and the serious Jesus, for such he
would have his followers to be, these he would have tread in his steps; these
he would have known by actions, and a behavior like his own, and is a Play
likely to plant this noble temper in you? Is the sight of a Comedy a probable
means to make you live above the World? are the profane railleries, that are
used there, fit preparatives for austerity of conversation? Is this the way to
promote gravity to visit the Stage, where all gravity, is looked upon, as
Pedantry, and traduced as a thing proper only for old Usurers, and Women who
are past their sins and vices? Is this the way to advance seriousness, to be
much at places, where seriousness is censured as a trick of Divines, or at the
best, as an effect of vapors, and the natural result of melancholy, and the
spleen? As a Christian, you are to shun the very appearances of evil, and is
this your obedience, to delight in that which is evil, to applaud it with your
smiles, to commend it with your tongue, and to encourage it by your presence?

As a Christian, you are the Salt of the Earth, Matthew. 5.13.
and consequently are to preserve your Neighbor from corruption; and is this
the way to preserve him from infection, by your presence in such places, and
being as vain as he, to encourage not only the actors in their unlawful
profession, but the spectators too in their disobedience to the Gospel? And
what is this, but to make your self a Proctor to sin, to help people to be
undone, to assist them in going to Hell, and to make your self accessory to
their folly.

Are these the Christians, that are to help one another to Heaven? Are these
the Christians, that are to go hand in hand together, to Gods everlasting
Kingdom? Are these the lights, the shining, the burning lights, that are to
light the ignorant Brother to the inheritance of the Saints in light? Is not
this to be blind to the great design of the Gospel? And if the blind lead the
blind, shall not they both fall into the pit?

Woe to that man by whom the offense comes, it had been better for him, that a
Millstone were hanged about his neck, and he drowned in the midst of the Sea,
says our great Master, Matthew. 18.6. Does not this threatening fright you? Does
this put no sad thoughts into your mind? Do you believe he spoke true? And do
not you think you are concerned? What is your going to a Playhouse, but giving
Offense? What is it but hardening other men in their sins? Is not this tempting
young people to those extravagancies they should detest? Is not this justifying
the Players profession, and to make them think that you approve of their
ludicrous vocations? Their profession is infamous by our Law, which looks upon
them, as persons of no honest calling, and if you go to see their actings, and
to see how they prostitute themselves, does not this look like a commendation
of their undertakings? And have not you sins enough of your own to answer for,
but you must load other men's upon you too? Are you afraid, Gods anger to you
will not be great enough, except you add your Neighbors offenses, to make his
wrath the heavier? All those persons of your acquaintance that go to a Play,
because you do, are all Scandalized by your example; and is not this putting a
stumbling block in your Neighbors way, especially if people believe that you
have some goodness in you, or have a name that you are Religious, how bold does
this make other persons to venture on these vanities? And how dreadful must
this make your account? Either you do not think much of other World, or if you
do, you cannot but conclude, that these things will lie very heavy upon your
conscience one day? What if you do not think it to be sin, will your thinking
so excuse you? Willful ignorance is as bad, as a known sin, and how easily
might you know such doings to be sinful? But being unwilling to be better
informed, judge you, whether it will not agravate your Condemnation? how could
the Primitive Christians know these things to be sinful? And is not possible
for you to know it? They had the Bible; so have you: They had the same precepts
that you have, only they did not read the Scripture so superficially as perhaps
you do, and that was the reason why they came to the knowledge of this sin,
while you halt betwixt two opinions; Their affections did not hanker and bend
so much after the World as perhaps yours do, and therefore they might easily
perceive Christ's and the Apostles meaning, while you, who dote too much upon
these outward things, have a cloud or mist before your eyes, that you cannot
discern the sense of the Holy Ghost.

Your present divertisements may hide the guilt from your sight, but when the
Summons of a terrible God to appear at his bar, shall rouse your Conscience one
day, you will be of another mind;

How? Did Christ come down from Heaven, and die, and spill his blood for you,
that you might securely indulge your carnal Genius? Did he sacrifice himself
for you, that you might please your self with such fooleries? Has he appeased
the Almighties wrath for you, that you might spend your time in a Theater? Is
this a proper end of the mighty purchase he has made? Did such fantastic
actions deserve so great a condescension? Is it likely that he would have
astonished all the Angels of Heaven with his descent into this valley of tears,
if this security in carnal satisfactions had been his design? One would rather
think, that so deep a humiliation called for the greatest severities, and was
shown on purpose to engage poor mortals to the profoundest acknowledgments of
his favor; One would think, that such miracles of charity challenged a most
serious behavior, and that after this men should not dare to think of trivial
and impertinent things; This is more likely to be the end of his Incarnation,
and Suffering, then the other. To delight in such vanities is a disparagement
to his love, a blemish to his charity, a disgrace to his condescension, and an
undervaluing of so great a mercy; And do you thus reward him? Do you thus
requite his kindness? Is this the return you make him for his sweat and
agonies, for his sighs and groans, for his pains and all his labors? Did he
bleed, that you might grow strong in sin? Did he die, that you might cherish
the lusts of the Flesh? Did he make himself of no reputation, that you might
please your self with divertisements, invented only to affront him and to
render his endeavors to convert our souls ineffectual.

Have not you observed it? Have not you taken notice, how men and women, who
have had some zeal for Religion, and very pious inclinations, how that zeal
has decreased upon their frequenting of these Houses, how their goodness has
decayed, how flat they are grown in Devotion, how weak in their holy
performances? how dull in the work of meditation? how slovenly and superficial
in Gods service? may be, they have kept up some outward shows, some external
formality, some earnestness for the fringes of Religion, or for the ceremonial
part of Christianity; But have not you seen, how they are become strangers to
that life, which must adorn it, to that contemplation of good things, they
formerly delighted in, to that strictness they once professed? Have not you
seen how they have remitted in their warmth, and how the holy fire that once
burned in their breasts is gone out? And is your Christianity so fierce and
violent, that it needs a bridle? Is it so hot, that it must have an
extinguisher? Is it so flaming that it wants this stolen water to quench it?

With what face dare you approach the Table of your Lord, who have been a
spectator of such shows but a little before? With what eyes can you appear in
the presence of that King of Kings, who have but a little before prostituted
your Soul to the Devil? With what conscience can you promise the Lord Jesus to
follow him, when you intend to expose your self again to these temptations? Do
not you blush to think, how you serve both God and Mammon, Christ, and the
World, contrary to your Redeemers protestation, that you cannot serve two
Masters? If you come to the Lords Table one day, and run to a Playhouse
another, do not you destroy all, that you built the day before? If you come to
the Supper of the Lord, there to profess your sorrow for loving the World, are
you in good earnest sorry for it, or are you not? If not, why do you play the
hypocrite, or do you think to put a cheat upon the Almighty, as if he did not
see your heart, or would be taken with show, and pomp? If you are, how can you
run into the same temptation again, or go to a place where you will infallibly
be tempted to the love of the World? Is not this to shut the gates of mercy
against you? Is not this to make your self odious to that God whose favor you
expect in the last day? Is not this to live in contradictions? In this
Sacrament you profess to imitate your Lord in despising the World, and is this
imitation, to go one day into the house of God, and the next into a den of
Thieves; for so the Stage may justly be called, where men are robbed of their
relish of spiritual objects.

Whence has come that Atheism, that looseness, that indifferency in things
Divine, that low esteem of the tremendous mysteries of Christianity, which of
late like a Land-flood has overrun us? Have they not derived their boldness
from these places? Have not the vices represented there in jest, been practiced
by the forward youth at home in good earnest? And can a Christian have a good
opinion of these houses, where so many have lost their virtue? Can any man of
reason think, that after all this mischief, they may be safely hugged and
applauded? Those many notorious Fornications and Adulteries we have heard, and
know of, those barefaced cheats, men's boastings of their sins, and glorying in
their shame, their impudence, their courage to do evil, their daring to do
things which sober Heathens have detested, whence have they come in a great
measure, but from these poisoned fountains? Why should we be afraid to call a
spade, a spade? Do not even wicked men confess so much, men who have been
guilty of such crimes? Shall men of no great sense of Religion complain of it,
and shall a Christian do any thing, that may contribute toward the holding of
them up?

If wanton, lustful, Ephesians. 5.4.
and obscene jests are expressly forbid by the great Apostle, nay, are not so
much as to be named among Christians, how can a man that makes profession of
that Religion, hear them, or be taken with them, when Gods name is profaned in
such houses? when Religion is mocked? when virtue is rendered odious? how can
you hear it without reproving the men that do it? how can you have patience to
let them talk at this rate? you are bound by your profession to rebuke your
neighbor for notorious sins, and not to suffer iniquity upon him; can you hear
these things, and see men affront their maker, and be possessed with a dumb
Devil? How can you discharge your conscience, to let your neighbor do evil
without giving him an Item of Gods displeasure? If we are to exhort one another
to take heed, lest any of us be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, how
can you see men harden themselves in their sins on the Stage, without a
fraternal admonition? If you have no courage to admonish them, what makes you
appear there where you must be silent under the indignities offered to your
Master? Had you a Friend, whom you loved, and saw his concerns in danger, his
reputation attacked, his credit torn, his good name wounded, would not you
stand up in his vindication? You own Christ for your Friend, and profess you
love him, and can you see his laws trampled on, and his blood and wounds made a
complement of Speech, and not be moved at it? or if you have some little regret
upon your spirits, where is your tongue to speak for your friend? Do you think
such men are like to be his favorites? and is not this to fall under the lash
of that threating, Mar. 8.38.
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my Gospel, in this adulterous, and
sinful Generation, of him shall the son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the
glory of his Father; since you have not spirit enough to reprove such sinners,
why do not you stay away? why do not you keep out of their company? you are
obliged to do either one or the other, if you cherish any hopes of salvation,
and since to reprove them you are ashamed, staying away must necessarily be
your duty.

Do you ever examine your self at night about the actions of the day? and if
you do, does not your presence at such shows, and your being pleased with them,
fly into your face? Do not you think, what have I done to day? how did I spend
my time, might not I have spent it better, then at a Playhouse? How many
persons have I hardened, and confirmed in their sins by my example? How much
lightness and vanity have I encouraged by my presence? has not such a sin been
pleasing to me? Have not I been delighted with seeing my neighbor abused? have
not I been tickled with men's speaking ill of him? had God struck me dead in
that place, how sad would my condition have been? how many vain and foolish
thoughts have these sights sent into my mind? If you examine your self in this
manner and find these effects, have not you reason to ask God forgiveness? and
if you ask him forgiveness, how dare you run upon the same rock again? will you
sin wilfully after this? will you sin against your knowledge, will you do that
again, which will require a new repentance? what is this but a mock-repentance,
to go on in a circle of confessing, and sinning, of sinning, and confessing.

But I doubt, this self-examination is a thing you do not trouble your head
with, and you shun it, as men do their creditors that dun them; you are afraid
it will fill your head with scruples, and therefore avoid it, as those who are
unwilling to look into their accounts, that they may not be surpised with the
sum they owe; if visiting the Stage makes you neglect this self-examination, it
makes you neglect a known duty; and if so, it must be sinful, and if sinful,
how dare you meddle with it?

Do but take a view of the writings of the Primitive Fathers, and you will find
them unanimous in this assertion, that in our Baptism, when we renounce the
Devil and his works, and the pomp and glory of the World, we do particularly
renounce Stage Plays, and such ludicrous representations. They that lived
nearest to the Apostolical times, in all probability knew, what was meant by
this rendunciation, and this they profess to be the sense of it, this they
assure us is meant by those pomps, and glories, and why should we presume to
put a new sense upon that vow? They received this interpretation from the
Apostles, and propagated it to posterity, and in their sense we make this
Abjuration.

Sir, have you abjured these things in your Baptism, and dare you venture on
them? have you renounced them, and dare you fall in love with them? Have you
protested in the presence of God and angels, that you will not meddle with
them, and will you break your vow? Have you solemnly professed before the
Congregation, that you will not have any affection for them, Salvian. degubern.
Dei. lib. 6.
and do you make nothing of persidiousness? How dare thou O Christian run
into a Playhouse after Baptism, says Salvian, when thou have confessed those
very Plays to be the works of the Devil? Thou have renounced the Devil and
these Stage Plays, so that if thou willingly and wittingly frequentest them,
it is evident that thou returnest to the Devil too, for thou have renounced
both, and have professed both to be one, so that if thou return to one, thou
returnest to both.

I know what is commonly objected, that the reason why the Fathers are so much
against Christians seeing of a Play, was, because the heathenish idolatries
were acted to the life upon the Stage, and that proselites might not be in
danger of being enticed to idolatry, was the great motive, why they inveighed
so much against sights of that nature; but those that use this plea, most
certainly have not read the Fathers, or if they have read them, have not
considered all their arguments; for to go no farther then Tertullian, Tertul.
de spect.
after he had condemned these sights, for the idolatries committed on the
Stage, he produces other reasons for which they are utterly unlawful; as 1.
Because the spirit of the Gospel, is a spirit of gentleness, but the actors are
forced to put themselves into a posture of wrath and anger, c. 15.
and fury, and the spectators themselves cannot behold them without being put
into a passion. 2. Because vanity, c. 15.
which is proper to the Stage, is altogether foreign to Christianity. c. 15.
3. Because we are not to consent to peoples sins. c. 16.
4. Because men are abused in these places, and neither Princes nor People
spared, and this being unlawful elsewhere, must be unlawful too upon the Stage.
c. 17.
5. Because all immodesty and scurrility is forbid by the Law of the Gospel,
not only acting of it, but seeing and hearing it Acted. c. 23.
6. Because all Players are hypocrites, seem to be what they are not, and all
hypocrisy is condemned by the Gospel. c. 23.
7. Because the Actors very often belie their Sex, and put on women's apparel,
which is forbid, by the law of God. c. 25.
8. Because these plays dull and damp devotion, and seriousness, which is and
ought to be the indeleble character of Christians. c. 25.
9. Because it is a disparagement to God to lift up those hands to applaud a
Player, which we use to lift up to the Throne of grace. c. 26.
10. Because experience shows, how the Devil has sometimes possessed
Christians in a Playhouse, and being afterward cast out, confessed, that he had
reason to enter into them, because he found them in his own place. c. 26.
11. Because no man can serve two Masters, God and the World, as those
Christians pretend to do that frequent both the Church and the Stage. c. 27.
12. Because though some speeches in a Play are witty and ingenious, yet there
is poison at the bottom, and vice is only colored, and gilded with fine
language, and curious emblems, that it may go down more glib, and ruin the soul
more artificially.

These are some of Tertullians Arguments, and he that shall attentively
consider them will easily find that they are not only applicable to such
Comedies where idolatry is Acted, but to those of this age, where scurrility,
vanity, and immodesty, and other vices are encouraged; and whereas some
pretended, that if they saw no Plays, they should want sport, and be without
necessary recreation, the learned Presbyter does very handsomely reply; c. 29.
Why art thou so abominably ungrateful, to complain of want of recreation, when
God has given thee such great variety of pleasures? for what can be more
pleasant, then to be reconciled to God the Father, and the knowledge of the
truth, our deliverance from darkness, and error, and a free pardon of all our
sins? what greater pleasure can there be, then the loathing of carnal pleasure,
contempt of the World, true Christian liberty, a conscience void of offense, a
spotless life, freedom from the fear of death, trampling on the Heathen Gods,
expulsion of Devils, the gift of healing; prayer for illumination, and living
to Gods glory? These are the pleasures, these are the Plays of Christians,
holy, free, and perpetual; in such things as these, fancy thou see a Play,
here see the course of the World, behold the gliding time, view the distance
betwixt this life and eternity, expect the consummation of all things, defend
the Church, rouse thy self at Gods signal, listen to the Archangels trumpet,
glory in the Martyrs laurells; If learning and knowledge do delight thee,
behold in the Scripture there are verses enough, witty sentences enough, songs
enough, and voices enough; no fables of Poets, but solid truths; no sophistry,
but majestic simplicity; would thou see Gladiators and wrestlers, here thou
have them, here thou may see lasciviousness overcome by chastity, perjury by
faithfulness, cruelty by mercy, wantonness by modesty, and these are our
Olympic games, in which he is Crowned that strives for mastery; Do thou love
to see blood drawn in a pulblick show? Behold thou have the blood of Jesus; and
what a noble sight will shortly appear to our eyes, even the coming of our
glorious Lord, the exultation of Angels, the Resurrection of his holy ones, the
stately Kingdom of believing Souls, and the sight of the new Jerusalem! There
is a another show behind, even the last day of Judgment, a day unlooked for, a
day despised by fools, a day wherein the old world will be swallowed up of
fire! How glorious a sight, will that be, when I shall behold with
astonishment, and joy, so many Kings, whom their flatterers placed among the
Stars, sighing in outward darkness with Jupiter, and their parasites? So many
Persecutors of the Christian name melting in insulting flames! So many
Philosophers with their Disciples, who gave out, that God was careless of the
affairs of this lower World, trembling before Christ's Tribunal! At that time I
shall know Tragoedians by their loud cry in misery, Stage Players by their
being tormented by fire more than other men, the Charioteers in the public
Games, by their being red upon a flaming wheel, and the Mimick by his being
tossed in sheets of fire. Thus far that excellent man; whom St. Cyprian exactly
imitates. And certainly he that has the same sense of Religion, that he had,
cannot but be of the same opinion. So that it is for want of searching, and
diving into the Nature of Christianity, and what is more, for want of feeling
the power of Religion, that makes men speak in vindication of Plays, and
interludes.

What a pitiful shift is it to say, that great good may be gained by them,
when it is plain that the evil which ensues upon them, does signally
preponderate, and outweigh the pretended benefit? What if a moral saying or a
witty sentence, or an ingenious Apophthegm lie scattered here and there among
the rubbish, will that grain of goodness counterballance a whole talent of ill,
that is seen there, or got by seeing it, some have been so vain, as to give out,
that they may learn as much by a Play, as by a Sermon; but not to mention, that
such persons spiritual appetite is extremely vitiated, while they continue in
this opinion, they will never be much edified, either by a Play, or a Sermon, and
till they have a nobler opinion of Gods Ordinance, it is just with God to suffer
the Devil to lead them Captive at his will. And what are the mighty advantages,
men get by the representations of the Stage? May be they learn to court a
Mistress well, or the vanities they see there, serve them to maintain a loose
discourse, or it enables them to make the company merry, but are these things
that tend to reformation of life, and manners? Who ever learned to abandon a
sin, he is addicted to, by seeing its punishment on the Stage? Or who ever
thought himself obliged to practice that virtue, which he sees Acted on the
Theater, except it be, to resent an affront that is offered him, and to know how
to maintain the punctilio's of honor, and bravery? And are these Christian
virtues? Are these the graces that must make us glorious in the sight of God?
such arguments are signs of a desperate cause, and tacit accusations of the
illness of the thing, since the aprons that cover it are made of Figg-leaves.

And what if some Plays be more innocent and not so profane, as others, if I go
to one, does not my example encourage men to go and see those, which are more
loose and wanton? If I mean to discourage sin in others by my actions, I must
not give them occasion to do that which is evil: Sensual Men distinguish not
betwixt the more harmless, and the more hurtful, and if I encourage the one by
my presence, I encourage the other too, and if by my example I approve of the
Players profession in one thing, I approve of it in another too, and harden
them in their folly; not to mention, that my seeing the more harmless, as I
call them, will in time entice me to see the more profane, for sin is catching,
and one vanity draws on another, and from the lesser we run to greater, and
when the horror of sin is once abated in our minds, the things which are most
contrary to Christianity, begin to appear harmless, and thus the Soul glides
insensibly into darkness, and eternal misery.

That which you use to pretend sometimes, that there are Divines of the Church
of England, who approve of these shows, has nothing of validity in it; for
suppose there were some, who allow of these vanities, does it therefore follow,
that the Church of England does encourage them? The opinions of some Divines,
are not the standard of our Church, nor are the private sentiments of a few men
prescriptions for her to go by.

The Church of England has no where declared so much, and as long as the
Church is silent, it is presumption to interpret the fond opinions of some men,
as her Rule and Doctrine. How can our Church countenance such things, that
professes strict adherence to the Word of God, and looks upon the judgments of
men, that are contrary to it, as Heterodox and Erroneous? At this rate you
might as well argue, that because some Divines have been seen at a Play, that
therefore they have encouragement from the Doctrine of our Church. The Doctrine
of a Church is one thing, and the practice of some of her pretended members is
another. The Churches case would be very hard, if she were to answer for all
the misdemeanors of her seeming Votaries; and who knows not, how in all
Churches the professors generally deviate from the rules that are extant in
their Books and Canons.

But after all, it is worth enquiring, whether those Divines you speak of, be of
the graver, or the younger sort; that some young men who want experience, and
perhaps a lively sense of Religion, should be taken with these shows, I do not
wonder; but who takes raw youths, and such as think any thing great, and good,
that is witty, and serves to tickle the fancy, who takes such men for judges in
an affair of this importance? As to the graver sort, I doubt you will find none,
or but very few, that are favorers of these spectacles, or if they do declare
at any time, that if Plays were reduced to their true decorum, they might be
inoffensive, from hence it will not follow, that they countenance the common
Tragedies and Comedies, which so manifestly go beyond the limits of decency.

And what if you do go but now and then, Does your going but seldom justify
the action? All that this excuse will amount to, is only this, that you do not
sin so often, as other men, but does this free you from the guilt, or make you
innocent in the sight of God? How would you take it, if a man should give you a
box on the ear but now and then? Or how would you resent it, to have your good
name taken away by a person, not always, but whenever his humor prompts him?
And from hence you may easily guess at the weakness of this exception, and if
you have that mean opinion of God, that low esteem of his greatness, as to
think, that to affront him but now and then can do no harm, you are unworthy to
be his Disciple, and judge your self unworthy of Eternal life.

But I am forced to go, you say, my Superiors command me to wait upon them to
a Play, and how can I refuse it, except I will lose their favor, and the Place
I hold under them? And is this such a bugbear to fright you from your duty? To
whom have you greater obligations, to God or Man? If to God, why dare not you
prefer his favor before the favor of Men, and be guided more by his Laws,
then by the benevolence of dust and ashes? Have not you courage to make a vow,
and when you are solicited by your Superiors to go, cannot you speak out, and
tell them, that you lie under the obligation of a vow not to go, and who will
be so profane, as to desire you to break it? Had you rather sin, then displease
Men, or is a poor Creature more terrible to you, then he who thunders in the
Heavens? If you are persuaded in your conscience, that to be present at these
shows is sinful, shall a creatures smiles make you venture the displeasure of
the most High? And what if you lose something considerable by pleasing God?
Has God no ways to make you amends for your losses? Has he no Glory, no
Kingdom, no reward, no recompense to redintegrate your fortune? If you lose
this World for his sake, is not the felicity of the next recompense enough? But
why should you mistrust him even in this present life? He that made Moses after
he had left the Court of Egypt, General of his own Army and advanced Joseph,
who hated to be great and rich by sin, to be Viceroy of the Realm, and
preserved Daniel in his grandeur for this reason, because he would not depart
from his conscienciousness; is his arm shortened or his strength abated, that he
can do nothing equivalent to all this? Are not the hearts of men in his hand,
and does not he turn them as streams of Water? How often does he make it appear
to the World, that where a man's ways please the Lord, he makes his very enemies
to be at peace with him? Nay how often do these generous selfdenials work by
Gods providence upon Superiors, and they that at first solicited a man to do
that which was vain, and contrary to the Laws of Religion, when they see him
resolute in his conscienciousness, how often have they been persuaded to
reflect upon themselves, at least to have a better opinion of the person, who
fears God more then them?

What you have often told me, that from this way of reasoning it would follow,
that it is unlawful to write or to read a Play, will deserve some
consideration: As for the writing of it, though Poetry be a thing lawful and
commendable, and is sufficiently warranted by the writers of Divine Poems in
Holy writ, yet that will not justify all the subjects, Poets pitch upon, and a
conscientious man will take as much care, that the subject he writes of, be
grave and serious, at least innocent, as he would do of his discourse in common
conversation.

I do not doubt, but that writing things obscene and filthy, and undecent, and
contrary to good manners, and whereby others may be Scandalized, and either
drawn into sin, or hardened in it, is as bad as speaking of them. Without all
peradventure a man may be witty without being profane, and exercise his fancy
to the edification of readers, without launching out into things, at which
Nature and Religion teaches us to blush, and I need only put you in mind of
what the incomparable Mr. Cowley says, in his Preface to his works, speaking
of the admirable subjects that the Scripture affords for the exercise of Wit
and Poetry; It is not without grief, says he, and indignation, that I behold
that Divine science employing all her inexhaustable riches of wit and
eloquence, either in the wicked and beggarly flattery of great persons, or the
unmanly idolizing of foolish Women, or the wretched affectation of scurril
laughter, or at best on the confused and antiquated dreams of senseless fables,
and metamorphoses.

As for reading of modern Plays, he that considers what an aversion from
seriousness, and better things, the reading of them causes in the younger sort,
will find no great reason to encourage them in such trifles, but rather to
dissuade them all he can from studies of this nature, and though I believe that
a grave, serious man, whose senses are thoroughly exercised to discern betwixt
good and evil, may lawfully peruse them, to see the humor of the Age, and to
know how to obviate and confute the debaucheries, and errors which are growing,
and tending to the ruin of good manners, as skillful Physicians may meddle with
poison, to make antidotes of it; yet to persons whose understandings are
slippery and weak, whose passions are stronger then their reason, and who have
already too great a tincture of sensuality, and consequently may easily
increase the ill humor by such divertisement, they ought to be forbid by
those, who have the care of their education.

These Sir, are my thoughts of the Query you proposed to me, and though the
Letter be somewhat long, yet I hope the arguments I have laid down, are not
impertinent; That they are liable to exceptions, I question not, being sensible
that it is easier to cavil, then to answer, and where men are resolved to
maintain the vain humor, they have imbibed from conversation, they will always
have something to say against the most sober truths and assertions. The drift
and design of the Gospel is certainly on our side; if any be fond of preferring
the dictates of flesh and blood, or the suggestions of the world, before the
mortifying lessons of our crucified Redeemer, all that we can say is this, that
we would have healed Babylon, but she would not be healed.

I shall only add my wishes and prayers, that what you have read here, may be a
means to bring you to a noble sense of a better World and convince you, that
the way to attain a future bliss, is very different from that, which leads to
sensual delights, and satisfactions: Our natures are generally too prone to
gratify the flesh, and we had not need add fuel to the fire, but to do all we
can to quench that, which is already kindled, that after our selfdenials here,
we may reign with the self-denying Jesus, with whom we cannot live hereafter,
except we suffer with him here, and endure the loss of the pleasures of sin for
a season, nor sit with him in his Throne, except we continue with him in his
tempations here. And I am persuaded, that did you live more in Heaven, and gave
your self time to meditate on the things which are not seen; Did you
incorporate those everlasting joys with your mind, and riveted the belief of
that endless bliss into your very spirits, that your faith might be the
substance of things unseen, and the evidence of the treasures hoped for, you
would despise these shows and glories of the world, as much as you do value and
esteem them now, and would be so far from stopping your ears against the
reasons I have given, that you would study and invent more, to control the
vulgar errors of mankind.

Get but once a true relish of spiritual things, and you will look between
anger and scorn on these trivial objects, admired by the vulgar. And why should
not you raise your soul above the bubbles of external pomp? whatever difficulty
there may be in the attempt, the fruit that grows on the tree at last, will
sufficiently recompense your labor. Our Souls are active or unactive,
according as we take pains with them, and though there be some irksomness in
swimming against the stream of carnal inclinations, yet if the Hill be once
conquered, the serene Air that is in the top of it, the gentle Gales, the
glorious Sunshine, the sweetness of Rest, that crowns all the Hardships, will
make you bless the day that you begun to mind the things which belong unto your
Peace. And that you may do so, is the unfeigned Desire of,

SIR, Your daily Orator at the Throne of Mercy, etc.


And having hitherto discoursed of the Nature of sensual Delights and
Recreations, and how far a Christian is bound to deny himself in them upon the
account of a future Judgment; to complete these Meditations, it will be
necessary to draw some useful Inferences from the Premises.

INFERENCES.
1. This clears what the Wise Man says, Eccles. 7.2. That it is better to go to
the House of Mourning than to the House of Feasting. So sad a Prospect, as that
of a future Judgment is, one would think, were enough to hush all Mirth and
Jollity whatsoever; however, we may rationally conclude, that it is enough to
turn the Bias, and make the Soul have less Affection for Mirth, than Sorrow
and Soverity of Behavior. The ancient Heathens make use of this Apologue;
Sorrow and Mirth presented themselves one day before Jupiter, and desired him
to determine which of them two was best, and most to be chosen. Sorrow pleaded,
That it made Men pensive, and serious, caused them to think, brought them to a
due Sense of their own Frailty, and a profound Veneration of the Divine
Majesty, made them compassionate, and tenderhearted, besides many other
Advantages, the dull World took no notice of. Mirth on the other side alleged,
that it cheered the Spirits, made them lively, and fit for Service, enabled
them to do great and noble Things, made Men good Company and beloved of their
Neighbors, beguiled the tedious Hours of Humane Life, and was an Emblem of the
Joys, the Gods themselves were drunk withal. Jupiter having heard them plead a
considerable time, and weighed the Reasons on both sides, found the Decision of
the Case so difficult, that he dismissed them without any other Answer but this,
That he could not tell. But what a Heathen Oracle could not resolve, a
Christian, guided by the Word of Life, may soon determine: and he that believes
the tremendous things, the Scripture speaks of, cannot but conclude, that there
is less Danger in Seriousness and Sorrow, than in Mirth and Jollity, because
there are fewer Temptations in the one than there are in the other. Our Natures
certainly are not so prone to sin in a Charnel House as they are at a Theater,
nor our Affections so apt to run out into Licentiousness in a Church, as they
are at a public Show. And though a Man may be strong, and courageous, and able
to defy all Dangers, yet a Sampson may be overcome by a Dalilah; and if he be
not overcome, yet something may stick by him, which may put an everlasting stop
to his Growth in Grace and Virtue.

He that goes much to the House of Mourning provides infinitely better for the
Safety of his Soul than he that frequents the House of Mirth and Feasting: the
former walks in a beaten Path, whereas the other ventures over a narrow Bridge,
or treads on the edge of a Wall, where it is possible, he may come off with
Safety; but for one that escapes without a Fall, there are twenty and forty
that miscarry. He that presses through a Hedge of Thorns may possibly get
through without tearing his Clothes, but he that has Patience till he comes to
a Gate, and opens it, and so passes on, takes the surer way.

The wisest Men in all Ages have judged it better to converse with Spectacles
of Misery, than with Objects savouring of external Splendor. He that visits a
Hospital, where he beholds variety of distressed Creatures, some lame, some
blind, some wounded, some deaf, some sick, some roaring under grievous Pains,
will certainly go away more edified than he that feeds his Eyes with all the
Gayeties of a luxurious Court; the former may leave some kindly Impressions
upon him, and oblige him to admire the distinguishing Mercy, Goodness, and
Compassion of God, who has suffered no such Accident to befall him, and season
his Heart with Pity and Compassion, with Tenderness and Charity; whereas the
excess and extravagance of the other will, do what he can, leave a touch of
Lightness and Vanity upon his Affections. That Is the Reason why some provident
Men heretofore, have carried their Winding-Sheets with them in their March,
others dug their Sepulchers and Graves in their Gardens, others at their
Solemn Feasts have had a Death's Head served up, and placed upon the Table,
others in a certain Room in their House, have set an empty Coffin, on purpose,
that looking upon these Spectacles often, their Minds might be taken off from
Admiration of worldly Satisfactions, and placed upon Objects which might
furnish them with more melancholic Contemplations: and this, in all
Probability, will be the effect of conversing with such Objects, if we view
them, not as they belong to our Trade, but as thinking Men and Philosophers.
The Sexton that digs his Neighbors Grave has an Object serious enough before
him; but he goes to it, as a Man that must maintain his Family with the Gain,
and therefore is never the wiser for his Familiarity with such Spectacles. The
Surgeon that goes among the Lame, and Bruised, and Wounded, with no higher
ends, than to fill his Purse, and to discharge the Office of his Art, will come
home as little edified as he went: but he whose choice of such mortified
Objects is voluntary, and deliberate, attended with suitable Designs of
meliorating and advancing the Mind, cannot but return enriched with that
Wisdom, the Merchandise of which is more precious than that of Gold and Silver.

Whatever the merry Sinner may think, it is better to weep than to laugh. Our
Great Master, the Lord Jesus, who is a good Christian's Pattern, was of this
Opinion: and in Imitation of him not a few eminent Saints have preferred a
Feast of Tears before a Banquet of Mirth and sensual Pleasure: Arsenius,
Olympias, Domnina, Abraham the Hermit, the solitary Pambo, and St. Austin, are
famous in History for their Tears; to St. Jerome they were in the nature of
daily Bread, and he professes, that when his Eyes were fullest of Tears, he saw
the Quires of Angels, and could discern the Orders of Seraphim and Cherubim;
such a Perspicuity of sight do Tears give to a Holy Soul. That which made these
great Men weep so much, was either a Sense of their own and other men's
Offenses, or a lively Prospect of the Love of God, or a glorious foresight of
the Joys above. But, worldly Sorrow is no Virtue; and he that weeps much,
either because he cannot have those Conveniences he would have, or is crossed
and disappointed in his Designs, or because he has lost such a great Man's
Favor, or because, some other Loss befalls him, weeps in vain, nay sins by his
weeping, and his Sin, if he continue impenitent, brings on Death, 2 Cor. 7.10.
Floods of Tears, upon a mere temporal Account, are insignificant in Heaven, and
no more than Water spilt upon the Ground; such Tears God does not put into his
Bottle, nor have the blessed Angels any Charge to number the drops that fall;
but where Religion, and a mighty Sense of God, and Tenderness of his Honor and
Glory, causes Rivers of Tears, and where the Soul has so delicate a Taste that
it cannot think of God without weeping, nor speak of him without weeping, nor
reflect upon his Goodness without weeping, there the Man is come up to a
Perfection, which is the very Suburbs of Heaven.

It Is true, all People cannot weep, nor are they therefore in a damnable
Condition; for they may be sincere in Goodness, and yet not be able to express
their Sincerity in Tears, tho I am apt to believe, that it is for want of
refining the Soul into a high Relish of Divine Objects, that puts a stop to
these sacred Floods in most Men; yet where they can weep, and something they
see in God, or in the Word of God, or in the Providence of God, is the true
Cause of those Tears, every drop is richer than a Diamond, and such a Soul may
vye Happiness with the greatest Monarchs. They are inestimable Treasures; and
though Man knows not how to value them, yet the Spirits above esteem them at a
mighty rate, and magnify them in Gods Presence, Luke 15.10.

It Is a huge Mistake, that Men cannot rejoice except they laugh; there are
Tears of Joy as well as Tears of Grief, and the very Heathen saw, that true Joy
was a very serious thing. Hence it was, that they confined true Joy to their
Philosophers, and left the louder Laughter to Slaves, and Carters, and
Ploughmen: and how often have I seen the richest Joys bubble forth from the
largest Tears? Nor would Men in those Circumstances change Condition with the
most potent Prince in the World, such Content, such Satisfaction, such Riches,
such Wealth, appears in these Tears which Religion forces.

How much better is it to be afflicted where our Porsperity and a good
Conscience are inconsistent, than to enjoy Kingdoms and Principalities without
the light of Gods Countenance. This was the excellent choice of Moses, and of
all the Martyrs of old, who were content to be sawn asunder, to be stoned, to
be tormented, to wander about in Caves and Dens, weeping and destitute, rather
than defile their Souls with Sin; which puts me in mind of the good Advice St.
Jerome gave to his Friend Heliodorus, Did the Babe, thy Grandchild, says he,
hang about thy Neck, should thy Mother that bare thee bid thee look upon the
Breasts thou have sucked, should thine own Father lie prostrate at thy Feet,
and entreat thee to spare thy self, and to forbear venturing on the Strictness
and Severities of Religion, get away from them, my Friend, and with dry Eyes
fly unto the Banner of Christ Jesus: in this case, to be cruel is the greatest
Piety. This was the Case of the Primitive Believers, who preferred their
Distresses before Nero's Chair of State, and took greater Pleasure in their
seemingly forlorn Condition, than Claudius or Caligula in their Affluence. In
the midst of their Tears they were greater men than their Persecutors; and
though they wanted all things, and their Enemies had all that Heart could wish,
yet they justly believed themselves happier in their Funeral Dress, than the
other in their Triumphs.

The Man that roars in a Tavern, or sings in an Alehouse, or rejoices in his
Sin, had more need to wish, that his head were water, and his eyes a Fountain
of Tears; were he in his Wits he would do so: But his Reason is distorted, his
Understanding darkened, his Eyes blinded, his Mind unhinged, his Desires
perverted, his Affections led astray, and like a distracted Creature, he
rejoices in his Nakedness.

Ah brutish and inconsiderate Soul! Thou weepest to see a Child or a near
Relation dye, and can thou see thy Soul die, and be robbed of that Goodness
which must give her Life, and be unconcerned? Thou weepest at the loss of a
thousand Pounds, and can thou remember how thou losest God's Favor, and all
Right and Interest in the Merits of a crucified Savior, and keep thine Eyes
dry? Thou weepest to see a Friend drowning, or burning in a merciless Fire, and
can thou think how thou flingest thy self into the Furnace of God's Wrath,
make his Anger kindle, and wax hot against thee, and do what thou can to
turn it into a Fire which no Man, no Angel can quench, and will no Tears flow
into thine Eyes? How barbarous, how inhumane, is thy Joy? What do thou
rejoice in? That Sin which makes thee merry, that Folly that cheers thy Spirit,
what is it but Ingratitude to thy kindest Benefactor? What is it but requiting
the greatest Good with the greatest Evil? What is it, but contempt of him who
keeps thy Soul in Life? What is it but bidding defiance to him who carries thee
on his Wings, and out-does the tenderness of a Mother, the care of a Father,
and does all that is fitting to guard thy Soul from Ruin? And are these fit
things to rejoice in? Are these fit Objects for thy Mirth? Are these
Divertisements for a Creature that holds his very Being of God, and is
beholding to him for all the Blessings he enjoys? What wonder, if after all
this Impiety and Stubborness, God rejoices too, rejoices in thy Groans,
rejoices in thy Anguish, rejoices in thy Agonies, rejoices in thy Sense of his
Justice, rejoices in thy Howlings? This he must do at last to secure his
Honor. This he will be obliged to do in the end, to vindicate the Veracity of
his Threatings. This he will be constrained to do after all, that Devils may
not mock his Holiness, nor deride his Thunders, nor upbraid him with
Partiality. At that time, this will appear very good Divinity, no Fable, no
Romance, no Trade of Priests, no Invention of Politicians, no old Wifes Tale,
no idle Story; and if thou could exhaust the Sea in that day, and weep it
out again, to testify thy unfeigned Sorrow, thou would do it.

Happy the Soul that thinks of this! Happy the Man that believes these Terrors
before he feels them. How much wiser are those tender Hearts that do little
else but weep and mourn, and make their Life a Valley of Tears without a
Metaphor! whose Fear of offending God is so great, that every little Defect,
and every accidental Miscarriage, forces Tears from their Eyes! Though there
may be some Indiscretion in the Management of their Conscientiousness, yet
notwithstanding all this, their Tears are the Wine of Angels; these are the
gaudy Dress of a holy Soul. The Almighty, that sees her adorned with these
Pearls, and glistering in these Pendants, falls on her Neck, and kisses her.

Fear not, ye afflicted, and tossed with Tempests: So the Lord Jesus wept,
though not for his own Sins, yet for the Sins of others, and was received into
Glory; so Mary Magdalen wept, and on those Streams a gracious Pardon was
conveyed into her Soul; so the great St. Paul wept, and found the Consolations
of Christ abounding in him, so the penitent Publican wept, and went justified
to his House. They that sow in Tears shall reap in Joy; Blessed are ye that
weep now, for ye shall laugh, Luke 6.21. There is a place high, wondrous high
above, where all Tears shall be wiped away, and no Sorrow, no Grief, no
Anguish, shall appear; so we have heard, so we shall see e're long in the City
of our God: Verily, Verily, I say unto you, That ye shall weep and lament, but
the World shall rejoice, and ye shall be sorrowful, but your Sorrow shall be
turned into Joy. A Woman, when she is in Travel, has Sorrow, because her Hour
is come; but as soon as she is delivered of the Child, she remembers no more
the Anguish, for Joy that a Man is born into the World. And ye now therefore
have Sorrow, but I will see you again, and your Heart shall rejoice, and your
Joy no Man, takes from you, Joh. 16.20, 21, 22.

2. See here, how differently spiritual things affect Men, as they either
attentively, or inattentively, think upon them. The process of the Day of
Judgment to a Man that retires, and through Desire, separates himself to think
of it, as the Covetous does of his Gold, or as the Timorous does of his Danger.
i. e. in good earnest, it will prove an invincible motive to self-denial.
Another, that looks upon it, as a thing spoke of in course every Lords day,
thinks of the Words as he hears them, but ruminates not upon the Sense, is no
more moved with it, than the Carcasses that sleep in their Graves, forbears not
one Sin for it, but does still, as he used to do, mind his Body, gratify his
Flesh, pursue his temporal Interest, comply with sinful Men, please himself,
regard Religion on the By, and set his Affections on things below. And as it is
in this, so it is in other Truths; for, do but take a view of the Public
Assemblies; here the glad Tidings of God's Mercy to penitent Sinners shall make
an humble Spirit weep, melt his Heart, and force him into humble Thoughts, and
lively Admirations of God's Condescension; there sits another, and either
sleeps all the while, or continues in as even a Temper as he came: What Is the
Reason? One weighs the Importance of this Truth, considers the vast distance
betwixt God and sinful Man, thinks, if these things be true, how mavelous
God's Love must be; and that touches him to the Quick. The other's Thoughts are
unstable, as Water, uncertain and inconstant: he sa^isfies himself with this,
that he has heard a Sermon, performed his Complement to God, and consequently
finds no Alteration in his inward Man.

How have I seen sometimes a pious Soul transported with a lively Description
of the unseen everlasting Glory, while the greatest part of the Congregation
have been no more concerned at it, than if one had spoke of common Trees, and
Herbs, and the Hysop on the Wall: the Reason is plain, The one thinks of it as
a Believer, the other as an Infidel. The one reflects, Lord, what am I, and
what is my Father's house, that thou intendest to advance me to this Dignity,
lift up a poor Worm from a Dunghill to a Throne, and place him with Princes,
even with the Princes of thy People, the innumerable Company of Angels. The
other pleases himself only with the Sound, mingles the Thoughts of the World
with his Devotion, suffers not the glorious Object to lie long in his Mind, and
so it passes, as it came, without any Impression. Here one rejoices at the
precious Promises of the Gospel, his very Heart leaps at the joyful News, and
they come like Oil into his Bones, warm his very Soul, and pierce even to the
dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit: there another sits like a Stook, and
wonders what ails his Neighbor to keep such a stir about a few empty Words.
But why should thou wonder at the Change thou see in thy Friend? He
thinks of the Veracity of God, and how these Promises will most certainly be
fulfilled; he thinks, how the Riches God promises exceed all the Treasures of
this present World, and what Satisfaction they afford to a hungry Soul, how far
they do transcend these earthly Glories, and how to have a share in them, is a
far greater Privilege than to be related to the greatest Monarchs; and that
raises his Soul into that secret Joy. Thou think no more than a Lion or
Elephant, think more of thy Profit and Gain than of these intellectual
Treasures; thy Thoughts are not busy about these Enjoyments; thou think it
time lost to spend any serious Thoughts upon them, and how should thy duller
Soul be affected with them?

Here the Example of a valiant Saint, that fought with his Lusts, overcame his
Desires, stood steadfast in the hour of Temptation, conquered the Devil,
vanquished all Oppositions, kept the Faith, finished his Course with joy, draws
an attentive Soul into Imitation of his Virtues. There another that hears or
reads the same Description, feeds still on his Husks, follows is careless
Neighbor, delights in vain Company, continues in his Aversion from the
stricter Lives of holy Men. The Reason is evident; for, the one thinks of the
noble Attempts such Souls have made, how they are applauded in Heaven, how they
have signalized their Valor, what Comforts they have prepared for, and of the
Reward they now enjoy: the other looks upon them as melancholic Men, thinks of
his present Pleasure more than of a future Recompense, dives not into the
nature of these Conquests, reflects not how agreeable they are to Reason, or
how necessary in order to a Crown, but thinks he may have the Diadem spoken of
with less Trouble, and therefore he sits still upon his Dunghill. Vain Sons of
Men! How long will ye turn your Glory into Shame* Has God bestowed upon you a
Faculty which Beasts are Strangers to, and for which Devils envy you, even
Reason and Understanding, the true Image of your Maker, and will you let it lie
dormant in the Ashes and Rubbish of your sensual Inclinations? When God has
distinguished you from the ignobler Brutes, will ye be like the Horse and Mule,
whose Mouths must be held with Bitt and Bridle?

Behold, the Almighty has prepared a Supper for you; and when the Morning and
Noon of your Life is spent, designs a Feast for you at Night immediately after
Death; a Feast, where the Lamb that was slain sits Master, and intends to bid
you welcome; a Feast, where the Meat will be Angels Food, the Wine Hallelujahs,
and the Entertainment, Perfection of Bliss and Glory; the Company, the Apostles
of the Lamb, and the Spirits of Men made perfect; a Feast, where no Good will
be absent, and no Evil present, where Plenty and Affluence will last for ever,
where Joys will abound, and the beatifick Presence of God will charm and ravish
Souls to all Eternity. To this Feast he calls you, to this Banquet he invites
you, to this Table he sends for you, to these Dainties you are bid, to these
Delicates you are entreated to come, of these Varieties you shall be made
Partakers; and is it not worth considering, what this mighty Offer means? What
if you see it not with mortal Eyes? your Thoughts may see it, your
Understanding may behold it, your Reason may take a view of it. Your Thoughts
will tell you, that God, who cannot lie, has promised it, the Son of God, who
is Truth it self, has revealed it; the Apostles, who came attended with the
Power of Miracles, have published it. These will tell you, that there can be no
doubt of it, and that it is as certain, as if you were actually Sharers of it.
Give but your Understanding leave to search into this Mystery, and you will be
charmed with it; give but your Reason leave to ascend and descend upon the
Ladder of the Word of God, and you will feel a Hunger and Thirst after it; your
Souls will long for it, your Affections will breath after it, and your inward
and outward Man will labor after it, and strive to enter in at the strait
Gate; and shall all these Riches be lost upon you for want of Thinking and
Contemplation? Could you by thinking make those Joys visible to you, and will
ye refuse it! Could you by meditating make that Glory present to you, and will
you neglect the Opportunity? Could you by musing and pondering bring Heaven
into your Chambers and Closets, and will ye debarr your selves of that glorious
Sight?

See what you lose by your Inconsiderateness! See what Consolations, what
Satisfactions, what Cordials, you deprive your immortal Souls of! Can you see
other Men run away with all the Comforts of the Gospel, and remain senseless?
Can you see others get into the Pool of Bethesda before you, and recover, and
are you fond of continuing lame, and blind, and poor, and miserable? Can you
see others carry away the Crown, and feel no Ambition in you? Can you see
others take away the Blessing of your Father from you, and be unmoved at the
want of it? Can you see how other Men by thinking arrive to Perfection, and
will you lie grovelling in the Dust? O! think while thinking may do you good. In
Hell you will think, but it will be too late; there you will think, but your
Thoughts will be your Torment; there your Thoughts will be the undoing of you;
there you will think what happy Persons you might have been if you had imitated
Abraham's Faith, and Moses's Resolution, David's Candor, and Josiah's Piety,
St. Paul's Courage, and St. Peter's Tears, St. John's Love, and Lydia's
Attentiveness, the Berrhaeans Zeal, and the Macedonian Churches Charity,
Zachaeus his Restitution, and the Publican's Repentance; but these Thoughts
will then be your Vexation, since the working time is past, and the day of
Vengeance come. There you will think that Christ was your Friend, indeed, when he
made himself of no Reputation, but took upon him the form of a Servant, became
obedient to the Cross, and dyed for you; but to think that he is your Enemy
now, because you refused Obedience to him, because you made light of his
Offers, and would not accept of him for your Governor, must needs fill you
with endless Grief, and bitterness of Spirit. Now consider this, ye that forget
God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver, Psalm. 50.22.

3. And is not the greatest part of the World to be pityed, that can delight in
nothing but what they can grasp and feel? The Covetous can delight in nothing
but in Gold: If he want Money, all his Joy is gone: If his Coffers be full, and
his Barns stocked with Corn, and Plenty does surround him, his Heart rejoices,
his Soul triumphs, and Cheerfulness plumps his Cheeks; but without this, his
Mind is disturbed, his Faculties languish, his Countenance is dejected, and he
looks like a dying Man. Who would imagine, that this Man has a rational Soul?
Who would think, he were created after the Image of God? Who would conclude him
to have lived in a Land where the Gospel is preached? Who can infer from his
Actions, or Behavior, that this Man believes a Word of Scripture? Who would
take the Wretch for a Disciple of the poor and afflicted Jesus? Who that looks
upon him, would not be apt to cry with him, Sit anima mea cum Philosophis, Let
me dye the Death of some brave self-denying Heathen Philosopher? For these
certainly are in a likelier way of Salvation, at least of escaping the Wrath to
come, than the covetous Christian.

Diogenes being desired of Alexander the Great to beg either Gold or Silver of
him, received this Answer, Do but stand out of the Sun, and do not hinder that
glorious Light from shining upon me, and I have enough. The brave Crates having
sold what he had, and turned it into Money, generously threw it all into the
Sea, saying, It Is far better, I should drown thee, than that thou should
drown me in Perdition. Alexander having sent to the great Phocion two Talents
of Gold, the wise Man asked the Messengers, Seeing there were so many good Men
at Athens, why the King should of all Men make choice of him, to present him?
The Ambassadors answered, because of all Men he looked upon him as the
honestest. Say you so? replied the Philosopher, Then let Alexander give me
leave to be still an honest Man, which I can be without all these Presents, and
glistering Treasures.

Cimon had two large Cups sent him from a Persian King, the one full of Gold,
the other of Silver. He looks upon them smilingly; and asks the Man who brought
them, Whether his Master intended, that Cimon should be his Friend or his
Servant? The man replied, It was out of Ambition to have him for his Friend,
that he sent it. Oh! then says he, take them back again, for being his Friend,
when I have need of them, I can send for them at any time.

Epaminondas, when some came to corrupt him with gifts, invites the
Ambassadors to Dinner, and there entertains them with Roots, and Herbs, and
with small sour Wine. Dinner being done, Go home, says he, and tell your
Prince, that Epaminondas being content with such a Dinner, is not easily to be
drawn by Bribes into a base and traiterous Action.

Fabritius, the Roman General, having concluded a Peace with the Samnites, the
Magistrates of the Samnites, by way of Gratitude send six Ambassadors to him
with vast Sums of Money, begging of him to accept of it; but he stroaking his
Head, and Face, and Breast, and Knees, Gentlemen, says he, while I can command
these Limbs I have no need of Money; and so dismissed them. Curious gave the
same Answer to them, adding, that he had rather rule over Persons, that had
Money, than be possessed of Money himself.

These Men were Heathens, whose Delight in Virtue drowned their Delight in
these outward Comforts. They saw, what an Impediment to Goodness, these Heaps
of Silver were, and therefore scorned to delight in a thing so base and
trivial; they were sensible, that the Soul had her Riches as well as the Body,
and as the former by the Confession of Mankind, went beyond the other in value,
so it was reasonable they should delight in the one more than in the other.
These Men were better Christians by the Light of Nature, than thousands among
us are with all the helps that Revelation and Grace affords; not that the Fault
lies in the means, which are larger and richer than Pagans and Infidels have,
but that men stupifie their Souls more under these Advantages, than Heathens
did under the lesser Irradiations of the Divine Light and Splendor.

So then the very Heathens saw, that the more spiritual the Delight was, the
nobler it was, and the more it was refined, and purified from the Dross of the
World, the more rational it was, and therefore more amiable, and fitter to be
embraced: and sure, God must have provided but very ill for Mankind, when he
embued, and impregnated their Souls with a Sense of Religion, if he had not put
something into Religion, that is charming, and lovely, whereby their Souls might
be attracted to delight in it. Religion being derived from him, who is the
Fountain of Delight, and Satisfaction, must necessarily have that in it which
may make humane Souls rejoice, and exalt their Delight into a victorious
Supremacy above all worldly Pleasures.

What did the Lord Jesus delight in, who lived upon Alms? What did the Apostles
delight in, who were in much Patience, in Afflictions, in Necessities, and
Distresses, in Stripes, in Imprisonments, in tossings to and fro, 2 Cor. 6.4, 5.
in Labors, in Watchings, in Fastings? What did all the Primitive Believers
delight in, that were poor, and naked, driven into Exile, banished, forced to
work in Mines, chased away from the Comforts of Wife, Children, and Relations?
Something certainly they delighted in; for humane Nature cannot well subsist
without delight in something. It could not be the Riches of this World, for
they had them not; nor indeed did they care for them, when they were offered
them: it was Religion, that engrossed their Delight. This made them joyful in
all Condiditions; this raised their drooping Spirits under the Rage of their
Persecutors; and certainly it would be hard, if a glorious God, with all his
Attributes, and the wonderful things he has revealed to our Comfort, were
improper Objects of Delight: and since these are the genuine Delights of a
Christian, O besotted Soul, why do thou delight in broken Cisterns, when thou
have the Fountain of living Waters to delight in? Why do thou delight in Apes
and Peacocks, when thou have the Creator of all these to rejoice in? Why do
thou delight in a morsel of Meat, when thou have the Birthright of eternal
Glory to delight in? Why do thou delight in the shade of the Bramble, when
thou have the shadow of God's Wings to delight in? Why do thou delight in the
nether Springs, when thou have the upper Springs of Mercy to delight in? Why
do thou delight in Houses, when thou have a House made without Hands to
delight in? Why do thou delight in the Rivers of Damascus, when thou have the
River of God's Pleasure to delight in? Why do thou delight in a fading
Beauty, when thou have him that is altogether lovely to delight in? Why do
thou delight in the Voice of a deceitful Siren, when thou have him whose Voice
comforts the Mourners of Sion to delight in? Why do thou delight in the
Slavery of thy Lusts, when thou have him, whose Service is perfect Freedom to
delight in? Why do thou delight in a little Gain, in Drops of Happiness, in
Crumbs of Bliss, in shining Dust, when thou have a Sea of Glory to delight in?

How deep must thy Soul lie immerst in Body, if such illustrious Objects cannot
delight it! How far must thou be yet from the Kingdom of Heaven, if things of
this nature cannot content thee! How earthly must thy Heart be, how debauched,
how perverted from the end of its Creation, if these spiritual Delights are
insipid to it!

There are some here I believe, who have tasted of both Delights, the sinful
ones of the Flesh, and those which are proper for holy Souls; tell me, I
beseech you, whether you think a Fit of Laughter, or a drunken Bout, or a merry
Meeting, you once delighted in, so sweet, so comfortable, so refreshing, as the
gentle, and soft, and kinder Influences of God's Spirit, when you have been
engaged in Prayer, and Praises, and Contemplations of a future State? When you
have been wrestling with God, and after that work of Love have felt a holy
assurance of God's Favor upon your Spirits, can any thing be more pleasing, or
charming, than those divine Communications? When you have entered into
Meditation of God's Goodness, and the Love of God has shined bright upon your
Souls, have not you felt that, which has been as much beyond all sensual
Delights as an oriental Pearl is beyond Brass or Copper, or such baser
Minerals? Have not you found a Joy stealing upon your Souls after such
refreshing Considerations, as has transported you even into love of Martyrdom?
How contented have you been after such Exercises, or after some signal
Self-denial? How harmonious have your Spirits and Affections been after such
Enjoyments of God's loving Kindness, and how like soft and curious Music have
these Gales of the Divine Goodness composed your troubled Thoughts, and hushed
them into a lasting Peace! And is not this infinitely better, than the
Pleasures of Sardanapalus, of Dives, and other luxurious men? Will not this
turn to better account at last than fleshly Lusts, which war against the Soul?
Look upon Heliogabalus, who tried how great a Monster a man could make himself;
in his Clothes you should see nothing but Gold and Purple, his Beds were
embroidered, and the Feathers that were in them must be the softer Feathers of
Partridges taken from under their Wings, mixed with the finest Rabbets hair. He
would ride in a Chariot shining with Rubies and Diamonds, and not only in the
outside of his Shoes, but even within, he would have precious Stones: he
would not ride abroad under six hundred Coaches with him; his Beds and Rooms
were strow'd with all sorts of curious Flowers, and an everlasting Perfume
filled his Halls and Parlors: sometimes in a Frolic he would be drawn in a
Chariot by four Mastiff Dogs, sometimes by four Stags, sometimes by four Tigers
as Bacchus, sometimes by four Lions, as Cybele, sometimes by four beautiful
Women. Now and then he would cause Ships to be richly laden with all costly
Commodities, and then sink them in the Sea. At some of his Meals he would have
six hundred Estriches Heads at the Table; And when the Humor took him, all his
Courses should be nothing but Pheasants heaped and piled together in Dishes,
sometimes they should all be Pullets; sometimes nothing would serve him, but to
have all sorts of deformed men at his Table, eight lame Men, eight blind, eight
Blacks, eight gouty, eight fat, eight bald, eight deaf. In such Fooleries he
delighted; and because the Syrian Priests had told him that he would dye an
unnatural Death, he would keep Posion in golden Vessels, to kill himself,
before any Person should be able to lay hold on him: to this purpose, he would
have silken Halters about him, and Penknifes set with Diamonds to dispatch
himself, when he should see occasion, and he built also a Tower, which he
over-laid with Gold, that in Case of any sudden Attack, he might throw himself
from the top of it. These were the sottish Delights of this man, and yet after
all, he died in a Jakes.

I have mentioned this Brute, and his Actions, because there are in his short
Life all the extravagant Actions that a distempered Brain can invent, and all
the Delights that a mad man could think of, yet who would not prefer a Delight
in a good Conscience, and delight in God's Worship, and delight in Acts of
Charity, and delight in heavenly Thoughts before it? Sensual Delights must at
last expire, but spiritual Delights do not die; but as you have seen those vast
Balls of burnished Brass on Church-Steeples cast a glorious luster as soon as
the Sun shines upon them, so at a serious man's Death, his delight in Holiness,
upon God's favorable Acceptance of it, instead of expiring and decaying,
immediately grows bigger in its Glory, the Rays of it spread, and enlarge their
Borders, and stretch themselves into Eternity. And therefore,

4. Who can harbor any hard Thoughts of Religion, because it debars us of
disorderly sensual Delights? In doing so, it does us a kindness, is our Friend,
prevents our Danger, saves us from the Pit, delivers us from Hell, makes us
live like Men. It does not debarr us of that which will make us happy, nor
hinder us from solid Joy, nor deprive us of such sensual Delights, as are
necessary for our Preservation. The Delights it keeps us from, are fitter for
Swine than for rational Creatures: it separates us from delights, which will
lead the Soul into the Shadow and Valley of Death, from Delights, which
dethrone the ruling part in us, make the Master serve the Man, and from Princes
debase us to a state of Thraldom. It denies us such delights as make God our
Enemy, move him to depart from us, and provoke him to Indignation. It will not
suffer us to meddle with Delights, which destroy the Glory of the Mind, damp
our Zeal, alienate the Heart from God, and drive away his holy Spirit from us.
It is against all such Delights as would make us miserable, and enamoured with
Sin, and the World, and in being an Enemy to such Delights it consults our
good. It is more favorable to us than we are to our selves, and seeks to make
us like God.

God is above all sensual Delights, he is not taken with the Beauty of the Face
in Man or Woman; he undervalues a great Table, and hates the Prodigality of the
Spend-thrift; he has no Body to please, no Eyes to satisfy with glittering
Objects, no Ears to delight with artificial Sounds, no Blood to cherish with
studied Cordials; and though the World be his, and the fullness thereof, yet he
solaces not himself in the Pleasures of it; his Delights are great, like
himself; spiritual like his Essence, infinite as his Glory, eternal as his
Being; he delights in himself, and is to himself the Object of his Pleasure: he
delights in the eternal brightness of his own Glory, and the express Image of
his Person: he delights in his own boundless Understanding, whereby he knows
all things, past, present, and to come, and sees all Beings before they are,
and what will come to pass, and dives into their nature, ends, designs, and the
Accidents that befall them: his delight lies in doing good, and communicating
the Rays of his Holiness to his Subjects. He delights in his own Perfections,
and Virtue is the amiable Spectacle of his Eyes: he delights in a Soul that
loves him, and an humble Heart is to him a glorious sight. The Soul that loves
her own Lowliness, and is content to be little, and despised in the World,
embraces Contempt and Reproaches, and like the mighty Jesus, runs with Patience
the Race, that is set before her; this causes Joy in Heaven.

To this likeness, Religion would advance the Soul; not that it hopes to give
it the same Perfection, but that it designs to work some Resemblance betwixt
her, and that Sovereign Being. The Soul being in some measure capable of this
Delight, its Endeavor is to bring her to a sense of it. In a word, it seeks to
reduce Man to the first state of Innocence, from which by Sin he fell. And
though Adam had all the Riches and Glories of the World concentred in his
Paradise, yet his Delights were more spiritual than sensual, since his Joys
were not so much from the Flowers, and Trees, and Animals themselves, as from
the Excellency, Power, Wisdom, Greatness of God, which glistered in their Make,
and Use, and the Ends, for which they were created. He saw indeed the proud
Tulip, the fragrant, Rose, the odoriferous Jessamin, and rejoiced; he beheld
the Cherry, the Fig, the Almond, and the Apple, and triumphed; he cast his Eyes
on the laden Trees, and how they seemed to let down their Arms to put their
richer fruits into his Mouth, and was glad; he took a view of the Fishes, that
danced, and leaped in the Crystal Rivers, that watered the glorious place, and
his Spirits were enlivened; but at the same time, the Bounty, Liberality, and
Omnipotence of the great Architect of all, appeared so lively to his Mind, that
he made his Garden a true Emblem of Heaven, fell down, and Day and Night sung
the Praises of his Creator, as if he vyed with the Angels of the upper World,
and were trying, who should hold out longest at melodious Hallelujahs.

This Kindness Religion intends to our Souls, and therefore suggests unto us
the Promises and Threatenings of God, to keep our Feet steady in the way, they
are to walk in: to this purpose it tells us, That he who loves sensual Pleasure
shall be a poor man, poor in Grace, poor in gifts of God's holy Spirit, poor
with Respect to God's Favor, poor even to contempt, destitute of those richer
incomes, which sanctified Souls receive, deprived of the Juice and Sap, which
flows from the flourishing Vine, the Lord Jesus, in want of a foretaste of
Heaven, and of a sense, What the hope of Gods calling is, and what the riches
of the glory of his inheritance is in the Saints, and what is the exceeding
greatness of his Power toward them that believe, according to the working of
his mighty Power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead,
and set him at his own right Hand in heavenly places, Ephesians. 1.18, 19, 20. Who
can grumble at Religion after all these advantages? Who can find fault with it
after this prospect of its benefits? Who dares asperse that beauteous Virgin
after such Fruits it bears? Who would not esteem it? Who would not prize it?
Who would not honor it? Who would not speak well of it? Who would not look
upon it as a horn of plenty, and a treasury of the greatest comforts? Who would
not maintain the honor of it, against all opponents? who would not vindicate
it, when it is abused? Who would not rise up in defense of it, when blasphemous
Tongues would traduce, and revile it? Let no man say here, I can follow my
Carnal pleasures, and yet be religious too; Alas! What Piety can that be, where
thy Affections are divided betwixt Religion, and Worldly Pleasures, and where
these Delights commonly have the greater share? May be thou say thy Prayers,
so have I seen Parrets, and Magpies repeat a few Sentences, which they have
been taught, May be, thou go to Church; so have I seen a Blind-man sit down
by a Candle, but to no purpose: Thou may attempt to reconcile the Temple of
God, and Idols, but these attempts are as vain, as thy pleasures are; while
these sensual delights ingross thy Mind, the Word must needs be a dead Letter
to thee: Heaven cannot supple thy Soul, Hell cannot fright it, the Thunders of
God are insignificant to it, and thou art unfit to dye, unfit to appear at the
great Tribunal.

The Heathens tell this Fable That Ceres coming down from Heaven one day, gave
out, that she was a Nurse; whereupon, King Eleusius took her to attend his Son
Triptolemus, and having him under her Tuition, in the day time she fed him with
celestial Milk, and in the night she covered him with Fire to give him
Immortality. Religion is that Fire, which must make you immortal; this purges
away your dross, and cleanses your Hearts from the dregs of Sin, and Death,
makes you bright and shining, and capable of eternal Light. No Nurse is so
tender of you as Religion is: it feeds you with celestial Milk that you may be
strong in the Lord, and able to put on the whole Armor of God, and grow up
into a perfect Man in Christ: what? if it will not suffer you to please your
Flesh beyond what is necessary for it is Subsistence, must it therefore be your
Enemy? Will you count it a Foe because it denies you the Sword which would kill
you? How lovely should this very thing make it in your Eyes! How dear should
this make its holy Precepts to you! How should you rejoice, that you have such
a Monitor to prevent your Ruin! What Praises do you owe to God, that witholds
you from that which would throw your Souls upon their Deathbeds! I conclude
the Inference with this Story: Two Brethren were traveling, one a very prudent
Man, the other rude and silly; coming to a place where two Ways met, they
dispute, which of the two they should take; one looked as if great Art had been
bestowed upon it, Flowers grew on both sides, and it seemed to be most
frequented; the other looked rough and uneven, liker a Foot-path than a
Highway: the weaker Brother, charmed with the outside, was clearly for making
choice of the former; but the wiser, though he saw that the pleasant way
invited the Eye, yet I fear, says he, it will not bring us to a commodious
Lodging, the rather, because I have heard, that the less beaten Path leads to
an Inn, where we may have excellent Accommodation. The foolish Fellow was
peremptory in it, that the most pleasant way must be the right way; and
prevails with the Brother to bear him Company: and being advanced considerably
in it, they light upon a Company of Robbers, who immediately clap Shackles on
their hands and feet, and hale them both to their Captain and Governor. Here
one Brother accuses the other; the wiser charges the other with Stubbornness;
the weaker blamed the other's Facility, and alleged; That since his Brother
pretended to greater Wisdom than he, he should not have been persuaded. In fine
both are found guilty, and both laid up in Prison. These two Brethren are your
Souls and Bodies* your Soul is the wise, your Body the foolish Brother. Let not
your Body by its Importunity prevail with the Soul to consent to its Desires
and Fondnesses of the dangerous Delights of the World. O! hearken not to the
Persuasions of a sensual Appetite, that chooses a present Satisfaction, but
considers not, there are Robbers at the end of the way, which will certainly
throw both into outward Darkness.

5. The great Day is at Hand, let us prepare for it. So Christ told his
Disciples, and so the Apostles taught the Christian World; nor must we wonder,
that the Blessed Jesus should fright his Followers with the Approaches of that
day, when he knew, it would not come in sixteen hundred Years, and more, which
are past, since his appearing in the World. I omit here the Calculations of
curious Men, who have been bold to determine the Year in which the day of
Judgment will happen; some that follow the Tradition of Elias have allowed two
thousand Years to the Economy before the Law, two thousand to that under the
Law, and two thousand to that under the Gospel, and after this have placed the
Succession of that tremendous day. But I doubt that this is rather a Jewish
Criticism than a real Prophecy: for, God having created the World in six days,
and a thousand Years being as one Day with the Lord, it is like Men have
concluded from this Notion. That as the World was created in six days, so after
six days, i. e. six thousand years, it would be destroyed. Some when they have
seen any extraordinary Judgments of Hail, or Rain, or Thunder, or Locusts, or
great Confusions happen in the World, have from thence inferred the immediate
coming of this Day. Some have placed it in one Year, some in another, but all
these are needless Speculations. It Is enough that the Decree is sealed in
Heaven, that there will be such a prodigious day; and it was as truly at hand
in Christ's time, as it is now, and now, as much as it was then; nay as much
now, as it will be but a Year or a Month before it comes in good earnest; for
the day of our Death is at hand, and we know not when, or how soon, whether
this Hour or the next, the fatal Messenger will arrest us in our Journey. The
day of our Death is the forerunner of that greater Day, and according as our
Souls are found at the day of our Death, so they will be judged in that
glorious day: the Judgment, that will be pronounced upon our Souls at our
Death, will be proclaimed aloud before the whole World in the other day; and if
they be so unhappy as to be condemned upon their departure hence, they will all
that while, till the great day comes, torment themselves with the thoughts of
that Sentence, and the Shame that will ensue upon it, as holy Souls will
comfort themselves with the Thoughts of their Absolution. Therefore, when our
Souls leave this Body, that day and hour, is really a day of Judgment to us:
and that this day is at hand, none but a Sot can deny; and accordingly all Men
of Sense have made, and do make early Preparation for it, and he that does not
imitate them, is so far from giving Proof to the World, that he is wiser than
they, that he proclaims his Stupidity, and in a manner, renounces his Portion
in the Inheritance of the Saints in light. But then by Preparation I do not
mean those little Sprinklings of Devotion, which Hypocrites, and Men who
pretend to love God, yet will not part with their Lusts, usually lay upon his
Altar, not the Pharisees Alms, and Fasts, and Prayer, which were performed with
sinister designs, out of Vainglory and Ostentation; not Ahab's Repentance, who
put on Sackcloth, and walked softly, but still kept an unmortified Heart;
Pro. 7.14.
not the Harlots Piety Solomon speaks of, who said her Orisons, and paid her
Vows, and her Peace Offerings, and thought to make God amends for the Crimes
she lived in, by these Services; not Judas his Sorrow, who lamented his Sin,
because he saw the Hell he was like to drop into; not Demas his temporary
Severity, which soon changed into fondness of the World; not the Angel of
Sardis his Profession of Religion, who had the name that he lived, but was
dead; not the Jews Zeal for the Ceremonial Part of God's Worship, while they
neglected Justice, Mercy, Chastity, Sobriety, and Charity; not the Zeal of
Ezekiel's Hears, who loved to hear, but were loath to do: but, if you would
prepare for this day of Account, so as to be commended by the Judge, the
Preparation must have these following Ingredients.

1. Pity those inconsiderate Men that live as if there were no future Judgment.
Express your Compassion to their Souls by your Tears, since they will not weep
for themselves: Ah! miserable Creatures! E're long they shall see him whom they
have pierced, and mourn, as one that mourns for his only Son, and they are not
aware of it! They are hastening to the Shambles, where they will be barbarously
butchered by hellish Furies, and they are not sensible of it! Oh, mourn for
them! They deserve your Pity more than Galley-Slaves, more than Wretches in
Turkish Captivity: Oh! call to them, and see whether ye can yet persuade them
into a livelier Faith of this terrible Day. O that you could yet save their
Souls from Death, and cover a multitude of Sins! It Is like they will scorn your
Tears, and laugh at your Admonitions, for the God of this World has blinded
them: but, Oh! pray for them, that their Eyes may be opened, that they may see
the Precipice they run upon, and behold the bottomless Gulf, upon the Brink
whereof, they stand. They are rolling down the Hill; Oh! stop them, if you can,
that they fall not into the Lake beneath: seeing your Zeal for their Souls,
your concern for their Welfare, your entreaties to save themselves from this
Generation, your sorrow for their undone Estate, your grief for their hardness
of Heart, they may yet relent, and turn before the Lord comes, and smites the
Earth with a Curse.

2. Every day spend some time in reflecting on this Day. In the Life of
Pachomius, we read, That every day he used to bespeak the several Parts and
Members of his Body, and talk to them, as if they had been rational Creatures:
Behold, says he, my beloved Parts, I will advise you to nothing but what is
wholesome, and useful for you, and therefore show your selves obedient to my
Counsel, and let us serve God cheerfully till we get to a better place. As to
you my beloved Hands, the time will come when you will no more be able to
strike your Neighbor, or play at Cards and Dice, and when you will not be able
to reach any more after Goods, that do not belong to you. As to you, my beloved
Feet, the time will come, when the way you have gone will be stopped up, and
when ye will be no longer able to run into vain and loose Company. Hearken unto
me my Senses, and whatever helps to make up this mortal Frame, let us strive
lustily before Death over-take us, and stand boldly in the evil day, and fight
bravely, till the great God put an end to our Sweat and Labor, and call us to
his heavenly Kingdom. What will it profit you to taste of all the Sweets of
this World, if any thing can be called sweet in so much Misery? Why should ye
be loath to labor, when to labor ye were born? Why should ye refuse to suffer
when shortly you must die, and mingle with Dust? Why should ye seek after a
soft and easy Life, when e'relong you will meet with it in Heaven: This is no
Time, no Place for Pleasure; that is only to be found among the Blessed above.
This is it, that I would have you comprehend above all things, that through
sensual Delights and Satisfactions, Men go into unquenchable Fire, but through
Briars and Thorns lies the way to Joys, which shall never have an end. Why do
ye murmur against me when I bid you fast, and watch, and pray? Should I indulge
you, it would be your Bane, it would be Cruelty in me to spare you; to give you
Ease would be the way to precipitate my self and you into endless Torment. Thus
spoke that holy Man to the respective Parts and Members of his Body: and thus,
Christian, do thou preach to thy Soul every day; ask it, which of those two
Sentences that shall be pronounced in the last day, art thou most desirous of;
of that, Come ye Blessed, or of the other, Depart ye Cursed? If (as no Man is
fond of Misery) thou do hunger and thirst after the former, come my Soul,
let us retire, let us ascend the Hill of God, and from thence take a view of what
will be hereafter. The Posture of Affairs thou see now, will not continue
long; Vid. Dre^^l. Tribun. Christi. l. 1. c. 8. 5.
fancy thou saw a Man whom the Divine Bounty has crowned with variety of
temporal Blessings. This Person having a mind to take his Pleasure, retires
with his Family to his Country House, adorned with Tyrian Silk, and Persian
Carpets, and with all the Eastern Riches, and there lives merrily, and at his
ease; one Night being very jovial at Supper, a Servant of his, base and
ill-natured, puts some Lethargick, or Opiate Potion into his Master's, and
Fellow Servants Cups; and having rocked them all asleep, opens the Doors, lets
in Thieves, and Robbers, who having plundered the House, at last lay violent
hands on the Master, and to make sport with him, drag him thus intoxicated into
the open Field, and there leave him. In the mean while the Heavens grow black,
and a hideous Tempest gathers in the Clouds, the Sky begins to lighten, and the
Voice of Thunder to be heard, and a dreadful Rain falls; and in the midst of
all this Noise and Confusion, the besotted Master wakes, looks about, quakes,
trembles, believes himself in another World, is astonished to see himself lying
on a barren Turf, without Servants without Attendants, without Friends, without
Necessaries, without Conveniences, among Showers, and Storms, and Tempests,
stiff with Cold, frozen to Death almost, and beholding nothing but Misery about
him.

O my Soul! thou can not but look upon such a Person, as the very Emblem of
Confusion, and while thou dread'st this fearful State, take heed thou do not
prepare for it, or drop into it; take heed of carnal Security, for that will
expose thee to the Rage and Fury of hellish Thieves, and make God's Indignation
strangely surprising. The Terror that will seize the sleepy Soul, when it is
summoned away to the Bar of a righteous God, will be beyond Storms of Hail, and
Tempests of Rain, and Flashes of Lightning, and Claps of Thunder. When
Covetousness would entice thee, show it the miserable Gehazi trembling before
the Throne of God: when Luxury would tempt thee, bid it look upon the wretched
Belshazzar, mourning to eternal Ages for his Intemperance: when worldly
Mindedness would debauch thee, find out Nabal among the damned Spirits, and
with that Sight fright the foolish Lust away: when Envy would enter into thy
Soul, call out Cain from that unhappy Crew, and bid it see its Doom in his
Funeral: when present Satisfactions would make thee slight the after hopes of
Glory, bid the profane Esau stand forth from his fiery Cell to which he is
condemned, and it will lose its Courage. Thou read of the Syrians, how in a
Consternation sent upon them from above, they fled in the Night, leaving all
their Provision behind them. But what is this to the Consternation, the
Judgment Seat of Christ will strike into that Man, who having slighted his
Commands, is on a sudden ordered to come and answer the Reason of his Contempt;
and forced to leave all his vain Excuses and Apologies behind him. The Name of
some Warriors has frighted Men, Women, and Children; and then how terrible
will the Name of the Lord of Hosts be to them, that have fought against his
Holy Spirit by their Stubbornness. O my Soul, Blessed is he that watches, and
keeps his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame, Rev. 16.15.

3. Walk circumspectly every Day, and use that conscientiousness, you would
use, were you sure, you should be summoned to Judgment at Night. Say not, next
Year, or when I have accomplished such a Business, I will trim my Lamp, and
make it ready against the Bridegroom comes. Every Day to live in expectation
of the Summons is the act of a Wise and Blessed Servant: And he that every Day
walks with God, walks in a mighty sense of his Omniscience, and Omnipresence,
and in his company, business, conversation, dealings, keeps God in his Eye,
sets his Laws before him, walks as one resolved to please God in all things,
lets not a Day pass over his Head without doing some good, uses the World, as
if he used it not, and if through inadvertency he slips, rises again presently,
and arms himself with fresh resolutions, is the Person, that lives every Day,
as if it were his last Day.

Sinner, were thou sure, that this Night thou should be summoned to the Bar
of God, would thou swear and lie, and dissemble, and be Choleric, or
backward to good works? Live, as if thou were sure of it: For suppose thou
continuest in the Land of the Living that Night, thou losest nothing by this
preparation, nay, thou art a mighty gainer by it, for hereby thy Soul is
refreshed thy Mind preserved in an excellent temper, thy Goodness strengthened,
thy Graces renewed, thy Affections enlarged, thy Understanding enlightened, thy
Will made more tractable, thy Spirits eased, thy Calmness maintained, and thy
very Body kept in Health. God loves thee, the Promises of the Gospel belong to
thee: Devils cannot hurt thee, thou live like a Christian, actest like a Man
of Reason, preparest for thine own quiet, thy Condition is happy, thy Estate
safe, thy Life out of danger, thy Conscience clear, thy Confidence in God
increases, thy Satisfaction swells, thy Comforts grow bigger, and thou freest
thy self from that Mire and Clay, in which so many Souls do stick, and
deliverest thy Soul from that terrible Pit, which swallows up so many imprudent
Travelers.

4. When ever you see, or hear of the judicial Process of a Malefactor, think,
and reflect upon this Day. Think how terrible the sight of the judge is to the
guilty Prisoner, and how much more terrible the sight of a Majestic God, will
be to the unhappy Sinner that would not be kept in by the Laws, and Sanctions
of the great Commander of the World, and stood more in awe of a Child, or
Servant, when he was going to commit lewdness, then of him, who gave him life,
and being: Think how the Malefactor is frighted and confounded with the vast
company of Men, and Women, that crowd in to hear his Trial, and how much more
the impenitent Sinner will be ashamed in the last Day, when all the People that
have been since the Creation of the World, will look upon him, and hear, what
his fate will be; some Orators have been struck dumb with the greatness of
their Auditory, what effect then may we suppose will the Congregation of
Mankind have upon a wretch, that never saw the hundred thousandth part of them
before?

Think how it must be with the Malefactor, before the Sentence of Death passes
upon him, how heavy his mind is, how Melancholic his Thoughts, how drooping
his Spirits are, and what Palpitations he feels about his Heart, and how far
greater the heaviness of the sinful Soul must be, before the Sentence of
Condemnation proceeds against her, from the mouth of God, how much more sad
remembrances, how much more dismal reflections will seize upon her!

And if it be so sad with her, before the Sentence be past, what trembling and
horror will invade her after it? A Malefactor here on Earth may yet entertain
hopes of Pardon, his Prince may be merciful, pity the distressed condition of
his Family, remember past services, and relent, and change the Sentence, but
the sinful Soul once condemned to suffer, has no hopes of forgiveness, no
hopes of being Repriv'd, no hopes of being released, not but that God is
infinitely more merciful, then the meekest Prince on Earth can be, but the time
of Mercy is past. Once he was merciful to her to a Miracle, his Mercy was her
Shield, Mercy did encompass her, Mercy lay entreating of her, Mercy courted
her, Mercy though abused, came again, and tried new arguments, Mercy followed
her, Mercy preserved her from a Thousand evils, Mercy would not suffer the
roaring Lion to touch her for many years, Mercy stood by her, even then, when
she desperately affronted her Maker, Mercy was patient toward her, Mercy wept
over her, Mercy called to her, Mercy would have pulled her away from her
Errors, but she thrust this bright Angel away, would have none of it, made
light of it, laughed at its charms, despised its entreaties, scorned its
carresses, disregarded its smiles, refused its offers, rejected its embraces,
and therefore cannot seed her self with hopes of Pardon now.

Nay, the Malefactor here on Earth, when Men will not Pardon, has yet hopes,
that upon his true Repentance God will Pardon him, but the Soul, that departs
hence in a sensual, carnal condition, the same she lived in, has no higher
Court to appeal to, none above God to make her moan to, none beyond the supreme
Lawgiver to address her self to. The God the has despised, and whose Mercy
could make no impression on her, is to be her last Judge, and therefore how
much more disconsolate must her state be, then the condemned Malefactor's here
on Earth!

5. Whenever you converse with sick and dying men, and are present, when their
Breath leaves their Bodies, think, and reflect upon this day: Think with your
selves, This man is going to be judged, his Soul is entering into the
Territories of another World, to know, what her everlasting state must be: This
will shortly be my case. I must ere long follow her to God's Tribunal; here my
stay will be but short; here I have no continuing City; here I am not to tarry
long; my Friend, that is gone, shows me the way, that I must go. I saw him
expire, I heard his last groans, I was by, when his Eye-strings broke, if the
Lord Jesus gave him any assurance of his favor, before he died, with what
cheerfulness will his Soul meet her Bridegroom in the Air, how welcome will he
be in the Court of the great King! What rejoicing will there be, when he, and
the other glorified spirits behold one another, and they see that one more is
added to their Number, for there is no envy in Heaven, no grudges, no fretting,
because so many are admitted into the Everlasting Mansions, but the more holy
Souls do enter there, the more their joy increases: If this my Friend has
lived above the World, while he lived here, with what gladness, will his Soul
be brought, and enter into the Kings Palace! How will his Name be remembered
there! How kindly will Angels talk of him! How favorable will the Judge be to
him! but if his Devotion and Piety has been but Paint and Show, what a
surprise will it be, immediately upon his coming among the spirits of another
World to be arrested at the suit of the Great God, and to be carried away to
his Trial! He is taken away from his sick Bed, but should his Soul be sent away
with a Curse, how much worse will Hell be, then his sick Bed! In a sick Bed
Physic may yet give some ease, but Hell scorns all Medicines, no Drugs are of
any use there, no Cordials, no Cataplasmes are to be found there, no vulnerary
Herbs grow in that Wilderness: On a sick Bed, Friends may yet comfort us, but
in Hell, there is no Friend, all are Enemies, all hate one another, because
none can deliver the other from his Torments: In a sick Bed Neighbors may give
their advice, but in Hell no advice can be given, for the Inhabitant are not
capable of taking it: The Devils indeed may advise them to speak evil of God,
because of the irreversible doom they lie under, but that is a Remedy infinitely
worse then the Disease, and they that follow this counsel increase God's Anger,
and their own Plagues, and as they venture upon new Sins, so God must inflict
new Curses, and try new Rods, and new Scourges, which makes the misery truly
infinite.

Such Reflections the sight of a sick and dying Man will cause; nor is this
judging of his everlasting and final State but a mere conditional Meditation,
undertaken for no other end, but to affect our own Souls with the day of God's
righteous Judgment, to improve our own Thoughts, and to make a holy use of such
Occasions, as God's Providence thinks fit to present to us.

6. Whenever you go to a Funeral, think of this Day of Judgment. When you see
the Mourners go about the Streets, when you your selves accompany the Corpse to
the Grave, think of the great Sentence the Soul will receive upon her
Approaches to the Throne of the Heavenly Majesty. St. Hierom describing the
Funeral of the happy Paula, that famous Saint, In Epitaph Paulae Romans
who while she lived here, was Eyes to the Blind, a Nurse of the Poor, a Staff
to the Lame, and an Example to all religious Persons, tells us, That when she
was dead, there were heard no Shrieks, no Howlings, no Weeping, no despairing
Lamentations, but Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs: her Corpse was carried
to the Grave upon Bishops Shoulders, Prelates carried Lamps and Wax-Candles
before her, and a Quire of Singing-Men accompanied her to her Tomb, and most of
the People of Palestina came together to attend the Funeral. The Monks crept
out of their Cells, the Virgins from their Retirement, and good Men, in all
Places thereabout, thought it Sacrilege not to pay the last Office to her. The
Widows and Orphans, as in the case of Dorcas, came, and showed the Garments she
had made for them; and all the indigent and needy cried, they had lost a
Mother: and for three Days, Psalms were sung in Greek, Hebrew, Latin, and
Syriack; and every Body celebrated her Funeral as if it had been their own.

When you behold the Funeral of such a holy Person, think, how with far greater
Pomp the Angels meet her Soul at the Gates of Heaven, and on their Shoulders,
carry it to the Throne of everlasting Mercy. Think how joyfully those blessed
Ministers conduct such a Soul to her eternal Rest, and how they triumph that
she is delivered from the Burden of the Flesh, and advanced from a Valley of
Tears, to a Place of endless Glory. When the great Constantius died in
Britain, his Ashes were put in a golden Chest, and with great Pomp carried
through France, and Italy, to Rome; but, think how far greater Honor it is,
for such a holy Soul to be conveyed by the Spirits of Light into the City
coming down from Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband, Rev.
21.2, 21.
the twelve Gates whereof are twelve Pearls, and the Streets pure Gold, as it
were transparent Glass.

On the other side; when you see the stately Funeral of a voluptuous and
sensual Man, such as Attila was, the Soldiers tearing their Hair, the
Courtiers weeping, the Body wrapped up in Silk, the Guard proclaiming his
valiant Actions, and Monuments erected upon the Grave, of Gold, of Silver, and
of Iron; think on the more dismal Funeral of his Soul, in case it was not
washed here with the Waters of Repentance, and which is the greatest
Purification, with the Blood of Jesus: think, if the Soul be for ever separated
from the glorious Presence of God, and commanded away into everlasting
Darkness, not all the stately Monuments raised for the honor of her Body will
qualify her Misery in the other World; not all the Acclamations or Applauses
of Flatterers will give her any Comfort, not all the Riches she enjoyed on
Earth, nor all her Wealth and Greatness, and Dominion, will there extinguish
the least Spark of Fire her Conscience will feel. This dreadful Funeral will be
attended with crowds of unhappy Spirits, who, instead of mourning, will rejoice
at the Guest that is come into their Tents, and Lycaon like, cover her with
eternal Darkness. Such a Soul is laid in a worse Grave than her Body, even in
the burning Lake, where the Misery is proportioned to her former Sins, and her
Conscience frighted with Scenes of Horror; and the Remembrance of her quondam
Pomp increases her Discontent and Anguish: think of this, and learn to be
sober; think of this, and learn self-denial: think of this, and learn not to
love the World: think of this, and learn to secure the Light God's Countenance:
think of this, and learn to honor them that fear the Lord: think of this, and
learn to do good in your Generation.

7. To avoid the Terror of this future Judgment, judge your selves here on
Earth; for if we would judge our selves we should not be judged, says the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 11.31. Then we judge our selves, when we confess our
particular Errors, and condemn our selves for the Commission; when with Grief,
and sorrow of Heart, and Indignation against our selves, we do acknowledge,
that we have abused the Divine Mercy, and by so doing deserved his taking his
holy Spirit from us; when we lay his Threatenings before us, and confess that
these Plagues are due to us, and that we have deserved them, and wonder at the
Patience of God that hitherto has been loath to give order to the destroying
Angel to seize on us; when, from a sense of our Neglect and Sins, we cry, It is
a bitter thing and evil, that we have forsaken the Lord, and that his Fear has
not been in us, and are so convinced of our Demerits that we can give no other
Reason for our Escape and Preservation so long, but God's infinite Goodness;
when we are angry with our selves for our imprudence in neglecting so great
Salvation, and study, how to be revenged upon our Corruptions; when we decry
our inward, and outward failings, and are resolved to mortify them, were they
as dear to us, as our right Hand, and Foot, and the Apple of our Eye; when we
erect a Tribunal in our Souls, and bid our disorderly Thoughts, and Words, and
Actions appear before us, and give an account of their behavior, and finding
they have been exhorbitant, lash them into better manners; when we lay mulcts
on our inordinate desires, in case they will not yield, and put our Flesh to
some more than ordinary trouble, in case it will not be kept within its due
bounds, and limits; when we punish our Eyes, by fixing them so many hours on
Heaven, or on the Word of God, because they gazed on things, which God has
forbid; when we chastise our Ears with hearing so many Sermons, because such a
Day, they listened with pleasure to an offensive story; when we inflict silence
upon our Tongues for some days, because such a time they spoke things either
undecent, or injurious to our Neighbors; when we bid our Feet keep at home for
a considerable time, because they ran into evil Company, when they should not;
when we deny our Body its necessary Food and Refreshment for some time, because
it pampered it self such a Day, and played the wanton; when we will not let our
sensual Appetite enjoy its harmless, and innocent delights for a certain time,
because the other Day it it was greedy after outward and carnal satisfactions;
when we suffer our selves to be reproached without answering because such a Day
we flew out into an unruly passion.

This is to judge our selves, and they that do so, may be confident, they shall
not be condemned with the World, in doing so we do that to our selves, which
God would have done to us, if we had continued impenitent, and and insensible,
and take that vengeance of our selves, which God would have taken of us in a
severer manner, in case we had not bethought our selves; and thus we prevent
his anger, and show, that we dread his Wrath, and seek his Love, that his
Threatenings fright us, and that we have just apprehensions of his Indignation;
and such men the Holy Ghost counts happy, for, blessed is he, that fears
always, says the wise Man, Prove. 28.14.

8. In your Actions, regard not so much how they are relished with Men, as
whether they will hold Water, and endure the Test, before the Judge, when your
naked Souls must appear before him. Abundance of our Actions appear plausible
to men, who see no further, then the outside, but let us consider, whether they
will bear the piercing Eye of this All-seeing Judge; it is true, should God lay
our Righteousness to the Line, and measure our Religious actions by the exact
Rule of his Wisdom, Justice, and Holiness, he would spy innumerable flaws even
in the Services of the devoutest Person living, but he proceeds not according
to that rigor, but upon the account of the Great Mediator vouchsafes Grains of
allowance for accidental infirmities, and incogitancies, and unforeseen, and
involuntary slips and the sincerity of a good work is that, he chiefly takes
notice of, whether the intention was good, whether the design was Holy, whether
Love was the Principle of it, whether it was without reserves of some secret
sin, whether there was candor, and ingenuity in it, and whether the offering
was free, unforced, unconstrained by any outward Motive, and whether Charity
lay at the bottom.

Many of our Actions may want these qualifications of Sincerity, and yet appear
specious, and gay, and glorious in the Eyes of Spectators, and those we
converse withal: Look not Christians on the commendations of your Neighbors in
your acts of Piety, but on the commendations of that Judge, to whom ye must give
an account, for not he that commends himself, or whom men commend, is approved,
but whom the Lord commends, 2 Cor. 10.18. If he do not commend our works, all
the approbations of Mortal men, will do us but little good another day; and
serve only to tell us, that we were cheated by those Encomiums. Alas! How many
men are counted Just, and Righteous, Honest, and Good here on Earth, whom the
Great Judge will not find so, when he comes to examine their deeds by the Rule
of Sincerity! Sirs! matter not, whether men do look upon you as devout, but
see, that God may esteem you so; Alas! what does it signify, that men call me
Religious, when God knows, I am an Hypocrite? What comfort can it be to me,
that men think me charitable, when God sees, I give Alms to be seen of men?
What will it profit me, that men call me Zealous; and Fervent, when God sees,
that gain, and profit is the cause of it? What does it avail me, that men say,
I pray well, when God sees, I study to please the Company? What great matter is
it, that men applaud me for a single Virtue, when God sees I am partial in my
Obedience? What great advantage can it be to me, that men say I am humble, when
God sees pride in that very humility! The Apostle therefore bids us look to the
manner of our performances; He that gives, let him do it with simplicity; He
that rules, with diligence; He that shows Mercy, with cheerfulness; Let love be
without dissimulation, be kindly affectioned one to another with Brotherly
love, etc. Romans 12.8, 9, 10.

So, when you pray, let your Hearts breath out holy Desires; when you sing, let
your Minds bear a principal Part in the Hymn; when you come to the Table of the
Lord, let your Souls be touched with the love of Jesus; when you are kind to
your Neighbors, banish all sinister Designs; when you express any holy
Fervours, let God's Glory be in your Eye; when you discharge any part of your
Duty to God and Man, let a cheerful Obedience to the Gospel be the Motive: Do
all this as unto God, not as unto Men; do it, as if no Creature saw you; do it,
as if none but God were before you; do it, as if you were to be summoned this
Moment to Judgment: such Services will endure the Probe, such Devotions will
stand good, such Acts of Piety will hear searching, such Works God himself will
be a witness to, that they were wrought according to his Will, and by the Power
of his holy Spirit.

9. What Injuries you receive in this World from Men, bear them patiently, out
of regard to this great Day of Judgment, when God will set all things to
rights, and take care that you lose nothing by your Sufferings. Rejoice
Christian in thine Innocence, which God intends to proclaim in this Day before
all Men and Angels. He Will wipe off all the Dirt and Aspersions that are thrown
upon thee, in this day: He will bring forth thy Righteousness as the Light,
Psalm. 37.6.
and thy Judgment as the Noonday. What need'st thou take notice of an Affront
offered to thee, when thy God stands engaged to take notice of it with a
Witness in this day? What need'st thou seek Revenge, when thy Master, whom thou
servest, is resolved to judge thy Cause in this Day? What need'st thou fret and
rage at the Contempt, Men put upon thee here, when thy great Lord will be
sufficiently angry with the Offender in this day? What need'st thou grieve that
Men abuse thee here, when thy Sovereign Master will grieve every Vein of the
Reviler's Heart in this day? What need'st thou be concerned for the Reproaches
Men cast upon thee for thy Righteousness sake, when he, for whose Name thou
suffer, will vindicate thy Wrong, and call the Persecuter Fool for his Pains
in this day?

Say not, At this rate there will be no living for me in the World; trust that
God, who has promised to clear thy Innocence in this day, and he will hide
thee under the shadow of his Wings, while thou art in this troublesome World:
he that preserved Elijah, when Ahab, and Jezabel, and all the Prophets of Baal
were enraged against him, knows how to keep thee in the Hour of Temptation. Ay,
but Revenge is sweet! What if it be so to Flesh and Blood? it will prove bitter
to thy Spirit: and if ever thou art saved, a bitter Repentance must come in,
and salve the Wound; and will thou prepare for a needless and uncertain
Repentance? How know thou whether God will after the Fact, give thee his
holy Spirit to come to this Repentance? And what Cruelty is it, when God is
resolved to revenge thy Quarrel, that thou will needs revenge it too? If thou
revengest it, God will take no care to plead for thee; but if thou leave thy
Cause entirely to him, thy Wrong will be infinitely recompensed in this day.
Thus did thy blessed Master, who when he suffered, threatened not, 1 Pet. 2.23.
but committed himself to him that judges righteously. Will thou boast of being
his Disciple, and art thou loath to follow his Example? Fear not, those Men who
wrong thee now, will be sufficiently sorry for the Injury, either here, if ever
they be truly converted, or hereafter, when the Almighty will convince them to
their everlasting Grief, how much they were mistaken in their Verdicts, and
what sinister Constructions they put upon thy Actions, how barbarous their Rage
was against thee, how inhumane the ill Language they gave thee, and how unjust
all their Reproaches were. Do but stay a little while, and thou shall see it
with thine Eyes: Have but Patience until that appointed day, and thou will
find, the Prophet was in the right, when he said, The Righteous shall rejoice
when he sees the Vengeance, so that a Man shall say, Verily, there is a reward
for the Righteous, Verily, he is a God that judges in the earth, Psalm. 58.9, 10.

10. Consider particularly, Matt. 11.22.
That it will be more tolerable for Heathens, and professed Infidels at this
day, than for Christians; and not without reason. Treason is more excusable in
a Stranger than in a Citizen or Domestic, and more may be pleaded for a sinful
Life in a Pagan, than in one of Christ's own Household. A Heathen is obliged to
God by the Right of Creation and Preservation; but a Christian has, besides
these, Baptism, and his Vows, to tie him: his Motives to the Fear of God are
stronger than they can be in other Religions. Where the greatest Rewards are,
there we may justly believe People will be most industrious, most laborious,
and most sedulous. No Religion proposes those rewards, that Christianity does.
The Heathens either had doubtful Apprehensions of an everlasting Happiness, or
were Strangers to the nature of it. Among us this endless Glory is not only
professed, but most clearly revealed; we are sure of it, confident of it, have
no reason to dispute the certainty of it, and the nature of it is discovered to
us by him who came out of his Fathers Bosom; therefore he that under these
Manifestations proves careless and negligent of God's Love, can have no Excuse.

And as Heaven is or may be seen in all its Glories among us, so we are assured
of a burning Lake, of an endless Misery, which attends the unconscionable, and
disobedient; whereof the Notions of Pagans, and Idolaters, were but dark, and
consequently we have a stronger Bridle to curb the Violence of our sinful
Desires than they; and therefore this must make our Doom more terrible.

The helps we have to arrive to Virtue are not only more in number, but more
powerful, our Knowledge is greater, our Instructions greater, our Illumination
greater, our means of Grace richer; and we have greater Examples of Holiness
than ever Heathens had; we have besides Philosophy, and the Law of Nature, the
Sacred Scriptures, and besides Conscience, the Spirit of God to exhort us, to
reprove us, to admonish us, to assist us, and to help our Infirmities. If a
Heathen sin, he does but stumble in the dark; if a Christian sin, he falls at
Noonday. We have Sacraments to bind us to a perfect hatred of Sin; and
Semiramis took no more pains to fence her City with Brick Walls, than the
Almighty does our Souls from falling a Prey to the Prince of Darkness; nay, our
Impediments in our way to Bliss are less than the Pagans had: by Baptism, and
the Power of Christ's Death, the Powers of Darkness are broken, the Devil's
Strength is much abated, his Arrows are not half so fiery as once they were.
The Heathens have far greater Obstacles. The Devils Power among them seems
unlimited, and therefore for us to fall a Prey to this Enemy, for us to yield
to his Suggestions, for us to be drawn into his Net, will scarce admit of a
charitable Apology.

These things are now made light of; but nothing is more reasonable, then that
they who have abused the greatest Mercy, should feel the severest Lashes;
Christian, why should God give thee greater Light, and greater advantages, then
to other men? They are men of the same passions, thou art of, and they are
Flesh, and have Reason, and are God's Creatures; and depend upon his
Providence, as well as thou; and why should God make a difference betwixt thee
and them? No other Reason can be assigned, but his undeserved compassion. Thou
wicked Servant, had thy Master a greater kindness for thee, then for thy fellow
Servants, and could not this distinguishing kindness prevail with thee to be
faithful, and loyal to him? Thy ingratitude is abominable, and thy torment
shall be proportionable: Thy impiety was intolerable, and thy flames shall be
so too: Thy baseness is inexpressible, and thy plagues shall be so too: Thy
unworthiness is uncommon, and thy agonies shall be so too: Thou deservest a
bitterer Cup, and thou shall drink it too. If God should not punish thee more
then Heathens, he would be partial, his Honor would suffer in the indulgence,
and he has but little encouragement from thy good nature to lessen his Wrath
and Fury.

Dionysius talked Atheistically, as well as thou, but he had no Scripture to
direct him; the Sybarites were luxurious, as thou art, but they knew not what
the Gospel meant. Novellius, Torquatus was given to drunkenness, as thou art,
but he never made Vows against it in a Sacrament of Baptism. Tarquinius was
proud, as thou art, but he never heard of the humble Jesus. Julia was vain in
her dress, and habit, as thou art, but she understood not, what the stupendous
Work of Redemption meant. Decius Mundus was lecherous as thou art, but he was
not acquainted with a Holy, Sanctifying Spirit. Themistocles was envious, as
thou art, but he never heard God speaking to him, by his Son. Epicurus was
careless of a future Immortality, bu he had not Ministers to preach to him.
Simonides was covetous, as thou art, but he knew of no Articles of belief.
Philagrius was choleric as thou art, but he made no profession of Goodness and
Religion. Sisamenes was unjust as thou art, but he never heard, that the
Unrighteous are not to inherit the Kingdom of God. Vnidius was uncharitable as
thou art, but he had not that Cloud of Witnesses, those holy Examples that thou
have. Sardanapalus minded nothing but his Lusts, and Belly, as thou do, but
he never heard of a Crucified Savior. Democles was a flatterer and dissembler,
as thou art, but the Terrors of the Lord were never manifested to him. All
which advantages thou possessest above these Pagans, therefore it must needs be
more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah at the Day of Judgment, then for thee.

11. Let the process of this Day among other Virtues, engage you particularly
to a practical Charity, and readiness to do good to others, who are under
affliction, especially where God has blessed you with conveniences, and
superfluities; for the Judge is resolved to insist upon this Virtue more then
others: This he has not only assured us of, Matthew. 25.34, 35, etc. but it is
also the most reasonable thing in the World, that we who hope to find Mercy in
that Day, should be acquainted with the showing Mercy to Christ's distressed
members here; or it is Christ's Rule, Luke 6.38.
that with what Measure we mete here, with the same Measure it shall be meted
to us again; and to this purpose the Apostle, He that sows sparingly, shall
reap also sparingly; but he that sows bountifully, shall reap also bountifully,
2 Cor. 9.6. -- The Virgins that wanted Oil, were excluded from the
Wedding-feast, when the Bridegroom came, that Oil was Charity, which therefore
the good Samaritan poured into the Wounds of the distressed Man; and as Oil
supples the Joints, gives ease to the part, which is in pain, and is an
ingredient of most Chirungical Operations, so Charity relieves the Miserable,
and refreshes the Calamitous, and has an influence upon all other Virtues. It
was therefore wisely said by that pious Duke of Savoy, when one asked him,
where his hunting Dogs were; he led them into his Hall, where abundance of
Lame, and Blind, and Poor People fed at his cost and charges; these faith he
are my Dogs that serve me in my hunting after Heaven and Happiness: All other
Virtues lose their glory, where Charity does not bear them company. To this
Virtue we are born, and it is the most easy of all the rest, and therefore to
want it when we come before the Judge, must needs turn his Face, and Favor
from us.

And it is remarkable, that the Judge represents all the acts of Charity, he
reckons up in this Day, as done to himself, I was an hungered, and ye gave me
meat: I was a thirsty, and ye gave me drink, etc. whereby he does not only
intimate the close union, and communion, the poor Man has with him, insomuch
that he is one with him, but shows, that in our Alms, and doing good we must
have respect chiefly to Christ Jesus. Let the Man, that begs thy Charity, or
wants thy Relief, be brought to Poverty by his own folly, let him be wicked,
let him be ungrateful, give him with respect to thy Savior; look upon Christ,
when thou do supply his wants; have the Lord Jesus in thine Eyes, regard not
so much the poor Man's Nature, because he is of the same Flesh with thee, nor
so much his Relation, because he is of Kin to thee, nor so much his Country,
because he is of the same Town, that thou art of, nor so much his Religion,
because he professes the same Faith with thee, nor so much his Person, because
he is a Gentleman, nor so much his readiness to extol thy bounty, as the Love
and Charity of the Holy Jesus to thy Soul and Body. Have that in thine Eye
chiefly, when thou openest thy Hand, let him be in thy Mind, when thou
distributest thy bounty; this makes thy Charity amiable, and acceptable and fit
to be proclaimed, and commended in this Day.

And indeed, How do thou know Christian, but that thy Savior may sometimes
disguise himself, and appear to thee in the shape of a poor Man, and wilt not
thou give freely, wilt not thou give cheerfully, wilt not thou give readily,
since thou know not, but thou may give it to thy Savior himself? And how
glorious an Encomium will it be in the last Day, to hear him say before the
World, I was naked, and this good Man clothed me, I was in Prison, and he
visited me! The three Angels of Old disguised themselves in the shape of
Travelers to try Abraham's hospitality, and from hence possibly came the
heathenish Fables, that their Jupiter came in the Habit of a poor Man to
Philemon, who entertaining him, Jupiter made his House a Temple, and the Owner,
the Priest of it; and that Apollo coming as a Traveller to Mydas and being
kindly entertained by him, rewarded his Bounty with vast Wealth and Riches;
though we have no warrant from Scripture to believe that Christ does actually
disguise himself to us in such shapes, and appears to us to try our Charity,
yet it is no impossible thing, and we may piously believe it, thereby to
encourage our selves to cheerful Contributions, lest finding us hard-hearted,
and ill-natured, covetous, and incompassionate he deal with us, as Jupiter
among the Heathens, is said to have dealt with Lycaon, whom when he came to
visit, as a guest, and found cruel instead of being hospitable, he turned him
into a Wolf. Christ has threatened the hard-hearted a worse, and stranger
Metamorphosis, for they that will not be like him in doing good, shall be
doomed to be like Devils, to mourn and lament as they, and to Eternal Ages too,
for this is the Sentence, Go into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels, for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat, etc. Mat. 25.41, 42.

12. Let nothing discourage you from admiring those men who have always lived
in the Thoughts, and Contemplation of this future Judgment; we admire men for
their Parts Abilities and Accomplishments; we admire Aristotle for his
Learning, Archimedes for his Mathematics, Socrates for his Gravity, Absolum
for his Beauty, Achitophel for his Policy, Saul for his Tallness, Arion for his
Music, Asahel for his Nimbleness, the Men of Benjamin for their Skill in
Slinging, Darius for his Gratitude, Cicero for speaking, Virgil for Poetry,
Vrbino for Painting, etc. but these are poor things for our Reason to admire;
Men that live Day and Night in a sense of this future Judgment, live
continually in expectation of the Archangel's Trumpet, or the Summons of
Almighty God, these are the Men, whose Praise we ought to show forth in the
Gates. Let others admire Demosthenes for his Rhetoric, I will admire St. Paul,
who so looked at the things not seen even at this Judgment, as to rejoice in
Tribulation, and though troubled on every side, yet was not distressed, though
perplexed yet was not in despair, though persecuted, yet was not forsaken,
though cast down, yet was not destroyed, appeared to the World, as sorrowful,
yet was always rejoicing, as poor, yet made many rich, as having nothing, and
yet possessed all things, 2 Cor. 4.7, 8, 18. 2 Cor. 6.10.

Let others admire Arcesilaus for his Prudence, Scipio for his Fortitude,
Aristoclides for his humanity. Pythagoras for his Philosophy, I will admire the
Primitive Believers, who stood in such awe of this Great Day, that their
constant Thoughts and Contrivances were, how to resist their Adversary the
Devil, and upon this account stood fast in Faith, quitted themselves like Men,
were strong, and always abounding in the work of the Lord. The thoughts of this
Day made them vigilant, sober, heavenly minded, despisers of the World;
charitable, kind, tenderhearted, fruitful in all good works, and why should we
delude our selves, or fancy we need not do so, or that they did more then they
ought to have done. The Best of Men, the Wisest Men, the Holiest Men that ever
lived, have been frighted overawed, supported, preserved in goodness by the
contemplations of this Day, and therefore if we are not, it is no sign, that we
are wiser then they but that we are more stupid; we are all ambitious of
participating of their glory, and why should we be afraid of taking the way,
that led them to it. These are the men, who choose the better part. These are
the men, who though laughed at by the World, are a Crown of Glory, and a Royal
Diadem in the Hand of their God; and for their Shame they shall have Double,
and for their confusion, they shall rejoice in their portion. Their light shall
come, the Glory of the Lord shall rise upon them: They shall break forth on the
right Hand, and on the left, and in Righteousness shall they be established:
They shall dwell on high, their place of defense shall be the Munition of
Rocks; Bread shall be given them, their Water shall be sure: Their Eyes shall
see the king of Glory in his Beauty, they shall behold the Land, that is very
far off; even the Land, where Rivers of Pleasure flow, where no Tears are to be
seen, no Sorrow to be found, no anguish to be heard of. These are the Men which
at last shall sit down in the Throne of God, and having suffered Hunger and
Thirst with the Holy Jesus here, shall Eat, and Drink at his Table in his
Kingdom. These Men will at last be looked upon with greater fear and reverence,
then now they are, and when the brutish World shall see them advanced to the
highest Seats of Bliss, and behold that these which once were the most
contemptible Creatures, shall judge the World with the Son of God, they will
change their Voices, and with the Maltheses be ready to call them Gods, whom
but a little before they condemned, as Varlets and Villains. I conclude this
discourse, with St. Peter's exhortation, 2 Pet. 3 9 -- 15.

The Lord is not slack concerning his Promise, as some men count slackness, but
is long suffering to us ward, not willing, that any should perish, but that all
should come to Repentance. But the Day of the Lord will come, as a Thief in the
Night; in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat; the Earth also, and the works that are
therein shall be burnt up; seeing then, that all these things shall be
dissolved, what manner of Persons ought ye to be in all Holy Conversation, and
Godliness, looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the Day of God,
wherein the Heavens, being on Fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall
melt with, fervent heat; Nevertheless we according to his Promise look for New
Heavens, and a New Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, wherefore Beloved,
seeing that ye look for such things be diligent, that you may be found of him
in Peace, without Spot, and Blameless. FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 38. line 13. read Farms, p. 4.5. l. 1. r. To let the World see the Bands.
p. 55. l. 12. r. persons are, who are employed. p. 210. p. 10. r. imitation.

BOOKS Printed for, and sold by Mark Pardoe at the Sign of the Black Raven,
over against Bedford House in the Strand.
Doctor Horneck's best Exercise, 8o.

Dr. Hooper's Sermon before the King on the Fifth of November.

-- His Sermon before the Lord Mayor.

Sir William Petty's Essay in Political Arithmetic; 8o.

-- His Observations on Dublin Bills of Mortality, 8o.

Novels of Elizabeth Queen of England, containing the History of Queen Ann of
Bullen, in Two Parts, 12o.

Observations on Fevers, 12o.

Plain Man's way to Worship, 12o.

Becteri Minera Arienaria, 4o.

mdash; De nova Temporis, 4o.

Holder's Elements of Speech, 8o.

Charras Experiments on Vipers in 8o.


