(...) this Child is set for the fall and rising ^^ain of many in Israel; and
for a sign which shall be spoken against. Luc. 2. 34.



The Fire of the Altar: Or, Certain DIRECTIONS How to raise the SOUL into Holy
Flames, Before, At, and After the Receiving the Blessed Sacrament Of the LORDS
SUPPER.

With suitable Prayers and Devotions. To which is prefixed, A DIALOGUE Betwixt
A Christian and his own Conscience; Concerning the True Nature of the CHRISTIAN
RELIGION.

Intended chiefly for the Inhabitants of St. Mary le Strand, and the Precinct
of the Savoy.

By Anthony Horneck D. D

Printed by T. N. for Samuel Lowndes, (...) against Exeter Exchange in the
Strand. 1683.

To my Beloved Parishioners, the Inhabitants of St. Mary le Strand, and the
Precinct of the SAVOY.
THough I intend you a larger Treatise upon the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
by the Name and Title of THE CRUCIFIED JESUS; Yet I was willing to let these
Directions come forth, to prepare your Hearts for those larger Meditations; not
but that there are Books enough already Writ upon this Subject, and by abler
Pens too; but you having for some years past known my Conversation, my Temper,
my Exhortations, and my manner of Speaking, and Writing; I thought something of
this nature might be more useful to you, then other more elaborate
Lucubrations. There is nothing I am more afraid of, then that the generality of
you, both young and old, either have not, or will not have right apprehensions
of that Christian Religion, you profess, some being apt to place it in a
careless, customary Belief of the Doctrine; some in leaving a few notorious
Sins; Others in saying their Prayers; Others in doing no body wrong; Others
again in having good desires, and pious inlinations; all which Opinions are
notorious mistakes of the nature and temper of Christianity, which imports a
change of Nature, Disposition, and Acting contrary to the Humors, Passions,
Manners, Customs, and Deportment of the World; and this is it I must see, and
perceive in you, before I can conclude, that my pains, and labors among you,
have not been in vain.

Brethren, My Hearts Desire and Prayer to God for you, is, That you may be
Saved. I will assure you, this is no Compliment, no form of Speech, no Words in
course, but the ardent wish of my Soul; and my fervent Prayers day and night;
This is the desire of my soul in private, and in public; for this I fill my
Mouth with Arguments to that God, who hears Prayers, even then when you do
not think of me; For this I study, and take pains, and am willing to spend my
self, and to be spent; and your Salvation is the great object of my care; for
this end I venture your Anger, and caress yonr Love; For this end I walk
blameless among you, and am tender of your welfare; For this end I reprove, and
exhort, and entreat you, and run, and spend my breath, and all, that you may be
saved.

I am not ignorant of the Devils devices, I am sensible of the nature of sin,
how apt it is to deceive you, and though I am not with you in all places, I see
by the effects, how the enemy of your Souls deals with you, and what will be
the issue of a careless Life. I consider the shrieks of the damned in Hell, and
would fain keep you from that dangerous gulf. I see you stand upon the brink
of destruction, and cannot forbear calling to you, O do your selves no harm.
The greatest kindness you can do me, the greatest gratitude you can express,
the greatest civility and respect you can show me, is to do according to the
wholesome Counsels, I do give you, whatever constructions some of you may put
upon these adjurations; The searcher of all hearts knows this to be true, that
I would rejoice in nothing so much, as in your obedience to the Gospel.

I would fain rejoice with you in the great day of the Lord Jesus; I would fain
see you Glorious Saints in the Everlasting Mansions; I would fain see you shine
as Stars in the Firmament of Heaven. I would see you triumph with Angels, sing
with Cherubim, and join the Celestial Quire in Eternal Praises. Think what a
dismal sight it will be in that day to see some of your friends in the burning
Lake, that might have feasted with the Son of God, in his Fathers Kingdom; We
that meet together in the Church-Militant here, What a happy, What a Glorious
fight would it be to meet all in the Church-triumphant, when these Bodies do
drop from us!

It is no small grief to me, to see some of you, who have lived for some years
under my Ministry, given to the same sins, and inordinate desires, as
Drunkenness, Swearing, Lying, Cheating, Dissembling, Malice, Wrath, Hatred,
Passion, Carelessness, and neglect of the Lords Supper, Quarrelling, foolish
Jesting, filthy Talk, Frothiness, Pride, Uncleanness, etc. they were formerly
enamoured with; certainly this must be an argument against you in that day,
when God shall judge the secrets of Men, by the Everlasting Gospel. O let us not
be forced to complain of you, that we would have healed you, and you would not
be healed To this end I beseech you,

1. To make the Rules in the following Treatise familiar to you. There is
nothing in it, but what you will find exactly agreeable to that Word, on which you
build your Faith. By making them familiar to you, I do not only mean getting
them by Heart, but applying your selves to the serious practice of them, till
you get a habit of those Virtues. A single act now and then when you are in a
Religious humor will do no good; but you must labor at them so long, till
they come to be incorporated with your Spirits, and mingle with your
Complexion, and Constitution.

To oblige your Children, and Servants to learn these Rules without Book, and
to admonish them to try, and see, whether they observe them in their Behavior,
and Conversation; to ask them often, Whether their Actions are agreeable to
these Rules, and whether they are not afraid of losing Gods favor, by
neglecting so great a Salvation.

But then you must show them a good example; for all your Exhortations, will be
but Wind, while you do not express the possibility of living up to these Rules,
in your own Lives. Your example will make these Christian Virtues amiable, and
your practice must show, that you believe them necessary. And oh! how
comfortable will it be upon your Deathbeds, and what joy will this testimony
of your Conscience Cause, that in Godly Simplicity and Sincerity, not according
to fleshly Wisdom, but according to the Grace of God, you have had your
Conversation in the World; God will love you, even he, whose loving kindness is
better then life it self. His Love will close your Eyes, His Love will whisper
the glad tidings of Happiness in your Ears. His Love will be your guide through
the shadow and valley of Death, and this Love will see you safe within the
Gates of a Blessed Eternity; which Love, that it may become your Portion, and
Inheritance, is, and shall be the hearty Wish, and Prayer of

Your Faithful Friend, And Minister in Christ Jesus, A. H.

THE TRUE NATURE OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION, IN A Dialogue betwixt a Christian,
and his own Conscience.
Conscience. Rouse, Rouse thy self, and awake thou slumbering Sinner, and
think, What that Religion means, thou do profess, and tell me ingenuously,
what it is to be a Christian?


Christian. It is not only to profess the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, but also to
Live, as He lived; to have the same Mind and Spirit in me, that was in Him, to
act upon the great Principle of an unseen everlasting Glory, and to neglect all
things rather, then the salvation of my Immortal Soul, John 15. 10. Phil. 2. 5.
Mat. 16. 26. Heb. 12. 1, 2.


Consc. Have thou a Soul, that is in a possibility of being either eternally
Happy, or eternally Miserable?


Christ. I have, for my Soul certainly is not of the same nature with my Body,
but is a Spiritual substance, Rational, and Intelligent as Angels are, and
therefore Incorruptible; and signally differs from Beasts, being capable of
obeying, and disobeying God, Mat. 10. 28. Psalm. 32. 9. Rev. 22. 8, 9. Isa. 1.
19, 20.


Consc. What if thy Soul be capable of obeying, and disobeying God, does that
make it either Happy, or Miserable?


Christ. Yes, certainly: For to the Obedient, God has faithfully promised
Eternal Life, and Glory, when they leave this World; and to the Disobedient, He
has peremptorily threatened everlasting Anguish, and Torment, Romans 2. 6, 7, 8.
Heb. 5. 9. 2 These. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.


Consc. What must thou then do to be saved?


Christ. I must necessarily obey the Precepts, and Commands of my Lord and
Master, and Savior Christ Jesus, which he has delivered, and enjoined either
with his own Mouth, or by His Apostles, John 14, 15, 21. John 15. 14. 1 Thessalonians.
4. 1.


Consc. What Precepts are those, thou art bound to obey in order to be saved?


Christ, 1. I must necessarily curb mine Anger and Passion, and be very Meek to
all Men in my Speeches, Answers, and Actions, gentle, and not much concerned
under any Affront, or Injury done to my Person, or when any thing is said, or
done, which displeases me; and be ready to forgive, and forget all Injuries.

I must not Revile, when I am Reviled, nor give ill Language to them, that
reproach me, nor revenge my self when it lies in my power, nor call Men Fools,
and Rogues, upon trivial occasions.

I must so far love mine Enemies, as to do good to them that hate me, if they
either desire or want it, bless them that curse me, and pray for them that use
me ill, Mat. 5. 22, 44. Tit. 3. 2. Romans 12. 17, 19. 1 Pet. 2. 21, 23.

2. I must be very humble, and have low and mean Thoughts of my Self, and of my
Worth, Knowledge, Fortune, Dignity, Riches, Means, and Condition in the World.

I must when I address my self to God in Prayer, or Praises, be very vile and
base in my own sight, and be ashamed to lift up my Eyes and Hands to God.

I must esteem other Men, in whom I see any goodness, better then my self.

I must not commend my self, nor take it ill, if other People do not, nor be
fond of Worldly Respect and Honor, but must be Civil, Courteous, and Obliging
even to the Meanest, and Poorest, and regard the Honor that comes of God more,
then the Honor which comes of Men, Mat. 11. 29. Mark 10. 15. John 5. 44. Gal.
5. 26. 2 Samuel 6. 22.

3. I must be kind and tender hearted, and compassionate, and love to do good
to my Neighbor, either by good Advice, and Counsel, or Reproof, if he go on in
any known Sin; or by my means, and Money and Goods, if he be in want; or by my
Labor and Industry, if I can do no more; according as my ability, and his
necessity require; and if I know none, must seek out Objects, upon whom, and to
whom I may do good, Gal. 6. 6, 9, 10. 2 Timothy 1. 17.

4. I must shun all foreseen, and known occasions of Evil.

If by looking on a Man, or Woman any dishonest Lust, or desire rise in me, I
must crush it, and look upon that Person no more: I must not go into company,
where I am sensible I shall be tempted, and drawn into Sin, whether it be
Drunkenness, or Swearing, or Passion, or frothy, or filthy Talk, or the like.

I must not touch any thing that would raise any inordinate Appetite in me, and
must forbear Gaudy Clothing, and other External Ornam^^^^ if they prove
temptations to Pri^^ or Loftiness, and vanity of Spirit, Mat, 5. 28, 29, 30. 1 Timothy 2. 9. 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4.

5. I must labor to be very patient under any temporal Afflictions, whether
Sickness, or Losses, or other Crosses and Disappointments, and neither murmur,
nor repine, because God my Heavenly Father sends, it, and has promised, That
if I love Him, to turn all these Troubles unto my unspeakable good, and designs
an infinite recompense in Heaven, for my Patience, Jam. 5. 7. Romans 8. 28. Heb.
12. 7, 8, 9.

6. I must study great simplicity in my Thoughts, Words, Actions, Garb,
Clothes, Furniture, Houses, Meat, Drink, and the like, and avoid all things
that may put a stop to my progress in a Spiritual Life; and particularly, all
such Recreations, as may dull and damp good things in me, or bring upon me an
aversion from that goodness and simplicity which was in Christ and his
Apostles* and the Primitive Christians, 2 Cor. ^* 12. Matthew. 10. 16. Phil. 2.
5. 15. 1 (...). 5. 22.

7. I must in all places wherever I am, watch over my Thoughts and Speeches,
and Expressions, and Actions, because God hears, and sees me, and is every
where present; and take heed, that neither any Temporal profit, nor pleasure,
nor the favor of Men make me say, or do, or comply with any thing, that is
sinful, and I suspect to be so, Psalm. 139. 1, 2, 3. Matthew. 12. 36. Col. 4. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4, 5, 6. Acts 5. 29.

8. I must not use equivocations, or mental reservations when I speak, or take
an Oath, or promise any thing, or make a bargain, nor te^^^^ye wittingly or
wilfully, though I might gain all the Riches of the World, or could save my
life by it; but speak the Truth, whenever I think fit to speak, or give an
answer, let the inconvenience be what it will, or the danger never so great,
Ephesians. 4. 28, 1 Pet. 3. 15.

9. I must take special notice of the various dealings of God with my Soul and
Body, and praise, and admire him for those providence, whether Spiritual or
Temporal, as many as come within my cognizance.

I must praise him when I rise, when I lie down, when I sit up, when I walk,
when I eat, or drink, or get any lawful gain, or Men are kind, and favorable
to me, Es. 5. 11, 12. Psalm. 105. 5, Matthew. 6. 26, 27, 28. 1 Cor. 10, 31. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18.

10. I must do the same kindnesses, favors, and services to other Men, which I
would have other Men, who are in such circumstances, do to me, and therefore
must be charitable, just, honest, faithful, sincere in all my dealings with
them, and put a good construction on their doubtful actions, because I would
have them be so, and do so to me, Matthew. 7. 12. 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. Romans 13.
7, 8, 9.

11. According to the condition, calling, or relation I am in, I must discharge
my Duty belonging to that calling, condition, or relation, with very great
conscientiousness; as a servant I must be faithful, and respectful to my
Master, or Mistress.

As a Son, or Daughter, very tender of my Parents welfare, credit, and command;
As a Subject, obedient and loyal to the King, and those who are in Authority
under him, in all lawful things, as a member of a public Church, careful to
preserve its peace, and unity; As a Husband, or Wife, loving, kind, and amiable
to my yoke fellow; and in the lawful calling God has placed me in, diligent
and industrious 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 18. Ephesians. 6. 1, 4, 5. Col. 3. 18, 19, 20, 21,
22. Col. 4. 1. Romans 12. 11.

12. I must delight to think of God, and delight to speak of spiritual things,
and delight to do the Will of God, and delight in all these, and in other good
Works, more then in the gaudes, pomp, glory, and vanity of this present World.

I must use the World as if I used it not, and be very indifferent whether I
have much of this Worlds Goods or no; and my chief aim and design must be, to
get a share in God's everlasting Kingdom. Matthew. 6. 33. 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31.
Psalm. 112. 1. Psalm. 139. 17. Psalm. 119. 72.


Consc. Why art thou obliged to do all this in order to Salvation?


Christ. Partly because God my Supreme Governor, expressly commands these
things to be done, partly because Eternal Happiness is promised to none but
such, as in good earnest apply themselves to the performance of them; partly
because infinite glory is a thing of that consequence, that it deserves these
pains, and this excellent temper, partly because the LOVE of God to me is so
great, that I can do no less in common gratitude. Matthew. 5. ^0. Matthew. 19. 17.
Luc 13. 24. 2 Cor. 5. ^^.


Consc. What is that mighty Love of God, that challenges such gratitude?


Christ. When with the rest of Mankind, I was lost, and undone in my first
Parents, deprived of all hopes of Mercy and Pardon, and Salvation; The Eternal
Son of God to restore me to God's favor, and to make me capable of Pardon, and
Eternal Salvation, took my Nature upon him, became Man, suffered, and died for
me; and having by his death purchased this Pardon, and Salvation for me, offers
me these Mercies, upon condition of obeying the aforesaid Precepts. Joh. 3. 16.
Romans 5. 17. 21. 2 Cor. 5. 19.


Consc. But what if thou have not obeyed these Precepts of the Gospel, is there
any remedy, or hopes to recover the favor of God?


Christ. I must necessarily repent of my disobedience with all speed, and make
it my business for the future, to live up to those Rules, in despite of all
commands and allurements from Men to the contrary, and upon (...) repentance,
sincere resol^^ (...)* and earnest endeavors to obey them; I may certainly
hope for Pardon and Salvation, because he has promised it, Matthew. 11. 28, 29.
Es. 55. 7. Joel 2. 12, 13, 14.


Consc. But is it possible, do thou think, for any Man to obey, and live up
to these Precepts?


Christ. If it were not possible for me to obey them, I cannot imagine why God
should peremtorily require it of me, and therefore I may certainly so far obey
them, as not to act wittingly or wilfully, or deliberately against them, and so
perform them, as to make them the settled Rule of my Thoughts, Desires, Words,
and Actions, if I will but use the means, God has prescribed in order to this
Holy Obedience, Matthew. 25. 26, 27, 1 Cor. 10. 13. 1 John 5' 3.


Consc. What are those means, whereby this Holy Obedience may be attained?


Christ. They are Eight, 1. Consideration and Thinking. 2. Earnest Prayer for
the assistance of Gods Grace and Spirit. 3. Diligent hearing, and reading the
word of God. 4. Asking advice, and consulting with faithful Ministers of the
Gospel. 5. Self-Examination. 6. A right apprehension of the Nature of God, and
of Spiritual things. 7. Humbling the Soul with Fasting. 8. A conscientious use
of the two Sacraments, the Son of God has instituted, and ordained.


Consc. How is Consideration, and Thinking to be managed?


Christ. I must seriously and frequently retire, and think with my self, that
surely Gods promises, and threatenings will be fulfilled; that upon the moment
of my death, there depends Eternity; and what a sad and forlorn condition I
should be in, should Eternal anguish seize on my Soul, when it leaves this
World; and though God be patient, yet he will not be mocked; that there is no
Soul in Hell at this time, but would be glad to obey God, if they might be
freed, and tried once more here on Earth; that a work of that concern is not to
be neglected for trifles; that my Death is very uncertain, and a Deathbed is
no place or time to bring my self to a habit of Obedience, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Ps.
90. 12. Ps. 50. 22.


Consc. What is the nature of Prayer, and earnest begging for Grace and
assistance of Gods Spirit?


Christ. I must take care, that my Heart and Mind do pray as well as my Lips; I
must be sensible of what I pray for, and fix my Thoughts upon God in Prayer,
and earnestly long for his Grace and Mercy, and be importunate with him, pray
often, and with fervor, like a person that am concerned at the danger I am in;
I must watch against wandering Thoughts, or expel them when they come in, and
my Soul must esteem and prize the Grace of God, and assistance of Gods Spirit,
above all the advantages of the World, and be restless till I get it, and take
notice how God hears and answers my Prayers, Joh. 4. 24. Ps. 66. 18. Ps. 63. 1.
Ps. 16. 8.


Consc. What do thou mean by diligent hearing and reading of the word of God?


Christ. When I read, or hear it, I must read and hear it with attention, and
resolution, to know Gods Will, that I may do it: Before I read and hear it, I
must beg of God to enlighten me, and to imprint those good Lessons, I shall
hear or read, upon my Soul, and to make them effectual to me; I must apply the
general commands I read and hear, to mine own Soul, and believe, that what God
commands all Men, as Christians and Believers, he commands me in particular. I
must watch against worldly Thoughts in reading, and hearing, and remember, I do
sin if I do not mind what I read or hear, Luc. 8. 18. Marc. 4. 24. Joh. 5. 39.
Ps. 119. 18.


Consc In what manner must thou ask advice of faithful Ministers of the Gospel?


Christ. I must go to those who are very serious, or send for any of them, and
ask them about the state and condition of my Soul, and what I must do to secure
Gods Favor, how I must go about the great work of Salvation, and beg their
direction in performing the Will of God, and acquaint them how it is with me;
what Temptations I am subject to, and what Corruptions I am inclined to, and
entreat them to tell me, how to be rid of them, and oblige them to help me with
their Prayers, and to encourage me to a vigorous pursuit of the everlasting
Riches; and when I have done so, must follow their Advice and Counsel, Acts 16.
30, 31, 32. Marc. 10. 17. Phil. 3. 17.


Consc. And what is to be done with Self-Examination?


Christ. I must frequently look into my Thoughts, Words, and Actions, and see
whether they are agreeable to the Rules of the Gospel; every night, I must take
an account of my self, and consider what I have been doing in the day time,
whether I have not told a Lie, deceived no body, broke forth into no passion;
done good, resisted temptations, been often with God in Prayer, taken notice of
Gods providence, etc. that where I have done amiss, I may watch against it the
next day, and where I have done well, I may admire the goodness of God, and
praise him for it, Ps. 4. 4. 2 Cor. 13. 5. Lam. 3. 40.


Consc. What apprehensions must thou have of God, and Spiritual things?


Christ. I must Believe

1. That God is a Spirit Omnipresent, Omniscient, infinitely Good, and Wise,
and Holy, and Just, and will be a rewarder to them that diligently seek him;
and punish the Disobedient, either here, or hereafter, or both here and
hereafter, Heb. 11. 6. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7. Ps. 58. 11. Ps. 50. 21.

2. That this God is our Supreme Governor, and has revealed himself to be
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, or our Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier; and that
there is some resemblance of these Three in One in the Sun, in which is the
Light and Heat, and Beam, which Three make but one Sun, 1 John 5. 7. Matthew. 28.
19. 2 Cor. 13. 14.

3. That all Mankind fell in Adam, the first Man, and by that fall, moved God
to withdraw his Love and Favor from them; and that God the Son in
commiseration to our Nature, became Man of the Virgin Mary, suffered and died,
and by his death, rendered God the Father, or rather the whole Trinity, kind and
propitious to us, and willing to receive us into Favor, and to give us Pardon
and everlasting Life, upon the conditions of Repentance, and unfeigned
Obedience, and therefore justly called Christ Jesus, i. e. the Anointed
Savior, Romans 5. 8, 9, 10. Gal. 4. 4, 5. Matthew. 1. 21.

4. That the Scripture where all this is revealed, is the word of God, because
the Men who revealed this in Scripture, were inspired by the Holy Ghost, and in
confirmation of it, wrought true miracles, miracles levelled against the power
of Sin, and impossible to be done by humane strength; the truth of which
miracles has been conveyed down to posterity, by multitudes of eyewitnesses,
and from them received by all Christian People, Heb. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4.

5. That the promises and threatenings of the Gospel, will infallibly be
fulfilled sooner or later, because God cannot lie, Tit. 1. 2.

6. That our Soul is not our Breath, nor our Blood, nor the Spirits of our
Blood, but a Spiritual Substance, able to live, and act without this gross
Body, we carry about us, and will immediately upon leaving this Body, be
obliged to appear before God, and to him give an account of its good and evil
Works, and according to the prevalency or predominancy of either, be made
sensible of the Sentence of Absolution, or Condemnation, which shall be
pronounced at the day of Judgment, Luc. 16. 22, 23.

7. That at the end of this world, there will be a solemn day of judgment,
wherein the Bodies of all Men shall rise, and be reunited to their Souls, and
their Thoughts, Words and Actions, be brought to light, and judged, and
sentence solemnly pronounced; and the Good commanded to take possession of
Eternal Joys, and the Bad to go into everlasting Torments, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Matthew.
25. 31, 46.

8. That God requires no more of us, then we do of our Children, and Servants,
and that is Love, and that this Love, if it be true, and hearty, must
necessarily discover it self in Repentance, and sorrow for offending him, and a
sincere endeavor to please and obey him for the future, Luc. 6. 46. Malach. 1.
6.

9. That though by nature we are generally more prone to evil, then to good,
and have a stronger bias to Sin then Righteousness: yet God the Holy Ghost, by
his power and influences, will certainly assist, and help us to abhor that
which is evil, and to cleave to that which is good; if so be, that by earnest
Prayer, Fasting, and Meditation, we long, and breathe for his help, and
influences, Luc. 11. 13.

10. That all the service, I offer to God, must be performed with my Mind,
Will, and Affections, or with my inward Man, and with my Heart, and that
without my Mind, have the greatest share in the service; it is insignificant,
and rejected by God, Prove. 23. 26. Matthew. 22. 37.

11. That by Believing in Scripture for the most part, is meant nothing but
obeying, and that he who obeys not the precepts of the Gospel, does not believe
that they are either Divine, or necessary to be obeyed, or that the Gospel is
infallibly true, Acts 6. 7. Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11.

12. That that frame of Spirit which fits a Man for Eternal Happiness, is
neither a customary frequenting of the Ordinances of God, nor shunning the
grosser sins and vices of the age we live in; nor being Master of a single
Virtue, but a Spiritual temper of Mind, which puts us upon doing all that is
necessary to be done in order to Salvation, Romans 8. 5, 6. 9, 10.


Consc. What are the Rules to be observed in humbling the Soul with Fasting?


Christ. I must frequently, as often as my strength will bear it, give my self
to Fasting, and Prayer, and on those Fasts, wrestle with God for growth in
Grace, and strength against those sins, I am most prone and inclined to, and
greater courage against temptations.

I must give Alms on that day, for the refreshing of some poor Member of
Christ, and spend the day in Supplications, and Contemplations of my sins, and
of the wrath of God, I have deserved, and of Gods mercy to penitent sinners in
Christ Jesus, and in Holy resolutions, to be watchful over my Heart for the
future, that I may perform those Duties I have formerly neglected, and imitate
Holy Men and Women in their virtuous practices, Es. 58. 6, 7. Matthew. 6. 17, 18.
1 Cor. 7. 5. 1 Cor. 9. 27.


Consc. Wherein does the Conscientious use of the Holy Sacraments consist?


Christ. In entertaining right and suitable notions of the nature of these
Sacraments, and using them to those ends, and purposes, for which they are
designed, Matthew. 6. 22. 1 Cor. 10. 31.


Consc. What Notions must thou entertain about these Sacraments?


Christ. 1. That these Sacraments are in the nature of solemn Vows, and
Protestations; that I will be faithful to God in Christ Jesus, by the
assistance of the Holy Ghost, or in the nature of Covenants, where God and Man
do mutually engage themselves one to another; or in the nature of outward
visible signs, whereby some Spiritual thing is represented, Romans 4. 12. Exodus
13. 9. 1 Pet. 3. 20. 21.

2. That these Sacraments are ordained, and instituted by the Son of God, my
Savior; and that Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, are all the Sacraments,
that are either given by Christ to the Church, or need to be received by the
Church of Christ, Matthew. 28. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 23.

3. That Baptism is a significant Ceremony, whereby Children, Men, and Women
are washed with Water, which washing imports Gods pardon of our sins, and our
Duty to keep our selves pure from Sin for the future; God promising the one,
and we the other, 1 Pet. 3. 21. 1 Cor. 6. 11.

4. That though Children can make no such promises, yet it is fit they should be
Baptized, because they are part of the Nations which Christ would have
Baptized, and are Disciples, and in the Covenant of Grace; and it is enough,
that other persons promise for them, as their Guardians, which promise they are
bound to perform, when they come to be of age, Acts 2. 38, 39.

5. That coming to the Lords Supper is the strongest engagement to a Holy Life,
because I do there personally, freely, and solemnly remember the death of
Christ, and that my sins caused his death, and do protest to allow my self no
longer in them, but to imitate Christ Jesus in his Meekness, Patience,
Humility, Charity, and Goodness, 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25.


Consc. How must these Sacraments be used, in order to thy present and
everlasting Comfort?


Christ. 1. As to Baptism, I must be baptized but once, because that initiates,
and admits me into the fellowship of Christians, and gives me a Right and Title
to the use of the means of Grace; and this need to be done but once: All that
is to be done after this, is to keep a good Conscience toward God, and toward
Man, in the use of those means, according to the promise made for me when I was
washed with water, Ephesians. 4. 5.

2. As to the Supper of the Lord, that requires my frequent coming, because I
stand in need of frequent renewing, not only of my Repentance, and love to God,
and Charity to my Neighbors, but of the motives and enforcives to these
Graces; whereof the remembrance of the love of God, in the death of Christ is
the greatest, and most remarkable, 1 Cor. 11. 26.


The FIRE of the ALTAR, OR DIRECTIONS Concerning the worthy Receiving OF THE
LORDS SUPPER.
Conscience. IS it not fit, O my Soul thou should pause a little on thy
Redeemers death, before thou go to remember it with the Congregation? there
are those charms in that Death, which if rightly viewed, will be invincible
motives to thee to die, to a sinful Life, and to embrace the Holy Life of Jesus.

Should not thou Think? Should not thou Cry?

O that I had wings like a Dove, that I might fly away to Golgotha, and behold
the dreadful spectacle of God crucified, for the sins of the children of men! A
mighty mystery this! To the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness: What all the Jewish Rabbis could not see, what the greatest
Heathen Sages could not find out, that has God revealed. O God! thy Ways are
not as our Ways, nor are thy Thoughts as our Thoughts. We entertain mean
apprehensions of Thee, such as our narrow understandings yield; but thou love
to do all things contrary to the measures, we poor mortals take. This has been
thy method, ever since thou have thought fit to plant a Church in the world!
Thou did send Lot into Sodom, and contrary to Men's imagination did preserve
him from the infection of that beastly crew. In the midst of an idolatrous
Country, thou did bid Elijah stand up, and declare, thy Name to the besotted
Israelites a place, where to own the true God, was fatal, and to make mention
of thy worship, Heresy; where to profess thy Faith was counted madness, and
not to imitate the Luxury of the age, a crime unpardonable; among the wicked
Men of Anat hoth: thou did separate Jeremiah for the Prophetic Office, and
in the land of Vz, crowded with Pagans and Infidels, gave Job a heart to fear
thy Providence. Out of Vz, the Metropolis of Chaldean Superstition, thou did
call the Beloved Abraham, and vouchsafedst to him the knowledge of thy Will, in
a crooked and perverse Generation; Thou did fill the bashful Moses with
courage to talk to Kings; and a timorous Aaron by thy Order, can control
Atheists, and Idolaters. Thou love to create a World out of nothing, and to
call things that are, out of those which do not appear; Thou love to do
things, which to us seem impossibilities; and when the Fig Tree does not
blossom, love to produce most pleasant Fruit; When calamities are become
dangerous, and past remedy, thou love to show thy healing hand; and when no
probabilities of help appear, declarest thy Power and Glory. Thou love to
bring forth Grapes from Thorns, and Figs from Thistles; and out of a barren
soil, or cursed ground, many times let the richest Spices grow; When all
mankind lay in darkness, and was covered with the shadow of death; When Devils
played about them, and the furies of the burning Lake laid hold of them; When
the fiery Dragon was ready to devour them, and the old Serpent going to swallow
up their Souls; Behold, thy Son appears from Heaven, frights the powers of
darkness, and all immediately disappear.

Ah! My dearest Jesu! Meekest of Kings, and fairer then all the children of
men! I behold thee Reigning, and hanging on the Cross! Reigning? for in
despite of all the reproaches of of thine enemies, thou wast still the
everlasting King, and Saints and Angels bowed to thee, When thy Body was torn,
bruised, and wounded on the Tree; Their reproaches could not dethrone thee,
their virulent Tongues could not make thee less then thou were. These impotent
wretches might bark at the Sun, but could not eclipse its Glory. Thou could
have destroyed their Tongues, but would not, and it was a Royal act, not to
punish them, when thou had the greatest provocations. O my Lord! I see thee
blotting out the Handwriting, which was against me! How red were the
Characters! How bloody were the Lines! yet thy Blood makes them as white as
snow.

O my Lord, I hear thy words sharper then any two edged Sword, and piercing, to
the dividing asunder of the Bones, and Marrow; I hear thy complaints I mean,
which broke the Rocks, and shook the Earth, and shall not my heart be moved at
them? For Thee, the Son of God, to cry out, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful even
unto death! Who can hear this? Who can think of it, and not stand confounded!
For Omnipotence to sink thus! For infinite Perfection to faint thus! For him
that sat on the circle of the Earth, and before whom all Nations were as
Grasshoppers; for him thus to Swound, thus to Weep, thus to Mourn! What could be
the reason? Oh thou Prince of Peace! For the iniquity of thy People thou vast
struck, for the sins of the World thou did suffer banishment, and wast used,
as if thou had not been anointed with Oil, or been guilty of the crimes thy
foes accused thee of. The snares of death did encompass thee, thy friends
forsook thee! and thy heritage, like a Lion out of the Wood did roar against
thee! O my Bowels, be ye troubled at this remembrance! O my flinty Heart, can
thou see thy Lord, as it were crucified before thine eyes, and not break out
into floods of Tears! O Jesu! Thou cryest to thy Father, and he hears thee not!
He seems to be cruel to his Son, and deaf to thy lamentations! The windows of
Heaven seem to be shut, and a vail to be drawn over all the Joys, and Comforts,
and Consolations, that formerly watered and enriched thy Soul! See how dry, and
barren, and burnt up, this precious Soil appears. No showers from above come
down, no Sun shines upon it; the Stars of Heaven withold their influence, and
scarce an Angel will stir to thy assistance. O Thou who art all Glorious
within, and art thy self the Glory of the Universe! Were my Sins laid in a
balance, they would weigh heavier then the Sand on the Seashore, and then,
what need I wonder, that thou cryest so loud under the heavy load? for the
arrows of the Lord stick in thee, and his hand presses thee sore.

O Blessed Nazarite! whiter then Snow, brighter then the Sky, purer then the
Sun; How is thy Face disfigured with Grief! How do thine Eyes languish! How
dismal do thou appear! Is this the Face that was the perfection of Beauty? Is
this the Face that was once the desire of all Nations? Is this the Face which
so many Prophets and Righteous Men have desired to see? Is this the Face that
Abraham longed to behold, and the Patriarchs were ambitious to have a view of?
Is this the Face admired by Angels, and dreaded by Devils? What is thy Beloved
more then another Beloved, O thou fairest among Women! Is this the mighty
Bridegroom of the Church, who was once transfigured on the Holy Mount, and his
Face did shine as the Sun, and his raiment became white as the light? Is this
he, whom God anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows! whose
garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia; and cast such a scent, that the
Daughter of Tire came with a Gift, and the rich among the People entreated his
favor! How is he altered? How is his Countenance changed! How is the Gold
become dim, and the fine Gold changed! Yet still thou art lovely to a Soul that
sees farther then the outside. Still thou art a Cordial to fainting Spirits.
Still thou art a fountain of living waters. Still thou art the Joy of the whole
Earth, the Light of Heaven, and the Song of Sion. My thoughts, O Lord, shall
follow thee to the Cross. Methinks I see how thou art going to die; thou
look back on thine Enemies, and notwithstanding all their Affronts, offerest
them Mercy. O incomprehensible Goodness! Even then when thou art lifted up to
the infamous Tree; Thou drawest and invitest all Men to thee. Thou Preachest on
the Cross, and thy very wounds are Sermons to the Children of Men, and thy
Blood trickling down, is an exhortation to Repentance. Surely it is good for me
to adhere unto thee, and to count it death to be separated from thee!

O whether shall I go but to thee, who have words of Eternal Life! Thou art my
Sun, by Thee I shall be enlightened, by Thee my Soul shall be warmed; O how
comfortable are thy beams! What a progress must that Soul make, on which thou
shinest, and dartest thy Glorious Rays! Thou art that lofty Cedar, whose boughs
overspread the Believing World!

Under the shadow of that Tree will I rest; It is for the healing of the
Nations. I will be glad in the Lord, and rejoice in my bleeding Jesus! While
the World despises thee, I will honor thee; While Great Men pass by and regard
thee not, I that am poor and needy, will wait to be refreshed by thee!

Go ye fools! be enamoured with your Trifles, admire your Butterflies, dote on
your sensual Pleasures: Here is one that looks charming in his Tears, lovely in
his Blood, amiable in his Wounds, and is more beautiful in the midst of all his
distresses, then the brightest Virgins Face, adorned with all the glittering
Treasures of the East!

O my Strength! by Thee I desire to be comforted, and supported. O anoint my
Eyes with thy Sovereign Eye Salve, and I shall see, and live. O that the Clouds
which dwell on my Understanding were dispersed, that I might look upon thee
sredfastly! Oh! then thou would appear more lovely to me on the Cross, then
Croesus in his Throne, or Solomon in all his Glory. God forbid that I should
glory in any thing, save in the Cross of Christ. In this lie hid vast treasures
of Sweetness! O my Jesus! make me conformable to thy death, and give me leave
to carry thy marks in my Body; Let me be crucified with thee, and let Christ
for ever live in me.

Can thou live in a Soul, that has abused thy Mercy, slighted thy Patience,
and so often baffled the stratagems of thy Compassion! I believe Lord! O help
mine unbelief* Thou came to call not the Righteous, but Sinners to
repentance. Oh! then my Husband will love me, my Redeemer will come and live
with me, for my repentings are kindled, I hate the sins that have defiled my
Soul! Away ye Swine! Here are no Devils to enter in. I am to receive my
Bridegroom into my Heart. Come Lord Jesu! Come quickly! Thou art the welcomest
Guest I know! How happy shall I be, if thou will lodge in this earthly
Tabernacle! Happier, then if all the Angels of Heaven took up their Habitation
here!

O ye besotted Jews, what makes you run so fast to kill the Lord of Life? ye
cannot live without him, and what evil spirit does possess you to kill and
murder him? Can you think of his miracles, and do so? Can you reflect upon his
Doctrine, and attempt such villainies? Can you remember how he taught you in the
Temple, even to astonishment, and venture on such proceedings? Can you call to
mind how he has purged your Country of Devils, and your Sick of their
Diseases, and suffer the Devil to enter into you!

O dreadful spectacle! O that my Head were Water! Who will rise with me against
the wicked! O thou that art purer then the Lillies, purge me with Hysop, and I
shall be clean; wash me, and my filthiness shall not be seen! O bathe me in the
Fountain opened for the House of Judah, and Jerusalem; and I shall look fairer
then the Children, which fed on the Meat of the King of Babylon's Table. O my
God I thirst for thee, as dry Land after Water. My Soul flies and flutters
about, like Noah's Dove, and can find no rest, till it gets into thy Ark. Great
Gate of Mercy open to me, hide me from the wrath of an offended God, and make a
covenant of Peace with me. Ah! Who would not love thee, that hears thee pray
for thy greatest enemies. O lovely Bridegroom of my Soul! wound my Heart, that
it may be sick of Love. How kind art thou, even to thy most hard-hearted foes!
What a motive is this to love thee! What need thou care what becomes of
stubborn sinners! Why should thou trouble thy self about wretches, that will
have none of Thee, that will have their Dirt and Dung, and Trash, and Husks,
and prefer these trifles before Heaven, and a Sea of Glory? Thou can live
without the society of Men, at least, thou need no such company, yet thou
longest for their Pardon and Happiness, as if they had been thy greatest
friends! Was ever Goodness like this? O that my Thoughts and Contemplations
might be always busy about this Love! This is no vulgar Love! the love of
David to Jonathan, and the love of Jacob to Rachel, the love of Brethren,
Sisters, Friends, will bear no resemblance here! Moses his love to the
Israelites, for whose sake, and so they might but continue in Gods favor, he
was content to be blotted out of Gods Book, and St. Paul's wish to be even
accursed of Christ, for his Kinsmen of the Jewish Nation, these de monstrations
of Love come somewhat nearer; but still thy Love, my dearest Lord, surpasses
all these, as the light of the Sun does that of the Moon, and the lesser Stars.
They borrowed their love from thine, and lighted their Candle by thy brighter
Fire; that which was excess of Love in them, was but a spark of that Charity,
which overspread thy larger Soul.

They did but wish to die for the People, thou did actually exspire for their
good; their Love was confined to a single Nation, thine extended to the whole
World! These Men were still their friends, that they wished to be miserable
for; but those, thou suffer for, were thine enemies! Their Love had great
defects mingled with it, but thine was pure and spotless; Theirs had Clouds and
Mists to darken it, Thine was all Light and Glory; Theirs was a sudden
transport, which might not last many days, but Thine was constant to a miracle,
and those whom thou lovedst, thou lovedst unto the end!

Great Emperor of Souls! thou hangest betwixt Thieves, and not without reason,
for thou stealest the Heart away! What Heart can see thy Beauty, and forbear
being enamoured with it! Thou do ravish my Soul with thine Eyes of pity. To
see thee cast a favorable look on such a monster as I am, Who can forbear
falling in love with so much clemency? I am a Captive in this World. The Law of
my Members makes me captive to the Law of Sin: O take me by force from that
prison. O set me as a Seal upon thy Heart, Rule thou in my Members. Erect a
Trophy over my Head! and rejoice in conquering me. O let me be content to
undergo the Cross, and reproach with thee, that thou may remember me, now
thou art in thy Kingdom. O remember me with the favor, thou bear unto thy
People!

O my Jesus! Who can hear thee cry, I Thirst, and not wish for Rivers of Tears!
What can thou Thirst for, but the Salvation of Mankind! Thou came for that
purpose from Heaven! Leftst those brighter Mansions, to invite poor sinners to
the mighty Banquet there! For this thou did travel up and down, and enduredst
Cold and Hunger, and Weariness; for this thou wroughtest miracles; for this
thou did Entreat, Rebuke, preach the Word in season, and out of season; for
this thou could be content to want a place, where to lay thy Head; for this
thou taughtest daily in the Temple, sometimes on the Mount, sometimes in a
Ship, sometimes in a Desert, for this thy Soul did long; for this thou
sufferedst, for this thou wast buffeted, beaten, bruised, and wounded, even
because, thou would not give over calling poor deluded sinners, to a sense of
their Duty! for this thou Thirstest here! The rude multitude fancies it is
either Water, or some cordial thou wishest for! They measure thy condition by
their own sensual appetite! but they were purer desires that glowed in thy
Breast! It is Water indeed, thou thirstest for, but such Water, as David made
his Bed to swim in. The Tears of a penitent Soul are the Wine thou longest for;
They are the Drink the Son of God, thirsts after. Weep, weep mine Eyes, that
the Lord Jesus may Drink and be satisfied! O Lord, I have given thee Gall to
Drink, I have offered thee the cup of Trembling, and Astonishment. Ah bitter,
Ah wretched Drink! worse then the foulest Ditch-water! Drink my dearest Lord,
Drink of the Brook by the way. Drink of these Tears, Drink of this Holy Water,
I do shed. O it is the Sweat of a grieved Soul; of a Soul weary of Sin, and
heavy laden with the sense of it. My Heart melts, my Soul dissolves at the
thoughts of my follies. Drink up this Heart of mine, and let it mingle with thy
bowels of Mercy. Here Lord! accept of the Vows I offer thee! Behold, and visit
this Vine, which thine own right has planted. Shine upon it Lord, let it bring
forth pleasant Grapes, no more Grapes of the Vine of Sodom, but Grapes sweet,
and which may cheer the Heart of God, and Man.

The Drink Offerings I bring to thee, are insatiable desires after thee, the
most fervent breathings of my Heart, after thy Grace and Mercy. O receive them
Graciously, and love me freely. I bring on Rivers of Oil, no Rams, no Bullocks
with Horns and Hoofs. Thou desire not Sacrifice, else would I give it thee;
thou delightest not in Burnt-offerings! Thou will take no Bullock out of my
House, nor He-Goats out of my Folds; for every Beast of the Forest is thine,
and so is the Cattle upon a thousand Hills. Thou know all the Fowls of the
Mountains, and the wild Beasts of the Field are thine: if thou were Hungry thou
would not tell me, for the World is thine, and the fullness thereof. Thou will
not eat the flesh of Bulls, nor drink the blood of Goats; but the offerings
thou expectest, are Thanksgivings, and paying my humble Vows to thy Divine
Majesty, and calling upon thee in the day of trouble. O my God! my Soul
faints for thee! when shall I come to appear before thee! My Soul is cast
down within me! When will thou comfort me! I long for thy Salvation! I hunger
and thirst after Righteousness; I see Beauty, and splendour, and excellency in
it, and would fain be clothed with that Ornament! Thou deservest my strongest
desires, my most vigorous Breathings, my most lively Pantings after thee! not
to long after thee, is to be a stranger to real Bliss; not to follow hard after
thee, is to be ignorant of thy Riches, and the plenty of thy House! But what do
I talk of desires of a single Heart? would to God, that all Mankind might offer
unto thee their reasonable service; thou deservest it, and deservest all the
love of Angels too. But thou desire nothing so much, as the Hearts of the
Children of Men The Angels are happy already, only Mankind lies ingulfed in
misery; and so great is thy Charity, that having taken their Nature upon thee,
thou would willingly make them equal with Angels.

Great Darling of the Holy Trinity! What haste do thou make to dye?

How do thou run to redeem the Sons of Men! Nothing can hold thee, nothing
can restrain thee, not thine own Greatness, not thy Majesty, not thy being the
Son of God, not love to thine own preservation. Thou did love me better then
thy self. How did thou fly to my deliverance! How do thou leap in to
prevent my hurt! No Devils can fright thee, no danger terrify thee, no pain
discourage thee, no anguish make thee afraid. Thou longest till the great Work
be done. The other Malefactors that are crucified with thee (What honor had
these wretches, and yet were not sensible of it! One at last opens his Eyes,
and sees it, and stands amazed) these held out longer on the Gibbet, but thou
bidst Death come away, and seize thy Life! It Is a pleasure to thee to die. Oh
surprising Mercy! Other Men seek to escape Death as long as they can; they run
away from the sight of the Monster, if they do but see the shadow of it, they
tremble and to them, Death is truly a King of Terrors. Thou go out to meet
it, as that, which must put an end to thy sufferings, and my misery. It Is death
to thee not to die. Thou chidest it for staying; T^^^ have a Baptism to be
Baptized with, and Oh what would thou that it were accomplished! Ah! My Lord,
I see thy dying Lips, from which dropped Speeches sweeter then Honey, and the
Honeycomb. Death is going to close them up, yet O vouchsafe me a look that may
refresh my Soul. And now the Glory is departed from Israel. The Savior of the
World gives up the Ghost! O let me die with thee! O draw me after thee, and I
shall live. I wonder not that the Graves open at thy death, and the Rocks rend,
and the Sun hides his Face; but I wonder the whole Earth did not dissolve, and
nature it self did not run into its primitive chaos, and confusion.

O my crucified Master! How ill art thou rewarded for thy kindness? Thou were
Eyes to the blind, and Feet to the lame; Thou were a Father to the Poor, and a
Staff to the Aged. Thou did cause the Widows Heart to sing for joy. Thou
did deliver the Poor, that cried the Fatherless, and him, that had no helper.
Unto thee Men gave ear, and waited, and kept silence at thy Counsel; after thy
words they spoke not again, and thy Speech dropped upon them: the naked decked
themselves with the Wool of thy Sheep, and thy Door was open to the weary
Traveller. But now they that are younger then thou, have thee in derision, and
they that were Children of Fools, Children of base Men, Men viler then the
Earth, gape upon thee. Thou art their Song, and art become their Byword; They
abhor thee, and flee far from thee, and spare not to spit in thy Face. They
mar thy Path, they set forward thy Calamity. Terrors are turned upon thee,
they pursue thy Soul as the Wind, and thy welfare passes away as a Cloud.

O infinite Patience! Yet these Sinners are offered Salvation by him, whom they
abused thus. Salvation? What do I hear? O then there is hopes for me, for I
have been one of thy enemies. I have mocked thee by by my Sins! I have derided
thy sufferings by my contempt of thy Laws; I have scorned thee by preferring
mine own Will before thine; I have spit upon thee by my filthy communications;
I have abused thee by sheltring my Sins under thy Cross; I have dishonored
thee by my Life, disgraced thee by my carelessness, buffeted thee by my
impatience, affronted thee by my pride, made light of thy Power and Goodness by
my mistrust of thy Providence; undervalued thy Love, by my affection to vanity,
and yet thou stretchest forth thine arm to lay hold on me, art loath to see me
perish, unwilling to see me undone, and proclaimest mercy to a forlorn wretch!
Blessed news! O King of Kings thou cryest, It is fulfilled; The work is done,
the vast work of redemption; Now thy Fathers anger is broke, now the Floodgates
of indignation are shut; Now Heaven stands open; Now thy Fathers bosom is held
out to all that thirst after thee.

Hear this all ye prisoners! listen to this message ye guilty Souls! Come all
that are laden with a sense of sin! Open the door! Throw off your Chains! Run
to this Rock! Make haste to this Fountain! Kiss this Sun! Make much of this
Light! Embrace this Mercy. Do ye dispute the thing? Do ye question whether ye
shall do it or no? Is it possible you can stand out? Is it possible you can
demur upon it? Is it possible your Hearts do not turn within you? Can you
refuse your Cordial? neglect the Medicine that must recover you? slight the
Remedy that must fetch you to life again? O Jesu! Thou have done all things
well; Thou have made the Blind to see, and the Dumb to speak, and the Deaf to
hear. O open thou my Lips and my Mouth shall show forth thy Praise. Open thou
mine Ears, and let me hear thy loving kindness betimes in the Morning. O open
thou mine Eyes, and I shall see how Sweet and Gracious thou art. O my Life!
thou die, and dying, fulfillest thy Fathers Will; for indeed it was fit that
one Man should die for the People, and that the whole Nation perish not. Ah!
What would Mankind have done, if thou had not paid the Ransom! Whether must
they have fled for refuge, if thou had not given thy self a Sacrifice? They
must have wandered about in Caves, and Dens, destitute, tormented, afflicted,
disconsolate, lived in perpetual fear of death, and the dreadful consequences
of it. Death must have been for ever a King of terrors to them, if they had
but looked upon that Hell, that death would have opened into. How could they
but have lived in perpetual horror! There could have been no hope of Mercy, no
probability of Bliss, their Souls would have been in Eternal confusion, always
doubting, always afraid, always upon the Rack. O my Jesus! Thou, through death
have delivered them, who through fear of Death, were all their lifetime
subject unto bondage! Thou have knocked off their shackles! loosed their Bands!
freed their Souls! set their Spirits at libery! I feel the power of thy death.
My Heart takes courage! O let me rise with thee to Eternal* life, O let me not
lie in the mire, but set my Feet upon a Rock, and establish my goings! I have
gone astray like a lost Sheep; O seek thy servant, that I may not forget thy
Commandments

Thou art the Bread which came down from Heaven, and with the Bread in thy
Sacred Supper thou offerest me all the benefits of thy death and passion; such
a Feast have thou prepared for me; such a Table have thou spread for me; my
Soul is invited to Sup with the Lamb that was slain! What an honor is this!
What a condescension is it! In this Sacrament thou erectest a Banner for me,
bidst me sit under thy Vine, and strenghthen my self with the Fruit that drops
from it. Were all the Fishes of the Sea, and all the Fowls of the Air, and all
the Beasts of the Field, dressed for my entertainment, it would not be so much,
as this plain, but Heavenly Diet is. Tell not me of Belshazzer's Banquet, nor
of Ahashuerus's Feast, nor of the rich man's curious Dishes; they are all scraps
and Offals to this Entertainment! Here my Blessed Redeemer courts my Soul; Here
he makes love to a miserable Sinner! Here he presents me with the Riches of his
Merits! No African Gold, no Eastern Pearls, no Indian Stones are to be compared
with these. Here the Lord of Glory offers to marry me, to unite me to him, to
make an everlasting Covenant with me, to be flesh of his flesh, and bones of
his bones, promises to endow me with all his Goods, puts a Ring on my Finger,
and bids me lie in his bosom. This is Honor, this is Glory, this is
Preferment, which no Royal Courts can give, no Solomon can afford, no Emperor
Grant, no Monarch Conferr, no King bestow. This is the mighty Wedding-Feast, at
which the blessed Angels wait how should not they be there, when their Master
is President, and Director of the Banquet? This puts me in mind of all the
admirable things thou have done for me; in this Bread are contracted all the
Dainties and Delicacies imaginable. O wonderful Love that wast not content to
be known to me, but art willing to give thy self for Food to me! What pains
do thou take to melt my stubborn Heart! Thou art willing to live in me, Thou
art willing to be one with me, that I may not warp from thee. Thou art willing
to be my Meat and Drink, not only my King to protect me, not only my Father to
tender me, not only my Master to take care of me, not only my Savior to snatch
me out of the burning Lake, not only my Mediator to secure me against Heavens
vengeance, but my Diet too. Thou see my Soul wants Meat proper for her
nature: Alas! the World cannot be that Meat! That Is a Heterogeneous thing! as
well may Angels feed on Hay, or Grass, as my Soul on things that profit not.
That which my Soul must feed on, must be something Spiritual. Thou O Jesu! art
that Great Spiritual Object, my Soul must fix on, nothing else will content it;
and when my Thoughts contemplate thee, when my Soul Meditates of thy Charity,
when my Affections love thee, when my Desires long for thee, When my Will
submits to thy easy yoke; When all my Faculties delight in thee, when thou
appearest lovely, and charming, and amiable to my mind, Then, then my Soul has
its proper food, then it is like to live, then it is in a way to thrive, then it
prospers, then it grows, then it gets a cheerful look, then the Angels visit
it; the World perfectly soures it; Sensual pleasures ruin it, carnal
satisfactions make it meager. Thou O Lord, thou alone can make it flourish
like the Palm Tree, and satisfy it with the Rivers of thy Pleasures.

O my Lord, how sweet is it to suck Honey out of this Rock! Thy Bread
strengthens to a miracle, and thy Blood makes Souls Drunk. It is as the Dew of
Hermon, and as the Dew that descends on the Mountains of Zion; for there the
Lord commanded the Blessing, even Life for evermore. O my God, I care not for
Abana, and Pharpar now, nor for the Rivers of Damascus. I will stand under thy
Cross, and open my Mouth. O do thou fill it; while others go to rejoice in
their Corn, and Wine, and Oil, I will go to the Supper of the Lamb. Here Lord,
here is my Heart, ready to receive that Heavenly Food thou offerest me. Awake
thou Eternal Spirit, awake, blow upon my Garden, that the Spices may flow out!
O let this Maenna satisfy my, taste, that I may forget the Fleshpots of Egypt.
Behold Lord, here I make a vow, that if thou will give me this Bread to eat,
which endures to everlasting life, Thou shall be my God, I will serve no other
Gods but thee. Thou shall command my Heart, my Desires, and my Affections, and
without thee no passion shall lift up its Hand or Foot in all the land of
Goshen, I will set thee over all that I have, and all shall be at thy dispose.


Christ. I feel my Heart warmed with this consideration. I will now turn aside
and see this great sight, who it is that hangs upon the Cross, and bleeds for
my Sins. Oh! it is the Son of God, he that was in the form of God, and thought
it no robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, and took
upon him the form of a Servant, and became obedient to the death of the Cross,
that I might be made the Righteousness of God through him.


Consc. But is there nothing else to be done by way of preparation for this
Blessed Sacrament?


Christ O Yes! For I must, First, Retire sometimes, and celebrate, and admire
the love of God to me in Christ Jesus, in some such reflections as these.

Be astonished ye Heavens, stand amazed ye Quires of Angels, at the
condescension of my God. I have betrayed him to the Philistines, yet he loves
the miserable Wretch, and so loves him, that he gives his Son to redeem him.

O God what do thou see in me?? Nothing but misery, nothing but rags, nothing
but poverty, and yet thou love me.

I am but Dust and Ashes, and will God vouchsafe a Gracious look, to so mean an
object? O Sovereign Being, Did thou ever behold a viler creature then I am!
and will thou go out of the common road of Love, and spread thy Garments over
me, and offer me thy friendship?

O Love! which Cherubim admire, and Seraphim adore! It passes understanding. It
goes beyond my Cognizance; It confounds my Reason, I admire the love of a
Prince to a Subject, but that will bear no resemblance to this Love!

God might have triumphed in my Groans, Glorified his Justice by my stripes;
but pity abounds in him, it has no Banks, it flows at large, its extended even
to the most abject Creature, as I am.

O Love! How humble art thou! How violent art thou! Thou breakest through all
the Clouds of Heaven to come down. Thou forgoest the Rules of Greatness and
Majesty, to show thy Glory, That the Eternal Son of God should take Flesh upon
him, and dye to give life to the World! Oh where can I parallel this Love!

I will sing of Love, I will speak of Love, I will think of Love, my very
Dreams shall be employed about it. O that I could write Panegyricks of it! Were
not my Tongue confined, it should do nothing else but talk of Love.

Here is Love, to which all natural sympathies must vail. I see no end thereof.
The farther I go in the search, the more I lose my self. But how should a
creature find out the end of that which is infinite?

Where shall I find out the spring of this mighty stream? Where shall I find
the beginning of it? Alas! The line of Reason is too short! There is no
fathoming of this depth. Who can search into the recesses of Eternity? In that
vast Abyss, the head of this great River lies; but who shall dive into it?
It Is enough that I am so happy as to be acquainted with it. It Is enough that
the Almighty has revealed it unto Babes. Even so Father it seemed good in thy
sight. I can give no reason of it. Thy Love Lord, was the cause of this Love;
thy Love was the motive. Nothing else could be any inforcive. I am sensible
thou art merciful, because thou will be merciful.

O thou Eternal Wisdom, whom the Lord possessed in the beginning of his way,
before his Works of old, who wast set up from everlasting, from the beginning,
or ever the Earth was; when there were no depths thou wast brought forth, when
there were no Fountains abounding with Water, before the Mountains were settled;
before the Hills wast thou brought forth, while as yet he had not made the
Earth, nor the Fields, nor the highest part of the Dust of the World, who wast
there when he prepared the Heavens, when he set a compass upon the face of the
depth, when he established the Clouds above, when he strengthened the deep, when
he gave to the Sea his Decree, that the Waters should not pass his
Commandment; O thou! who wast by him, as one brought up with him, who wast
daily his delight, rejoicing always before him, enlighten my Mind, that I may
have clearer apprehensions of this Charity!

Arise my Thoughts! Awake up my Glory! See O my Soul how that Love smiles upon
thee! See how bright, how clear, how charming it is! See how Devils tremble at
it! See how they grin, and fret to think, they must have no share in it; See
what Glorious Beams it darts on penitent sinners! See how it warms their
Hearts! See how it follows them, how loath it is to leave them! See how it
adjures them, and how importunate it is with them to suffer themselves to be
conquered by it.

2. I must examine my self, not only what, and where, and when, and how I have
(especially of late) been acting against God, and affronted his Goodness,
Mercy, and Patience; and what Sorrow, Grief, and Fear these particular offenses
have caused in me; but whether I am unfeignedly resolved to part with all these
particular sins, I am most prone, and inclined to; whether my Heart and purpose
be fixed to know the Will of God, and to do it; Whether I do sincerely, and
without reservation, intend for the future to prefer God's Will before my Will,
and his Favor before the Favor of Men; and whether I do in good earnest
design to forgo my profit, gain, or interest in the World, rather then do any
thing, that is displeasing to God; Whether I do truly prize the love of God
above all the Riches of this World, and see greater Beauty in that Holiness, to
which I am invited by this Love, then in all the gaudes and satisfactions of of
the World. And if I do, and my Conscience bears me witness of it, I may
cheerfully go to the Lords Table, and expect the benefits that are offered
there.

3. If I have done any signal wrong to my Neighbor, I must make him either
restitution or satisfaction; I must either restore to him, what I have cheated
or wronged him in, or have secretly, and against his Will taken away from him;
or if I am not able to restore, make confession of the fault, and beg his
forgiveness. I must be reconciled to him, if I have offended him, or given him
just occasion to be angry; and if after that attempt, he will still keep his
anger, I have delivered my own Soul.

I must let my neighbor know, that I do as truly forgive him, as I hope to be
forgiven of Christ Jesus, and be as ready to give, as my neighbor to ask my
pardon.

I must remember how God has entailed his Pardon upon mine, and if I forgive
not from my Heart, neither will my Heavenly Father forgive my Trespasses. If I
have abused my neighbor, either in Words or Deeds, and he either has
received, or is like to receive any prejudice by it, I must not be ashamed to
acknowledge my error, but prefer a quiet Conscience before my Reputation in the
World.

4. I must survey the bitter sufferings of my Blessed Savior, as they are laid
down and described by the Evangelists. I must follow him into the Garden of
Gethsemane, and go up with him to the Mount of Olives, and there behold how his
Heart was troubled, and how the fears of death fell upon him; how his Soul was
filled with sorrow, and how his Life drew near unto the Grave. How he trod the
Wine Press of Gods anger alone, and humbled himself before his Father. How, as
Man, he begged, that the Cup might pass from him, and yet as Mediator, freely
consented to his Fathers Will. How distress and anguish came upon him, and in
the midst of those miseries, the weary Disciples fell asleep; how he wept and
mourned, and sweat drops of Blood; and how Hell opened her Mouth upon him; how
he bore our Griefs, and took the chastisement of our Peace upon him. How he
drank the bitter Cup, and his Heart within him became as melting Wax. How he
was led to Annas, and he to whom all the Angels in Heaven bowed, stood before a
sinful Man. How from Annas he was dragged to Caiphas, and like a Lamb led to
the slaughter. How he was accused before Pontius Pilate, and there bespattered
with all the ill language that Men or Devils could invent. How he was set at
naught by Herod, and in scorn decked with a Purple Robe. How from thence he
returned to Pilate, and thereupon was scourged, and crowned with Thorns. How
after this he bore his Cross, and was actually crucified. How he was made to
drink Gall and Vinegar, and at last, bowed the Head and died.

But then I must not only barely survey these sufferings, but reflect at the
same time upon my sins that procured them, and accuse not only my grosser sins,
if I have been guilty of any, but my lesser errors of using the Son of God so
barbarously; I must not reflect upon his bloody Sweat, without thinking of my
proud Thoughts, and Speeches, and Actions that pulled it on him, nor upon his
wounds, without beating my Breast for my Envy and Malice, and revengful desires
that caused them; nor upon the Crown of Thorns, without detesting my
intemperance, and sinister designs in doing good, and affectation of vain
Glory, that set it on his Head; nor on the Nails that tore his Flesh, without
taking a view of my pettishness, and peevishness, and impatience, which struck
them in; nor upon the Spear that opened his side, without entertaining some
dismal Thoughts of my neglect of Meditation, and Prayer, and fervency of
Spirit, and Holy Discourses, and bearing of Injuries, and Heavenly Thoughts;
nor upon his Tears, without looking stern upon my slight, and superficial
performances; for all these helped toward his Death and Agonies.

5. I must show my willingness to imitate Christ Jesus, by doing some good
Work, if health and strength do give me leave. This must be the first fruits of
my future treading in his steps, and will make my coming to the Holy Sacrament
more comfortable. I must in this, imitate the Woman that poured out the
ointment on Christ's Head, before his sufferings began; and Christ himself, who
washed his Disciples Feet, before he refreshed their Souls with the Holy
Sacrament. I must either free some prisoner, to testify my resentment of the
Mercy, Christ showed me, in freeing me from the bondage of the Devil, or
relieve some poor Family, to express my sense of Christ's relieving my Soul in
the greatest strait, or impart some good Counsel to a wicked and careless
neighbor, to show how kind Christ was in visiting me with his Admonitions; or
visit some sick persons that are under great distress; and comfort them, or
help them, or give them, or procure them some Physic that may do them good; if
they be needy; to show how sensible I am of Christ's being my Physician, or
forgive some small Debt, a poor Man owes me, to show how I rejoice at Christ's
forgiving me Ten thousand Talents; Or visit a man that hates me, and behave my
self most courteously to him, to see whether his Heart will melt, and come to a
better temper, thereby to express my sense of Christ's Love to me, that have
been his Enemy; or give a good Book to one that has no Money to buy one; to
show my sense of Christ's feeding me with the word of Life; or deny my self in
a lawful Recreation, or lawful Ornament, or lawful Meal, to show, I am sensible
how Christ has denied himself for mysake; or pray earnestly for the
conversion, of a person I have no acquaintance with, and whom I hear to be very
vicious to express my sense of Christ's care of my Salvation.

6. I must frequently pray, that God would give me a Heart to breathe and pant
after him, and particularly, a Heart to esteem and prize his Love manifested in
this Sacrament, above all the pleasures of this World; that he would give me a
Faith active and vigorous, and which may press through all impediments, and
purify my Heart and Life, and forget what is behind it; That he would give me a
contrite Spirit, and Grace to tremble at his Word, and threatenings; that he
would give me courage to undervalue, and despise the World, and the Glories and
Vanities of it; that he would give me a burning Zeal to his Glory, a
transcendent love to his Name, and Ways, and Ordinances; that he would make me
sincere in Devotion, in Prayer, and in all good Works, and banish from me all
sinister and worldly ends, and designs in Holy performances; that he would give
me a firm resolution to imitate the Saints of old, and the best examples at
this day, and to stop my ears against all the suggestions of Flesh and Blood to
the contrary; that he would give me a Mind which may delight in contemplating
the Divine Goodness, and Perfection, and would teach me the great Art of
Self-resignation, of trusting him with my Soul and Body, and of relying
entirely upon his providence.

7. I must resolve, and unfeignedly upon my bended knees, or in a very solemn
manner resolve to watch and strive for the future against those particular sins
and errors, and sinful inclinations I am most inclined to; If I have neglected
such a Self-denial, to neglect it no more; if I have been guilty of such acts
of pride, and envy, and ill nature, to be guilty of them no more; if I have
been careless and slovenly in my Prayers, to be so no more; if I have pleased
my self with vain Thoughts, to please my self with them no more; if I have
delighted in fine Clothes, to delight in them no more; if I have been false to
my Vows and Promises, to be false to them no more; if I have made nothing of
ill Names, and ill Language, to dread it like poison for the future; I must
resolve to mortify such a habit of sin with rigors, with being unkind to my
flesh, with Fasting, and with mulcts of Money; if I commit but a single act of
the sin, I must resolve to use the proper means to subdue such a corruption; I
must resolve to avoid that company where I am, and have been apt to yield to a
certain sin; I must resolve to spend my time better, and if I have spent too
much of it in Dressing, in Pleasure, in Carding, and Dice, etc. to do so no
more, whatever disgrace, dis-respect, or frowns I may meet with from the World,
or from mine Acquaintance; and if I have been careless of meditating, and being
serious on the Lords day, to make a better improvement of that day. And I must
so resolve, as to think my self concerned to fulfill and perform my solemn
Resolution, unto which I have called God as a witness.

8. I must watch against all things that would discompose, and disorder my
mind, put me into a rage or passion, and make me peevish and discontented, and
consequently unfit for the worthy receiving of this Sacrament: I must labor to
preserve a calmness, and serenity of Mind; and that neither multitude of
worldly business do distract me, nor injuries past and gone, discompose me, or
put me into impatient Thoughts, and expressions, nor present disappointments
rob me of my quiet? I must watch against impediments, that would tempt me to
delay my coming to this Table, and take heed I do not yield to Temptations,
that would make me neglect the opportunity, put into my hand, of making Peace
with God, and mine own Conscience. I must reject suggestions of this nature,
and regard more, the necessary concerns of my Soul, then things, that at the
best are but sensual satisfactions.


Consc. And what must thy Thoughts be, and what frame must thy heart be in when
thou come to the Holy Table of the Lord?


Christ. I must,

1. Employ my Soul in Holy ejaculations, such as these.

O who will give me to drink of the Water of the Well of Bethlehem! Wherewith
shall I come before the Lord! How shall I bow my self before the most high!
Shall I come before him with Burnt-offerings, with Calves of a year old?

O my Lord! Thou have showed me what is good, and what do thou require of me,
but to do justly, to show mercy, and to walk humbly with my God! O my God, I
bring an humble Heart, a Soul that desires to lie low before thee; a Soul that
longs to be clean, and to be washed in the blood of the Lamb; a Soul weary of
Sin, that sees no comfort, no satisfaction, no content in things below, but
behold's afar off, the treasures of Consolation, that lie hid in Christ Jesus!

These are things to be desired. These are Mercies worth having. These enrich
banckrupt Souls, with these Pardon is purchased, and Heaven is procured. O give
me a Title to them, Thou that art the true Morning Star! O shine upon me! O
enlighten me! O enlighten me! O let me feel thy comfortable beams! These burn
not, These scorch not, but sanctify, and polish, and adorn.

I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy Merits are exceeding broad. They
enlarge Heaven, subue Death, conquer Hell, expel Devils, and make God my friend.

How have I doted on the vanities of this World! They are bubbles all; but thou
sweet Jesu art perfect Beauty, a fountain of Joy, which never wants Water,
never dries up, never fails, and never dies.

How much better is it to be here in the Courts of the Lord, then in the Tents
of the proudest Monarchs! one day here is better then a thousand elsewhere.

Here God bows to poor sinners. Here infinite Majesty converses with Dust and
Ashes. Here the King of Heaven is not ashamed to call such poor Worms as we
are, Brethren!

How different are the ways of God from the ways of Men! They shun a Lazarus,
and a Beggar; God receives them, and the Soul that is sensible of her poverty,
and begs to be enriched, is refreshed by him, and invited into his bosom.

How Lovely art thou my Great Redeemer! How Amiable! How Kind! How Beautiful!
Therefore do the Virgins love thee.

Could there be greater Love, then to spill thy Blood for me! Could there be
greater Charity then to dye for me! What miracles of Mercy are these!

I come to beg an alms at thine hands; it is too great a gift for me to ask, but
not too great for thee to give, for it is thy self I beg.

O warm my Heart! Touch it with a coal from the Altar! O kindle Holy Fire in my
Breast! Burn up the dross and Tin there, and let nothing but pure Gold remain.
Let Love prevail. O change my Heart into fesrvent Love, and turn all my
faculties into Charity!

2. I must join with the Congregation in their Prayers. I must put my Perfumes
into that common Genser, that the Holy Smoke may go up with joined force to the
throne of Mercy.

I must not come behind my fellow members in Zeal, and Earnestness.

They pray for the prosperity of the Universal Church, that God would guide her
by his Holy Spirit; so must I.

They pray for all Christian Kings and Princes, that they may promote the Glory
of God, and the Churches welfare; so must I.

They pray for the Ministers of God's Holy Word, that they may be sound in the
Faith, and patterns of Holiness; so must I.

They pray for all distressed Members of Christ, that the Consolations of
Christ may abound in them; so must I.

They prostrate themselves in Holy Confessions of their Sins, and pray for
Remission and Pardon, and Sanctification; so must I.

They pray to be made partakers of the benefits of Christ's Body and Blood; so
must I.

3. I must show my compassion to the Poor, by contributing to their
necessities, if I am able.

I must remember how poor, how wretched, how naked, how miserable I was, when
the Son of God first took pity on me, being yet in the Loins of my Father Adam.

I must consider, that my self at this instant am lying at the pool of
Bethesda, waiting for the Angel of the Covenant to come down, and stir the
Waters that I may be healed.

I must look upon my self as a Person full of Sores and Sickness, and reflect,
that I come to be cured for Gods sake, by the Great Physician of Souls.

From my Self, I must look down on the Poor, that want my help; and as I would
have my Great Master have compassion on me, so I must have compassion on my
Fellow Servants.

4. I must at this time resist all worldly Thoughts, and did my Oxen, and my
Farms, and my Domestique Affairs stand aloof like Lepers, that must not come
near a place so full of Majesty, and a Work so big with wonders.

I must with Mary choose the better part, and look upon Martha's serving as
unseasonable.

I must lay aside contrivances how to make a bargain with my neighbor, and
know no other Covenant, but what I am making with God in the blood of Jesus.

I must not think of my Trade and Trafick, but remember, it is for the Pearl of
Price, that I am Trading now, and laying out my strength, and labor.

I must not be disturbed with a desperate Debt that is owing me, but remember
the Debts I owe to God; and how I do expect that at this time they should be
struck out, and cancelled for ever.

I must not now torment my self about a livelihood, when I come to get a Title
to a Life of everlasting Glory.

I must not now think how to get Bread, and make provision for my Family, but
rather reflect with joy, what large provision the Almighty makes for my Soul,
and what care he takes to make me a Son of God, an Heir of Heaven, and Coheir
with Christ.

When sensual Thoughts fly through my Mind at this time, I must continue to say
to them, Arise, and Depart, for here shall not be your rest.

5. I must now make some Spiritual reflections on the breaking of the Bread, and
upon pouring out of the Holy Wine.


On the breaking of the Bread.
BEhold O my Soul, thus was thy Blessed Savior's Body broken; Thus was his
unspotted Flesh torn asunder. O my Sins, ye did this barbarous act. The Jews
were but the External instruments, ye were the fatal causes of that torture;
had it not been for you, the Crown of Thorns had never wounded that Sacred Head.

Break my Heart, Break, it is a dismal sight! A broken Heart is Sacrifice,
which he that was broke upon the account of thy sins, will not despise.

Nay, he will comfort the humble Soul, and the contrite Spirit; he will pour
Wine and Oil into its wounds, supple it with Balm, heal it with his Death, and
make it whole by his Agonies.

See here, O my Soul, the Bread which is broke, is it not the Communion of the
Body of Christ; see how many broken pieces are here, which all make but one
Loaf. So thou, and thy fellow-Believers, make one mystical Body, whereof the
Crucified Jesus is Head, and Governor, who influences the Body by his Spirit,
and from his fullness dispences Grace for Grace.

Rejoice, O my Soul! For now the waves and billows of Gods wrath are laid, The
storm of vengeance is hushed, The thunder is gone, The clouds clear up, thy
broken Savior has turned the sound of the Trumpet of War into a still small
Voice.

O break with him no more! O preserve that friendship which was so dearly
bought! A friendship purchased by Blood, sure must never dye. Thou art his
Friend, O do not become his Enemy again, for fear he be never friends with thee
again.

On the pouring out of the Holy Wine.
THus, O my Soul, thus flowed the precious Blood of the tormented Jesus. In
such streams it issued from his wounded Body. Thus was the costly Juice let
out. Thus the rich Veins emptied themselves of their Treasure, and all, that
thou might may be clean.

And O Jerusalem, wilt not thou be clean, When shall it once be? When God makes
use of his own Blood to purify thee, O my Soul, Will thou wallow still in thy
Dung, and Nastiness? This would be inexcusable. Arise, wash thy self in this
Jordan, and thy Flesh shall come again, like unto the Flesh of a little Child.

O my Soul! had not this Blood been shed, there had been no remission of Sins.
From the shedding of this Blood, date thy happiness; when God saw this Blood,
the tide turned, and thy offended Father looked on thee with a merciful Face.

How sweet is this Blood! it nourishes into Eternal Life!

How high the value of it! it redeemed a whole World!

How wholesome! it expels all Sicknesses.

What pity was it, that the least drop of it should fall upon the ground! It
was fit to be received by the hands of Angels! But the Earth on which sinful
Men walked, was defiled, and cursed, and therefore it must fall upon it, to
take away the Curse, Man's Sin had made it subject to.

O precious Blood! Drop, drop upon my Soul! Let me feel thy Virtue! Drive out
the Curse, Water this barren Ground, that has brought forth Briars, and
Thorns, and let it bring forth pleasant Fruit again.

6. When I receive the Holy Bread, my Mind must vent it self in some such
breathings as these.

Either,
O My Lord, I do remember with Joy and Grief, that thy Body was Crucified for
me, the meanest of thy Servants. I remember it with joy, because thy Love is
wonderful. O how vehement, how violent was it to love an Enemy, and by that
Love, to charm me into Obedience! I remember it with grief, because my Sins
were thy Murderers. O my Lord, I will stand out against thy offers of Grace no
longer. Here take my Heart. I solemnly resolve to dedicate my Self, and all I
have to thy Service.

Or,
O God! this Sacred Bread puts me in mind, how the Lamb of God was offered for
me. Do I believe this, and shall not my Soul make thee her highest, and her
chiefest good? O my God, I take thee here, not only for my Savior, but for my
King and Master too. Come Holy Spirit, rule my Heart, for I will hence forward
serve no other Gods but the Great Jehovah alone, who loved me, and gave himself
for me.

Or,
O my Jesus! My Life! My Joy! My Comfort! Thou diedst that I might live. I
remember it, and adore thy Majesty in misery. O make me thine, and as this
Bread does mingle with my Substance, so let thy Spirit mingle with my Soul,
that the same Mind may be in me, which was also in Christ Jesus.

Or,
Look upon this Bread, O my Soul, it represents the bleeding Body of thy
dearest Lord. Bleed, O my Heart! Give thy self up to him that groaned for thee.
It Is done, O God, neither Death, nor Life shall separate me from the Love of
God which is in Christ Jesus my Lord.

7. When I receive the Holy Wine, my thoughts must still be at work, and
address themselves to God in Christ Jesus, some such way as this.

Either,
O Jesu, I thankfully remember that thy Blood was spilt for me; What am I, and
what is my Fathers House, that thou have brought me thus far! Thou have loved
me better than I have done my self. O my Lord, give me thy sweet, thy tender,
thy free, thy humble Spirit, that I may be one with thee, and may admire none
in heaven but thee, and desire nothing on Earth besides thee.

Or,
O blessed Balsom of my wounded Heart! Welcome thou Sovereign Salve! How
seasonable is this Medicine! I die if thy Blood relieve me not. O wash me, and
I shall be whiter than Snow. I have deserved to drink the Cup of Trembling and
Astonishment, and thou hold out to me the Cup of Salvation. O my Soul,
remember who it is that is so kind to thee. O esteem, adore, magnify, and love
him for ever.

Or,
O thou blessed Shepherd of my Soul! How ought I to blush when I think of thy
Blood, which my Sins did spill! Thou have turned my Darkness into Light, and my
Treason into an Antidote, Thou curest me by Contradictions, and the Blood my
Sins have drawn from thy flesh, is become the only refuge, I have in the day of
Wrath. O look upon thine own Blood, and hide me in thy Wounds. I know not how
to prize thy favor; O do thou teach me to do great things for thee, to deny my
self, to take up my Cross, and to follow thee.

Or,
O my Lord! By thy Tears, and by thy Blood thou adjurest me this day to imitate
thee in thy Graces, in thy Meekness, in thy Patience, in thy Humility, in thy
Charity, in thy Contempt of the World, and in thy Heavenlymindedness. My heart
is fixed, O God! my heart is fixed, I will Sing and give Praise. Thou shall be
my Pattern. Here under thy Cross I promise Obedience and Conformity to thy
Graces. O do thou help me! O assist me! uphold me with thy free Spirit, so
shall I teach Transgressors thy Way, and Sinners shall be converted unto thee.

Or,
Great Bishop of my Soul, who have left the ninety and nine in the Wilderness,
and art come to seek this straying Sheep; Behold Lord, the Prodigal is coming
home again! Thou come toward me Bleeding, Groaning Dying, thou come to
receive him that has forsaken thee, to draw him that has fled from thee, to
kiss him that did scourge thee, to Crown him that did Prick thee, to Embrace
him that did Crucify thee, to revive him that did kill thee, and to Love him
that did Hate thee. O stupendous Mercy! Henceforward no Vain Glory, no Worldly
Pomp, no outward Riches, no Smiles of great Men, no outward Comfort, shall have
so much of my heart as thy sweet self. O increase my Faith, my Hope, my Love,
my Charity; make my Soul a Temple of the Holy Ghost: O come, come thou
Bridegroom of my Soul, come and dwell in me for ever!



Consc. And is this all that is to be observed upon this occasion?


Christ. No. For after I have been made Partaker of these Mysteries and Tokens
of God's Love, I must,

1. Bless God for the opportunity I have had of going with the Multitude to the
House of God, with the Voice of Joy and Praise, with the Multitude which keeps
Holy Day.

I must Magnify his Goodness, who so loved the World as to give his only
Begotten Son, to the end that all those that believe in him should not Perish,
but have everlasting Life.

I must summon my thoughts to enter into some such Meditation as this;

Whence is it that the King of Kings and the Lord of Lords, in whose eyes the
very Angels are not pure, should come to visit such a Wretch as I? O my Lord,!
to whom do thou stoop! What is that Creature that thou bowest thus low to? A
Den of Thieves, a Habitation of Vipers, a Vessel of Dishonor! O how often have
I polluted my self, even after thou have washed me! Is it possible that God
will dwell in such a polluted House! Is it possible that God will come and
Feast and Sup with such an unprofitable Servant! O my Soul! It is not only
possible, but thy Lord has done it to day: Thine eyes have seen the mighty
Works of thy Redeemer. Thou have seen him converse to day with a Wretch, that
has undone what God has done, has rendered him evil for good, and hatred for
his good will. Thou have seen thy Lord this day vouchsafing to sit with one who
is full of Bruises and putrefying Sores, and those not bound up, nor mollified
with Ointment.

Alas! my Lord! I have abused the mighty Creator to please a Murderer,
affronted the great Preserver of Men to please a Fiend, and undervalued him
that called me to Salvation, to please a usurping Tyrant. I can give no reason
why I have offended thee, except it be thy Goodness and Patience; and could
fair Weather make me angry?

What did thou see in me, Lord! that should attract thee, and make thee leave
the highest Heavens to descend into an Abyss of Misery?

O my Jesus! water my Soul with the Tears thou have shed, anoint me with the
Myrrh of thy Grief and Sorrow, tie me by thy Bonds, let thy Scourges soften my
Heart, let thy Derisions strengthen me, let thy Cross raise me; Reign over me,
do with me what seems good to thy Power, Wisdom, and Goodness. O let me never
depart from thee; let not the Creature draw me more than the Creator, Vanity
more than Eternity, Misery more than Felicity, Filthiness more than Beauty,
Slavery more than Greatness, Bitterness more than Sweetness. My Beloved is
mine, and I am his, he feeds among the Lillies. O that thou were as my Brother,
that sucked the Breasts of my Mother, I would kiss thee, yea, I should not be
despised.

O Lord! all my desire is before thee, take away from me whatever does
displease thee. Give me an humble heart, that I may be content to be counted as
Dung for thy sake: give me an obedient heart, that I may be entirely guided by
thee: give me a strong heart, that I may cheerfully bear whatever thy hand lays
upon me: give me a tender heart, that I may be kindly affectionate to my
Neighbor: give me a free heart, that nothing may hinder me from running to
thee: give me a heart of Flesh, that I may love thee perfectly.

Praise ye the Lord, I will praise the Lord with my whole heart in the Assembly
of the Upright, and in the Congregation. The Works of the Lord are great,
sought out of all them that have pleasure therein: His work is honorable and
glorious, and his Righteousness endures for ever. He has made his wonderful
Works to be remembered. The Lord is gracious and full of Compassion, he has
given Meat to them that fear him, he will ever be mindful of his Covenant; he
has showed his People the Power of his Works, that he may give them the
Heritage of the Heathen. The Works of his hands are Verity and Judgment; All
his Commandments are sure, they stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in
Truth and Uprightness. He sent Redemption unto his People. He has commanded
his Covenant for ever. Holy and Reverend is his Name. He raises the Poor out of
the Dust, and lifts the Needy out of the Dunghill, that he may set him with
Princes, even with the Princes of his People. Praise ye the Lord.

2. I must pray for the Congregation, and my fellow Christians, that do eat of
the same Bread, and drink of the same Cup with me, that they may all be
satisfied, as with Marrow and Fatness, and their Souls may live.

I must beg that none of them may receive the Grace of God in vain, That they
may keep and stand to the conditions of the Covenant they have made or renewed
with God, That they may indeed fight for the future against the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil, and be more than Conquerors, through him that loved them,
the Lord Jesus Christ.

My love to Christ must constrain me to wish and beg that every Man may love
him, else he does not appear truly lovely to me.

I must entreat the Father of Mercies to dispense his Spirit abundantly at this
time, That the love of Christ prevailing, may pull down in my fellow-Receivers
all the strong Holds of Iniquity, and all Imaginations which exalt themselves
against the Obedience of Christ Jesus, That Christ may Reign victoriously in
every one of them, live in them, act in them, govern them by his Spirit, That
they may indeed bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit, Love, Joy, Peace,
Goodness, Faith, Gentleness, Meekness, Temperance, etc.

I must be importunate with God to make them all Partakers of the Benefits of
Christ's Death and Passion, even of that Pardon, and Peace, and Salvation he
has purchased, and cause them to walk worthy of it, like persons that are
sensible of the greatness of the Favor and the depth and breadth and length
and height of the Love of God, and consequently may be filled with all the
fullness of God.

3. I must be thankful for the Honor I have received at such a time. I must
look upon it as more than ordinary Preferment that God has vouchsafed me a
place at his Table, admitted me into the number of his Children, made me
Partaker of the promises of the Gospel, opened his Bosom to me, received me
into favor, assisted me with his Spirit, given me a right to the Tree of Life,
and visited me with his Salvation.

Here the Words of David may justly be applied, My Soul shall joy in thy
strength, O Lord, and in thy Salvation how greatly may I rejoice! Thou have
given me my hearts desire, and have not withholden the request of my Lips; thou
have prevented me with the Blessings of Goodness, thou set a Crown of Pure
Gold on my head. I asked life of thee, and thou gave it me, even length of
days for ever and ever. My glory is great in thy Salvation, Honor and Majesty
have thou laid upon me, for thou have made me Blessed for ever. Thou have made
me exceeding glad with thy countenance. Therefore will I trust in the Lord, and
through the Mercy of the most High I shall not miscarry. Thine hand shall find
out all my spiritual Enemies, thy right hand shall find out all those that hate
thee. Be thou exalted, Lord, in thine own strength, so will we sing and praise
thy Power.

4. I must go home rejoicing, and praising God. Praise is comely for the
Upright; the poor Cripple did so when he was Healed, and have not I far greater
reason to do so? Behold I am healed at this time from mine Infirmity, and shall
not his Praise be continually in my mouth?

I must say in my heart, My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit rejoices
in God my Salvation. I will extol thee, O God my King, and I will Praise thy
Name for ever and ever. Every day will I Bless thee, and Praise thy Name for
ever and ever. O all ye that fear the Lord, come and I will tell you what he
has done for my Soul. His Love has overcome my Corruption, his fervent
Charity my Coldness, his Goodness my Sins and Follies. Except the Lord had been
on my side, now might I say, if the Lord had not been on my side, when
Temptations and Corruptions rose up against me, then they had swallowed me up
quick, when their Wrath was kindled against me, then the Waters had overwhelmed
me, the Stream had gone over my Soul: Blessed be the Lord, who has not given
me over as a Prey unto their Teeth. My Soul is escaped as a Bird out of the
Snare of the Fowlers, the Snare is broken, and I am escaped. My help is in the
Name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth.

5. Being made whole, I must for the future take heed, and sin wilfully no
more: Having washed my Feet, I must not defile them again.

I must stand upon my watch, and shun those occasions, which formerly led me
into Sin.

I must be cautious and afraid of an ill Word, as much as of an evil Action,
and my very Thoughts must be purged from that filth, that used to cleave to
them.

I must strangle an evil suggestion in its birth, and when I find any motion
rising in my mind, that looks like Envy, or Pride, or desire of Vain Glory, or
greediness after the World, I must check it upon its first appearance.

I must bid an Eternal farewell to Unbelief, and mistrust of Gods Providence,
and shun those sinful compliances with Men, which heretofore I was used to be
guilty of.

I must not only watch against grosser Sins, and such as Jews and Heathens can
avoid, but against the secret disorders and errors of my Heart, which none sees
but God, who is over all, Blessed for evermore.

6. I must frequently compare my Actions and Behavior with the Vow and
Promise, and solemn Resolution I have made in the Holy Sacrament, whether my
Deportment be agreeable to those Engagements; Whether I stand in awe of those
Vows and Promises; and whether they influence my Thoughts and Words, and
Practices; Whether my hatred of Sin increases, and my love to Holiness grows
steady, and unmovable; Whether I check my self, upon feeling an inclination,
or propensity to a sinful act with such Thoughts as these. Is this the effect
of my late Vow? Is this to stand to the Covenant, I lately made with God? Is it
possible, I can be so perfidious as to break with God? Has the Cross of Christ
so little power with me? Shall it not restrain me from such a sin as this?
Foolish Creature! shall a little profit or pleasure tempt me to please the
Devil, and wrong my immortal Soul? I am tied by a solemn promise made in a most
solemn place, by a promise made to God, by a promise Sealed with the Blood of
Jesus, not to do it; and shall I presume to do it, or hope for pardon, after
this presumption?

I must take notice, Whether the Thoughts of Christ's death, make my passions
weak; Whether they lessen the heat of them; Whether they repress their
fierceness; Whether they work in me that contempt of the World, which was so
signal in my dear Lord and Master.

I must ever and anon look how my Graces thrive, Whether no weeds grow among
them, that are like to choke the wholesome Herbs.

7. I must now study Self-denial, even in things lawful, and that seem to have
no harm in them. Self-denial in Eating and Drinking, in my Clothes, in my
Recreations, in my Time, in my Discourses, in my Wit, in my Reading, in my
Profit, in my Ease, and in my Sleep.

I must now take heed, I do not Eat and Drink to satiety, but labor still to
rise from my Meals with an Appetite.

I must now and then humble my Soul with a Religious Fast, and many times
forbear eating of that Dish, I have most mind to, to bring my sensual Desires
into order.

I must not imitate every vain fashion, I see other people use, but must be
very modest and decent in my garb; and having means and opportunities to buy me
better, reserve that Money, I would have laid out upon a richer Suit, for Pious
uses.

I must not think every recreation lawful, because it is commonly used by Men,
who are none of the worst. I must not encourage the vanity of Men and Women,
that are in love with Stage Plays by my example, as being things, I abjured in
my Baptism, but my recreation must be such, as may fit me for Spiritual
Devotions.

I must not spend my time as some luxurious, and idle People do, in needless,
and complemental Visits, in playing at Cards and Dice, but in Words, and
Actions, and Discourses, as may be useful and profitable: either to the Souls
or Bodies of my Family, and my Neighbors.

I must not censure, or judge my Neighbor rashly in my Speeches and
Discourses, and not be easily drawn to give a Verdict or Judgment of People,
except it be in their Praise and Commendation, if they do deserve it.

I must not give my self too great liberty in jesting, but forbear blurting out
a witty Saying, if it be smutty or abusive of my neighbors Credit, and
Reputation.

I must not give my self to reading of Romances, and such Books as serve to
render the Mind vain, and the Affections loose and regardless of Spiritual
things.

I must express my gratitude to God, for the Temporal Gain and Profit his Hand
sends me, by consecrating some part of it to good uses; nor must I be fond of
that Profit which arises from undermining my neighbor.

I must not study the ease of my Flesh much, but take opportunities to use it
to some hardships, that it may become more obedient to my Reason.

I must not stay at my sport so long as my sensual desires crave, but use only
so much of it, as may render me serviceable to God and Man.


Consc. And do thou verily believe that this is the way to Eternal Life?


Christ. Yes certainly, for this is the way, that the Primitive Believers
walked in. They did not think that Heaven was to be gained at a cheaper rate,
and why should I? Thus did the Apostles, thus did their Followers, and without
such Self-denial, they thought there was no arriving to Happiness. Besides,
this is most agreeable to the Precepts of the Gospel; and why should I think,
that I may be-Saved another way, then God himself has appointed.


Consc. If thou art persuaded that this is the way, Lord! Why do not thou set
about it? Why art thou so loath to come to it? Why do thou act so contrary to
it, when every moment thou art in danger of death, and upon thy death, there
depends Eternity?


Christ. O this base, this wicked World hinders me, the ill examples of my
careless Neighbors, care of getting a livelihood, the many crosses and
disappointments I meet with, hopes of having more time hereafter; the company I
converse with, the people I have to deal with, fear of Want, and the Calling
and Condition I am in, are such impediments, I know not how to shake off?


Consc. Is it not possible to live in the World, and to keep thy self unspotted
from it? If it be not, live a Beggar rather, live despised, live contemptible,
live dis-regarded by all Men, rather then not enter into these everlasting
Joys! Shall a pleasant sinful Life hinder thee from the everlasting enjoyment
of God! Shall the fawnings, or applauses of Men, hinder thee from the Eternal
applause of Angels! Think, if thou were standing at the great Tribunal,
trembling at the Eternal horror thou art condemned too; Think whether thou
would not wish, that thou had lived in Caves and Holes, poor, destitute,
afflicted, for a few years rather, then have come to this miserable end? Why
should the examples of thy careless neighbors move thee, when thou know
there are but few that will be saved? Can not thou get a livelihood, except
thou art rich and greedy after the glories of the World? If thou can but get
Food and Raiment, content thy self; and that most certainly thou will get, if
thou art industrious in thy lawful Calling, and dare but trust God* Crosses,
Losses, and Disappointments, are necessary for thee to drive thee from Earth to
Heaven; and if all this while thou do not lose thy Soul, thou art safe
enough. Do but look upon thy Soul as worth more then a thousand Worlds, and
none of these things will deject thee! Thy hopes of having time to repent
hereafter, is a mere cheat, and if thou trust to that, thou will never be
saved. A Spiritual life is a thing of labor, and pains, and circumspection,
and can thou be so silly as to think, a few careless Prayers at last will
plant it in thee? Alas! These are childish reasonings. The company thou
conversest withal, if they are thy bane, must be shaken off, whatever comes
on it. There is no dallying in a thing of this consequence; and if other men
will poison themselves, why should thou? Let the People thou dealest with, be
never so bad, tha'ts no example for thee to follow. If they are unreasonable,
why should thou lose thy Wits, and thy Salvation for their sakes? If they
cheat or abuse thee, they do themselves more wrong then thee; nor will thy
fuming and fretting at them, convert, or bring them into a better temper. Why
should thou be afraid of Want, when thou do not see a Bird starve, or die
for want of Food, and can Want be grievous, when the Author and Captain of thy
Salvation was in want, and his followers were so too, and yet did live in
Heaven? Either thy Calling is honest, or dishonest; if dishonest, and an
inevitable occasion of sinning, away with it, and turn Ploughman, or Servant
rather, then live in it. If hohonest, do not involve thy self in too much
business, for that will certainly hinder thee from frequent Prayer and
Meditation: and looking after the concerns of thy Soul; and as for necessaries,
thy God will not suffer thee to want them.

Lift up thine Eyes, look upon this World. The greatest part of the Men thou
see, will certainly be Eternally miserable. Why should thou venture with
them? Do thou think that howling with them at last will give thee any
comfort? There is a prize put in thy hand; Why should thou slight it, and
lament thy contempt for ever? Neglect not the present time; Do not let this
opportunity slip. Thy God waits for thee. Come in, before the door be shut,
believe in good earnest, and nothing will seem difficult.


Christ. I am convinced, I yield, I have nothing to say against all this. Great
God! Help me. Draw me after thee, and I will run. Up, up my lazy, idle,
sleeping Soul! Open thine Eyes, put on Resolution, wash away thy filth, shake
off thy prison Garments; gird up thy Loins; make haste, run to God, break the
chains of Sin, and present thy Heart to the living God. Lift up thine Eyes.
Look into Heaven. Listen with thine Ears, view the Holy Angels, hearken to
their Hallelujah's; chase away thy darkness, cleanse thy self, become an humble
Spouse of the Lord Jesus! Feed thy self with his Beauty! Kiss him with the Lips
of Faith; make him thy Darling, receive him into thy bosom; Quench thy Thirst
with his Blood. Hold him fast. Do not let him go. Sing his Praises. Admire his
Love. Meet him by Repentance. Keep him by Holy Fervours. Honor his Name. Dare
to speak for him. Be not ashamed of him. Confess him before Men, and he will
confess thee before his Father, and his Holy Angels.


PRAYERS, AND DEVOTIONS To be used Before and after Receiving of the Holy
Sacrament OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
A Confession to be said by way of Preparation.
O Thou Great Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier of Men! When I reflect upon my
Life, how contrary to thy Holy, and wholesome I aws, how unlike the Lives of thy
Saints; How unworthy of thy Mercies, and Favors it has been; how can I
forbear blushing! How can I forbear prostrating my Self before Thee! How can I
forbear falling into the humblest postures, my Soul, and Body is capable of!
How have I abused thy Goodness! How have I affronted thy Charity! How have I
trespassed upon thy Patience! How have I resisted thy tender Calls! How have
thou waited for me while I have been stubborn! How have thou courted me while I
have been vain! How have thou carress'd me while I have been careless! How deep
ought my Contrition to be! How profound my Sorrow! How profuse my Tears! I have
mourned for a dead Corpse; I have wept for a deceased Relation; I have grieved
to see the Body of my Friend left without a Soul! Yet have not mourned for
God's departing from me, nor wept for the deadness of my Heart; nor grieved to
see my self deprived of thy Grace and Mercy!

O my Lord, I see my folly, I perceive I have gone astray, I am sensible I have
dishonored thee! How different do my Sins appear to me now, from what they did
before! They look more dismal, more dreadful, more bloody, then once they did!
Now I would mourn, now I would take on for them, now I would deplore them! Oh
touch this frozen Heart, that it may melt! O Jesu! Look upon these Eyes of
mine, that they may flow with Water! O Behold me from the Cross, that I may
weep bitterly! There is hopes, that if I mourn I shall be comforted; If I weep,
I shall laugh at last; If I grieve I shall rejoice. O my God, I long to hear
thy joyful voice; Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee! I long to
rejoice in thee! I long to be Blessed with the light of thy Countenance! But
the Sun will not shine out till after the Rain. O then water this Face of mine,
speak the Word, bid the Waters flow, bid penitential showers enrich this barren
ground, and I shall feel thy warmer beams, thy Love will refresh me, thy
Presence will revive me, and my Garments of Heaviness will be turned into
Garments of Praise, and Exultation. O my Jesus! Thou hangest naked on the
Cross, that I might be decked with thy purple Robes! Thou wast wounded that I
might be healed! O Heal me, and I shall be healed! Come dearest Physician, and
thy Servant shall be whole.

Behold Lord! Here comes a poor Prodigal quaking and trembling to thy Throne! I
come from a far Country, from the Land of Darkness, from the borders of the
burning Lake; from the frontiers of Hell. I come miserable and naked! I come
begging, that thou would put a Ring upon my Finger, and betroth me unto thy
Self in Righteousness, The Mercy is too big for me to ask, but not for thee to
grant. I have no merit, I can plead no desert. Here thou see nothing but
filthy Rags. O throw thy Mantle over me! I have heard, that thou love to
manifest thy greatest power in the greatest weakness, thy greatest strength, in
the greatest infirmity. I have heard thou love to spread thy skirts over
those that are destitute, and afflicted that are cast abroad, have no Eye to
pity them, and know not where to address themselves for relief. Thou have
promised to such to open Rivers for them in high places and Fountains in the
midst of Valleys! When the needy and thirsty seek for Water, thou the God of
Israel wilt not forsake them.

O my Lord! If Misery be a motive to Mercy, here thou see it in the highest
degree! What mighty, what mavelous things have thou done for me! Yet have I
run away from thee! What haste have I made to get out of thy sight! how afraid
have I been of serving thee! Thou have been my greatest friend, and I have used
thee like an enemy! How have I shunned thy Counsels, as if they had been big
with Death and Thunder! Ah foolish Creature! How have I forsaken thee, the
Fountain of living waters! How fond have I been of broken Cisterns! How
enamoured with muddy puddles! Ah My Father, how did thou pity me! How did
thou bewail my blindess! With what sorrowful Eyes did thou look upon my
wilfulness! Behold My Lord! I do return. I return, that I may look upon thee, I
return that thou may look upon me! I return, Oh do thou rejoice over me, Oh!
Let there be joy in the presence of thy Holy Angels over this sinner, who
repents! I am troubled, I am exceedingly troubled, that I have made no
answerable returns to thy Love; that thy Grace has been bestowed upon me in
vain; that thy Mercy has been thrown away on such a wretch: Oh the baseness!
Oh the ingratitude! Oh the disingenuity, that I have been guilty of! Thou have
been my greatest Benefactor! How freely, how lovingly, how heartily have thou
visited me! yet I have resisted thy Power, despised thy Wisdom, undervalued thy
Goodness! Thou would have torn down my strong holds of iniquity, and I would
not! Thou would have taught me my Duty to God and Man, and I refused it; Thou
would have made me Holy, as thou art Holy, and I scorned it. Ungrateful Worm!
Do I thus reward the Lord my God! Could I recompense such Mercies with such
Sins! Such Favors with such gross neglects! thy condescension with Pride, thy
Humiliation with Envy, thy Love with Anger; thy Bounty with slight and slovenly
performances; Thy Bowels with Disobedience; thy Charity with contempt of my
Neighbor; Thy Blessings with Revenge; Thy Benefits with averseness from Virtue
and Goodness; thy Munificence with Vanity; and the showers of thy Grace with
earthly-mindedness!

Ah! how are my sins multiplied! How like a heavy burden, are they become* too
heavy for me to bear! But Oh my God! Thy Mercy is over all thy Works; Thy Mercy
is greater then my Sins! My Sins have taken hold upon me! What shall I do? I am
a burden to my self! I am bowed down with the weight of my Transgressions!
Whether, O my Lord, should I go, but to thee, who have the words of Eternal
Life! Thou have pity on sinners, thou conversest with them, thou eatest with
them, Receive me Graciously, Love me Freely; Think upon thy Mercy, think upon
thy Blood, think upon thy Tears; and accept of me! I am surrounded with
dangers, encompassed with Enemies, encircled with Hellish Monsters, yet in the
midst of these pressures, I hear thee saying, Come to me all ye who are weary
and heavy laden. Shall I hide my self as Adam did in Paradise! Shall this word
fright me away? Shall I refuse to come when thou call in this still voice?
No, No, I will confess my Transgression, and thou will forgive the iniquity of
my Sin. I will harden my Heart no more; I will turn a deaf Ear to thee no more;
I will stand out no longer; I will resist thy Light no longer; I will grieve
thee no more, I will afflict and vex thy Holy Spirit no more.

O infinite Goodness! O wonderful Love! though with the Publican I dare not
lift up my Eyes to Heaven; yet with the humble Magdalen I will come behind thee
weeping, and wash thy Feet with my Tears, and kiss them. Oh let me hear the
blessed news of Pardon from thy Mouth! Thou came, Lord, thou came not to
call the Righteous, but Sinners to repentance; and of these I am chief! If thou will converse with Sinners, here is one that wants thy help, and that stands in
need of thy cure, full of Diseases, full of Sores, full of Weakness, full of
Errors, full of Infirmities, a prodigy of Frailty. Here Lord! here is work for
thy strong Hand, and for thy mighty Arm. In this Heart are Devils that must be
expelled by thy Power. Stretch forth thy Hand and save me. Here is an object to
exercise thy omnipotent hand upon. My Cure requires Miracles. It Is no ordinary
Virtue, that will set me to Rights again. Thou, Thou O Lord, must come, and
strike thy Hand over the sore place, and my Leprosy will be gone.

Thy Prophet cries by thy order, Return unto the Lord your God, for he is
Gracious and Merciful, slow to anger, and repents him of the evil! I believe
Lord! I believe; My Heart is wounded within me. I come, I come. Father, I have
sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy
Son; make me as one of thy hired Servants. But then I desire no other hire, no
other wages, but thy Self: Thou art my exceeding great reward.

Oh! How bitter a thing is it to forsake thee! What have I got by offending
thee! What have I gained by sinning against thee Nothing but Shame, and Horror,
and Trembling, and Confusion. Darkness has covered me, the shadow of Death
has fallen upon me! What fruit had I then in those things, whereof I am now
ashamed! My Soul has been divested of her innocence, her Joy, her Peace, her
Comfort, and her Satisfaction. And Oh my Jesus, did not thou stand my friend
now; Great Mediator, did not thou stand in the gap now, and plead for me; O
my Redeemer, Did not thou intercede for me; I must be prostituted, and
exposed to Eternal laughter and derision! Good Lord! How pitiful, how wretched,
how trivial, how impertinent, how inconsiderable was that pleasure, that
profit, that thing, for which I did did affront, and dishonor thee! When I
look upon thy Creatures, either above, or below; I wonder how they were able to
contain themselves, and not vindicate their Masters Honor, which they saw
abused by me; I wonder, they did not not fall upon me and crush me into
perdition, when they saw how bold, how presumptuous this Caitiff was!

O my Lord! For this my Soul shall mourn in secret; even for this that I have
not loved thee better, that I have not sought thee, more, that I have not
approached thee with greater veneration! Hence forward Lord if all the
Pleasures, all the Riches, all the Honors of this World, were concentred in
this sin, that formerly I lived in, it should be no temptation to me. I would
tear the Tyrant out of its seat. It should usurp thy place no more. I would
pull it out of its Throne, it should find no harbor in me. Thy Love should
constrain me to part with it. I will Crucify thee no more. I have trampled too
long upon thy Mercy. I will make light of it no more!

O my Jesus! Remember thy Agonies, remember thy Pain, remember thy Sufferings,
remember thy Death, and forget my Sins. Thy Servant David cried once, I have
sinned, and thou did presently take away his Sin. My sighing is not hid from
thee. O do not hide thy Face from me! Manasseh looked up to thee, and thou
had respect unto his Prayer. O give ear to my Prayer too, that goes not out
of feigned Lips. The Ninivites humbled themselves, and thou wast entreated. Oh
repent thy self of the evil, thou have said, thou would do unto me, and do it
not. Peter wept, and thou gave him a Gracious Look. I water my couch with my
tears; Oh smile upon me too, and say, I have redeemed thee, thou art mine!

I love thee O Lord, and would have every Creature love thee. I would have all
things that have breath praise the Lord. I would have every creature show forth
thy Glory! Thou have loved me from all Eternity! Was ever such Love heard of,
as thine was! To come from the Mansions of the Blessed, into a Valley of Tears,
to advance such a creature from Death to Life Eternal! Thou have made my Death
a harmless, nay a gainful thing. Thy Cross has sweetened all; there was Death
in the pot, but thou threwest in Meal, and did sweeten all. O blot out the
very footsteps of my Sins, and set me as a Seal upon thy Heart, so will I give
thee thanks in the great Congregation, my Lips shall praise thee.

O my Life! I would prefer thee above all thy Creatures! I would look upon all
these outward Comforts as a drop in the Bucket, and on Thee, as the Ocean! On
these, as the small dust in the Balance; on Thee, as the Rock of Ages! I would
love Thee with all my heart, I would love Thee more then my Self! O that my
whole Mind were united to Thee! O that I might know nothing save Jesus Christ,
and him Crucified! O that all the powers of my Soul might embrace Thee! O that
I might seek thy Glory with stronger desires, then Worldlings do their Wealth,
or the Covetous the increase of their In-comes! Oh! that I could adhere unto
Thee inseparably! O withdraw my Heart from every evil way. Incline my Heart to
all Goodness. Let not my Affections be henceforth corrupted with the love of
the Creature; Let me not be weary of loving Thee! Let nothing overcome my Love!
Let nothing damp it! Oh enable me to say, Who shall separate me from the love
of God! O draw my Soul with cords of Love, with this Love wound, and pierce my
Heart, and make it sick, that it may insatiably long for Thee! Oh! I would love
Thee without ceasing, love Thee without bounds, love Thee without measure! Oh
let my Soul melt with this Fire, and purge away that filth which does so easily
beset me! Take away from me all that does displease Thee; Refine in me all that
pleases Thee! Be Thou ever present with me! Live in me thou Fountain of Life!
and let me live in Thee, and let that Charity live in me, which suffers long,
and is kind, which envies not, which vaunteth not it self, which is not puffed
up, which does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily
provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth,
bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer for Faith.
O Thou, from whom every good and perfect Gift descends, who give to all Men
liberally, and upbraidest not; Thou call, Seek ye my Face; Thy Face, Lord,
will I seek! Thou have said, O Lord, Thy Mouth has spoken it, if ye had but
Faith as a grain of Mustardseed, ye should say unto this Mountain, Be thou
removed, and cast into the Sea, and it should obey you. O my Lord! I have Rocks
to be displaced, Mountains to be removed, vast loads to be freed from; Rocks of
Unbelief, Mountains of Sin, loads of Iniquity! Oh lend me thy helping Hand.
None can give relief, none can succor, none can do me any good, but thy self.
How dark, how dull, how doubtful is my Faith! sometimes it blazes, then it
disappears again, sometimes it is vigorous, then slacks, and grows remiss again.
I believe thee in Sunshine, and faint in a Storm; sometimes I get a sight of
thy Glory, then I lose it again. Oh how uneven is my Faith! When thy Candle
shines over my Head, and I wash my Feet in Butter, I believe, but where is my
Faith in the dark, when the Fig Tree does not blossom, when there is no Fruit
in the Vine, when the labor of the Olive does fail! Oh how it sinks at such
times, how weak it grows! Lord, I believe, help mine unbelief! O thou Sun of
Righteousness, thou bright Morning Star; Thou mighty Star of Jacob, shine upon
me, shine upon this dark Soul of mine, press in by thy piercing beams, scatter
the Clouds of my unbelief; Dispel those mists, as chaff is driven away by the
Wind, so drive them away, O thou Holy One of Israel.

I Believe, but my Faith does not rouse me from my Spiritual slumber; I
believe, but my Faith does not overcome difficulties; I believe, but my Faith
does not put me upon Self-denial; I believe, but my Faith does not engage me to
that cautiousness of offending thee, which is necessary to Salvation. I
believe, but my Faith does not make me laborious, does not make me strive, and
fight, and work, and enter in at the strait Gate; I do not believe, as if I
saw. My Faith is not the substance of things unseen. I do not represent that
future Glory to my mind in such lively Characters, as if it were present to my
sight. I seem to rejoice in thy Promises, but when I am to apply them, what
doubts, what scruples, what perplexities arise in my mind! I believe thou have
overcome Death, yet how do I tremble at its approaches! I believe thou art
present with me in affliction, yet how often do I lose thy Image! I believe my
dearest Lord, that thou came from Heaven to reveal to me thy Fathers Will,
yet I do not so readily obey it, as I would. I believe, but am too often
overcome by a Passion, too often by a Temptation, too often by the World!

O my Lord! Give me an active Faith, a working Faith, a vigorous Faith, a
lively Faith, an effectual Faith! A Faith which may oblige me to shake off all
dullness, all drousiness, all laziness, and which may make me awake to
Righteousness; Give me a Faith, that may surmount all hardships, may be afraid
of nothing, of no Bear, no Lion in the way; Give me a Faith which may make me
bold as a Lion, courageous in Danger, resolute in the greatest Trials, and
magnanimous under the greatest burdens; A Faith I want, which may make all
that is within me stoop to the yoke of Jesus, which may cross my Flesh and
Blood, cruicfy my vain Desires, and dash mine inordinate Affections. O give me
a Faith, which may make me tender of thy Glory, loath to do any thing that may
be offensive to thee, unwilling to displease thee, the Author of my Being; Give
me a Faith which may oblige me to labor in thy Vineyard, and work out my
salvation with fear and trembling; A Faith, that may look into Eternity, Survey
the Glorious Mansions prepared by the Son of God; live there, and converse
there, and draw Comforts and Consolations from that perfection of Glory; A
Faith which may live upon thy Promises, lay hold on them in despite of
opposition, and claim them as my Heritage for ever; A Faith, which may look
Death in the Face, defy its Power, support it self with Christ's victory, and
sing with Triumph over it; Oh Death! Where is thy sting? A Faith, which may
make Affliction easy, my Burden Light, and sweeten all my Troubles; A Faith,
which may purify my Heart, constrain me to Obedience, and compel me to a
cheerful running at thy Command, and Order; A Faith, which may control all my
Lusts, check my inordinate Desires, bear down all before it, set up the Lord
Jesus Sovereign in my Soul, and make every imagination subject to him, who must
Reign, till he has put all enemies under his Feet.

O Blessed Light, which enlightnest every Man that comes into the World! Direct
my steps, illuminate my Understanding, show me the way I must walk in, that no
Error may mislead me, no false Doctrine corrupt me, no Heresy deceive me, no
false Fire beguile me; stretch forth thy Hand, and hold thou up my Goings in
thy path, that I may get safe to my Journeys end. I am a Traveller and Pilgrim
here, go thou before me, and I Will follow thee; lead me through this barren
Wilderness, and leave me not till I enter into Canaan; It is not, Lord, of him
that Runs, nor of him that Wills, but of thee who show Mercy. As Flesh and
Blood could not have revealed these things unto me, so thou alone must enable
my Faith to quench all the fiery Darts of the Devil. Arise O God, and let thine
enemies be scattered.

O how am I beholding to thee! What Thanks, what Praises do I owe thee, that
thou have called me to the light of thy Gospel! That thou have discovered to me
those Errors, which Persons of other Religions in the world lie involved in!
That I have liberty to read thy Word, to peruse it, and to know the things
belonging to my Peace! Thou have not dealt so with other Persons, and as for
thy judgments, they have not known them. But what will this knowledge profit
me, if my practice be not suitable, or my Belief strong, and firm, and vigorous?
I tremble to think, how many thousands are like to perish for want of this
Faith! Ah! How few do believe in good earnest! How few believe with any lively
Affections! How few act, and live, as if they did believe! O most patient God,
pity, pity that vast multitude of Christian Unbelievers! See how Hell has
opened her Mouth to swallow them up! O thou that have redeemed them with thy
Blood! Why should the enemy run away with thy purchase! See how these poor
creatures wander like Sheep without a Shepherd! O Gather them! O seek them,
that thou may find them! Undeceive them, let them see how far they are from
the Kingdom of God! O my Lord, I believe, that thou art, and wilt be a rewarder
to them, that diligently seek thee! I believe, if any man will do thy Will, he
shall know of thy Doctrine, whether it be of God or no! I believe, that not the
least tittle of thy Word shall fail! O increase my Belief! Let not my Faith
rest upon thy Doctrine only, but let it have regard to all thy Laws! O let me
so believe an approaching Eternity, as to be concerned at the Thoughts of of
it! O let me not only talk of it, but let my Belief rouse my Affections from
their slumber.

O my Jesus! I believe thou wast crucified for my sins! How then should I live
in sin! Assure me, that if I do, I do but mock thee! How can I believe my sin
odious, while I embrace and cherish it! How can I believe, it killed thee,
while I make much of it! How can I believe it drew Sweats of Blood from thee,
while I water it, and keep it warm! Oh! I am weary of this vain Belief! Rid me
of it! Deliver me from it! Let all my neighbors see, that I believe these
things indeed! Let the World see by my Conversation, that these things work
upon me! Oh! Let me not only believe these great things, but live them over!
Come forth my dearest Lord, and meet me! No Man can come to thee, but he whom
thou drawest to thee! Oh let me touch but the hem of thy Garment, and I shall
recover! Let me so Believe in thee, that it may appear, thou live in me, that
I may at last obtain the end of my Faith, even the Salvation of my Soul; Great
Author, and Finisher of my Faith, hear me for thy Mercies sake, Amen.

A Prayer for a lively Hope.
O Thou in whom my Fathers hoped! They hoped in thee, and thou did deliver
them; Thou art all Goodness, all Sweetness, all Clemency; Who would not hope in
thee! Thy Mercies bid me hope, Thy Promises bid me hope, and all thy
Revelations bid me hope! O thou Hope of Israel! Here I am, Here I lie prostrate
before thy Face; Here my Soul intends to breath out her desires! O my Lord!
When will that happy day come, that Glorious day which shall have no Night, no
Clouds, no Darkness! Thou have spoke of it, thy Prophets have seen Visions of
it; Thy Apostles have Declared it; One was wrapped up above the Clouds to take a
view of it. The Son that came out of thy bosom has assured me of it. It is the
bright day, when I shall enter inter into thy Joy, be made a Coheir with
Christ; be clothed in White, shine as the Stars, look upon thee and not be
ashamed! Thou have promised it, and shall not I hope for it? Oh my Lord, that
see me, that art present with me, and know my Heart, my Sighs, my Desires,
thou know I hope for it! Oh let this Hope be lively, let it be a Hope which
may purify me, even as God is pure. Nay my very flesh shall rest in Hope, and
thou will not suffer my Body to see everlasting corruption; Thou will raise me
from the Dust at last; All my Bones shall say, Lord, Who is like unto thee! I
know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the
Earth; and though after my Skin, Worms destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh shall
I see God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine Eyes shall behold, and not
another; and having this Hope, O assist me, O persuade me, O prompt me to
cleanse my self from all filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, and to perfect
Holiness in the fear of God

Deck my Soul with Humility with Patience, with Constancy, that no Rods, no
Stripes, no Prison, no Torment, no Shipwreck, no perils of Waters, no perils of
Robbers, no perils among my own Contrymen, no perils among Heathens, no
perils in the City, no perils in the Wilderness, no perils in the Sea, no
perils among false Brethren, no weariness, no painfulness, no Watchings, no
Hunger, no Thirst, no Cold, no Nakedness, no Weakness, no Infirmity, no Honor,
or Dishonor, no good Report, or evil Report may discourage me from trusting in
thee! Though the Lord should kill me, yet let me hope in him. If in this Life
only I have Hope in Christ, I am of all Men most miserable. The Lord is my
Light and my Salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my Life,
of whom shall I be afraid? Though an Host should encamp against me, my heart
shall not fear, though War should rise against me, in this will I be confident,
for in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his Pavilion, in the secret of
his Tabernacle he shall hide me, he shall set me up upon a Rock. Thou art he
that took me out of the Womb, thou did make me Hope, when I was upon my
Mothers Breasts; O let it not be in the power of Men, or Devils, to shake this
Hope; Let it be my Anchor, sure, and steadfast, which no Waves no Billows, no
Storms, no Tempests can move.

Whatever evils befall me, let me think they come from a Fathers Hand. Let no
prosperity, no Sunshine, no Calmness, no smiling Fortune subvert this Hope in
my Soul. Let me look upon all these outward Comforts, as Vanity, Vanity of
Vanities, which can give no Ease, no Comfort, no satisfaction to a Soul of a
Spiritual Appetite. Let me thirst after nothing so much, as after thy Love, as
after Spiritual Blessings, as after the hidden Manna, as after the white Stone
which no man knows, save he, who receives it*

I will not hope in any creature, I will arise, and depart, for here is not my
rest. Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me?
Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
Countenance, and my God. My Soul, wait thou only upon God, for my expectation
is from him; He any is my Rock, and my Salvation, he is my Defense, I shall not
be moved. In God is my Salvation, and my Glory, the Rock of my Strength, and my
Refuge is in God. Trust in him at all times, ye People, pour out your Hearts
before him. Thou have been a shelter for me, and a strong Tower from the Enemy.
From the end of the Earth will I cry unto thee, when my Heart is overwhelmed! O
my God, my Goodness extends not to thee; The Lord is the portion of my
Inheritance, and of my Cup, thou maintainest my Lot. Who was ever confounded
that trusted in thee? Who was ever forsaken that hoped in thee? Who was ever
despised, that in good earnest called upon thee? All Hail my dearest Lord, my
Hope, I love thee, I embrace thee, I renounce all those lesser Goods, which are
in the World, that I may make thee my highest, and my chiefest Good.

It Is true, Lord, I am a sinner, and have been a very ungrateful wretch; The
least of thy Mercies is more then I have deserved, My very Righteousnesses have
been as filthy Rags, but I will not trust in my Bow, neither is it my Sword
that shall save me, but thy Mercy, O Lord, thy Mercy, and the palms of thy
Hands, on which thou have engraven my Name, shall be my refuge. I have no
merits, no deserts to trust to; I can claim nothing as my Right; all I am, and
all I have is thy Charity; What Goodness there is in me, is entirely owing to
thy Grace, and Compassion; With this thou crownest me, with this thou enrichest
me, with this thou anointest my Head, that I may work in thy Vineyard, and
receive the Penny at night; I confide not in my Works, I depend not upon my
Industry, I rest not in my own Labors, but in thy Blood, in thy Sweat, in thy
good pleasure, O Glorious Son of God! Cursed is the Man, that trusts in Man,
and makes Flesh his Arm. I will hope in thy Mercy, my Heart shall rejoice in
thy Salvation. Evening and Morning, and at Noon will I Pray, and thou will hear
my voice. Thou have said, Ask, and ye shall have, Seek, and ye shall find,
Knock, and it shall be opened to you; Who would not Hope after this? Who would
not rely upon thee after such a Promise! O let me find Grace in the sight of my
Lord! I desire nothing else; this is the height of my wishes; this is it, which
engrosses the faculties of my Soul. Thy Grace is the Jewel I want, the Pearl I
stand in need of, the Crown my Soul longs for. Thou art my witness O Lord, That
my Heart thinks so; Thou have Treasures of Mercy, Thy Stores are large, and
inexhaustible! Thou bidst me come, and buy without Money, and without price,
and my Soul shall live; Thou do promise me more then Kings can promise, and
no wonder, for thou art greater, and richer, then all the Kings of the Earth.
Thou give Rest to the weary Soul, and Strength to the Faint; Therefore mine
Eyes shall be toward thee! O let thine Eyes be open, and thine Ears attent unto
the Prayer of thy Servant! Do thou choose, and sanctify this House, that thy
Name may be there forever! and let thine Eyes, and thy Heart be here
perpetually.

Thy liberality and bounty is immense, and infinite! I cannot but hope in thee!
Oh my unbelieving Heart! Could thou but trust him more, what great things
would thou see! His Mercy is upon thee according, as thou hopest in him. The
more thou hopest, the greater is his Mercy!

O my Lord! What stupendous Gifts, do thou present me with! What amazing
Offers do thou make to my Soul! Thou art not only willing to impart thy
Graces to me, but in thy Supper give me thy Self! and here thou offerest to
carry me in thy Arms, to be my nursing Father, and to be Food to my hungry
Soul. May it be unto me according to thy Word! Come Lord! Lodge thou in my
Soul, make it thy dwelling place; anoint it with the Oil of Mercy; I will go,
and take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. Thy loving
kindness shall be before mine Eyes, and I will walk in thy Truth; I will not
sit with vain Persons, neither will I go in with the Dissemblers; I will wash
mine Hands in innocence, so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord! That I may
publish with the voice of Thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous works: my
Heart shall be inditing a good Matter, and I will speak of things touching the
King of Saints. Into thy Hands I commit my Spirit, thou have redeemed it O Lord
God of Truth! O make thy Face to shine upon thy Servant, and O let me Hope unto
the end, for the Grace that is to be brought unto me, at the Revelation of
Jesus Christ, A men.

A Prayer for Love and Charity.
O Thou who have so loved the World, as to give thine only Son, to the end,
that all that Believe in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life!
What shall I do to love thee! What shall I do to be united to thee! What shall
I do to get a place in thy Bosom! If I love thee not, I am undone; If thou do
not look exceeding lovely in mine Eyes, I am lost; If my Affections do not fix
upon thee, I perish, I cannot be happy without loving thee! My Soul is
destitute of her proper Good, if thou be not the object of my delight! I am
perfectly miserable, if thou be not the Center of my Spirit. Love is the
greatest Gist that is given to poor creatures. Love enriches their Souls; Love
makes their Faces shine; Love must brighten their Souls, and make them appear
lovely in the Eyes of God! O my Lord! Thou have given me faculties to love
thee, Understanding to contemplate thy Beauty and Mercy, and Perfection, memory
to retain the lively apprehensions of thy Glory, and a Will to prompt my whole
Man into suitable Actions! The more I love thee, the Holier I am! The more I
love thee, the more I am with thee! for where I love, there is my Soul! where
my Affections are, there is my Spirit: where my Treasure is, there will my
Heart be also Who would look upon a Dunghill that can view a Glorious Palace!
Who would hear the screeches of Owls, and Night-Ravens, that can hear melodious
Music! And why should I be taken with the pomp and glory of the World, which
in comparison of thee is a mere Dunghill; or with the caresses and praises of
mortal Men, which are perfect howlings compared with the harmony, thy Love does
make! Shall I love Honor, and not love thee, who art the Fountain of it! Shall
I love Pleasure, and not love thee, in whose Presence there is fullness of Joy!
Who can be likened unto thee, O Lord! And if nothing can be likened unto thee,
I must love nothing like thee! And if I justly love that which is good, I must
necessarily love thee more then all things in this world, for thou art
infinitely better, then all things in this world! There is nothing so good,
nothing so precious, nothing so rich, nothing so amiable as thou art!

O my Jesus! How great was thy condescension! Thou knew I could love nothing
so well, as what was like me, and in compliance with my temper (for thou
knew my frame) thou becamest like me indeed: The Immortal became Mortal; The
Eternal became an Infant. If therefore I love Man, who is naturally like me,
how much more am I bound to love thee, who wroughst a miracle to become Man,
that thou might be like me! Love desires the presence of its delightful
object, and can any thing be more present then thou art? Thou art in me, and
with me, and without me, thou art present in all places, at all times, in all
companies; thou art willing to dwell in me, and to make thine abode in me; Thou
art content never to depart from me. Thou art strangely bountiful, who would
not love thee? Who ever gave greater or larger Gifts, either more in number, or
more in quantity, or longer for duration, then thy liberal Hand! from thee
every good and perfect Gift comes down; whatever Gifts I receive from thy
Creatures, thou sendest them: The Creatures are but the Channels, or the Pipes,
through which they are conveyed, and shall not I love the Fountain more then
the Channel, the Spring more then the Pipe, through which the water runs, and
the great Giver more then the Messengers that carry it? Thou workest in all,
thou inclinest the Hearts of the Bountiful; Thou openest their Hands, thou
turnest their Hearts into Charity; Thou seasonest their Minds with Thoughts of
me, and thou bendest their Wills to do me good! And shall not I look up from
the Creature to the Creator, and give him my dearest Love!

I will love thee, O Lord! I must love thee, for thou art sweet beyond
comparison, amiable without a parallel, lovely to a miracle! Thou art the true
Father of my Soul, thou providest for me, thou take care of me, thou art
exceeding tender of me, thou bear me on thy hands, on thy wings thou
carriest me, as the Eagle does her young; nay, thou offerest me to be thy
Brother, thy Sister, and thy Mother, for he that does thy Will, shall be all
this in thy esteem; He shall be as dear to thee, as these Relations are to
mortal Men! Thou art my Friend indeed! O my Lord, whether does thy Love carry
thee! Thou layest aside thy Glorious Titles, and magnificent Names, and
becomest my Friend! and never was a truer Friend then thou art, and have been
to me! No vicissitude has changed thee, no revolution has altered thee, no
accident has estranged thy Heart from me, my Unworthiness does not turn away
thy Affections from me! Though thou dwelle^^ on high, yet thou humblest thy
self to behold the ways of the Children of Men! My Sores do not make thee loath
me, my Infirmities do not move thee to cast me away, my Vileness does not tempt
thee to despise me! Thou love at all times, if I am wounded, thou bindest up
my wounds; if I am broken, thou healest me, if I am grieved, thou refreshest
me, if I am in danger thou deliverest me, if under pain, thou give me ease,
if under trouble, thou comfortest me; O my Jesus! Thou art gone up to thy
Father, and to my Father, and have made us Friends! Thou have reconciled him to
my Soul! Thou have loved me before the foundation of the world! How often have
thou in Mercy looked upon me! How often have thou pitied me! I was unworthy of
thy compassion, yet seeing me lie in my Blood, thou said Live, in thy Blood
Live.

What shall I say unto thee, O thou great preserver of Men? No Words, no
Language will reach thy Love, or give a tolerable description of it; yet still
this increases my obligations to love thee! And what a mercy is it that thou will give me leave to love thee! That this Great, this Glorious, this Immense,
this Incomprehensible God will vouchsafe to be loved by a Worm; What a favor
is it! Prize it, O my Soul! and think thou hear every Creature, that is
beneficial to thee, calling upon thee to love him! The Sun that shines upon
thee, calls to thee, I give thee light, that thou may admire the Father of
Light; so does the Moon, so do the Stars, so do all those things, whereby thou
art fed, maintained, clothed, and preserved in Health, these all call, We
serve thee, that thou may serve thy God, and do good to thee, that thou may
love him, whose Hand has placed us in these stations. O my God! Shall I have
such monitors to love thee, and be deaf to the Call! How will all these rise in
judgment against me one day, if I love thee not! How justly do I fall a
Sacrifice to thy wrath, if under such exhortations I despise thy Love!

How many Souls have perished, and I am yet alive! How many have been struck
dead in their Sins, and I am yet called to pentance! How many do yet walk in
darkness, and I have the honor to see thy mavelous Light! Thou have dealt
more kindly by me, then thou have done by others! O how am I bound to love
thee! I see the odiousness of that sin, which others dote on! I see the
deformity of those Vices, which others wallow in! I see the Beauty of that
Virtue, which others scorn! I see the charms of that Grace, which others laugh
at! I taste of those Comforts, which others continue ignorant of! I see the
reasonableness of thy Precepts, which others count an intolerable yoke! I have
some sense of another world, while thousands live, as if there were none! I see
the necessity of Holiness, while others make a mock of Sin! What motives are
these to love thee! Shall I be afraid, or ashamed after all this, to love thee!
Every Sense I have, bids me love thee! I cannot smell to any thing, but I smell
the fragrancy of thy Love. I cannot taste any thing, but I must taste how
Sweet, and how Gracious thou art! I cannot look upon any thing, but I must see
thy Goodness! The oil of thy Love swims upon every Creature, I touch or feel!
That Soul deserves to dye, that does not love thee! In loving thee, I live! Thy
Love is better then Life! My days will have an end, my Life ere long will pass
from me! My Riches, my Glory, my Wealth, my Health, my Liberty, my Ease, my
Friends, my Acquaintance, they all will ere long expire; but if I love thee,
that will remain with me to Eternity! My love to thee makes me thine, and makes
thee mine. By loving thee, I show that I am not mine own: Thou have made me for
thy self, and if I am not thine, I cannot be mine own; for at that instant that
I would be mine own, I cease to be thine! Thou art to me all that heart can
wish, or reason can desire! Thou art my Light, my Pillow, my Rest, my Sun, my
Meat, my Drink, my Glory, my Joy; Thou have given me thy Son, and in giving
him, have given me more then Ten thousand worlds! And if this be not enough,
thou art ready to give me more; Show me thy Love, and it suffices me. Thou have
wounded me with thy Love! I will follow thee! O let me do thy Will; Let me do
that which thou will, and not what I will. Despise me not, forsake me not; O do
not go far from me! Draw me after thee, and I shall run! Woe is me, that I must
dwell in Mesheck, and have my habitation in the Tents of Kedar. O leave me not
to my self. I consecrate both my Soul, and Body, to thee; employ them, O Lord,
as it shall please thee best!

O forget me not, and let me never forget thee; let me rather die a thousand
deaths, then live without thee! O let me love thee so, that I may long to draw
others to thy Love! Let me be grieved when Men do not keep thy Law. Let it go
to my Heart to see thee dishonored and affronted! Thou threatnest me with
Eternal Flames, if the flames of thy Love cannot warm me now. I am not worthy
to love thee, yet thou art most worthy to be loved by me! O let me sigh, let me
pant, let me breath after thee! O my Life, let me live to thee! O my Glory, let
me be content to die for thee! O my refuge, let me ever run to thee! O thou
Eternal Love, let me be always mindful of thee! Let me embrace thee, let me
resolve not to let thee go, till thou have brought me to that place, where I
shall be for ever united to thee!

Withdraw mine heart from the creature! why should it go astray from thee! I am
sensible what hurt my love to the creature has done me! It has alienated my
Heart from thee! it has made thy Word a savor of death unto death to me! It
has rendered thy promises insipid to me! It has made me slight thy Service! It
has made thy ways nauseous, and irksom to me! It has made thy Laws tedious to
me! It has made me forget the Life, I am to live for ever. It has made me
weary of thy Love, backward to Self-denial, made me ashamed of Christ, cooled
my Zeal, damped my Religious desires; and shall I harbor the viper in my bosom
any more! O throw this enemy out of my Soul. Dispossess it of its habitation,
expel it by thy power, make it vanish by thy Presence! I beg not Grace to hate
any thing that thou have made, but thy assistance, that I may love the Creature
less then Thee: I would not have this love of the creature engross my Soul, I
would not have it usurp Authority in my Heart. I would not have it take place
of my love to thy sweet Self! I would not have it engross my Affections! I
would have it subordinate to thy love. I would have it to be a servant to my
love to thee! I would not have it rule in me. I would not have it justle out
thy Love!

I know, my dearest Lord! I must love my neighbor too. I cannot love thee,
without I love him with unfeigned Love! I lie, if I say I love thee, whom I
have not seen, when I love not my Brother, whom I see, but I would not love Man
better then thee! I would not obey him more then thee! I would not comply with
him, to displease thee! I would not prefer his smiles or frowns before thy
Favor, or thy Indignation; I would love him for thee, and in thee; and O thou
that have loved me so as to die for me, Grant me that Charity, which is a
necessary effect of my love to thee!

Thou have loved my neighbor, as well as my self! My Jesus! Thou have died for
him, as well as for my self! Though I must stand amazed at the particular Mercy
thou have shown to me, yet the light of thy favor has shined upon my
Fellow Christians too! O let me love them with a pure heart fervently! Hereby
shall all Men know, that we are thy Disciples if we love one another! O my
Lord! I am resolved to be thy Disciple, and therefore will not only love those
that love me, but even those that hate me! O make me tenderhearted, and
compassionate to my neighbor! Make me ready to forgive, ready to bear with his
Infirmities, ready to relieve him, ready to assist him, ready to succor him: O
let all clamor, and malice, and hatred, and evil-speaking, and censoriousness
be put away from me! Rid me of all guile and hypocrisy, and dishonesty! Let it
be known by my meek, and humble, and charitable temper, that the same mind is
in me, which was also in Christ Jesus! In vain do I call my self thy Follower,
if I tread not in thy steps, or do not render good for evil, and show all
meekness unto all men.

When I am reviled, let me not revile again! Let there not be any root of
bitterness in me! Banish from me base suspicion! Teach me to put a favorable
construction on other means actions, and to overcome Evil with Good. Mortify in
me, the itch of contradiction! Make me affable, courteous, kind, gentle, and
let no provocation sour that disposition in me! Make me patient, and
long-suffering, peaceable, and easy to be entreated; Give me a temper as may
make me rejoice in the prosperity of others! Let all Pride, and Envy die in me!
Let me delight in works of Mercy, in feeding the Hungry, giving Drink to the
Thirsty, clothing the Naked, visiting the Sick, comforting the Prisoners,
counselling the Weak, supporting the Feeble, directing the Erroneous, reproving
the Unwary, guiding the Blind, using hospitality to Strangers.

Make me circumspect in my Speeches, that I offend not with my Tongue! Give me
presence of Mind upon all occasions, that I may not speak, or act rashly to my
neighbors prejudice! O let thy Love be always before me, that I may have
compassion on my fellow servants! O let thy Blood supple my Heart, that it may
melt at the sight of its wants, and necessities! O let that Word sound always
in mine Ears, That Though I speak with the Tongue of Angels, and have no
Charity, it profits me nothing! I shall see thy Charity in the Sacrament of thy
Supper! I shall see what thou did for me, and all the world! I shall see what
inconveniences thou did endure to procure our happiness! I shall see how
thou did deny thy self for our sakes. I shall see how thou did not count
thine own Life dear to save ours! I shall see how gentle thou wast to thy
enemies, how thou pray'dst for them that persecuted thee; how thou did bless
them that did curse thee! I shall see what pains thou tookest, what anguish
thou enduredst to snatch us from damnation.

Oh let that charity prevail with me! O let that Goodness produce bowels of
Mercy in me, that as much as in me lies, I may keep the unity of the Spirit in
the bound of Peace! Make me willing to decede from mine own Right, for Concords
sake! O root out that base selfishness which makes me so careless of my
neighbors Good. O thou Eternal Truth, thou have promised to write thy Laws in
my Heart! O write this Law of Love there with thine own Blood, and make the
Characters so lasting, that nothing may blot them out. O let me love my self
less, that I may love thee and my neighbor more! O let the fire of thy Love
put out the impure fire of my Lusts, and Corruptions! O let that Fire purify my
Soul from those inordinate passions, and desires, which too often endanger it.
Thou art the God that answerest by Fire. Let me feel thy Fire, and the force of
it. Let it go through my Soul, and scatter heat through every part, that I may
be transformed, and changed into Love; Let me love thee vehemently, ardently,
superlatively, constantly, and my Neighbor chastely, modestly, purely,
sincerely, and inviolably. Whatever thou deniest me, deny me not this Love;
Remember thy Word unto thy Servant, in which thou have caused me to hope; Thou
have said I will give unto him that is a Thirst, of the water of Life freely. O
give me this Love, else I faint. O spare me a little that I may recover
strength, before I go hence and be seen no more. O thou spirit of Love, blow
upon me, and these dry bones shall live. O Jesu! Come and live in me, and if
thou, who art Love and Charity it self, live in me, I shall love all that thou
would have me love, and be a monument of thy Love, and share in thy
everlasting Love, Amen. Let the King of Heaven hear when I call.

A Prayer for imitation of the Holy Life, and example of Jesus.
O Thou, who art the way, the Truth, and the Life! I know thee who thou art,
the Son of the living God! who shall lead me into Edom! who shall bring me into
the strong City, into that City, which has foundations, whose Builder and
Maker is God. wilt not thou, O Lord, Strong, and Mighty! Hear O my Soul! Thy
Redeemer calls; If any man serve me, let him follow me, and where I am, there
shall also my servant be. O my Lord! I had need of a guide in this age, when
the world lies in wickedness! how many ways to ruin do I see! How many Nets do
I see spread for me! what a snare are even these outward Comforts! How do they
entice, and draw the heart away! O Father of Mercy! How many thousands do I see
beguiled by the Riches and Pleasures of this Life! How insensible do they grow
of that life, they are to live for ever! How forgetful of God! How enamoured
with the Gauds and Glories of this World! How does the beauty of their Souls
decay, and wither away! And one teaches the other to go to Hell! O my God! what
shall I do among so many enemies! What shall I do in all this darkness! What
shall I do among all these Precipices! Without thy light, I must needs be lost!
Rise, rise thou glorious morning Star! that I may be able to see my way! Thou
art the light of the World! He that follows Thee, cannot walk in darkness! Why
should I be afraid of going astray? Thou art my way How can I be deceived! Thou
art Goodness it self! How can I mistrust Thee, when thou have spilt thy Blood
for me! Though naturally thou dwell in a light inaccessible, yet of
invisible thou becamest visible, on purpose that I might follow, not the Father
of Lies, not Lucifer, not that Enemy who transforms himself into an Angel of
Light, but Thee in whom all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are. Great
Physician of Souls! thou came down to prescribe me physic, and that I might
not be afraid to take it, did take it before me, and of God becamest Man,
that I might imitate Thee in the Holiness of thy Humane Nature!

This is it, O my Lord, that my Soul desires, even to set Thee before mine
Eyes, to represent Thee in lively colors before my Mind, and to conform to thy
great example! O my Jesus! thy Spirit I want, which may change me into thy
Image from Glory to Glory, from one degree of Brightness to another, and enable
me to comprehend with all Saints, what is the depth and breadth, and height, and
length of the Love of God, and may be filled with the fullness of God!

O my God! My Soul longs to say with thy Apostle, I live, yet not I, but Christ
lives in me. Once thou did create me, after thy Image, but I defaced it,
those curious lines I darknen'd, and dashed, yet, thou have given me hopes to
recover that Jewel, and O my Lord! do thou place it in its Throne again; How do
I long to have my Mind renewed, and my Soul transformed, that I may mind the
things of the Spirit with sincerity and earnestness! Who but a Fool would not
tread in thy steps, my dearest Lord! yet such a Fool, such a Sot, such a Beast
I have been! I have seen Thee lighting me to Heaven, and yet have loved
Darkness better than Light! O thou Eternal Wisdom! I hate this Folly! I abhor
this Stupidity! I will follow the Lamb whether soever he goes. Thy Apostles
followed Thee, why should not I? whole Armies of Primitive Believers followed
thee! Why should not I? why should I become behind them? why should I have a
less esteem for thee than they had?

My very Name obliges me to follow Thee! What am I a Christian for, if I do not
imitate Thee! O let me not blaspheme that worthy Name whereby I am called! I
blaspheme it if by my vain conversation I give thine Enemies occasion to speak
ill of thy Religion. Do I call my self by thy Name, and am loath to tread in
thy steps! My Heart is stubborn! My Will perverse! O do thou bow it! make me
ready, make me willing, make me expedite for this Work. Thou tookest up thy
Cross, Oh let me not dream of Beds of Roses! Thou wast Subject to thy Parents,
Oh make me submissive to my Superious! Thou did resist Temptations, O let me
not be overcome by them! Thou did despise the World, Oh let me not be
enamoured with it! Thou wentest about doing good, O let me not be backward to
works of Charity! Thou did deny thy self, O let me not indulge my vain
desires. Thou did work while the day did last; Oh let me not harden my Heart
in this my day! Thou wast humble; Oh let the same humility take root in my
Soul! Thou wast meek, Oh let this meekness be the rule of all my actions! Thou
did not aim at Vainglory; Oh let no such pitiful end defile my Soul! Thou
did bear with the weak; Oh let me be tenderhearted, and gentle too! Thou
did patiently endure injuries; Oh let me not fret and murmr under them!
Thou wast faithful in all thy Fathers House; Oh let me be so in the duties of
my Calling, and Relations! Thou did receive, and embrace the penitent; Oh let
me rejoice over those who are sorry for their faults! Thou did encourage
Goodness, and Holy Inclinations; Oh let me cherish them, wheresoever I find
them! Thou did do thy Fathers Will; Oh let me not pretend impediments! Thou
did good for evil; Oh let me not recompense Sin with Sin! A sense of Gods
Goodness was Meat and Drink to thee; Oh let it be my Diet too! Thou wast a
pattern of Gravity; Oh let me not be vain and foolish in my Conversation! Thou
did spend thy self for the good of Mankind; Oh let me not indulge my Ease too
much! Thou did entirely resign thy self to thy Fathers pleasure, under the
severest Trials; Oh teach me this Art of Self-resignation too! Thou wast
zealous for the House of God; Oh let not Luke-warmness spoil my Soul! Thou wast
not taken with the Pomp and Glory of the World; Oh let me not be gulled with
these empty shows! The frowns and contempt of Men could not make thee weary of
being strictly conscientious; Oh let not these pitiful things make me ashamed
of thee, and thy Gospel!

O my Jesus! Thy Kingdom must suffer violence; and whoever enters there, must
force his way through all impediments; and what if I offer violence to my Lusts
and Passions for a time, How sweet will it be to lie encircled in thy Arms one
day, and to hear thee say, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you. Thou do promise me, that if I will fight for thee, thou will give me to eat of the Tree of Life, and to sit down with thee in thy
Kingdom, at thy Table, and to be a King, and a Priest for ever! Do I believe
this, and scruple fighting the good fight. Do I believe this and am I afraid of
the worlds frowns? Do I believe this and am I ashamed of the severities, thou
call me to? Why should I mistrust thee, when I see thee use the same
mortifications thou biddest me choose! If a Soldier see his King use the same
Pains, Habit, and hard fare, which the meanest man in the Army uses, what
courage does it infuse into him to endure hardship, and other difficulties that
may attend the various enterprises he is engaged in!

O my Lord! That very contempt of the World, that Meekness and Humility, that
severity of Life, that aversion from sensual Pleasures, that enmity to Sin,
that hatred of Vanity, that indignation against brutish Delights, that
Sincerity, that Simplicity thou requirest of me, thou did observe, and
practice, and perform thy self, so that thou layst the same burden on my
Shoulders, that lay on thine; and if I die with thee, I shall live with thee
too; if I suffer with thee, I shall reign with thee.

Oh then I will not tarry! I will make haste and conform to thine example! I
shall not fare worse, then my King and Master did; and as I have born the Image
of the Earthy, so I shall bear the Image of the Heavenly too. I will walk as my
Jesus walked! O my Lord! Make me Holy, as thou art Holy, Perfect as my Father,
which is in Heaven is Perfect. O my Lord, there is no other way to Glory, but
by thee! Thou being exceeding rich, becamest poor to enrich my Soul! Thou
came not to do thine own Will, but the Will of him that sent thee! Put thine
Arms under me; and I will not do mine own Will. I will follow thee through Fire
and Water; I will follow thee through Briars and Thorns, through good Report
and evil Report.

O chase away all slavish fear from my Soul! Let me not be afraid of
difficulties. What can be difficult, where thou art both the guide, and the
encourager? Thou can not deceive me. Thou can not delude me. It must be so
as thou have said. All things are possible to him that believes. I Will choose
some hardship here, so I may rest in thy bosom hereafter. I Will be content to
pass through a dirty way for some time, that I may lie down in the green
pastures of thy Mercy for ever. The sight of thy Cross in the Holy Sacrament
shall be my motive. I Will draw Arguments from that Remembrance of thy death, to
die to the world. I will travel with thee, I will sail through the boisterous
Sea of this Life with thee. And O my Jesus, let me arrive safe at last in the
Everlasting Harbor, Amen, Amen.

A Thanksgiving after Receiving of the Lords Supper to be said, either at
Church, or at home.
ANd now, what Reward shall I render unto Thee, O Holy Blessed, and
incomprehensible Trinity, for all the benefits, I have received at thy hands
this day! Awake up my Glory! Awake my outward, and inward Man! I will Sing, and
give praise! Whence is it, that so poor a wretch as I am, is crowned with all
this Mercy and loving Kindness! O my Soul, thou have been watered this day with
the streams that flow from the Paradise of God! I that was worthy of Gods
hatred, how have I this day been advanced! What great things has God done for
me! What Honor has he laid upon me! What Majesty, What Glory has he
conferred upon me!

I feel the Fire of God within me! My Heart grows hot within me! I will Sing,
and give Praise! Who would not praise thee, that has seen thy goings in the
Sanctuary, as I have seen them this day! Holy Father, thou have this day
embraced me! Holy Jesus thou have this day poured out Blessings upon me! Holy
Spirit, thou have this day manifested thy self unto me; Holy, Holy, Holy Lord
God of Hosts! Thou have humbled thy self this day to a dead Dog! O how often
have I returned to the vomit! How often have I gone a whoring from thee! Yet
behold, the Lord instead of the Bread of affliction, has given me the Bread,
which came down from Heaven; instead of the cup of Trembling, has given me the
cup of Salvation! I will remember thy Name, O Lord! I will speak of thy
wondrous works.

O my Lord! I see thy hand is not shortened, neither is thy strength abated!
Thou that had mercy on the vilest sinners formerly, extendest thy goodness to
such miserable creatures still! I have drawn Water this day from the Well of
Salvation, even from thy wounds, O crucified Redeemer! Thou have looked upon
this Prodigal this day; thou have run, and fallen on my Neck, and kissed my
polluted Soul. Oh Honor! Oh Dignity! Oh Compassion! Oh Charity! Oh Love! Oh
Mercy! Oh Goodness! which the Redeemed of the Lord must speak of! Even they
whom he has Redeemed from the hand of the Enemy, and gathered them out of the
Lands from the East, and from the West, from the North, and from the South;
they wandered in the wilderness, in a solitary way, they found no City to dwell
in, Hungry and Thirsty, their Soul fainted in them; then they cried unto the
Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them out of their distresses, and he
led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a City of Habitation! O
that Men would praise the Lord for his Goodness, and for his wonderful Works to
the Children of Men!

Open to me the Gates of Righteousness, I will go into them, and I will praise
the Lord. This is the Gate of the Lord, into which the Righteous shall enter, I
will praise Thee for thou have heard me, and art become my Salvation. The Stone
which the Builders refused is become the head Stone of the Corner! This is the
Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. If I forget Thee O my Jesus! let
my Tongue cleave to the roof of my Mouth! Thou have regarded my Tears, thou
have taken notice of my Supplication! Thou have given me my Hearts desire, thou
have not withheld from me the requests of my Lips. Thou have given me leave to
come to thine Altar this day, and to lift up mine hands toward thy Holy
Oracle! Thou have fed my Soul this day with Royal Dainties, with Peace and
Pardon, with a right to thy Promises, and offers of Eternal Life, with
assistances of thy Holy Spirit, and the Riches of Grace and Mercy. This is the
Food, which the Holy Bread and Wine have represented to me this Day, and with
this Food thou have blessed my Soul. In this Food will I glory, of this will I
make my boast. This is Food for Immortal Spirits! This preserves Souls through
the power of God unto Salvation! This is bread which fades not away, this is
Wine which may be had without Money, and without Price.

O my God! thou requirest no Price, but a wounded Heart! No Gold, no Silver, no
Jewel, but an obedient Soul! I bring it, I offer it. I beg thou would be
pleased to accept of it! Thou deservest it; thou may challenge it: it is
thine, thou gave it me, thy Spirit made it willing. Thy Grace did melt it.
Thy Fire burnt away the Dross. Thy Goodness purified it, and thou will cleanse
it more and more. All the Good I have is thine! from Thee it flows! from Thee
it springs! Thou conveyest it to my Soul. Thou openest mine Ears. Thou
awakenest me, every good thought I have is thine; every good inclination, every
good resolution, every good intention is thine; Thou influencest every good
action I perform. My praise shall be of Thee in the great Congregation, I will
declare thy Faithfulness and Salvation.

O how good is God to Israel, even to them, that are of a clean Heart! O make
me clean, that I may feel thy Goodness! Thou art my Physician, I am thy
Patient, thou art my Father, I am thy Son, thou art my Master, I am thy
Servant, thou art my Teacher, I am thy Disciple; Thy Spirit is Good, O lead me
in the way Everlasting!

God forbid, that I should glory in any thing, save in the Cross of Christ, and
him Crucified. O that the World were Crucified to me, and I unto the World! I
will rejoice in thy love, my Dearest Lord! I have seen thy Power, Wisdom and
Goodness! I see what pains thou take with my Soul, to make it happy, to drive
away the night of ignorance from it, and to make me know, there is no true
bliss, no true comfort, but in Thee! Thou teach me to overcome my Spiritual
Enemies; Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teaches my hands to War, and my
Fingers to fight, my Goodness, and my Fortress, my high Tower and my Deliverer,
my Shield, and in whom I trust! Thou preventest me with thy Grace; Thou give
me the earnest of Eternal Glory, by thy Spirit I am sealed unto the day of
Redemption! Thou art my past, my present, and my future good! Let the People
praise thee, O God, Let all the People praise thee! O that all Men might know
and love Thee! O that all Mankind might feel thy Power, and Glory! O thou who
art the chiefest among Ten thousand, the Upright love Thee; and among these, I
the unworthiest of thy Servants presume to love thy Name! Thou have made me to
walk upon mine high places, and in the bitterness of my Soul have refreshed my
Spirit; Thou have pardoned I hope all my Sins, and blotted out mine Iniquities
as a thick Cloud. I expect thou should forgive me much, and therefore sure I
must love Thee much! Thou have born my Grief, and carried my Sorrows, thy
Torments have given me ease, thy Reproaches have procured my Glory, and thy
Misery is the cause of all my happiness.

Therefore I will put on the Lord Jesus Christ! Thou shall be my Garment, my
Crown, my Diadem. I will sing unto thee as long as I live. I will sing praise
unto my God, while I have my being. My Meditation of Thee shall be sweet; I
will be glad in the Lord! O my Lord! I rejoice to hear that every knee bows
unto Thee! I would have all the World fall down before Thee, and worship Thee!
I rejoice in all the good things, that thou possessest, not that I expect thou
should make me Partaker of all, but because they are in Thee, and they are
thine, and thou do dispense them to thy Creatures according to thy pleasure

I rejoice, O Lord in all the glorious Gifts thou have conferred on the Head of
the Church, The Man Christ Jesus. I rejoice in all the Mercies, thou have
bestowed on the blessed Angels, in that Purity and Innocence, in that
Brightness and Splendour, in that Bliss and Felicity, they are crowned withal,
in their care of thy People, in their Ministerial Offices to those that shall
be Heirs of Salvation. I rejoice in all the Graces, Thou have dispensed to thy
Holy Apostles, in their Miraculous healing of the Sick, in their Powerful
Preaching, whereby the World was converted, in their Knowledge, and
Illumination, in their Zeal and Fervor, in their Patience, and Humility in
their Watchfulness and heavenly mindedness, for in all these I see thy mighty
Arm, and thy strong Hand, and the light of thy Countenance, and all that they
have done, and said, is written for my Learning.

I rejoice in all the Blessings, thy Saints enjoy, in thy calling them to thy
mavelous Light, in thy adorning their Souls with so many Resplendent Virtues,
in thy honoring of them with the lofty Titles of Children, and Brethren, and
Friends, and Kings, and Priests, in thy visiting of them with thy Salvation, in
thy assisting of them with thy Power, thy Spirit, and thy Influences in their
Dangers and Necessities, in thy Helping their Infirmities, in thy Purifying of
their Souls, in thy enlivening their Spirits, that they may not be ashamed of
the Gospel of Christ Jesus, in thy keeping of them from all Evil, in thy
rescuing of them from Temptations, in thy giving them a happy Death, and
Promise of a Glorious Resurrection. I rejoice in all thy Mercies to Poor
Sinners, in thy calling of them, to Repentance, in thy entreating, admonishing,
and beseeching of them to be reconciled to God, in thy forbearing of them in
thy Patience, and Long-suffering toward them, in thy waiting for their
Repentance, in thy adjuring of them by Bowels of Mercy, by the Blood of Jesus,
by the Wounds of a Crucified Redeemer, by the sweetest Calls, and by the
greatest motives to Seriousness, and Holiness, in thy receiving the Penitent,
in thy forgetting all their Unkindnesses, and forgiving the Affronts, they have
offered unto Thee, in thy remembering their Sins no more, and drowning them in
the depth of the Sea, even in the Blood of the Lamb, which was slain from the
Foundation of the World.

I rejoice in all thy loving kindnesses to thy Church, in thy giving her thy
Word, thy Ordinances, thy Sacraments, in thy making her thy Bride, thy Spouse,
and thy Favorite, in thy Ordaining the Lord Jesus to be her Head, her Husband,
and her Protector, and Nursing-Father.

O Jesu! I rejoice in thy Incarnation, in the great Mystery of Godliness, God
manifested in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, Preached in
the World, Believed on by the Gentiles, received up into Glory. I have reason
to rejoice in thy hypostatick Union, in thy being the Prince of Men, and
Angels, and in that all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are in thee! I
rejoice in thy sending the Comforter into the world; in thy Promises, in thy
Offers, in thy Providence, in the Provision thou have made for our Souls, and
Bodies.

O give me a thankful Heart for my right shape, for my Health and Strength, and
temporal advantages; O what a mercy is it, that thou have caused me to be born
in the Light, in the true Religion, in a Religion free from notorious Errors,
and Superstitions! How am I beholding to thee, that thou have kept me from so
many opportunities of sinning against thee, from abundance of temptations, from
innumerable occasions of evil! How many have been snatched away by sudden death;
and I am alive yet! How many have been denied the grace of Repentance, which
thou still offerest to me! That I have a heart to pray and praise thy Name,
What a mighty token of thy Love is this! Let Heaven and Earth praise the Lord;
Let all the Angels in Heaven praise him. Let every thing that has breath
praise the Lord, praise thou the Lord O my Soul!

I remember, O Lord, how when I have gone through the water, thou have been
with me; when I have passed through the Fire, thou have commanded the Flames
not to kindle upon me! I remember, when for a small moment, thou have hid thy
Face from me; How with everlasting kindnesses thou have visited me again! O how
often have thou delivered me from the nethermost Hell! When I have been ready
to sink in the mire, thou have pulled me out of the horrible pit, cut of the
miry Clay, and set my feet upon a Rock, and established my goings! When the
snares of death have encompassed me, and the pains of Hell laid hold on me,
thou have delivered my Soul from Death, mine Eyes from Tears, and my Feet from
falling. I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the Living; what reward
shall I render unto thee for all thy benefits! How loath have thou been to
behold my ruin! How have thou called after me, Have mercy on thy self! With
what convictions have thou followed me! What checks of Conscience have thou
given me! O my Lord! Thou shall have all the Glory. Thou art worthy to receive
Blessing, and Honor, and Majesty, and Dominion! How precious are thy Mercies!
How rich thy Loving kindnesses! To do so much for dust and ashes, for a Worm,
for a Grasshopper, for a Creature that has abused thee, and rebelled against
thee; O what goodness is this! My understanding is not big enough to comprehend
it. I Will acknowledge thee for my God, I Will own thee for my Redeemer; Thou shall
be my King, my Master, my Sovereign Lord! I will consecrate all my Labors, all
my Services, all I have, and all I am to thy Glory! O what a favor is
forgiveness of Sin, which I trust I have received this day!

Think O my Soul, what a bondage thou art delivered from! Think what slavery
thou art freed from! Now thou art at liberty, now thou may serve God
cheerfully; now thou may freely go on from Virtue to Virtue. This is a day of
Thanksgiving; this is a day of glad tidings; this is a day which ought to be
remembered; O my Jesus! Thou have this day visited the Earth, and watered it!
Thou have made it rich with thy showers, thy Grace has dropped upon me this
day, like the Rain on the mowen Grass! O order my steps according to thy Word
for the future! Let me see thee in every Mercy! Teach me to admire thee in
every Blessing! Let nothing seduce my Heart from thee! When any afflictions
come upon me, let me receive them with Thanks and Submission! When I stumble,
do thou support me; when I fall, do thou raise me; when I go astray, do thou
seek me; when I err, do thou direct me; When I slacken in thy service, do thou
strengthen me! Keep the door of my Senses, that no impure thing may enter
there! Let my Heart be thy Temple! Teach me to enquire daily, what progress I
make in thy way; Let thy Word be a lanthorn to my Feet, and a Light unto my
paths! Let no evil company discourage me! Let thy Providence direct me to
persons that love thy Law, and in these excellent ones, let all my Delight and
Comfort be!

O my Lord, my Life is hid in thee! But when thy Glory shall appear, I shall be
like thee! Speak Lord, for thy Servant hears! Let none of thy Commandments be
hence-forward grievous to me! Open thy hand and feed my Soul! When I am
tempted, lay no more upon me, then I am able to bear! Give me courage to strive
to enter in at the strait Gate! Let me ever look at the things which are not
seen, for the things which are seen are Temporal, but the things which are not
seen, are Eternal! Thy Kingdom, Lord, is not in Meat and Drink, but in Peace,
and Joy in the Holy Ghost; Give me a taste of it! Let Eternity be always in my
mind! Into thy hands I do commend my Spirit, my Body, and all the concerns of
my Life! Let thy Grace come down upon me plentifully! Let me not do thy Will
negligently! Let me live in the thoughts of another life, and let those
Thoughts encourage me to follow after, that I may apprehend that, for which I
am also apprehended of Christ Jesus! O hear me! O Answer me! O pity me! O
relieve me! O come in! O succor me, thou that art the God of my Salvation, and
my Tongue shall talk of thy Righteousness, all the day long! Let all those,
that seek thee rejoice, and be glad in thee, and let such as love thy
Salvation, say continually, Let God be magnified! I am poor and needy, make
haste unto me, O God! thou art my Help, and my Deliverer: O Lord, make no
tarrying, Amen, Amen.

ERRATA.
PAge 51. l. 24. read liberty. p. 169. l. 19 r. Repentance.

What literal Faults, or Mistoppings may occur; the Reader is desired to mend
with his Pen.

Books Printed for, and Sold by Samuel Lowndes over against Exeter Exchange in
the Strand.
CLelia. An excellent new Romance.

Parthanissa. That most Famed Romance.

Dr. Greys Complete Horseman, and expert Farrier.

Two Sermons Preached at the Cathedral Church in Norwich; By B. Rively.

Mr. Glanvil's Saducismus Triumphatus, with the Additions of Dr. More, and Dr.
Horneck.

Mr. Glanvil's Lux Orientalis, Or the Opinion of the Eastern Sages, concerning
the Pre-existence of Souls; Bishop Rust of Truth, and Annotations on both.

Dr. Horneck's Great Law of Consideration.

Papismus Regiae potestatis Eversor.

Paul Festeau's French Grammar. Maugers Letters, in French and English.

The Mirror of Fortune.

The French Rogue. Cambridge Jests, or Witty Alarms for melancholy Spirits.

Kerhuel Idea Eloquentiae.

The Situation of Paradise.


