The Poor Man's Misery, OR Poverty Attends Vain COMPANY, WITH A Speedy Call to
Repentance from their ways.

Wherein you may behold who they are that are reckoned in the rank of vain
persons, and also the great danger they live in, whilst they live in Vanity,
and follow the ways of sin and wickedness, Very necessary for all to Read and
consider of the danger thereof in this day, wherein so many take pleasure in
sin, and wicked company.

By Roger Hough a lover of Sobriety.

Psalm 119.63. I am a Companion of all those that fear thee and keep thy
precepts.

2 Thessal. 3.14. If any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man,
and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed.

London, Printed for Tho. Passinger at the sign of the Three bibles on the
middle of London Bridge. 1670.

To the Reader.
COurtious Friend, in this my labor small,
Thou may behold a Duty great withal:
Read and Consider, and get good hereby,
If thou art vain, to God for mercy cry.
For sure vain company will ruin bring,
For vanity does (...) with it a sting;
The slugard may unto the Ant repair,
Because he take no early harvest care
Vain idle company then flee thou from,
And in the place of wickedness, by no means come.
If that thou profit by this labor small
Give God the glory for his graces all
Proverbs 28.19. He that follows vain persons, shall have poverty enough.


THe wise man by the Morral virtue of the laborious man, holds forth the bad
consequences that do attend the contrary: He that tilleth his land shall have
plenty of herad, but he that follows after vain persons shall have poverty
enough. The serious consideration of the folly and madness of wicked men at
this day, if matter of great lamentation to all those that truly fear God, to
so men through their own ^olly and ignorance ^o run their poor souls upon the
h^zard of eternal destruction, by their associateing themselves with vain
persons: My dearly beloved friends, I desire you may seriously consider it, and
lay it to heart: what profit can you have in wasting, your precious time, and
letting slip over the days of ^our youth, and dishonouring your Heavenly
Father, by your unequal walkings: herein Solomon the Son of David King of
Israel, that was the wisest man that ever was before him, or that ever should
come after him, 1 Kings 3.12. saw the evil of this, and in this Text if ^ee^
^^^^, he makes it known unto us; He that tilleth his land shall have plenty of
bread, but he that follows after vain persons shall have poverty enough: in
which w^^^^ (...) man learn this necessary reason.

That poverty attends vain company.

When persons leave off their honest and lawful casting, to follow after vain
and idle company, this their folly will bring them un^o poverty Prove. 12.11. He
that tilleth his land shall be sati^fied with bread, but he that follows vain
persons is void of understanding. Sirs, as you love the lives of your ^^^cious
and immortal souls, look to your Companions, vain Company will be the ruin and
bane of your immortal souls without deep repentance, look but to that example
or the prodigal, Luke 15. 16. who when his substance was gone, and he left in a
disconsolate condition, would have been content to have fed upon the Husks that
the Swine did eat, and no man gave them unto him; then this is the condition
you are brought unto by associateing your selves with evil Companions, If any
question who they are that are vain persons, who are to be considered under
this notion; I Answer in the General they are such persons, as daily delight in
vanity, then are such persons as live in wickedness: Vanity is unprofitableness
either to the soul, or to the body, but more perticularly there is a threefold
vanity, and a threefold poverty, that attends that threefold vanity.

First, There is a vanity of common known Sinners.

Secondly, There is a vanity in the self Righteous Moral, Worldly man, the
civillest men of the world; And,

Thirdly, There is a vanity in unsound Professors: now the poverty that attends
these three Ranks of Vanity are:

First, Temporal want to the outward estate of Man, attends your communion with
known sinners.

Secondly, Spiritual blindness, and self-confidence, without a sure foundation,
or a real reliance upon Christ, that attends the second Rank of Vain persons;
And,

Thirdly, Eternal misery in Hell for ever, besides the shame and disgrace they
meet with on this side the grave, amongst those that fear God, when their
Hypocrisy is discovered, and the filthiness of their shame is made known: This
attends the third Rank of vain persons.

For the first of th^se, who are these common known sinners, that are to be
avoided; they are persons that live in sin and sinful courses, idle-headed
persons, that to fulfill their own lusts, and nourish vice and wickednesses ^un
on headlong to their own deft action: from such therefore turn aside, every
known sin that any man lives in, he transgresses against God in his sin, and
herein does his vanity appear, every wicked man's a vain person, wicked sinners
are vain persons.

A^l L^^rrs, Idle Discoursers, Common S^^earers, Tale-bearers, Strife mongers.
D^sc^n^o^^-sectors, Flatterers, Deceitful Talkers, Drunkards, Whore m^nmers,
Sabbath-breaker^, Contemners of Gods People D^su^^ers of his Ministers, and
D^d^^^nces, Grinders of the faces of the P^or Proud Persons proud in Words,
proud In A (...) is, and F^^^ions of the times, common G^un^ste^s, Stage
Players, Sorcerers, Jugglers Murderers, Chieves, Charmers ^uchau^ers
Errortioners Usurers, V^^rpers of other ure^s powers. Busi^-Lod^es in other
men's matters, without a law ul^call thereunto, Quari^^ous Cavil^rs, C^i^hers of
Iumot^nt persons by Injustice, D^spisers, Markers, S^orners, and Persecu^^rs of
Gods People, Imvezellou^s, Wasters and Destroyers of their own and other men's
substances, whatsoever known sin any man lives in and delights in, that sin
makes him a vain person, therefore to follow after such sins, or such sinners,
will bring poverty; For poverty attends vain company.

Now sirs consider before we pass to the second Rank. what profit can you get
by your accompanying with any of these sinners? do you not learn with the Liar,
to pass a way your time for idle stories, and with the profane, to be
profane? do you not learn with the deceiver, to deceive? and what can you get
by flatterers and deceitful talkers, and such like? David was of another mind,
when he said, Psa. 101.4, 5, 6, 7. A froward heart shall depart from me, I will
not know a wicked person; whosoever privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I
cut off; him that has a high look and a proud heart will not I suffer; mine
eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me, he
that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me: he that works deceit shall
not dwell in my house, and he that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight:
Well then, let this teach you sirs to put forth of your Society and Company,
those that good David will put forth of his sight: But,

Secondly, There is a Vanity in the self Righteous, Moral, worldly man, or the
^^vilest men of the world.

There is vanity in them though there is in them to the outward show, a Civil
carriage and a fair show of uprightness, yet where there is not a true zeal for
God, and a relyance upon Christ's merrits for salvation, they are yet in the
dark paths of ignorance, notwithstanding this their gilded carriage in the
world, the young man in the Gospel, he had kept all the Commandments from his
youth, Mat. 19.20. here was a Moral man, he had done his outward duty toward
God and toward his Neighbor, and thereupon he might be reputed that he had
done no man wrong, he was therefore as touching the Law blameless, yea, that
which was yet more, he came to Christ for Counsel, he supplicated for eternal
life in the 16. verse at his very first entrance, and when Jesus had re^eated
the commandments of the Law to him, all these have I done, verse 20, what lack
l yet, he is frill Inquiring after heaven, but comes not to the price thereof,
but when he must part with all his substance, he would keep that, And so he
went his way sorrowing, that one thing needful he could not attain unto,
because he could not part with that one thing burdensome; for the text says, he
had great possessions, and they were such a burden unto him that he went away
sorrowing, if God contend with such men, they are not able to stand before him,
the Civil Morral men of the world, though they carry themselves uprightly to
the outward eye of man, yet they are too low for heaven, he that is too high
for grace, is too low for glory, and herein their poverty appears, as being
deprived of the best things which are durable for a few fading worldly
endowments that leaves them when death comes to arrest them: Nichodemus could
come and reason with Christ, that was a great Ruler, about Regeneration: yet
understands not the words of Christ, though he was a Master in Israel, John
3.10. Also Gamahel a Doctor of the Law, could stand up in the Council, to
defend the lives of the Apostles, Acts 5.34, to 40. but believed not himself.
Now a spiritual blindness and self confidence, without a sure foundation or
r^al reliance upon Christ attends this the Morral man's vanity. Indeed by the
company of these worldlings, you come to no outward standers o^ disgraces, as
you may do by the first rank. But you get nothing by their company, but learn
to see^le your selves and take root in their self-confidences; though you waste
not your outward substances hereby, yet you loose your precious time, for that
which prof^teth not, and settle your selves upon false rests. As first, upon a
civil life and chaste carriage, and think by that means to merit heaven.
Secondly, by self righteousness they will walk uprightly, and use what they
have of the world to their best advantage, and not offend: Is it because they
will deal uprightly in all outward appearances, and think thereby to Merit
heaven. Thirldly, Some others will be very charitable to the poor, and freely
impart what the Lord bestows upon them, thinking thereby to attain eternal
life. Fourthly, Others there are that will come nearer to the mark of
profeshion, and diligently attend the Ordinances of God in publi^ue, and go
daily every Lords day to hear the Word preached, and think thereby to obtain
heaven. Fifthly, Others will do their duties incombent upon them by the Word of
God, they will read and pray in their families, and maintain family Duties, and
think thereby to inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. Nay, sixthly and lastly, there
are some persons will do all these duties, and repeat Sermons in their ^amthes
and declare to others what external gifts they have received front God, and
discourse much of Heaven and Eternity in a high manner, and yet for all this
fall ^hor^ of eternal happiness, because they rest themselves upon these
slaves, on the Ladder of Eternity. My beloved friends, these things you must
do, if ever you intend to be s^ved, but ^here is not any of these to be rested
on, the way to heaven is by faith in Jesus Christ, for faith without works is a
dead faith, you must have works to accompany your faith, James 2.17. Even so
faith being without works, is dead being, alone: But,

Thirdly, There is a vanity in unsound professors, and false worshipers of God;
all such as worship God in a false way contrary to the rule of the holy
Scriptures, these are vain persons, such are all Papists, Idolatrous,
Will-worshippers of God, and such as worship God by a rule of men's Inventions,
and not according to his Will, all unsound Teachers, that speak without the
life, feeling, and scence of the holy Spirit of God, strengthened and
Authorized by the rule of the Scriptures, to guide and direct them in the
truth, and to be the touchstone of trial, to strengthen, uphold, and maintain
them, and herein all such scismacical and heritical opinianists, show forth
nothing but vanity; such Craft, mongers, and soul-deceivers win God take in
their own crastiuess, John 5.13. Because such when they know God they glorify
him not as God, neither are they thankful, but become vain in their
imaginations: their foolish hearts being darkened, professing themselves wise
they became fools, Romans 2.21, 22. and therefore all such as follow them in
their dark paths, though it may be in the way of a profession, shall have
poverty enough.

For where the sound bread of life is dejected, the soul for want thereof may
be infected, now the poverty that attends these, is eternal misery in hell for
ever (without a hearty and deep repentance) besides the shame and disgrace they
meet with on this side the grave, amongst those that fear God, when their
hypocrisy is discovered, and the filthiness of their shame is made known.

As first the Papists their cruelty against the truth, their idolatrous
worshipping of Saints and Angels, unnecessary consecrations and all their
idolatrous ceremonies, where with they delude the simple, and steep them in
ignorance and blindness, which impostrous Religion path deluded many poor
souls: And then

Secondly, All such as contemn and despise the Ordinances of God, in a way of
profession by corrupt opinions, springing up amongst them, as your Socinians
and Free-willers, that would de^sure and publish Free Will, and a general
Redemption to the world, with many other opinianists, that I shall not here
stand to name because I am scanted of Room in this small Treatise, and
therefore must hasten to draw to a conclusion: Therefore take heed my beloved
that you grow not wilfully ignorant, that this spiritual and eternal poverty do
not overtake you: Sirs, you here see the evil consequences that attends vain
persons: that is poverty Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal.

Now there is same reasons-why it is that poverty attends vain persons: And
they are these.

First, Because vanity is thee ^o^ked with poverty, look upon the outward frame
of wickness, and you will find poverty ever attending vanity, Psalm 62.9.
Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are as a lie to be
laid in the balance they are altogether lighter t^en vanity, Now I do not say
th^^ ^very poor man in the world is a vain person: poverty is servant to
vanity, but vanity may not be a servant to poverty: we read of poor Job, but
not of vain Job, his poverty was not vanity, nor poor Lazarus was not vain,
Lazarus vanity, would be no servant to poverty, neither to Job nor to Lazarus,
but yet for all this, there is a poverty that attends vanity, either Temporal
or Spiritual, if not Temporal, yet for the most part Spiritual or Eternal;
Dives had not Temporal poverty, but when he was in hell, he had so much poverty
as satisfied for his cruel covetousness, for whereas before on earth he would
not give one crumb, in hell he must not have one drop: surely then sirs, here
was poverty enough, so much poverty, as to make him eternally miserable.

Secondly, Poverty attends vain persons, because of the vain glory that is in
them, vain persons take glory in their vanity, like unto the Church of
Laodicea, Rev. 3.19. That said she was rich and increased in goods, and did not
know her poverty, Now that she was, retched and miserable, and poor, and blind,
and naked.

Thirdly, Poverty attends vain persons, because of that ignorance that is in
vain company, there is a palpable ignorance in vain persons, Ephesians. 4.17, 18.
This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as
other Gentiles, walk in the vanity of their mind; Having their understanding
darkened through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of
their heart. Surely (...), where there is ignorance, there is blindness and
poverty.

Fourthly, Poverty attends vain company, because of their evil Council, vain
persons are vain counselors, this you may see plainly in Roboam King of
Israel, when he forsook the Council of the A^cients that stood before Solomon
his Father, and took Council at his Companions, that we called young men that
were brought up with him, 1 King. 12.8. then the judgment came upon him, and
all the Tribes were taken from him, to be governed by Jeroboam, save only the
Tribe of Judah, which he and his Posterity reigned over: So you (...). Beloved,
that there is reason why pove^^^ ever attends vain company, because ^^^verty is
yo^ked to vanity: poverty is seen (...) the vain glory of vain persons; there
is a palpable ignorance in vain company, and because of the evil of the bad
council that vain persons are apt to give to those that attend them, and
company with them: I might give several other reasons, as grounds to confirm
this truth, why poverty attends vain company, as the unprofitablenesse of vain
company, the discredit that you shall have by following of them: the evil of
their ways, the loss of ^our precious time with several other grounds that for
brevity sake I omit at this time.

But now by way of Inference my Beloved (if poverty attend vain company) In the
first place, this lets us see the great unprofitablenesse that is in vain
company, as for the first r^nk of vain persons before spoken of, expertence may
teach you the proof hereof, how many have we seen in England, by wasting their
precious time (and sp^^in^g thereof) become temporally poor, by following after
vain jesters, and i^le s^oriors, and by del^g^^ing in their lies, (...) ^een
given up to strong delusions, to (...) before then will i^h^ace the (...)
These. 2.11. and have not only ^alled (...) outward ^states, but are by this
ine^^ns brought into the state of e^ernal misery, without speedy repentance,
for which end they were given up to the strong delusions, vers^ 12. that they
all might be damned who believe not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. Again, how many persons have we see by experience amongst,
us; that have been possessed of good estates, in this Nation, I think I may say
without fencible error, that almost every Wila^e, Town, throughout England, can
exsperience it, as many ^a^^ wasted all their outward estate by following after
vain drunkards and whoremongers and common gameing and gamest^^d, and such like
Company, which companying with them, has brought them into the depth of
pover^^, so that then have thereby consumed their outward ^states, and brought
themselves to beggary, and thrown themselves, down under poverty temporally,
wanting necessaring for the outward man, but it were well it this were the
^^rit, (...) this is lu^t the smallest l^sse (...) ^^the by, they are in w^^^
of all things that should he ^e^^e^ to the s^^^, they want spiritual strength
to stand, they want spiritual power to pray, they want spiritual relief for the
soul, for in such company they never hear of, or see, or foel any good, or
comfort for the souls refreshing, and is not this pover^p enough think you,
Nay, that which is more, this beget^ your eternal milery both of body and soul,
at the day of judgment, when we shall all appear before the judgment seat of
the Almighty God, there c^^^^ive our sentence of salvation or damnation, if
then you be put on the left hand, with this sentence, Go you cursed, Mat.
25.41. Is not this poverty enough think you to be deprived of beaven, and
thrown into eternal misery ^ nay you shall find many that have made profession
of Christ. many that have received the Ministry, and teachings of Christ, to
the outward ears, that have done duties, and sought after Christ, to fall short
of heaven, and surely this you may see, Mat. 7.22, 23. Many will sa^^ to me in
that day, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out
divess, and in thy name have done wonderful words; Sirs you see here are people
making a great profession in duty, they have pro^be sied in the Lords name;
Nay, that which is more, in his name have cast out devils, these people a man
would think should be in high labor with God, they had done wonderful works
too: I pray you consider of it these were for from vain persons that could
prophecy, cast out devils, and by wonderful works, and yet sall short of
heaven, yea verily, verse. 23. and then will I prof^ss unto them, I never knew
you, Depart from ye workers of iniquity. Ah! poor souls, that are running the
haz^rd of your upon destruction. Consider this, if these men that have thus
outwardly pro^est Christ, by prophes^^g in his name, and casting out of Devils,
and doing wonderful works shall be shut out of heaven, what will become of you
that have done none of these things. Again, what do you think by as such as are
despisers of Gods People Scoffers, and Scorners of them that profess Religion,
and the ways of godliness; Beloved, all manner of wickedness is vanity and
nothing, wicked persons are vain persons they say, as in Psalm 12.4. We have
said with our tongues we will prevail, our lips are our own who is Lord over
us, the Prophet David was hear complaining, v. 2. Says he, they speak vanity
every man to his neighbor, with flattering l^ps and with a double heart, do
they speak well, says he, verse 3. the Lord will cut off all flattering lips,
and the tongue that speaks proud things: Sirs, you see here the palpable
wir^^ediness of vain persons, therefore he persuaded so look so pant
companions, As for the^^. Fansso^valst persons ^^cious, mortal woudly many
th^self righteous men, you (...) no good nor inward comfort by them; Because
they want that one thing u^^dful there is one thing lacking, and that is their
following of Christ, and pasting with the world; the young man in the Gospel
was Morra^^^ righteous, he had kept the commandemeni^^ of the Law, yet onething
was lacking, Go, sell all that thou have and follow me and thou shall have
crea^^e in heaven. Beloved, a man may be (...) careful in obserding his duties,
and (...) the commandments of God, and pro^^^^ have In^ge possessions of the
world in his heart, he may be ^^^ned to many super^it^o^^ worldly ^^^onts, be
(...) have his he gre^^^ upon the treasures in the world, or (...) the
Pleasures of the world, many a (...) maken profession, and yet the (...) of the
world draws away his heart, of the Pleasures of the world draw (...) off, (...)
becomes ^ain: we read (...) Mar^^^ (...) busie-avaine the world, into (...)
thing the (...) when as Mary (...), word the aching in (...) of Mary, there
^^one thing needful, and Mary had chosen the better part.

Thirdly, The third rank is unsound professors of Christ, these are as
dangerous as the first, nay mo^^da^^^ is in false professors of Christ, a man
may as well never profess Christ at all as profess him in an e^^onias may the
Papist those Pass mon^ers that profess Christ under a notion of Image worship,
and men's ^raditions, and indentions of men cense^^^ (...) Darers of Popes, and
Cardi^olls; and as they say the Auriquitie of the (...) of Rome, whom they firm
to be the Mat ^er Church of the World, and the Pope the head thereof, declaring
him to (...) Peter's Successor^ and to fit in Peter's their whose Declaration is
false, and their Religion pernicious, and the Pope himself an Im^^^^ the (...)
Antechrist of the Wor^^ (...) of yt danger of them but (...) fined to keep in
(...) Sosinians, (...) will not allow the Desep of Christ, prede three
substances in the God heart, which is false and (...) Script (...) there is a
substance of the Father^^^ making man at the first (...) his own. (...) that be
not suff^^^^ to prove the substance of a person, Christ is called, Heb. ^^ the
expressed Image of his Fa^hers person Secondly, Christ his self come down from
his Fathers hoso^e, took upon him the similitude of man and dyed yi^lded his
body to the smiters; sursly here was the similitude of a person in C^^ist, who
had a humane body given unto him. Thirdly, the Holy Ghost He then affirm not to
be a person: if that perticle (He) be not sufficient to prove him a person in
the Deity; where Christ says (He) shall tell you all things, yet there is a
bodily shape put upon him when Itsus was baptized by John in Jordan, in the 3.
of Luke, it is said, the Holy Ghost descended upon him like a Dove, there was a
bodily shape, to prove this undeniable truth; and then the Arminians that hold
Free, will, and general Redemption, as if persons had power within themselves,
of themselves to stand or to fall at their own will and pleasure; These-company
beloved are very dangerous to comply with for the avoiding of which, take this
word of exhortation, if it be so that poverty attende^^ vain company, then ^^ee
vain company and the company of vain persons, and that you may thus do.

First, Consider the discredit that is attained by vain company, it is a
disgrace to be found complying with vain persons Pro. 28 7. Whosoever keeps the
Law, is a wise son, but he that is a companion of riotous men, snameth his
Father, Prove. 13.5. a wicked man is loathsome and comes to shame, Secondly,
Consider the great wast you come by, by following vain persons, whose society
many times wastes your outward substance, Prove. 29.3. Whosoever loves wisdom,
rejoices his Father, but he that keeps company with Harlots spends his
substance: the Prodigal in the Gospel wasted his substance after this manner.
Luke 15.13. Thirdly, Consider the advice that is given you by the holy
Scriptures, the Apostles and followers of Christ, exhort you to fly had
company, 1 Cor. 5.9. I wrote unto you in an Epistle, not to company with
fornicators, ver. 10. Yet not altogether with fornicators of this world, nor
with coverous not extortioners, for then must you needs go out of the world,
but now have I writ unto you ver. 11. not to keep company, if any man that is
called a brother be a fornicator or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a
drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one do not ea^. Fourthly, Consider
that such companions are reserved for destruction, and shall be thrust out of
heaven without repentance, Rev. 21.8 The fearful and unbeleiving, the
a^ominable and murderers, and whore mongens, and and forcerers, and idoliters
and all Ipers, shall have their portion in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstour now beloved, if you ask what you may do to avoid the evil, take these
helps along with you.

1. Eye your company, watch ^v^^ your selves, while you enjoy the presen^^ of
your Companians, and cry them up the Word of God in their discourses, for with
the holy thou shall be holy, and with the profane, thou shall learn
profaneness, 2 These. 3.14 If any man obey not our word by this Epist^e note
that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. 2. Get into the
company of all those that fear God and keep his commandments, Psalm 119.63. I
am a Companion of all those that fear and keep thy precepts. 3. Set your
delight on such as fear God really, let your soul delight in them, Psa. 16.2,
3. O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my Lord: my goodness
extends not to thee: but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the
excellent its whom is all my delight.

Dearly beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, consider of these things,
you have heard what evil attends vain company and the Lord of his infinite
mercy and goodness, in Jesus Christ the great Shepherd and Bishop of our sou^s,
set it home upon your hearts, to whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever,
Amen.

FINIS.
(...)
