Imprimatur,

November. 16. 1678.
THE JESUITS MANNER of CONSECRATING Both the PERSONS and WEAPONS Employed for
the Murdering KINGS and PRINCES By them accounted HERETICS, Being Matter of
Fact.

Translated out of Hospinian's History of the Jesuits, page 366. Printed at
Zurich in the Year 1672.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. in the Year 1678.

This Account is extant in a Process Printed at Delph, by John Andrea
Bookseller, and quoted by Hospinian in the following words.
THE Jesuits have ready prepared (for having so much money at command, they can
take Leases where they please) several Mansions of Rest and Beatitude, so
ordered by virtue of their Transcending Charms, ready hung, fitted and
furnished for the reception of those Ajaxe's, who being more stout then subtle,
are by them drawn in and inveigled to the barbarous execution of what they more
barbarously meditate and consult. Those deluded Villains, and Religious Braves,
they bless, they sanctify, and canonize at length for Saints, assuming to
themselves a large Canton in Heaven for their reward.

The person whose silly reason the Jesuits have once overcome with their more
potent Arguments, is immediately conducted into their Sanctum Sanctorum,
designed for prayer and meditation. There the Dagger is produced, choicely
wrapped, up in a linen safeguard, enclosed in an Ivory Sheath, engraved with
several aenigmatical Characters, and accompanied with an Agnus Dei. Certainly a
most monstrous copulation, so unadvisedly to intermix the height of murdrous
Villainy, and the most sacred emblem of Meekness together.

This Dagger thus unsheathed, is hypocritically be dew'd with holy water, and
the handle as soon adorned with a certain number of Coral Beads, thereby
ascertaining the credulous Fool, that as many effectual stabs as he gives the
assassinated Prince, so many souls he should redeem out of Purgatory upon his
own account. Then they deliver the Dagger into the Parricide's hand, with a
solemn recommendation in these words, Elected Son of God, receive the Sword of
Jephta, the Sword of Sampson, the Sword of David wherewith he smote off the
head of Goliath, the Sword of Gideon, the Sword of Judith, the Sword of the
Maccahees, the Sword of Pope Julius the second, wherewith he freed himself from
the prosecution of Princes after he had defiled several Cities with the
effusion of (...) Blood, Go and prosper, prudently courageous, and the Lord
streng(...) Arm, Which words being once pronounced, ^y all fall upon their
knees; at what time the Head of the Society pronounces this Exorcism; A^pud O
Cherubims, descend and be present O Seraphims, you Thrones, you Powers, you
holy Angels come down, and fill this blessed Vessel with eternal glory, and
daily offer (...), it is but a small reward, the Crown of the blessed Virgin
Mary, and of all the holy Patriarchs and Mar^. He is (...) more concerned among
us, he is now of (...) Celestial ^ernity. And thou, O God, most terrible and
inaccessible, who yet have revealed to this instrument of thine, in thy
dedicated place of our Prayer and Meditation, that such a Prince is to be cut
off as a Tyrant and a Heretic, and his Dominions to be translated to another
Line, confirm and strengthen, we beseech thee this Instrument of thine, whom we
have consecrated and dedicated to that sacred Office, that he may be able to
accomplish thy will. Grant him the Habergeon of thy Divine Omnipotency, that he
may be enabled to escape the hands of his pursuers. Give him wings, that he may
escape the hands of all that lie in wait for his destruction. Infuse into his
soul the beams of thy consolation, to uphold and sustain the weak fabric of
his body, that contemning all fear, he may be able to show a cheerful and
lively countenance in the midst of present torments, or prolonged
Imprisonments; and that he may sing and rejoice with a ^e than ordinary
exultation, whatever death he un^.

(...) ^xorcism being finished, the Parricide is brought (...) ^ta^, over which
at that time hangs a picture (...) ^ng the story of James Clement, a Dominican
(...) with the figures of several Angels protecting and ^cting him to Heaven.
This Picture the Jesuits (...) their Cullie, and at the same time, presenting
(...) with a celestial Coroner, rehearse these words. Lord, ^k down, and behold
this Arm of thine, the Executioner of thy Justice. Let all thy Saints arise and
give place to him. Which Ceremonies being ended, there are only five Jesuits
deputed to converse with, and keep the Parricide Company. Who in their common
discourse make it their business upon all occasions to fill his ears with their
divine wheedles, making him believe a certain celestial splendor to be shining
in his countenance, by the beams whereof they are over-awd to throw themselves
down before him, and to kiss his feet; appearing to them now no more a mortal,
but transfigur'd into a Deity. And lastly in a deep dissimulation they bewail
themselves, and feign a kind of Envy at the happiness and eternal Glory which
he is so suddenly to enjoy, exclaiming thus before the Credulous Manslayer;
Would to God the Lord had chosen me in thy stead, and had so ordered it by this
means, that being freed from the pains of Purgatory, I might go directly
without let, into Paradise.

But if the person whom they imagine proper to attempt the Parricide prove any
thing squeamish, or reluctant to their exhortations, then by nocturnal
Scarecrows, and affrighting apparitions, or by the suborned appearances of the
Holy Virgin, or some other of the Saints, even of Ignatius Loyola himself, or
some of his most celebrated Associates, they terrify the soon retriv'd
misbeliever into a compliance with a ready prepared oath, which they enforce
him to take and wherewith they animate and encourage his staggering Resolution.
Thus these villainous and impious Doctors in the Art of Murder and Parricide
sometimes by the terrors of punishment, sometimes by the allurements of merit
enslame the courages of the unwary, and having entangl'd them in the noozes of
sacrilegious and bloody attempts, precipitate both soul and body into eternal
condemnation.

Story mentions a sort of People formerly notorious in the Eastern parts of the
world, whom the most Historians call Assassins, that is to say, murderers of
Princes and great men. These being followers of the Mohammedan Religion,
instituted a new Sect, of which the first founder was Aloadim, accounted a
Saint and a Prophet by those of his own Gang. This Order soon began to
flourish, being more remarkable then any other of the Mohammedan belief, for the
beauty of their Colleges, and the pleasantness of their Habitations. Which
were confirmed upon them with large endowments, for the Instruction of youth in
the Mohammedan profession, among whom they had the privilege to cull out the
boldest resolutions and the choicest Fancies.

The Principal Tenants of this sect were these.

1. That Mahomet was the Prophet of God, the restorer of lost mankind, and the
rewarder of Good and Evil. 2. That the Chief and Prince of this sect was his
Vicar upon Earth, the only interpreter of the Divine and Human law delivered by
Mahomet. 3. That it was just and legal to kill and murder all Princes, that
were not obedient in all things to him, either by open force or private
contrivance, as opportuty offered. 4. That his Disciples were not bound or
obliged in their allegiance to any Prince, whatever oaths they took to be true
to him. 5. That Paradise was a Garden flowing with milk and honey, and abounding
in all manner of sensual pleasures and delights. 6. That whosoever should kill
any Prince, and Enemy to their law, should enjoy the next place in Paradise, to
Mahomet himself. 7. That it was in the power of this Vicar of Mahomet, by a
particular Grant or Pattent from Mahomet, to distribute and share the joys of
Paradise, to such as he should think deserving,
With these pestilent, and abominable maxims, did they leven and corrupt the
education of all the Youth that came within their Clutches, to render them the
more obedient to their Principles, and to make them the more undaunted in such
dangerous attempts which they themselves should put them upon. The particular
Disciples of this Doctrine, being first stupefied with a potion of Opiate, were
carried into a Garden adjoining to the College, where when they awaked again,
all sorts of delights and pleasures waited on them. Streams of Honey, Wine and
Milk; Variety of Music, sumptuous Garments, and costly provision to please
the Palate; neither were lovely Women wanting; all which pleasures they enjoyed
to full satiety. Afterward when they had had a full enjoyment of all these
pleasures, they were again laid asleep with another draught of Opiate, and
carried back into the College. When they came to themselves again (to use the
words of Paulus Venetus) and called to mind, what pleasures they had for so
small a time enjoyed, they began to be troubled that those pleasures were too
short. But being instructed upon what account they might enjoy them to
Eternity, they began to be in love with death, and to contemn all thoughts of
danger that should bring them to these everlasting pleasures, of which they had
had such a transitory taste already. Then their Doctor, who feigned himself to
be the Prophet of God, laying hold of the opportunity; Be but prepared, said
he, in obedience to me, to suffer Death undauntedly when occasion shall serve,
and you shall eternally enjoy those pleasures, which were here too short. Upon
which, those miserable wretches, believing death to be so great a gain,
willingly condescend, and swear to obey him in all things; whatever he shall
enjoin, though to the loss of their Lives. And thus this Tyrant over Souls,
animates and instigates these credulous admirers of sensual Pleasure, to commit
the most Execrable Murders and Villainies that Revenge or Interest can
contrive. Thus far Paulus Venetus, with whom Nicetas Choniates agrees in these
words, They go and reside as Friends and Subjects of those Princes, whom they
are designed to murder, and faining private business, or the public
employment of Envoys or Ambassadors, in secret Conference dispatch the Prince
appointed for the slaughter; never considering the difficulty of the attempt,
nor the severe punishment of such an abominated Crime: And this they do to
render themselves formidable to all men; and that none should dare to withstand
their Fury. Whereby it came to pass, that many Regions and Princes became
Tributary to this Tyrant, till he was by the Tartars put to death for a false
Prophet, and all the whole crew of Homicides quite extinguished in the Year
1262.

The same Education do the Jesuits give their Scholars in all their Schools
and Colleges, inflaming the Courages of their Disciples to all acts of impious
Violence and Villainy, under the specious pretense of doing God good service;
which being once imprinted in a mind, animated with the hopes of eternal
happiness, is enough to guide the rash hand of Impiety to the Sacred Breast of
the greatest Prince in the World,

FINIS.

