

Printed for Sam: Lownds near ye Sauoy. 1677.

THE GREAT LAW OF Consideration: OR A DISCOURSE, Wherein the Nature,
Usefulness, and Absolute Necessity OF Consideration In order to a truly Serious
and Religious LIFE, is laid open: By ANTHONY HORNECK, Preacher at the SAVOY.

Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.
Lactant. Lib. 1. Instit. Been dicere ad paucos pertinet, been autem vivere ad
omnes. London, Printed by T. N. for Sam. Lownds near the Savoy in the Strand.
M.DC.LXXVII.

IMPRIMATUR,

October. 25. 1676. Guli. Sill R.P.D. Henr. Episc, Land. a Sacris Domesticis.

TO HIS GRACE Christopher, Lord Duke of Albemarle, etc. Lord Lieutenant of the
Counties of Devon, and Essex, Gentleman of His Majesty's Bedchamber, one of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Knight of the Most Noble Order of
the Garter, etc.
My LORD, May it please your Grace,
I Dare not call this Address Presumption, the usual Compliment men give to
Persons of Honor in Dedications of Books, but Duly, and the greatest Service,
I can pay you, It Is the cause of God, and the cause of Men's immortal Souls, I
am defending in this Treatise, a Subject, which claims attention from all
degrees of men, and wherein the most puissant Prince is as much concerned, as
the meanest Vassal. It is a future estate, and what becomes of men, when their
bodies do drop from them, and what they must do to inherit that eternal glory,
which a merciful God has been pleased to promise them, that I intend to speak
to; and if there be such a thing, as a retribution after Death, and our Souls,
When they leave their earthly Tabernacles, must come to an after-reckoning, and
appear before the dreadful Tribunal of a just and infinite Majesty, certainly
that man is unjust to himself, and an enemy to his own preservation, that dares
neglect his preparation for that great, and tremendous Audit, and prefers not
meditation on that last account before all the sensual enjoyments of this World.

My LORD, We are fallen into an Age, wherein some few daring men (indeed their
number is inconsiderable, compared with the more sober part of Mankind) have
presumed to mock at a punishment after death, and termed that a Bugbear,
derived from the tales of Priests, and the melancholy of contemplative men,
which the wiser World heretofore was afraid to entertain, but with most serious
reflections. When the ripest and most subact judgments for almost six thousand
years together, by the instinct of Nature, and Conscience, have believed a
future Retribution, it is pretty, to see a few raw Youths, who have drowned
their Reason in Sensuality, and scarcely ever perused any Books, but Romances,
and the lascivious Rhapsodies of Poets, assume to themselves a power to
control the universal sense, and consent of Mankind; think themselves wiser,
than all the grave Sages, that have lived before them; and break Jests in their
Riots and Debauchery's, upon that, which not only Christians, but Jews,
Mahometans, and Heathens, the subtilest, and most knowing of them, have ever
since we have any Record or History of their Actions, and Belief, professed,
and embraced with all imaginable Reverence.

And are not things come to a fine pass, My LORD, when Christianity, the
clearest Revelation that was ever vouchsafed to men, has been received,
confirmed, and approved of in the World above sixteen hundred years, and the
greatest Philosophers in many of those Countries, where it has taken Root,
have not dared to doubt of the truth of it, the convincing power that came
along with it, proclaiming its Divinity and Majesty, that these bold Attentates
should now begin to arraign its Authority, and put us upon proving the first
Principles of it, as if the World were returned to its former Barbarism, and we
had once more to do with Infidels, as if men had divested themselves of
Humanity, put on the nature of Beasts, and were sent into the World to
understand no more, but the matter, and motion of the Malmsbury Philosophy.

I confess I have sometimes blamed my self for accusing these Libertines of
Atheism, when I have understood, what mortal Enemies they were to Lying, and
Nonsense; for how should not they believe a God, that cannot speak a sentence,
but must swear by him, or the truth of the Christian Religion, that put so
remarkable an Emphasis upon 's Wounds, and Blood; or another World, that do so
often imprecate Damnation to themselves, or the being of a Devil, who do not
seldom wish, he may confound them? Would not any man conclude, That Persons who
do so exclaim against every mistaken, and misplaced word, and are such perfect
Masters of Sense, and value themselves so much upon their Veracity, must needs
believe the existence of those things, they make use of in their ingenious
Oaths and Curses, the pompous Ornaments which in this Licentious Age set off
the Glory, Wit, and Gallantry of such accomplished Pretenders? But though we
must not be so unmannerly, as to accuse these Wits of contradictions in their
discourses, yet any man that does not love darkness better than light, may soon
perceive how faulty this way these Scepticks are; there being nothing more
common with them, than to smile at the Notion of that God, by whom they swore
but just before; and to raille that day of Judgment, which they seemed to
acknowledge in their absurd wishes and imprecations.

Some have I known, who in a serious Fit have been pleased to tell me, That if
they could be sure, there was another World, and a Retribution for Good and
Evil, none should exceed them in strictness of Conversation, and exact piety of
Life; and I am so charitable to believe,

that these spoke the sense of most of the rest, and that the imaginary want of
certainty in this dubious Point, diverts them from venturing on that innocence
and purity, which was the glory of the primitive Christians. But may it not be
requisite to enquire, whether these Doubters have ever taken the right way to
be satisfied? If one, that had never heard of such a City, as Exeter, should be
told, that a Friend of his lately deceased there, had left him a Thousand
pound, and he should reply, that if he were certain, there were such a City, he
would repair thither, and yet would not enquire of those, that are able to
inform him, might it not be presumed, that such an one had no mind to be
satisfied? And I durst appeal to the Consciences of these men, that doubt of an
after-retribution, whether they did ever sincerely, and impartially desire or
endeavor to be satisfied about it? Did they ever do, what every rational man
ought to do, that is willing to be ascertained of the truth of a common report?
Did they ever put themselves to half that trouble, to be convinced of the
certainty of a future judgment, that they put themselves to, when they would
know, whether the Title of the Estate, they would buy, be good or no. Do not
they trudge from Lawyer to Lawyer to advise about the Evidences, that relate to
it? And by this we guess, that they are willing to be satisfied.

To scoff at a Notion of weight and moment before examination, is a great sign
of indiscretion and folly in those that do it, whilst the prudent man, that
desires to know the truth of it, enquires what solidity there is in it, whether
any wise men were ever of that opinion, what reason they had to think so, and
what enticed, or moved them to embrace it? he is so far from exclaiming against
it at the first hearing, or arraigning those that receive it as too facile, and
credulous, that he will consult with men, whom he may rationally, suppose to be
at least as wise, and learned, as himself, and see, what Arguments they can
allege for it, and whether those arguments be satisfactory, or no; Nor would I
require more pains, or industry in the case in question, than such an
application of prudence to be satisfied in the truth of a future state, and he
that would thus proceed, must, be strangely stupid, if he be not convinced of
the verity and rationality of it.

But when I speak of enquiring into the truth of the Notion before us, I do not
mean a slight, or superficial survey of it, not a flash of conception, which
like Lightning (to ufe Plutarch's phrase) dies as soon, as born, but a serious
weighing, and pondering the matter; for it would seem a strange effect of
arrogance, and self conceitedness, to undertake at first sight, to comprehend,
and refute all the reasons of a Point, wherein very wise men have employed the
contemplation, and study of many hours. In all disputes, there are Topics of
greater, or lesser weight, and if some of these pregnant Wits find themselves
able to refel some of the waekest arguments, it is ill Lugick to infer, that
threfore they can as easily answer the strongest, and most judicious; And yet
this is the usual method, whereby these vain men discipline themselves into
unbelief; They are careful to pick out such additional proofs, which men of
Reason super add to their weightiest observations, and these they take the
boldness to cavil at, whilst they avoid those more material evidences, which
would stagger their understandings, and write a Mean Mean Tekel Upharsin upon
their Lusts and Passions, which careless disposition I can ascribe to nothing
so much, as want of CONSIDERATION. And indeed it is lamentable to see men endued
with Reason, sink so much beheath it, and live in the reverse of those
Principles, which the Supreme Architect of Heaven and Earth has engraven on
their Consciences. To reduce such and other sinful men to a serious
Consideration of their spiritual Concerns, is the chief design of this Work and
all I shall request of your Grace, is, that you will be pleased to peruse it
sometimes at your hours of leisure, not that I pretend to have writ more or
better on this Subject, than far more Learned Authors have done before me, but
as the mighty Artaxerxes accepted of a cup of water from the hand of a Peasant,
so your Grace will let the World see, how great a Master you are in the Art of
Condescension, by countenancing the poor Present of,

MY LORD, YOUR GRACES Most faithful, and most obedient Servant, and Chaplain,
Anthony Horneck.

THE Preface.
THe great Foes of Religion, which have in all Ages opposed its progress, and
undermined its glory, are Hypocrisy and Profaneness. Between these two Thieves,
the Jewel hangs, as its great Master on the Cross; and they both revile it, the
one under the character of a familiar Friend, the other under that of an open
Enemy: which of these does the greatest harm, is something difficult to
determine. Hypocrisy commonly ushers in Profaneness, and as a Lad thrust in at
a Window, opens the door to the greater Monster; for there is nothing more
common, than for men, who are not very discerning, to contemn all Piety, when
they see the blackest Crimes prosecuted under that silken Mantle, and men with
the Temple of the Lord in their mouths, abuse both the Temple, and the God,
that dwells in it. People, whose understandings are weak, observing men to carry
Daggers under their Bibles, and to make use of the noblest means for the worst,
and basest ends are apt to think they may with authority laugh at all, that is
sacred, and fancy they are excused from all devotion, when they find the
greatest pretenders make it only a trick to cheat the world. Whether that
Profaneness, which has too much of late incroach'd upon this Western World, do
not owe its original to such Religious pretenses of men, who under the name of
justice and sanctity have dared to do that, which Heathens would have trembled
at, I leave to wiser men, than myself to judge.

Only I cannot but take notice of a strange effect, which our Sermons have
accidentally, as the Sun does Snakes and Serpents, when shining upon unclean
Dunghils, produced in the Lives of too many, of whom we might justly have
expected better returns in Religion; for while we have been discouraging them
from Hypocrisy, they have run out into Debauchery; and while we have
endeavored to clear our Church from such as have but a form of Godliness, they
have made our attempt an opportunity to indulge themselves in their Lusts, and
thought that the way to approve themselves true members of our Church, was to
drink, and swear, and be lewd, and to commit those sins openly, which the other
may be did in secret; Excellent Sons of the Church! that Viper-like, tear up
her bowels, and by their gallantry fetched from Hell rail at their Mother more,
than Shimei did at David. I may be bold to affirm, That there is no Church this
day in all the Christian World, that in her Doctrine does either encourage real
goodness more, or strives more to keep the balance even, that God may have the
things which are Gods, and man the things which are man's, than that we live in;
yet to our sorrow we find, that while we have given People leave to laugh at
Religious dissimulations, they have laughed themselves into Licentiousness; and
while they have taken liberty to cavil at a false Religion, they have at last
learned to be averse from all that looks like Holiness. This has made me some
time admire, what these men do with their reason, and they that do not
presently forswear buying any more Pearls, because some there are, that sell
counterfeit ones for true, strange! They should to avoid one extreme run into
another, and to shun deceptions in Religion, run as far from it, as the Devil
can mislead them: How soon might the folly of both extremes be discovered, if
men were but willing to think more than they do! But while they go on in a road
of a few outward duties, and consider not, how unworthy of that Church, and
Gospel they live, whose Friends they profess themselves to be, no marvel, if
they fright men away from our Assemblies, and bring darkness upon all the Land
of Goshen.

The just indignation, I have taken, at the injuries, our Church suffers from
these scandalous men, has been partly the occasion of this Treatise. For I see
men's Cures lie within their own breasts, and that so many are sick unto death,
and ready to perish, the reason is, because they will not reflect, what
unreasonable men they are; nor represent to themselves the wrong they do to
their own Souls by a lively Consideration, as will evidently appear in the
ensuing Discourse.

I confess, diverse accomplishments, which render a Book acceptable to curious
Palates, such as are, Rhetoric, Elegancy of Style, Fancy, Wit, and quotations
of Authors, etc. will be found wanting here, but as I profess no skill that
way, so my design was not so much to fill men's heads with Notions, as their
hearts with Fire. It was to engage the ignorant, and careless, to a substantial
improvement of their reason; and if what I have said, can prevail with those
that have lived like Beasts, to recover themselves into men again, I both
undervalue the little Censures of supercilious men, and content my self with
that success. We cannot all shine as stars of the first magnitude in the wide
Firmament of the Church; those that cannot, must give such light, as they are
able to dispense; I envy not our Eagles in Divinity, that they see far more,
than I, but thank God, I see so much; and while the greater Sages offer Gold,
and Myrrh, and Frankincense, I am happy enough, if I may be allowed to bring
Goats hair, and Badgers skins, toward the accomplishment of the Tabernacle. A
critical eye may spy faults in this Free Will offering, and I do not wonder at
it, for my duller sight, now I have done, discovers more than I wish, there
were in it, But my discourse is fitted to my end. Doing good is my intent; if I
succeed not, it is no more, but what greater men have failed of. Farewell.

The Contents of the Chapters contained in this Treatise.
CHAP. I. THE Nature of our Souls. The Eternal State, they are designed for.
The Means God has made use of, to fit Men for Everlasting Bliss. All these
Means ineffectual without Consideration. CHAP. II. Consideration no transitory
view of spiritual things, imports laying the Heart and Mind close unto
spiritual Concerns; resembles magnifying Glasses, which discover things
imperceptible by the naked eye. The great Ingredients of it, Self-Examinatian,
Expostulation, and strong Resolution. CHAP. III. The absolute necessity of
Consideration in order to a serious life. Gods frequent commands to that
purpose. Our Reason, and the power of Consideration we are furnished, or endu'd
with, proved to be given us for this end. Without it, Men have cause to
suspect, that their Reformation is counterfeit. CHAP. IV. Of the various
impediments and remora's of Consideration. Men fancy greater difficulty in it,
than there is indeed. Are continually employed about sensual objects. Loath to
part with their sins. Ignorant of the pleasure of Consideration. Reflect upon
the danger of lasing their unlawful gain. Fear they shall fall into,
melancholy, or go distracted with so much seriousness. Are of opinion, that
Conversion, in that sense the Scripture speaks of it, is needless. Mistake the
nature of Consideration. Are discouraged by evil company. Neglect consulting
with Ministers about this necessary work. Delude themselves, with the Notion of
Christ's dying for the sins of the world. CHAP. V. Of the various Mischiefs
arising from Neglect of Consideration. The want of it proved to be the Cause of
most Sins. Some Instances are given in Atheism Unbelief, Swearing, Pride,
Carelessness in Gods-Service, Lukewarmness, Covetousness, etc. CHAP. VI. Of the
various advantages of serious Consideation; it is that, which makes a man master
of all Christian Duties; it helps a man to improve Sublunary Objects into
Heavenly Contemplations. It Is the greatest support under afflictions; disposes
a man to be a worthy Receiver of the Lords Supper: Prepares him for an
Angelical Life on Earth; makes him prudent and discreet in Secular Affairs, and
Businesses. CHAP. VII. A pathetical Exhortation to men, Who are yet strangers
to a serious, religious Life, to consider their ways; the wilfulness of their
neglect; how dangerous it is; how inexcusable they are; how inhumane to God,
and their own Souls; how reasonablel God's requests are, and how justly God may
turn that power of Consideration, he has given them, into blindness, and
hardness of heart, since they make so ill a use of it, etc. CHAP. VIII. Of
Retirement, and Prayer, the two great helps to Consideration. Retirement proved
to be necessary, to make Consideration of our spiritual state more quick, and
lively. Prayer call in the assistance of Gods Spirit, and renders the work
effectual. A Form of Prayer to be used upon this occasion.
ERRATA.
PAge 39 l. 6. for harden r. charm, p. 59. unseasonableness r.
unreasonableness, p. 108. l. 28. not r. no. p. 117. l. 15. immediately r.
mediately. p. 118. l. 14. tears r. teazes. p. 127. l. 26. prepares r. prepare.
p. 148. l. 16. sleeping r. pleasing. p. 195. l. 26. blown-balls r. blow-balls.
p. 198. l. 16. pass. r. compass. p. 200. l. 8. nearer, r. meaner. p. 207. l. 3.
Love God r. How! God, p. 219. l, 24. wherein r. who is. p. 238. have persuaded
r. have as well persuaded, p. 293. l. 26. in r. is. p. 310. l. 10. when r.
where. ibid. then r. there. p. 337. l. r. saciety r. society. p. 340. l. 26
Friends r. Fiends. p. 372. l. 4. reasons r. reason. p. 385. l. 25. Zachans r.
Zachaeus. p. 400. l. 12. delivered r. deliveredst.

Other literal faults, and mlstoppings, the Reader is desired to Correct as he
reads.

CONSIDERATION, THE Nature, Usefulness and Necessity of it, in order to a
Serious Life.
CHAP. I. The Nature of our Souls. The Eternal State, they are designed for.
The Means God has made use of, to fit Men for Everlasting Bliss. All these
Means ineffectual without Consideration.
THat we are designed for Nobler Employments, than Eating, and Drinking, and
Sleeping, and Playing, and following our Trades, and Businesses in this World,
a happiness which Beasts arrive to as well as we; the great Souls which we
carry in our Breasts, do evidently demonstrate. These being capable of knowing
God, of delighting in him, and conversing with him for ever, we may rationally
suppose, That those, who suffer the Profits and Pleasures of this present
World, to engross their Affections, go astray, and Err from the great End of
their Creation.

While the Atheist laughs at the immortality of his Soul, and the Profane
selis his better part to the Devil, the Religious, who will prove the only
wise Man in the end, and who has none of those clouds and mists, the other are
troubled with, before his eyes, sees clearly what a Treasure the bountiful hand
of Heaven has bestowed on him, in shedding so excellent, so angelical a Being
into his Body. A Soul that can build it is Nest among the Stars of Heaven, walk
through yonder Mansions, and taste of the Rivers which make glad the City of
God. A Soul which can wing it self into the Clouds, and survey the Crowns and
Scepters laid up for those that dare despise the World, and have their
Conversation in Heaven. A Soul which can enjoy a Paradise, while the Body is in
trouble; and rejoice in him, who is All in All, while the fierce Winds are
whistling about her ears.

The vast reach of these Souls, we have, their fitness to receive Divine
illumination their strong desires after Immortality, their secret actings
without the help of a Body, their hopes of Heaven, their fears of Hell, all
proclaim, the certainty of an eternal state or condition, they are intended for.

This eternal state imprinted on our Natures, discovered to the Gentiles,
proclaimed by the Son of God, preached by Angels, confirmed by Apostles,
revealed to Christians, believed in the World, as it relates either to Bliss or
Misery, to Joy or Torment, to Honor or Dishonor; so how to enjoy the one, and
avoid the other, must in all probability be the great object which God designed
Men's Souls should be chiefly employed about.

For as there cannot be a thing of greater moment than Eternity; so he must be
a Sot, a Beast, that can imagine, that God, who ever intends the noblest
Creatures for the noblest Ends, will give Men leave to busy themselves
altogether about picking of straws, and pleasing a few sensual Lufts, when he
has given them Souls capable not only of laboring and seeking after, but
obtaining a Kingdom which fades not away. And when we sweat, and toil, and
labor, to make provision for twenty, thirty, forty years, what do we do, but
proclaim our obligation to be infinitely more concerned, how to provide for
that state, which must never have an end?

And as it was the goodness and wisdom of God to make us capable of an
everlasting duration, so we should be injurious to both, if we did not suppose
that God has ordered and appointed means, whereby it is possible to save our
selves from the wrath to come.

He that takes a view of Gods proceedings, and dealings with Men, ever since
the Creation of the World, cannot but stand amazed at the cost and labor, and
pains, and means, and motives, and arguments, God has used to make Men
sensible of their everlasting interest, and to engage them to a serious
preparation for that World, they must live for ever in.

This serious preparation must necessarily be a holy, blameless, spotless life,
for the means must ever be suitable and agreeable to the nature of the end. And
Heaven being a holy place, perlect holiness reigning there, it is not to be
imagined, how perfection of holiness can be entered upon, without a
considerable progress in holiness here, no man reaching the highest step of a
Ladder without the lowermost; and one might as well flatter himself, that his
Trade by such a time will bring him in Ten thousand pounds, when he is so far
from minding his Trade, that he contrives only how to run with others into
excess of Riot.

And indeed to plant this holiness in Men, the means have been so various, so
numerous, so potent before the Law, under the Law, and under the Gospel, that
one may justly admire, the whole World does not stand candidate for Heaven, and
all the Inhabitants of the Earth do not take the Kingdom of God by violence.

Before the Law, the continual pleadings of the long-lived Patriarchs with
sinful Men, to improve the light of Nature, that Primar of Divinity, the many
Visions, Revelations, Dreams, Signs, Wonders, Voices from Heaven, the Ministry
of Angels, Gods Patience, Forbearance, Long-suffering, and sometimes Exemplary
Justice, the Examples of holy Men, Gods love to those that honored him, the
signal blessings he bestowed on those that made him their highest, and chiefest
good, what were all these but so many calls and entreaties, that Men would by
holiness prepare for a future happiness.

Under the Law, God was so far from being weary of using means, and taking
pains with Men in order to this end, that he seemed to have reserved those Ages
for larger and fuller Demonstrations of his Power and Munificence; and if the
people of Lystra had any ground for their exclamation, the Jews had far greater
reason to cry out, Acts 14.11.
That God was come down to them in the likeness of men. For while other
Countries were left in darkness, and like Moles, suffered to wander in the
shadow and valley of death, they, as if they had been made of purer Clay, seemed
to be the Darlings of Providence, and the Favorites of Heaven. Heaven bowed to
them, and under its protection they went, as under a Canopy of State, and
might, with greater reason than the Sultan, have challenged that lofty Title,
The shadow of God: And with that Persian Emperor, styled themselves, Kinsmen of
the Stars. Their eyes saw Miracles almost every day; and with their daily
Bread, they received daily Prodigies; and in the midst of their Rebellion, God,
like the Sun when smiling through a Cloud, showed them a merciful Face; not
that he approved of their Impiety. but because by these Beams he would warm
their hearts into obedience. Their Blessings came down upon them not in drops,
but in showers; and their Prosperity, like the Cinnamon Tree, was so fragrant,
that strangers might smell it a great way off, before they saw it. The Waters
of Life were continually flowing into their Bosoms; and though God now and
then frowned upon them, (what Father would not sometimes chide his Son?) yet
his Indignation, which, like Flints, sent out Fire, upon their penitential
Tears, strait way returned to its former coldness. The Rocks poured them out
Rivers of Oil, they washed their Feet in Butter; and one might say of their
Land, as he Aen. Sylvius.
of the Isle of Rhodes, They were blessed with a continual Sunshine. Their
Prophets, what mighty, what powerful Men were they? Men that, like Lamps,
consumed their own Oil, to light their Auditors to Heaven; or like Silkworms,
spun out their own Bowels, to deck their Hearers with Garments of
Righteousness. Where words could not prevail, Tears were the means to supple
and affect them; and, it seems, there is not stronger Rhetoric in the World
than these? Here one Prophet spoke like an Orator, there another like a
Logician. Here one endeavored by Eloquence to charm them, there another by
clear Reason to convince them. Here one threatened, there another promised. Here
one wooed, there another thundered. Here one came with a Scepter of Love, there
another with a Trumpet of War. Here one offered his hand to save them, there
another made bare his arm of revenge. Here one offered an Ark to those that
desired mercy, there another rained down floods of Curses to drown the
obstinate. Here one represented God with his Sword drawn, a smoke going up out
of his nostrils, Psalm. 18.8.
and devouring fire out of his mouth, there another followed sinners to the
very gates of Hell, with offers of mercy in his hand; and while Vengeance was
knocking at the door, and the Sword was at their heatts, called to them, Turn
ye, Turn ye, why will ye dye? And what was all this, but to lay invincible
obligations on Men to Reform, and by Reformation of their Lives, to arrive at
last to that Harbor of Bliss and Immortality, which the great preserver of Men
has prepared for those that fear him.

Under the Gospel, as if beyond this there were no other remedy to engage Men
to holiness, the Son of God himself comes down from Heaven, and turns Preacher.
He that commands all the powers of Light and Darkness, appears in a Pulpit. He
by whom the Worlds were made, leaves the brightness of his Fathers glory, to
tell Men, what a Monster Sin is, how odious, how loathsome in the eyes of God;
how lovely, how amiable, how beautiful the ways of God are: confirms the
sayings of all the Prophets of old, assures Men (and certainly he could not
tell a lie) that all those Messengers of old were in the right, when they
professed, That Iniquity would be Men's ruin, and that at yonder gate no
unclean thing should enter, and that God must be preferred before all the
Riches, Honors and Pleasures of this World, a favor for which we want
expression, and which we must draw a vail over, as Timantes the Painter did
over the face of Iphigenia's Father, because we cannot reach it with our
colors. If a King should send a Messenger with a Pardon to a Malefactor that is
ready to be turned off of the Ladder, there is no Man but a stranger to pity
and compassion, but would speak in commendation of the Royal mercy; but should
the King himself approach the place of Execution, and absolve him, it is like
the unexpected bounty would cast the Malefactor into a Swoon. And then, when
the great God of Heaven and Earth made his favor exstatical, went out of the
common road of mercy, stepped beyond all precedents and examples, increased his
kindness into perfect miracles, miracles which the Ages before cannot parallel,
and the Son of God made his way through all the Clouds of Heaven, to tell Men
how God longed for their society and happiness, we cannot suppose a possibility
of greater condescension. And that which still increases the Wonder, this Son
of God entreats, wooes, and beseeches Men to bethink themselves, and dress up
their Souls for the next Worlds glory. He that might have come (as one day most
certainly he will) with flames of fire, and taken vengeance on the obstinate,
and terrified and startled them into seriousness, and might without a Metaphor
as it is, Psalm. 45.3. girded his Sword upon his Thigh, and looked stern on the
Rebels, that would not have him reign over them, and frowned them into Hell.
That this Son of God, this Sovereign Prince, whom all the Elements serve, at
whose command the Waters drown, and the Fire burns, and the Earth swallows up,
that he should come, and draw near the City, and instead of consuming, weep
over it, as if he meant to quench the fire of Gods indignation against it; and
instead of dooming it outright to eternal vengeance, wish, O that thou had
known in this thy day, what belongs unto thy peace! Call like a tender
compassionate Father, How often would I have gathered you, as a Hen does gather
her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not! That he should bear affronts,
and in the midst of those injuries, entreat Men to be reconciled to him, and
seek for a Pardon! That he should conjure Mankind by Tears, and Wounds, and his
own Blood, by those very Torments and Agonies he endured for them, to have
mercy on themselves, to take a view of the burning Lake beneath, and run away
to look upon the joys above, and be ravished with the sight! That he should
court them by the sweetest invitations, and the kindest calls; by the greatest
offers, and the softest promises; promises of assistance, and of his holy
Spirit, of peace and joy in the Holy Ghost; and seal his strong desires and
longings after their holiness with his own death, and after his death, being
risen again, sends Apostles, and whole Armies of Confessors and Martyrs, to
establish those desires, ordain a Function of Men, that might preach those
Desires in Men's ears to the Worlds end, this indeed is a condescension, which
the great ministering Spirits in Heaven stand amazed at, and may justly be
looked upon to be one of those things, the Angels desire to pry into.

By such astonishing means has the great immortal God endeavored to effect
that holiness in Men, that Seriousness, that Piety, that Heavenly-mindedness
which he has appointed to be the only way to endless bliss. Glorious means
indeed! But then they are no more but Pearls thrown before Swine where Men
consider not how far they are concerned in the heavenly Call. And what can be
the meaning of all these arts and stratagems of Divine compassion, and what
should make God thus sollicitous and careful to procure man's happiness, and how
dreadful it must be to neglect so great a salvation? To lay all this labor and
industry, and indefatigable pains of God before their eyes, where they will not
fix their contemplations on the Remedies intended for their recovery, what is
it, but to make a learned Oration to a flock of sheep, to talk to a blind Man
of Colors, to discourse Mathematics to one in a Fever, and to prepare
Elixirs, and Cordials, for Men deprived of life and sense? Without
Consideration, we have little but shape and speech left us, to distinguish us
from Beasts; and God clearly loses the virtue of his exhortations and
entreaties, except Consideration sets them home, digests and applies them to
the Soul, and the inward thoughts, like Sunbeams in a burning Glass, unite and
continue so long upon these spiritual objects, till they set the heart on fire.

CHAP. II. Consideration no transitory view of spiritual things, imports laying
the heart and mind close unto spiritual Concerns; resembles magnifying Glasses,
which discover things imperceptible by the naked eye. The great Ingredients of
it, Self-Examination, Expostulation, and strong Resolution.
HOW Consideration, Thinking, Pondering, Meditation, Contemplation do differ,
is not material to enquire. Consideration includes all these, and is nothing,
but exercising and improving that rational Faculty, the great Architect has
bestowed on us, to the glory of God, and the felicity of our immortal Souls.
The character St. Bernard gives of it, may help to illustrate this Description.
It distinguishes, says he, things confused, collecteth such as lie dispersed,
searches and dives into such as are concealed and hid, examines probabilities,
reflects upon what is done, resolves what to do, and presses toward the mark,
for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

The Schoolmen are in the right, when they call it, employing the whole
understanding about a thing; for indeed a flash of Thinking is no more
Consideration, than a few wandering sparks can be said to warm a spacious Room:
and as in cold Weather Men do not get themselves a heat by a step or two, but
by such exercises, as put the Body into a violent motion; so neither will a
careless thought now and then, heat the heart within, but Consideration, which
puts the Soul into a strong and vigorous motion or agitation, is that which
must kindle the holy fire, and shed life into all the faculties of the inward
Man.

Not to mention here, that the word was originally used to express the industry
of Astronomers, who, by diligent contemplation, and observation of the stars,
their Motion, Position, Conjunction, Influences, etc. gave a judgment of the
several Phenomenon, or appearances they met withal, from whence it was
afterward applied to Men who seriously and attentively ponder things of moment,
whether Civil or Sacred. The Scripture usually expresses it, (...) Hagg. 1.5, 7.
by laying our hearts close to our ways, as if it were with Consideration, as
it is with Men's listening to a confused noise, and laying their ears close to a
Wall, with design to get a more distinct knowledge of it.

And indeed without Consideration, Eternal Life, and our Duties in order to it,
appear no very great attractives. Consideration clears up those Notions,
dispells the Clouds and Mists that dwell upon our Reason, wipes away the Dust,
discovers unknown Worlds, and makes even such things as were vulgar obvious
before, look with a new face, they being found upon Consideration things of
greater consequence, of greater comfort, of greater necessity, of greater
virtue and efficacy, than before they were believed to be.

It is much with Consideration, as it is with Microscopes and Magnifying
Glasses; what contemptible Creatures do some little Animals* and the smaller
sorts of Plants appear, while beheld with our naked eye, but viewed through
Dioptrical Glasses, what curious Fabrics do we spy? How inconsiderable an
Insect is a Fly? How despicable a Creature is a Mite? Yet he that through such
Glasses, beholds in them all the perfections of the largest Animals, the
multiplicity of their parts, the variety of their motions, and how curiously
every limb is wrought, how mathematically all their little members are framed,
and set together, cannot but wonder at the spectacle, and break forth into
admiration of the immense Wisdom of their Maker.

Consideration is that Glass, which represents spiritual objects in other
colors, than before were observed and detected in them. Sin, that looked but
with a faint red before, through this Glass, appears all Scarlet, and Crimson.
Gods Laws, which before were hardly regarded so much as humane Injunctions,
through this Glass, appear so beautiful, so rational, so wise, so wonderful, so
suited to an intelligent Nature, that a Man with David cannot hold, but must
cry out, O how I love thy Law, it is my meditation all the day. The New
Jerusalem, which looked but like an ordinary Building before, when viewed
through this Glass, the Towers and Bulwarks of it are seen glittering afar off,
the Pearls and precious Stones, it is paved withal, shine with more than
ordinary luster; and that which looked but dull and weak before, now dazles the
Spectators eyes with its oriental brightness.

But this will further appear, if we enquire into the essential parts, or
necessary ingredients of these spiritual Optics. Consideration, as it is the
Sun, that enlightens this Microcosme Man, and irradiates the benighted
faculties of the Soul so, that it may have this virtue, there is required (and
it cannot be Consideration without it) Self-Examination, Expostulation, and
strong Resolution.

I. Self-Examination. That man, who examines not his spiritual estate or
condition, whether he is that sinner, that shall be everlastingly miserable?
whether the threatenings of the Gospel concern him? whether he finds those
qualifications in himself, which the Son of God requires of all that shall be
Heirs of glory? whither he feels those things in his Soul, which men that have
a title to the great Inheritance are sensible of? and whither he walks in that
strait way, and strives to enter in at that narrow gate, the Holy Ghost does
speak of?

He that with Gallio, cares for none of these things, is so far from
considering, that he does not believe the immortality of his Soul, or another
World. For were his heart seasoned with a sound belief of that future state, he
could not but enter into his Closet, and reflect. In this Bible, in this Book,
which I do believe contains the Oracles of God, and his peremptory Will,
concerning the salvation of men, I find stubborn, careless, unconverted sinners
adjudg'd to eternal torments; I find God protest, he will know none in the last
day, so as to show them favor, but such as dare deny themselves for Heaven, and
heartily endeavor to do the Will of their Father, which is in Heaven; I find
God swear, that men who prefer their Farms and Oxen, and secular Concerns,
before his Injunctions, and Commands, shall never taste of the great Supper of
the Lamb.

Am I one of these stubborn, unconverted, careless men or no? Why should I be
afraid to ask such a question, when there is no less than Eternity in the case?
If I am none of this number, 1 Samuel 15.14.
What means the bleating of Sheep, and the lowing of Oxen in mine ears? What
means my earthly mindedness? What means my living in wilful Contempt of so many
commands of the Son of God? I take no pains to be saved; some little
formalities and complements of Religion serve my turn, and satisfy my
Conscience. I can put off the great God of Heaven with the Worlds leavings, and
throw him a dull heartless prayer at night, when I have been wallowing in sin
all day. I am for no devotion that is either expensive or troublesome to flesh
and blood, and such ejaculations as do not molest me in my pleasures; and as my
flesh can easily spare without any detriment in its satisfaction, I am willing
to lay upon Gods Altar. I feel little or no sorrow for sin, no remorse, no
compunctions, when I offend a gracious God. A temporal advantage affects and
revives me more, than all the joys of Heaven. If I do sometimes resolve, to
leave either my grosser vices, or my more secret iniquities, the next company
or divertisement takes me off again; and I make no more of breaking my solemn
promises of better obedience, than if God were a mere stock, or stone, that
takes no notice of affronts, and injuries. Self-denial I am so great a stranger
to, that I know not what it means. The graces and fruits of Gods Spirit, Love,
Joy, Peace, Goodness, Faith, Temperance, Meekness, Patience, Long-suffering,
have so little of my desires and affections, that I think it but time and
labor lost to bethink my self how to be Master of any of them. Why should I
flatter and deceive my self? Why should I sooth my self into kind thoughts of
my condition, that is so apparently dangerous? Thus it is with me, why should I
deny it? Why should I call light darkness, and darkness light; put bitter for
sweet, and sweet for bitter? Whom do I cheat all this while, is it not my own
Soul? And what shall I gain by it in the end? Shall I think my self
sufficiently holy, when I am so little acquainted with the first rudiments of
Holiness? Shall I think my self a Child of God, when that which I do, is fitter
for a Child of the Devil, than for a Favorite of Heaven? Conversion, or
turning to God, which the Holy Ghost does so often and with that vehemence and
earnestness inculcate, implies an universal change of my disposition, and
inclinations. And where is that alteration, that renovation of the Mind, Will,
and Affections? My Affections are carried out after Froth, and smoke as much as
ever. My Love is set on Trifles, and is regardless of the highest and chiefest
good, as much as ever. I hate Seriousness, and delight in childish, impertinent
Gayeties as much as ever. The promises of the Gospel are as inconsiderable in
my eyes, and the riches of this World as glorious and ravishing as ever; and I
can dispense with the want of spiritual consolations, while I have but my share
in these outward comforts. My feet run in the ways of destruction, and my eyes
are dazzled with external pomp and grandeur as much as ever. An amorous Song is
more pleasing to me, than the most harmonious Psalm. The Word of God is but a
dead Letter to me, while a Romance, or a Book that Treats of Folly and Vanity,
Transports me into more than ordinary content and satisfaction: And what I must
eat? And what I must drink? And wherewithal I shall be clothed? Are questions
I have a far greater desire to be resolved in, than to know, what I must do to
please God, and to be happy for ever? If I have made light of the Thunders and
Threatenings of Scripture, I do so still. If I have preferred my secular
Interest, before Gods Honor and Glory, I do so still. If I have feared Men,
more than God, I do so still. If I have been loath to do good with the Temporal
blessings God has conferred upon me, I am so still. And what Sins I leave, it is
more because I have no inclination to them, or because I am afraid they will
spoil and blemish my Reputation in the World, than because I love that God who
made me, and has obliged me by a thousand Favors to esteem and prize him
above all. And is this the Coat of the Sons of God? Is this the Livery of a
Christian indeed? Is this done like a Man that lives upon Gods Bounty, is fed
by his Charity, supported by his Alms, and maintained from his Storehouse, and
cannot subsist one moment without his Concourse, and has not a better Friend
in all the World than him, who is the Fountain of living Waters? Consideration,
one great design of it being to know how the case stands between God and our
own Souls, such a Self-examination must of necessity be the Corner stone of
this spiritual Building, and comparing our Lives with the Rules of the Gospel,
and the proper characters of such as are in a likely way to enjoy God for ever,
may justly challenge the first Seat in this intellectual Paradise. But then as
building of a stately Gate without a House answerable to it, does but expose
the Builder to derision and contempt; so Self-Examination, without a serious
Expostulation with our own hearts, is but to make the Accuser of our Brethren
laugh at our vain attempts, and God scorn the endeavor, that could be crushed
in the Bud, and tired before half its Race is run.

II. Expostulation rouzes the Soul from her Slumber, and drives it away from
the soft Down it would have rested and reposed it self upon, and gives the
first blow (for Self-Examination only threatens it) to that Tree of Death, I
mean, to the reigning power of Sin; and I see not how Sin can shelter it self
any longer, or what excuses it can make for its stay and continuance, where the
Soul does summon it to appear before the Bar of Conscience, and enters into
such reasonings and interrogations as these: Are these things so, and do I
stand trifling with my salvation? Do I run the hazard of everlasting flames,
and do I lie playing in the Suburbs of destruction? Either I believe an
eternity of Torments, that shall attend a careless sinful life, or I do not: If
not, why dare not I profess my denial? Why do I play the Hypocrite, and make
the World think I do believe it? What Is the reason that I cannot shake off the
fears of it, if I would never so fain? Why does something within me check me,
when I would be so profane as to deny it? Can I ever be serious, and not
believe it? But then if I believe it, what a mad Man am I to loyter, when the
Candle I am allowed to work by is almost burnt out, and I know not how soon it
may please my great Master to extinguish it? Do I lead a life which is the
readiest way to eternal Vengeance, and shall I not step back and prevent it?
Can I imagine God will blow out that everlasting Fire, to gratify my vicious
temper? or destroy that Tophet, out of tenderness to my Lusts and Corruptions?
Can I conceive it possible, that God will go from his Word, to please a
stubborn Sinner? or prove a Liar, that I may go with greater ease to Heaven? Do
I know that I shall be miserable, if I continue in that course I have held on
in hitherto, and am I in love with eternal ruin? Am I certain that Iniquity
will be my confusion, and am I resolved to dye? I have all the reason in the
World to believe, that it was the Son of God that was the Author of those
Threatenings and Comminations I find in the Gospel: Do I believe him to be the
Son of God, and can I imagine that the least tittle of his words will perish? I
have run up and down in the World these many years, and hunted-after those
Vanities which sensual Men do dote upon: But will these save me when I dye?
Will not the remembrance of my eager pursuit after these Butterflies and
Gaudes, fill me with anguish and sorrow? Have I lived in the World all this
while, and am not I nearer Heaven than I was some years ago? Must my body
engross all my endeavors, and must my Soul be starved? I have a Soul that
cannot dye, and must not dye, and must shortly appear before Gods Tribunal, and
shall not I study its safety and happiness as much as I am able? Lord God!
should Death arrest me before I have made my Calling and Election sure, how
fearful, how wretched would my condition be? should it fall to my share to
howl in outward Darkness, how should I curse the day that ever I was born!
should those Tortures the Damned feel be inflicted on me, how should I wish
that I had lived all my days in Deserts and Wildernesses, and spent my whole
time in praying and praising of God, and given all my Goods to the Poor, and
lived upon Bread and Water, and undergone the greatest hardships and
severities, outpray'd a Saint, and out-fasted a Hermit, rather than ventured my
Soul in so slight a bottom, as worldly mindedness must necessarily be! should
that burning Lake be my Habitation for ever, O how I should imprecate all my
merry Companions that did allure me to run with them into Folly and Vanity! O
how I should wish that my eyes had never seen them; that my ears had never
heard their names; that my tongue had been torn into a thousand pieces, when
first it entertained Discourse with them; that my Arms had been cut off, when
they embraced those pleasures, which like Sirens cheat men into misery and
calamity! O how I should curse the place where my Sins were committed, the
persons that occasioned them, the hour that ever I thought of them! O how I
should wish that I had improved those opportunities I do now make light of, and
believed Moses and the Prophets that gave me warning, and turned to God, while
the doors of Grace stood open, and applied my self to the Ministers of the
Gospel, and taken directions from them what I must do to be saved! How should
the possibility of such misery fright and terrify me into watchfulness and
seriousness? Is not Eternity more to me, than a moment of time? Can that Gold
and Silver I enjoy and do so much prize and adore, be any motive to the great
Judge of Life and Death to absolve me? Can the pleasures of Sin be antidotes
against Sin? or my Jollities procure a pardon in that day, when God shall judge
men according to the Gospel? What makes me thus stupid, that I should forgo the
Milk and Honey of Canaan, for the pitiful Garlicks and Onions of Egypt? What
Devil does possess me, that I should prefer Dancing and Revelling for a few
hours, before endless joy? where is my reason? What Is become of my
understanding? Am I bewitched, besotted, beguiled, that I should believe a few
flattering motions of flesh, and blood, before all the Oracles and Inspirations
of the Holy Ghost? Can there be any thing more reasonable than Christ's
precepts? What is there in them that should discourage me? If God had commanded
severer things, is not Heaven recompense enough? I that forbear the greatest
Delicacies, shun the choicest Dainties, will not be tempted to eat of the most
palatable Dish, when I am sensible it will bring upon me the pain either of
Collic or Strangury. Nay, I that lying under a raging painful Distemper, wish
my self a Beggar, or the poorest Body alive, and would be content to stoop to
the meanest offices, so I might be but freed from the Malady which torments me,
can I scruple to obey these Laws, when it is to avoid an eternity of pain and
flames? Was not Dives as stubborn as I can be, and have not I reason to believe
if he were on earth again, he would think the Law of Charity the easiest and
the reasonablest Law imaginable? Have not I reason to believe he would go
beyond Zachaeus, leave himself but just enough to live on, and study how to do
good with the rest? Have not I reason to believe, that the Laws of Christ
would seem very facil and practicable to him? Can I think he would say, A
Little more sleep, and a little more slumber, and delay his obedience? He that
has felt the misery of another World, would think nothing too good, nothing
too dear, nothing too costly, to sacrifice to him who is the King immortal,
invisible, blessed for evermore. God that gave me these Laws, and has entailed
everlasting bliss on my sincere obedience, certainly knew best what was fit and
expedient for me; and he that is acquainted with my sitting down, and mine
uprising, and had a hand in my frame, can I think he would prescribe me any
thing prejudicial to my happiness? These precepts, as they are effects of the
greatest wisdom, so they cannot but be highly beneficial, and promote my
spiritual interest, for they drop from a God that is infinitely good, as well as
infinitely wise; so that not to submit to them, is not only to stand in my own
light, and to hinder my Soul from its proper food and nourishment, but to make
my self wiser than the Almighty, and to extol my reason above his Omniscience,
and to accuse his immense wisdom of rashness and folly, and shall I add
blasphemy to my disobedience? Am I afraid God is not enraged enough against me,
or that his Anger is not red enough? shall I throw brimstone into the flame, to
make that consuming fire more terrible? Is it such a pleasure to have God my
Foe? Is it such a satisfaction to have him, that can destroy both Soul and Body
into Hell, for my Adversary? such Labyrinths, such Inconveniences do I cast my
self into by my sinful life, and are these encouragements to continue in it? Is
this the Wedding garment I may triumph in? Shall I sing in Chains, rejoice in
Fetters, glory in my Shackles, be proud of the Devils Service, boast of my
Slavery? When is it that I intend to be clean, shall I delay it one moment
longer, that know not but I may be in Hell before the Clock does strike again?
Dull blockish heart, what do thou mean? Do thou stand upon the brink of
destruction, and art thou not afraid? Do thou see a crucified Jesus
stretching forth his Arms to embrace thee, and do thou feel no warmth, no
heat, no zeal, no affection? Do thou see the great burning Lake before thee,
and do not thou quake and tremble? Do thou see the Revenger of blood upon
thy heels, and wilt not thou run into the City of Refuge? Do thou see the
Angel of the Lord preparing to rain down Fire and Brimstone on thee, and will thou not save thy self in Zoar? What hinders thee? What is it stops thy
progress? Art thou still in love with that which will undo thee? Why should
Father and Mother, Wife and Children, Brethren and Sisters, Lands and Houses
make thee lose a Crown? Has Gods Favor no Temptation? Is there no Charm in
his Love? Has Heaven no Beauty? If thou must be miserable, had thou not
better be so here, than hereafter? Shall the present Food flatter thee into
eternal hunger? And because the Tree is pleasant to the eye, will thou prepare
for being expelled out of Paradise for ever? Will a few pleasant Cups
counterballance thy everlasting Thirst? Will thou venture an everlasting storm,
for a present calm? And run the hazard* of an endless Tempest, for a few months
Recreation? O Wretch that I am! the Devil was never crucified for me, never
spilt one drop of blood for me, never endured Agonies for me; he never wore a
Crown of Thorns for me; he never tasted of the shameful death of the Cross for
me, and shall I fly into his Arms? How often has he disappointed me in my
hopes and desires, and shall I fawn upon the Enemy? lay force upon his Kingdom
of darkness, in despite of all the Bars and Bolts, and Guards which the great
King of Heaven puts between me and Damnation? I have been abused and cheated by
Sin these many years, and shall I be cheated still? Does not my blood rise at
the very thoughts of it? I that will not be cheated in my Trade or Dealings
with men, shall I suffer my self to be imposed upon by a lying Devil? And when
I study how to be revenged on him that has sold me a Peble for a Pearl, a
Bristol stone for a Diamond, and endeavor to prevent the like deception for
the time to come, shall I in these great concerns of my Soul, where the Cheat
is so apparent, where to discover it, I need do no more, but open my eyes,
where God and his holy Angels, and all the Ministers of the Gospel assure me of
the fallacy, where the Cheat is of that dangerous consequence too* borders upon
eternal Damnation, shall I be so disgenerous, so base, so low-spirited, as to
suffer my self to be thus grossly abused, and deceived? O Monster! Why so cruel
to my own Soul? Why so barbarous to my immortal part? Why so inhumane to my
spiritual interest? Why so mad to run into the fire? Why such an enemy to my
own good? Have not I enemies enough, but I must make my self my greatest Foe?
Shall I join with that roaring Lion, and teach him how to devour me? Shall I
give him advantages against my self, first let him deceive me, and then laugh
at me? first let him seduce me into the Net, and then punish me for being
taken? I believe my Children, if they tell me that they have seen such a House
on fire; and believe my Neighbors, if they assure me there are Thieves broke
into my House; and believe a Physician, who affirms, That such a Powder or Herb
is perfect Poison; and shall not I believe that God who has prepared, and
fore-ordain'd these everlasting burnings I hear and read of, and must needs
know the terror of them, shall not I believe him, when he tells me, and
protests upon the word of a God, that if I do not betake my self betimes to
another course of life, I shall assuredly fall a Prey to those endless
burnings? Shall not I believe that God that feeds me, and protects me, and
knows all things, and can do all things, and never intended me any harm, but
has given me such evidences of his kind inclinations to me, that I must deny
my own Being, if I question his willingness to have me come to the knowledge of
the truth: I choose a present Agony to keep off an After-evil, and am content
to prolong torment, so I may but prolong this mortal life; and shall not I, to
avoid those endless tortures, mortify a silly Lust, subdue my extravagant
Desires, and inflict so much Penance on my self, as to cashier all darling and
bosom iniquities? What means my Conscience, it is not quiet under all the
pleasures of sin, it is ready to accuse me; when it gets me alone, it twitches
me, I find it is a hard matter to rock it asleep; and when I think it is fast,
like a Giant it awakes again, and frights me with flashes of the next Worlds
flames, and shall I break through all those Funeral Torches, to invade
Damnation? Such Expostulations, if the heart be not all Rock and Adamant,
cannot but startle the Sinner in his Licentiousness, make him stamp with his
feet, and force him into other resolutions, which is the third ingredient of
this great Art, Consideration.

III. Strong Resolution. This is the necessary consequent of the preceding
Expostulations, if they be serious, and not used only out of formality; and the
Soul, that is by this time stung into a sense of its danger, and cries out,
Lord, what have I done? will soon fall from thence into such resolutions as
these. Does the case stand thus, and must my sinful life expire into the Worm
that dies not? must my Frolicks dye into endless howlings? and must my sport of
sin be crushed into never dying anguish? and my wilful contempt and neglect of
Gods Will, be turned into Chains of Darkness for ever? Is it so as God has
told me? (And why should he tell me so, if it were not so? Why should he fright
me with painted fire? And how could it consist with his Wisdom and Integrity to
deceive me with Bugbears, and Chimera's?) If this be the fate of a sinful life,
then tell me no more of Dalila's, tell me no more of Impediments or Excuses, or
Delays. If this be the fearful Exit of Sensuality and Irreligiousness, there is
no dallying with sin, I Will get rid of it, whatever it cost me; I Will hearken to
its soft Airs no longer; I Will be charmed no more with the lovely looks of that
Harlot; its curious Dresses, its trcacherous Glances shall commit a Rape upon
my Affections no longer. I will not for a few jolly hours neglect my eternal
safety, Eternity is not a thing to be made light of; I believe there is such a
thing, and why should I be such a Changeling as not to provide for it with all
imaginable care and industry? I am gone. Farewell Applause and Greatness of the
World. Farewell ye little shooting flames of sensual pleasures, which serve
only to delude, not to revive or enlighten an immortal Soul. Farewell my old
Acquaintance, that cocker'd and helped to please those Lusts I now abhor.
Farewell ye dangerous Friends, that would have dragged me into Hell, and would
have had me kind to you even into eternal fire. Farewell unhappy men, who would
have had me venture on that burden of Gods anger, which Devils cannot bear,
and tempted me to be miserable for companies sake, I must either have no peace
with God, or none with you. The friendship of God and the World are
incompatible, and would you have me leave my God, my happiness, my joy, my
comfort, my refuge, my hiding place, my riches, my treasure, to follow you to a
place of endless torments. I see, I see, what all your follies will come to; I
am convinced, that if there be a happiness hereafter, as I am persuaded there
is, the course ye take, cannot be the way to that Paradise. Molest me no more,
I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep Gods righteous judgments.
I see a City which has foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God, I behold
afar off a House made without hands, eternal in the Heavens. Farewell
temptations, farewell corrupted deceitful heart, I Will believe thy false
suggestions no longer, I have a surer word of Prophecy to lay hold of. How
often have thou taught me to cover my sins with plausible names, that I might
not be forced to leave them? How have thou prompted me to call my Pride,
Decency; my Covetousness, Frugality; my Drunkenness, Good Fellowship; my
Revenge, Vindication of my Honor; my Uncleanness and Lasciviousness,
impossibility of resisting the Dictates of Nature; my slandering of others,
saying, but what I hear: as if God did not see my inside, as well as outside,
or could be deceived with shadow and varnish, and were not resolved to wash
away these curious Colors with Rivers of flaming Brimstone. How often have
thou bid me call my greater enormities, little sins, and made me look on them,
as men do on objects, through the wrong end of a Perspective Glass, as if God
were altogether such an one as my self, and would therefore be contented to
call my Favorite Vices Peccadillo's, because my self was loath to call them by
another name. How often have thou flattered me with deceitful riches, if I
would but give my self that liberty my irreligious Neighbors use. How often
have thou tempted me with the famous examples of prosperous men, that have been
strangers to Seriousness, and Heavenly-mindedness. How have thou disparaged
Piety to me, as a sneaking qualification, and represented Sin as the Royal way
to Credit and Reputation? Away with these Fables, I Will be trepanned and soothed
no more; tell Children of such bables, I know too much to be ravished with
these borrowed glories. How often have thou promised me long life, and ease and
plenty, if I would stream out my golden years in vanity, and brutish delight;
as if my youth had been too good for God; and God, when he wooed me to
obedience, came but to torment me, like that evil spirit in the Gospel, before
my time, as if I were the great disposer of my time, and could command my age
to flourish at fourscore. How have thou bid me delay my Repentance and
Seriousness, and given me hopes that I should find a convenient time hereafter,
when I could keep Sin and the World no longer? as if Repentance were in my own
hands, and I could command it to attend me at my pleasure, and as if it were a
work to be dispatched with a sigh or groan How have thou tempted me to sin,
under a pretense that none should see it; or if the Sin could not be kept
secret, none should know that I had a hand in it, as if God did not see by night
as well as by day, and a private corner could keep out Omnipotence; or as if
God sat like an idle Pilot in Heaven, without regarding how the great ship of
this World is governed? How have thou, under the color of a single sin,
involved me into a necessity of adding another, and been restless till I have
added more to support the rest? And how treacherously have thou bid me walk in
the counsel of the ungodly, when it was but to engage me to stand in the way of
sinners, and then to make me sit down in the seat of the scornful? How have
thou prompted me to palliate my Offenses, and to lay them at other men's doors?
How have thou bid me trust to broken Reeds, and lean on props which were rotten
and decayed? I have seen enough of thy falsehood and inconstancy, I Will be held
no longer, I Will stay no longer in Sodom. These flowery meadows, this enameled
grass shall make me lie down no more, I see there is Death in the Pot, and the
great day will be upon me for all the seeming delay, before this poor besotted
World is aware of.

I come Lord, I Will stand out against thy calls no longer; I do hear thy voice,
and I Will harden my heart no more. O my God, will thou receive a Wretch that
has sinned thus long, and trampled on thy Laws, and played with the bread which
should have nourished him for ever? Will thou take him into thy bosom, that
has been a Rebel, a Traitor against thee these many years? I know the World
will laugh at me for this resolution. But I Will give them leave to mock; if I
can but get into yonder blessed and everlasting Mansions, laugh on ye mad men,
I have a God will honor me. If there be a future judgment, and men shall be
rewarded according to their works, and God will be so severe against stubborn
sinners as he has threatened, (and indeed he cannot be God without it, God, and
not be true to his word, implies a contradiction:) then sure I am, the rich,
the voluptuous, the carnal men of this world, that make such provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof, must certainly be in a more miserable
condition than I. Methinks I see how they tremble before the Throne. They
thought it below them here on earth to make Religion their business, methinks I
see how ashamed they are of their folly, how the wretches blush to see that God
has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise. Methinks I
hear them cry out to Rocks and Mountains, Fall on us, and hide us from the face
of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. O how their
thoughts at that time will all be changed, and all their Triumphs be turned
into Funerals? I Will be wise before it be too late, I will not hazard my Soul as
most men do, O how I blame my self for serving Sin and the World thus long? Had
God snatched me away in that dismal service, how dreadful would my wages have
been? Blessed be God, who has been thus patient with me, I Will trespass no
longer upon his Long-suffering. Come ye Ministers of the Gospel, teach me what
I must do to be saved; lead me, direct me, I Will follow, and neither Men nor
Devils shall draw me away. I have done with these stolen waters; I see no
felicity that rises from bathing in those dangerous streams; they may lull and
harden for a while, but leave the Soul empty. If any Man had reason to find
satisfaction in them, Solomon had, who had Riches and Power, and Lust enough to
range where he pleased, yet when he had walked through the whole Garden of
sensual Pleasures, cropped the choicest Flowers, fed upon the most luscious
Fruits, left nothing unattempted to know the utmost reach of that Fools
Paradise, searched all the by-places and corners, where they said the treasures
of satisfaction lay, unravel'd all the secret Intrigues of sin, ransacked all
the hidden mysteries of it, when he had thus wandered up and down, and almost
lost himself in that unhappy Labyrinth, the Verdict he gives of all, is this,
Vanity of Vanities, mighty Nothings, perfect Trouble and Vexation of Spirit;
and then protects, that the only satisfaction that is solid, and like to last,
lies in fearing God, and keeping his Commandments. That Is it, I see, Men are
forced to confess at last, and too often when it is too late. I see most Men
are of another mind when they come to dye, to what they were in the time of
their strength, and health, and liberty, and that seriousness, they formerly
derided, they then wish for, when the Sentence is passing upon them, Cut them
down, why do they cumber the ground? The Pearl they might formerly have had at
a reasonable price, and would not, they now would purchase with ten thousand
worlds, if they had them, and cannot. This it is, to turn the grace of God into
wantonness, to play with the glorious message sent to them by the great
Bridegroom of their Souls, and to make light of invitations to the Supper of
the Lamb! O folly! O madness! O monstrous stupidity! O my Soul, come not thou
into their secret, unto their assembly mine honor be not thou united. I Will
take warning by these sad examples. Their Imprudence shall make me wise. Their
indiscretion shall make me take another course. I see there are snares laid for
my Soul. I am beset with Temptations. If I tremble at the main Ocean, a shallow
Puddle is offered me to drown my self in. What should make the Devil so busy,
so earnest, so industrious to draw my Soul away from the Fountain of living
waters, without all peradventure he fees, what happiness it is capable of, even
of a happiness, which knows neither measure nor end. He sees the inclinations
and propensions it has to take up with God alone; and to divert the stream, he
dresses out sin in several garbs, that if one will not tempt me another may.
But, O my God, sin shall insinuate into my favor no more, it shall creep into
my bosom no more; I Will avoid all familiarity with it; I Will hugg the Monster no
more; I Will take it no longer for a harmless thing; it shall be my Darling, my
Benjamin no more, my eyes shall be no longer pleased with viewing of it, my
tongue shall commend and praise it no more; I Will open my door to the fatal
Guest no more. My faint oppositions shall be turned into stronger resistances,
I Will call up my blood and courage to withstand its juggles; I have resolved,
and my heart shall be carried out after this Idol no more. It was resolution
made the three Men, Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego, adventure into a fiery
Furnace. It was resolution made St. Paul ready not to suffer only, but to dye
at Jerusalem for the Name of Jesus. It was resolution made David's Worthies
enter into the Camp of the Philistines, and draw water out of the Well of
Bethlehem. It was resolution made Ignatius despise Fire, and Sword, and wild
Beasts, to procure the favor of him whom his Soul did love. It was resolution
made that Grecian Tertullian. Apolog. c. 50.
Woman endure the Rack, and when prompted by the Executioner to confess her
Associates in the Treason, bite her tongue to pieces, that she might not be in
a possibility of betraying her Partners in the Conspiracy. It was resolution
made Id. Ibid.
Mutius stand still, and unconcerned while his right hand burned. It was
resolution made Empedocles sacrifice himself to the flames of Aetna. It was
resolution made Anaxarchus, when his bones were crushed, make sport with his
torments, and cry out, Break, break the Carcass of Anaxarchus, but his mind you
shall never break. It was resolution made Regulus fling himself into the
merciless Arms of his Enemies, and suffer himself to be stung and pricked to
death. It was resolution made Job bear his losses and ulcers with invincible
magnanimity, and as Tertull. lib! de patientia. c. 14. Erumpentes bestiolas in
eosdem specus and pastus foraminosae carnis ludendo revocibat.
he said, play with the Worms that bred in his sores, and as they were crawling
out, drive them back into the holes and pastures of his putrified flesh. It was
resolulution made David run through a Troop, and leap over Walls, Psalm. 18.29.
It was his resolution made these words drop from him, I have sworn, and will
perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. I will speak of thy
testimonies before Kings, and will not be ashamed, and I will delight my self
in thy Commandments; my hands will I lift up unto thy precepts which I have
loved, and I will meditate in thy statutes, Psalm. 119.46.106. And why should
not my resolution prompt me to the same generous enterprises? Why should other
Men, to purchase an immortal same, resolve to lose their ease, and lives, and
estates, and all that is dear, and pleasing to them here below, and I not
resolve to lose my sins, my lusts, my pleasures, to gain an everlasting
inheritance? My heart is ready, my heart is ready: A gracious God invites me, a
loving Savior calls to me from his Cross, wash ye, make ye clean, put away the
evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well,
a holy sanctifying Spirit beckens me. The great God that might laugh at my
calamity, and mock when my fear comes, because he has called; and I refused,
because he so often stretched forth his hands unto me, and I have not regarded,
This great, this tender Father, after all the wrongs, and injuries, and abuses,
and insolences I have offered him, is willing to receive me, provided I Will be
faithful to him, run no more after other Lovers, and resign my self to be
guided, governed, and directed by him. And can I resist that Love? Can I harden
my heart against these Charms? Can I refuse this kindness? Spurn at this favor?
Slight this stupendous blessing? And provoke him to swear in his wrath, That I
shall never enter into his rest!. No, no, I yield, I render myself Captive. I
am convinced, that Gods service is perfect freedom. He that enters upon it, is
under the government of a lawful Prince, his life is sweet and easy, he feels
no Tyranny, no Oppression, the King with everlasting kindness visits him, and
guides his feet into the ways of peace, gives his Angels charge to keep him in
his going out, and his coming in, and will not suffer any of his bones to be
broken. He is with him in distress, and when he weeps, holds a bottle under to
catch his tears, Psalm. 56.8. He binds up his wounds, and is a wall of brass to
him, that mocks at the flashes of Hell, and dashes all the fiery darts of the
Devil. Here men are free from flavish fear, as being under the wings of a
Father. Here nothing but Love rules in their hearts, which makes their yoke
easy, and their burden light; makes the strait gate pleasant, and the narrow
way full of delight and satisfaction. Here peace of Conscience reigns, and the
Subjects of this Kingdom are acquainted with joy in the Holy Ghost. Here men
are freed from the curse of the Law, and their minds are employed in the
noblest contemplations. Here they dwell in the secret place of the most High,
and abide, under the shadow of the Almighty. Here I Will fix, here I Will build
Tabernacles, for it is good to be here. Away with all suggestions that would
make me unwilling or backward to this work. Away with all thoughts that would
discourage me. Away with all imaginations that would possess me with
misconstructions of the ways of God. Ye are all miserable comforters, ye seek
not the good, but the loss and desolation of my Soul. I Will seek the things
which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God; I Will set my
affections on things above, and not on things on earth; I am dead to all these
sublunary Vanities, and my life is hid with Christ in God; and when Christ, who
is my life, shall appear, then shall I also appear with him in glory.

Without such resolutions as these, Consideration is lame and feeble: it is
practical Consideration that must do the work, and it is these resolutions make
it so, the necessity of which Consideration is the next thing I must endeavor
to demonstrate.

CHAP. III. The absolute necessity of Consideration in order to a serious life.
Gods frequent commands to that purpose. Our Reason and the power of
Consideration we are furnished, or endu'd with, proved to be given us for this
end. Without it, Men have cause to suspect, that their Reformation is
counterfeit.
WHat we have said hitherto, is not a thing indifferent, left to our liberty
and discretion to mind or to neglect it, as we shall see occasion. If laboring
after a better life, if endeavoring to get a share in the incorruptible Crown
of glory, if attempts to compass the eternal felicity of our Souls, if studying
how we may be admitted into the Quire of Angels, and enjoy the society of the
Firstborn which are written in Heaven, if contriving how we may arrive to that
fullness of joy God has both revealed and promised, be indispensably necessary,
this Consideration must be so too. If Self-preservation be not a thing
indifferent, Consideration cannot possibly be so. For the great object of this
Consideration is, how we may preserve our selves from being undone for ever;
how we may guard our Souls from everlasting perdition; how we may avoid the
second death; and how we may make our happiness lasting and durable proof
against the gates of Hell, and the assaults of that roaring Lion, who walks
about seeking whom he may devour.

God that commands all the powers of Light and Darkness, and has the same
power over us, that the Potter has over his Vessel, and has made us capable
of being governed by Moral Laws, and has created us on purpose to be ready at
his beck, and may force us into obedience by plagues and thunders, if we are
loath to be courted by smiles and favors, and afar off sees all the dangers we
are subject to, and knows what Armies of Enemies lie in ambush, and watch our
fall; it is he that peremptorily commands this Consideration. A Sovereign Prince
expects to be obeyed, and he that dares refuse, or slight his reasonable
command, is justly looked upon as a stranger to Loyal principles: and well may
God, who is All-wise, and can do nothing that is unreasonable, expect submission
to a precept so great, so good, so advantageous both to Soul and Body, as will
appear in the sequel. Consider your ways, is a Law which God (to show he is
in good earnest) inculcates twice in the same Prophecy, Hagg. 1.5, 7. And for
that the Dream is doubled, it is because the thing is established by God, said
Joseph to Pharaoh, Genesis 41.32. The same we may say of repeated Exhortations.
And indeed when the famous Moses bids the people under his charge and care to
keep the statutes and the commandments which God had graciously vouchsafed
them, that it might go well with them, and with their children after them; the
great preparative he requires for this religious frame, is Consideration, Deuteronomy.
4.39, 40. as if without this, all attempts of obedience were vain, and all
endeavors to serve God in Spirit and in Truth, were no more but water spilt
upon the ground. It was upon the same account, that St. Paul, as quick-sighted
as the other, peremptorily tells the Romans, that they would never practically
approve that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God, without they were
transformed by the renewing of their mind, i. e. made a new improvement of
their minds by Consideration. For Consideration rebuilds the house that is
fallen to the ground, makes the mind new, removes old prejudices against a
serious life, and transforms the judgment into other thoughts and conceptions,
carries away the rubbish which oppressed the Soul, and leaves it not till it
becomes a new creature, Romans 12.2. What can St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1.13. mean, when
he presses the Christians of those days, to gird up the loins of their minds,
but this great Duty we discourse of; Consideration as it is a convocation of
our thoughts, so it ties and unites those thoughts to the great object, the one
thing necessary, and as it were girds the Soul, that it may keep within the
rules of the Word of God, and may not run out into strange desires, or
inordinate affections, but be more expedite and nimble in her Travels to the
Land of Promise.

The truth is, from the mind, as from Aarons head, the precious ointment runs
down to the skirts of our garments. This is the great wheel which sets the
lesser orbs a going, and if that be impregnated with principles of goodness and
seriousness, and these enlarged and spread by Consideration, the will and the
affections will soon be persuaded to follow that star, till it brings them to
Bethlehem, the house of mercy. In our civil affairs, it is the mind must first
be fully persuaded either of the necessity, or convenience, or danger, or
advantage of things, before any wise resolution can be taken; and we may justly
conclude that in spiritual concerns, men begin at the wrong end, if they do not
season their minds with such reflections as may make a deep impression on the
will and affections. For that these may resolve to follow God, and may be
ravished with his love, and apply themselves to his ways, and may hate every
false path, and detest their former exorbitances and deviations, we must
necessarily suppose there must be some spring to feed them, which Spring can be
nothing else but Consideration.

And because the more objects, the more flowers this Consideration feeds upon,
the more effectual it is, and the greater seriousness it produces, and the most
signal change it works, the Holy Ghost therefore in order to this end,
particularizes several things, and commands them to be taken in, as promoters
of this excellent work. Hence it is that we are sometimes called upon to
consider our latter end, Deutr. 32.29. sometimes the works of God, Eccles.
7.13. sometimes the last judgment, or the great account men must give of their
works, whether they have been good, or whether they have been evil, Psalm.
50.22. sometimes the testimonies of God, the sweetness, beauty, perfection,
worth and excellency of them, Psalm. 119.95. sometimes the future reward that
God has promised to them that fear him, 2 Timothy 2.7. sometimes the holy Life,
Example, and Christian constancy and magnanimity of Christ Jesus, Hebr. 12.3.
sometimes Gods correction and chastisement, together with our sins, Hab. 2.15.
and all, because these will help Consideration thoroughly to weigh a sinners
spiritual condition, and to lay it in the balances together, as Job expresses
himself, Job 6.2.

Nay of that Necessity does the Holy Ghost make this Consideration, that it
seems, God (such a Lover he is of the happiness of Mankind) is not at ease
without it. He is forced as it were to take humane passions upon him, to
express his displeasure against the neglect of this sovereign medicine. He
seems disconsolate, if men slight this balm, this water of life, this
eye-falve. He calls to Heaven and Earth to mourn with him, because his people
will not consider what they are a doing, and whither they are going, and what
will become of them, Es. 1.3. He seems grieved and dejected, because they
consider not the operations of his hands, and what noble Beings he has given
them; how he has made them but a little lower than the Angels, crowned them
with glory and honor, and infused Souls into them capable of living for ever
under the beatifical vision and presence of Almighty God, Es. 5.12. He seems to
droop; and he that is eternally happy in himself, takes on, as if his
happiness, his joy, his satisfaction were interrupted, because men consider not
that he remembers all their impieties; that he sits on the Battlements of
Heaven, and beholds all; that there is not any creature that is not manifest in
his sight, and that all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with
whom they have to do, Hos. 7.2.

Indeed God is resolved to deal with us as with rational Creatures, not as with
Brutes and Engines; as with free Agents, not as with Machines, and works of
men's hands, and that is the reason why he is so earnest for this Duty. Without
all peradventure, God could force men into seriousness; and he that commanded
light out of darkness, might take the sinner up in his arms, and carry him even
against his will into that banqueting house, the banner whereof is Love; and
might set men's Souls, as the Workman does his Clock, that they should not fail
of running the Race which is set before them. But then what would our reason
signify? why should he make us capable of being wrought upon by arguments and
moral persuasions? why has he given us faculties to discourse pro and con of
things, and to argue, and debate the case with our selves? why has he given us
a rule to try our actions by, and power to judge what is good, and what is
evil, what can be said for the one, and what can be pleaded for the other;
which Arguments are stronger, and which are weaker; which are ponderous, and
which are of no value.

If God does do nothing in vain, what can we imagine that this power of
Consideration is given for? He that makes a curious Vessel of gold, does not
intend it for a Trough or Washing Tub. He that enamels a Ring, does not intend
to throw it upon a Dunghill. He that builds a house, does not intend it for a
habitation of Owls and Ravens, and Birds of prey. He that plants a rich and
kindly Fruit Tree, does not intend it for Timber in a Hogs-stie. He that makes
a rich Carpet, does not intend it for Dishclouts: And shall I think God more
imprudent than man? Shall I imagine that God has less foresight with him, than
dust and ashes? Shall he plant in me an ability and power of Consideration, and
intend it for no higher use, than to teach and instruct me how to rake a little
dung together, how to feed a poor corruptible body for the grave, and how to
wallow with the Swine in the mire. He that can have such low thoughts of God,
deserves to be banished from all humane society, and to dwell with Beasts of
the Wilderness. God could not bestow this power on me in vain, and if not in
vain, it ought most certainly to be employed on things of the greatest
concernment. And what things are there of greater concernment, than turning
from the power of Satan unto God, and laying up treasures there, where the Moth
cannot corrupt, and where Thieves cannot break through and steal.

Nay, why should God assure the sinner, that his impenitence shall be punished
with everlasting destruction, but that he would have him make use of his
reason, and consider the truth and importance of this threatening, the
uncertainty of his own life, and how sin will certainly harden him, if he does
not turn with all speed, and how soon ruin and destruction may seize on him,
and how dear his pleasures may cost him, and how fearful it will be to fall
into the hands of an angry God, whose patience has been abused, whose words
have been scorned, whose thunderbolts have been laughed at, and whose compassion
has been looked upon only as a shift or trick to ensnare men into rigorous
severity.

Lord God! I am not bereft of my reason, when I hear the Supreme Governor of
Heaven and Earth threaten me; when I hear him who sits on the circle of the
Earth, denounce wrath and indignation against me, I have a tongue in my head,
and can enquire of men wiser than my self, whether this be really the
threatening of God or no; and whether the great Creator, when he threatens thus,
be in good earnest or no: I have eyes to read, whether there be a mistake in
such Comminations or no: I have reason to argue and comprehend, what Arguments
are solid and weighty, and what are frivolous and impertinent; whether the
reasons for my turning from my evil ways be stronger, than those which would
dissuade me from it. I have reason to ponder, how many thousands have with
shifts and excuses, and delays, been the cause of their own ruin; and I have
power to reflect, how that if I am guilty of the same folly, I shall shortly be
wrapped up in the same calamity with them; and what poor, what inconsiderable
comfort it will be, to find those men companions in eternal misery and
calamity, that have been formerly companions to me in sin, and offending God. I
have reason and power seriously to debate whether there be a future judgment or
no, and with very little trouble may satisfy my self, that things are so, as
the Gospel represents them, and that there is no jesting with edged tools. I
have power to reflect, that if there were no more but a possibility of eternal
torments, if we could strain the Notion no higher than to a may be, it would
become a wise man to prepare for the worst, and to endeavor to be on the sure
side of the hedge. And having reason to consider all this, power to weigh and
ponder all this, and so to ponder it, that my understanding thus possessed, may
prevail with my will and affections, to resolve for contempt of sin and of the
world, I must necessarily conclude, that God expects I should proceed, and come
to that spiritual life this way. And let no man tell me here, that this is to
make man independent from God, and to assert that men may convert themselves,
and change their own hearts, and give themselves that repentance and faith
which the Scripture everywhere asserts to be the gift of God. For Gods power
and glory is so far from receiving any prejudice by this Doctrine, that I know
nothing can advance and promote it more than this way. It Is confessed that
Conversion is the work of God, but then he expects I should do my part, and
work according to the power he has given me, and improve the Talents he has
already bestowed upon me, and trade with them, and make use of the faculties I
have, and exercise them as much as I can, in order to a serious change of life,
and in the use of such means God will be found, as we see in Cornelius, Acts
10.4. And his holy Spirit shall come down, and make the work effectual, and
bless those honest endeavors with grace and mercy, and make the wheels go
merrily, which went but heavy before; and turn that piety which proceeded from
fear of Hell before, into a sincere love to God, and to the beauty of holiness,
and make that obedience universal which was but partial, and by halves before,
and that is a kindly Conversion. To indulge our selves in laziness and idleness,
and weariness of Gods service, upon pretense that we must wait Gods time, and
stay till God is pleased to work upon our hearts, is no better than mocking of
God. For God who has protested, that he will cast out none that will but come to
him, and never left himself without witness, and is engaged by promise to be a
rewarder to them that diligently seek him, has no where in his Word promised
to work upon our hearts, except we will use such means as he has given us
power to make use of in order to Conversion; and he that lets the power God
has given him for this use, lie dead, does but imbezle the gift of God, and
with that unprofitable servant, lays up his pound in a Napkin, and
consequently can expect no other answer, than was returned to him, Out of thine
own mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked servant: thou knew that I was an
austere man, taking up that I laid not down, and reaping that I did not sow.
Wherefore then gave not thou my money into the bank, that at my coming I
might have required mine own with usury? Therefore take from him the pound, and
give it to him that has ten pounds. And as for those mine enemies that would
not that I should reign over them, (and it seems, such are all those that will
not improve those powers God has given them, especially this of Consideration,
in order to be reclaimed from the errors of their ways) bring them hither, and
slay them before me, Luke 19.22, 28.

And indeed, he that can sit down and consider what losses may befall him, what
mischief may happen to him, if he keeps company with a turbulent, quarrelsome
man, and thereupon shuns his society, will find in the last day, that he might
as well have sat down, and considered, what evil a sinful life would bring
upon him. His reason to be sure is capable of taking the one into Consideration
as well as the other; and he that believes he has a Soul, must be supposed
able to think of dangers that may befall his Soul: and since Consideration is
that which represents all dangers in very lively colors, and by that means
affects, and makes impressions upon the whole man, there is no person but may
safely expect Gods blessing upon such Considerations, not upon the account of
merit, but because God has most freely, and most graciously promised his
assistance, where men show their willingness to work in his Vineyard.

And that is the reason why Conversion in Scripture is sometimes attributed to
man, and sometimes to the Father of lights, from whom every good and perfect
gift descends; and why we read in the same Prophet, Make your selves a new
heart and a new spirit, Ezekiel. 18.31. And I the Lord will give you a new heart,
and a new spirit will I put within you, Ezekiel. 36.26. Because God expects the
sinner should take his ways, and preposterous actions, and the danger which
hangs over his head, into serious Consideration, represent the odiousness and
disingenuity, and unseasonableness of his sin to his mind, and muse upon that
endless happiness, he may arrive to, weigh the comforts and consolations he may
enjoy on this side Heaven, and God will encourage him, gather the Lambs with
his Arms, and carry them in his bosom, i. e. prosper those sincere endeavors,
and water them with the dew of his benediction, till the byas of the Soul is
changed, and turned toward Heaven.

Consideration is the Bed where the incorruptible Seed is sown, and on the
ground thus prepared, the Sun of Righteousness does shine, and by his warmth
produces in the Soul all manner of pleasant fruits, Cant. 7.13. Consideration,
like the Pool of Bethesda, draws the great Angel of the Covenant down, who
stirs the Pool, and gives it a healing virtue, and immediately the blind
receive their sight, and the lame walk, and the Lepers are cleansed, and the
dead are raised up, Matthew. 11.5.

That God has sometimes by miraculous means converted, and turned men from
their irreligiousness and contempt of holiness we do not deny; but though these
miracles might be the occasion of their Reformation, it was still Consideration
that digested these miraculous Providence, and engaged these men to enquire
what they meant, and for what end they were sent, and how they should escape if
they neglected so great a salvation. It was this made them argue, that as these
Calls were great, and full of wonder, so they challenged entertainment and
submission answerable to so great a mercy. It was this made them see the love
of God, and wonder whence it should be, that God should overlook so many
thousands, and knock at their gates; pass by Palaces, and be content to take up
his rest in their poor habitations. It was this made them ponder, that after
such Admonitions and Exhortations from Heaven, there was no standing still, and
that contempt of such extraordinary Providence, must needs fall very heavy on
the Soul one day, and sink it into the nethermost Hell; upon which
Considerations and Expostulations, they resolved to close with Christ, and with
the terms of the Gospel.

But all this will more fully appear, if we can prove, That without
Consideration, Conversion or Reformation of life cannot but be counterfeit,
Conversion being a change of the whole man, and loving God better than the
world, or minding Heaven more than earth, an immortal Soul more than a frail
dying body, there can nothing be imagined under God more likely to prevent our
being deceived with a form of godliness, than Consideration. That the Devil
very ordinarily transforms himself into an Angel of light, and imposes upon our
minds by shadows of virtues, as it is his interest, so it is a thing as common
as our yielding to temptations of that nature. Daily experience is a sufficient
witness, how men deceive themselves with a varnish and paint of Piety, and
flatter themselves, that they are ordained to eternal life, and in a way to
those Regions of bliss, when they are not. Because they acknowledge and
profess, that God is infinite, perfect, glorious, and the Supreme Governor of
the world, and that in him we live and breathe, and have our Being; and that
it is he that rules the great wheel of Providence, they conclude they love him
better than their riches or pleasures here, when they do nothing less, indeed
no more but what Parrots may do, which being taught, can repeat the same words,
and be never the nearer that wisdom which makes men wise unto salvation. We see
how men because they have no inclination to some gross notorious sins that
other men are guilty of, are apt to conclude that they mortify their lusts,
and put off the works of darkness, walking soberly as in the daytime; and
because they frequent the Temple of the Lord, they are presently true hearers
of the Word. Because such a man is not drunk every day, but is sober now and
then, he believes himself to be a very temperate man. Another, because he does
not cheat so notoriously as his Neighbors, concludes he is just, honest,
upright, and fair in his dealings. Another, because he works hard in his
Calling, and does no body wrong, fancies he does all that is fit for a Christian
to do. Another, because he has sometimes a good thought of God, and can send
up a short ejaculation to Heaven, is very confident he meditates and
contemplates the Almighty. Another, because he has some faint breathings after
him, knows nothing to the contrary, but he is as zealous for Gods glory, as any
of his acquaintance can be. Another, because he has now and then a melancholy
thought of his sins, and confesses them to Almighty God, concludes he does
repent as well as the best; and because he often wishes for salvation, and has
a good opinion of holiness and goodness, he doubts not but he is made partaker
of the Divine Nature.

That these are Cheats and Delusions, is evident to any rational man. The
Gospel does not offer Heaven on these terms, and it is not partial but
universal obedience that Christ requires of his followers. He is resolved
Heaven shall cost them more than these little services come to, and they shall
not impose upon God, however they may deceive themselves. But then how shall
these, or any other Cheats be discovered and avoided, but by Consideration?
True Conversion consists in resisting and conquering such Delusions, but how
shall they be resisted, if they be not known? how shall they be known, if men
consider not whether the course they take, be either agreeable to the way God
has prescribed, or like to bring them to that happiness they aim at.

It Is Consideration must manifest which is God, and which is the Cloud; which
is Gold, and which is but Guilt; which are the waters of Jordan, and which are
the rivers of Damascus; which is Corn, and which are Tares; which are the fiery
tongues, and which is the Glowworm light; which are Jacob's hands, and which
are the hands of Esau.

There are not a few sins which look very much like virtues; complying with
men's impieties looks so like Humility, Flattery so like that Charity which
bears all things, and hopes all things, and believes all things, and endures
all things, reviling again when we are reviled so like doing justice, worldly
mindedness so like providing for our Families, lying for profits sake so like a
work of necessity, and self-preservation, and bearing a grudge to him that has
offended us, without discovering it in our actions, so like curbing our
passions, that few men will think themselves concerned to part with them,
except they consider which is the pure, and which the sophisticate mettle.

How like saving knowledge does that knowledge of God look, which puffs up the
Soul, and tempts men to despise others that are not arrived to the same measure
of the stature of the fullness of Christ. There is no distinguishing of them,
but by the effects; and how shall the effects be discriminated, but by
Consideration. I cannot avoid being deceived, if I do not sit down and reflect.
Lord! I pretend to knowledge of the Cross of Christ, but does this knowledge
make me humble and vile in mine own eyes? Does it discover to me my spiritual
poverty, and make me prefer others before my self? Does it make me prize Christ
above all? And does it engage me to count all things Dross and Dung, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ? Does it make me stand under the Cross of
Christ, and breathe and pant after his precious blood, like a man truly
sensible both of the worth and want of it? Does it produce that mind in me,
which was in Christ Jesus? Do thou feel this O my Soul? How happy art thou,
if thou art sensible of these operations? Do not deceive thy self, does not
this knowledge thou pretendest to, make thee secure and careless? Does it not
make thee sit down contented without the life of Religion? Does it not persuade
thee to believe that thou art a Christian, though thou do not imitate Christ
in his holy life and conversation? Does it not make thee proud and
self-conceited, and think more highly of thy self than thou ought to think,
and like the Pharisees, look between anger and scorn on those that know not the
Law; if so, how is the knowledge of Christ Jesus in thee?

The same may be said of Faith, it is Consideration must separate it from
presumption, and satisfy me whether it be of the true Eagle-kind or no; it is
impossible to know whether my faith be of the right stamp or no, without I make
such inquisition as this. Faith is a gift or fruit of the Spirit, which I am
apt to believe God has blessed and enriched my Soul withal, and I thank him
that I am not born an Heathen or Infidel. But what power has my Faith upon my
Affections? Does it purify my heart, and drive away those lusts that have
taken up their residence there? Does it make me cut off my right hand, pull out
my right eye when they do offend me? Does it make me live like a person that
believes the Omnipresence, and Omniscience of God? Does it make me cautious and
afraid of offending that God whom I believe of purer eyes than to behold
iniquity? Does it make me embrace Christ both as my Redeemer and Governor, both
as my Savior and my King? Does it engage me to resign my will to his Will, and
to receive the Kingdom of God, as a little child, without disputing his
commands, or contradicting his injunctions? Does it work by love? And does it
drive me to give God my dearest and tenderest love? Does it work by charity
too, by good works? And does it make me cast my bread upon the water, give away
freely and cheerfully, though I have no prospect, and see no probability of a
recompense here on earth? Does it make me despise the World, and overcome it,
and use it only as my Servant, while God alone is my Master? Does it make me
resist the Devil, and grapple with powers and principalities, with the Rulers
of darkness, and with spiritual wickednesses in high places? Ephesians. 6.12. Does it
make me pray with fervency and importunity? Does it transport my Soul into
ravishments upon the sight of yonder glorious things, God has laid up and
prepared for those that love him? Does it make me rejoice in that Savior I
have not seen with joy unspeakable and full of glory? Does it make me trust God
in Adversity, even then when the Fig Tree does not blossom, when there is no
fruit in the vines, when the labor of the Olive fails, and the Field does
yield no meat, when the flock is cut off from the fold, and when there are no
herds in the stalls? Hab. 3.17. Does it make me take notice of Gods gracious
Dealings and Providence, and admire Gods wisdom and greatness, and power and
goodness in all? Does it make me prize the promises of the Gospel above all
riches, and does it make me willing to suffer for Christ? Rejoice, O my Soul,
if Faith has thus warmed thy heart, and if thou find these footsteps of God
within thee! These are ornaments sit for thee to appear in before the great
Tribunal. On the other side, what ease, what quiet can thou enjoy, if thy
faith be dead and dull, and unactive, if it does not touch thy tongue with a
Coal from the Altar, and does not make thee break forth into celebrations and
admiration of the height and breadth, and length, and depth of the love of God?
If thou feel no holy force in thy Soul, to shake off every weight and every
sin which does so easily beset thee? If thy faith does not make thee stand upon
thy watch, and break through all discouragements and oppositions, to obtain the
end of thy faith, even thy salvation. If it does not make thy corruptions
abate, and thy extravagant desires and passions fall. If it does not chase
Discontent in a great measure from thy thoughts, and does not give thee bowels
of compassion to Ministers, to the Servants of God, to Christ's distressed
members. If it does not drive thee into Heaven, into contemplations of a
glorious Eternity, which shall make amends for all the losses, troubles,
perils, miseries and difficulties thou undergoest here. If it does not make
thee prefer Christ's honor and will before the vain allurements of flesh and
blood, and the society of those who delight in God, before familiarity with the
richest and greatest who cast Gods Laws behind them. If it works no patience in
Afflictions, no humility, no self-denial, no meekness under curses and
injuries, and persecutions, no courage to stand up for God, and for his glory,
no delight in the Word and ways of God, no sincere endeavors to practice what
thou hear, no relish in spiritual things, no holy revenge upon thy
corruptions, no indignation against thy former sins, no carefulness to please
God, no vehement desires after him who is fairer than the children of men.

Faith thus considered, if it be but a painted fire, will quickly betray it
self, and this Consideration will soon give an item to the sinner, that this is
no good foundation to build eternal salvation on. In this manner we are obliged
to proceed in our prayers and supplications. Consideration must acquaint us
whether it be the desires of our hearts, or the desires of our lips only, that
we offer unto God; whether it be a deep sense of our spiritual wants and
necessities, and of the Greatness, Majesty, Purity, Holiness, Mercy and
Goodness of God that makes us pray, or Custom, and Education, and Civility to
our unruly Consciences.

So in our Distributions to the Necessities of others, Consideration must
acquaint us, whether we give enough or no, whether we fulfill those Rules
Christ and his Apostles have delivered concerning it, and whether it be vain
glory and the applause of men, that makes us both liberal, and speak of our
liberality, or an honest design to advance the glory of God, and the good of
our Neighbor.

So in Fasting, Consideration must acquaint us, whether it be the outward
performance we do regard more, than the inward frame of the Soul? whether it be
a real, sincere resolution to mortify sin, that engages us to this severity,
or an intent of giving God satisfaction for the affronts we have offered him,
and whether the austerity makes sin truly bitter to us, and works an eternal
detestation of it in our hearts, or whether it disposes us to fall on afresh,
and tempts us upon the credit of that piece of Mortification, to venture into
new sins and enormities.

So in our zeal for God, Consideration must acquaint us, whether we are more
passionate in things, which concern the honor of God, than in promoting of our
own interest, whether it be a zeal according unto knowledge, and kindled by the
Sun of Righteousness, or furious and lighted by the flames of the burning Lake,
and whether we are zealous for the greater as well as for the lesser matters of
the Law, for Judgment, Faith and Mercy, as well as for paying tithe of Mint and
Cummin, and Anise.

Without Consideration, our Souls must necessarily remain under very great
darkness and mistakes, and consequently run the hazard of being cheated in the
work of Conversion. How should these Cheats be discovered but by our reason?
How shall our reason judge of them, but by Consideration? For Consideration
calls them to an account, lays them open, examines their rise and progress,
discovers them to be dross, and spies out the danger they involve the Soul in,
and by that means works it into a faithful resolution to take another course.

CHAP. IV Of the various impediments and remora's of Consideration. Men fancy
greater difficulty in it, that there is indeed. Are continually employed about
sensual objects. Loath to part with their sins. Ignorant of the pleasure of
Consideration. Reflect upon the danger of losing their unlawful gain. Fear they
shall fall into melancholy, or go distracted with so much seriousness. Are of
opinion, that Conversion, in that sense the Scripture speaks of it, is
needless. Mistake the nature of Consideration. Are discouraged by evil company.
Neglect consulting with Ministers about this necessary work. Delude themselves
with the Notion of Christ's dying for the sins of the world.
COnsideration, a Duty so great, so noble, so necessary, one would think should
find suitable entertainment with all men that pretend to reason, or wisdom, or
discretion, the Guest being so beneficial, who can imagine to the contrary, but
every man will spread open his doors, and let it in? How? Lock the gates
against a good Angel? Keep out a Messenger that brings glad tidings? Darken the
Room that I may not see the Sun? Consideration, that directs me, how I may be a
Friend of God, get room in his bosom, sing with Angels, triumph with
Seraphins, sit at the right hand of a glorified Jesus, stand before the Throne
of God, serve him day and night in his Temple, and be freed from all
possibility of sin and misery, from all discontent, and vexation of Spirit! Is
it possible a messenger of that worth and beauty, and excellency, can want a
lodging? Is it possible it should fare no better than the GREAT JESUS, be
destitute of a place where to lay its head? Does not every man desire to be
happy? Did ever any man hate his own flesh? Was ever any man in love with
torment? Is it not every man's interest to study how to prevent it? And then
sure, Consideration cannot but have the love and embraces of all persons, that
do not make sport with casting firebrarnds, and death, and arrows, Prove. 26.18,
19.

So an impartial, serious man would think, yet to our grief and sorrow we find,
that men run away from it, as from the Plague, and do as carefully avoid it, as
they would do Ratsbane, or Sublimate, or Nightshade. This will oblige me in
the next place to enquire what are the Remora's or Impediments that make men
neglect this Panacaea, and like mad Dogs, shun the water that would cure them,
and slight the remedy that would infallibly recover them. It Is natural for men
to enquire into the reasons of any decay. If a Tree do not thrive, if Flowers
do wither in the Bud, if a Child do not grow, or if the water of a River fails,
the first thing we do, is to enquire where the stop is, and what the causes of
the defect are, and why things do not prosper according to expectation? And he
that has a Vineyard in a very fruitful hill, and fences it, and gathers the
stones out of it, and plants it with the choicest Vine, and builds a Tower in
the midst of it, and makes a Wine Press therein, may well ask the question,
Wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth
wild grapes, Isa. 5.1, 2, 3, 4.

The clogs and impediments of Consideration are numberless, for indeed it is the
Devils study and contrivance day and night, which way to prevent it. Where a
person dares extricate himself from the snares of sense, and venture upon this
work, the enemy justly fears he shall lose a Subject; and a Soul will be
snatched out of his clutches, and he shall not be able to hold the sinner in his
Egypt, or hinder him from sacrificing to the Lord his God. And being a spirit
that lives upon Envy, enjoyes his malice, and finds his greatest satisfaction
in destroying men's Souls, we must suppose he leaves no stone unturned, no
stratagem untried, no means unattempted, to hinder men from a serious
recollection of their thoughts and imaginations.

There is such beauty, such loveliness in the ways of God, notwithstanding the
coarse outside, that should a person by serious Consideration, be tempted to
lift up the vail, and see what is behind it, remove the Sackcloth and Ashes,
and take a view of that which is underneath, open the Iron gate, and behold the
Gold within, unlock the Cabinet, and see the jewels there, he would most
certainly be ravished with the sight, and not stay one hour longer in the
chambers of death. This the Devil knows, he is sensible, that Consideration is
a Tree of life, therefore least men put forth their hands, and take of the
Tree, and eat and live for ever, we may rationally believe, he will cross their
endeavors to the uttermost; so that we may suppose as many impediments of
Consideration, as the Devil can invent stumbling blocks to throw in the way to
this Duty: however let us take a view of some of the principal.

I. The fancied difficulty of it. I say fancied, for there is not that hardship
in it men imagine. But such enemies are the generality of men to their own
happiness, that they will fancy difficulties in things they are loath to do, and
they therefore cry out, That they are hard, and not to be compassed but with
infinite deal of trouble, because they would be excused from the performance or
practice of them. It Is ordinary for School-boyes to plead difficulty of the
Task their Master sets them, when they have a greater mind to play, than to
learn, much like Solomon's sloathful man, Proa. 26.13. There is a Lion in the
way, there is a Lion in the streets. Vain man! there are no Lions but in his
own brain, no considerable difficulties, but what are of his own making. So
here men fancy, that this serious Consideration of their ways, is a thing
which none but Scholars, and men of Learning can reach, and none are obliged to
mind but men of Letters, and such as are Bookish, and read much, and have large
capacities, are men of great judgment, and can wholly give or dedicate
themselves to this study, a conceit as false, as God is true, and which we
cannot reflect upon without indignation.

There is no man that is sensible, that Gold is better than Glasses and Rattles,
or that Pearls ought to be prized and valued more than Pebles. There is no man
that is capable of apprehending that three and three makes six, or can contrive
and plot, which way a dangerous Pond, or a dreadful Fire may be avoided, but
may consider, whether the things the Scripture speaks of be true or no, whether
the promises and threatenings of the Gospel are things that belong to him or no,
whether he lives up to the precepts of Christ or no, and what will be the
consequence of his contempt of mercy, and what may be the means of escaping the
wrath to come, and whether an endless glory be not infinitely better than a few
hours Pageantry, and everlasting enjoyment more satisfactory than momentary
pleasures, and eternal rest more desirable than a transitory titillation.

What difficulty is there in this Consideration, what Rocks, what Precipices
are there here, that must be ventured on to bring it about. I see a whole
street on fire, and am struck into amazement, and cannot I consider how
dreadful everlasting fire must be. I consider, it is worth sitting up late, and
rising early, and running up and down to get a livelihood, and cannot I
consider, how far more rational it is to sweat, and toil, and labor for an
everlasting inheritance. I can consider with delight, how much ease and content
I shall enjoy, when such an Estate I have the reversion of, does fall. And
cannot I consider how happy those must be, that after their patient continuance
in well-doing, shall be possessed of glory and honor, and immortality, and
eternal life. I can consider how pleasant, how glorious a thing it is to live
in the good opinion of my Prince, under the smiles and gracious looks of my
Benefactor. And cannot I consider what a felicity does attend them, that enjoy
the light of Gods countenance. Here is but changing the object. And I that can
consider, how disingenious, and sordid a thing it is to act against a man, that
has raised me out of dust, and advanced me to great dignity and preferment,
cannot I consider, what baseness, and disgenerous ingratitude it must be to
provoke that God who maintains me, and preserves me, and without whom I cannot
breathe or move? I that can consider the reasonableness of sorrow and grief
where I have offended, and done a signal injury to my Superior, cannot I
consider how just and equitable it is when I look on that Savior, whom my sins
have pierced, to mourn as heartily, as one that mourns for his only Son? Why
should not my understanding serve me to consider the one as well as the other?
Spiritual things are the most adequate and most proper objects of my
understanding. They are the proper fuel for that flame which cherish and feed
it, and make it rise, and soar to Heaven. Whatever concerns provision for the
flesh, or for this present life, is but a secondary object, more by favor and
permission, than by design. For Gods design in giving us understandings, was,
that they might be receptacles of spiritual Truths, storehouses of invisible
Treasures. Contrivances, how we may get our bodily wants and necessities
supplied, for ought I know may be performed, and ordered by sense alone,
without reason, without this sublime faculty of understanding, as we see in
Beasts and ignobler Animals, which being strangers to this privilege, and
directed only by sense, furnish themselves with necessaries, conveniences, and
superfluities: Go to the Ant, thou sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise,
which having no Guide, Overseer or Ruler, provideth her meat in the Summer, and
gathers her food in the Harvest, Prove. 6.6, 7, 8.

But what will not men call difficult, if they are unwilling to do what they
should: And who sees not that this is but a shift to satisfy their
Consciences, that they may not twitch them for the omission; and they must have
some plea, left they should sin barefaced, and seem to affront God without
cause or instigation. And indeed this plea is a true stroke of the Devil, for
though the way to destruction be far more craggy, and infinitely fuller of
precipices, than the way to life, witness men's breaking through infamy, the
hatred of their Friends, the displeasure of their Relations, the fences of
Modesty, the scorn of Angels, the indignation of a consuming fire, to get at
sin, witness their venturing sometimes their Fortunes, sometimes their Lives,
sometimes their Reputation, sometimes the ruin of their Families, to please
the Devil, yet the broad way being down, whereas the strait is up the hill, his
persuasion prevails the sooner, that the former is infinitely more facile and
easy, and thus he brings an evil report upon the good Land, particularly upon
Consideration, the great Ladder whereby we must climb to Heaven, and hard it
must be, though nothing be more easy: it is a thing portable, and is always to
be had; it is always in season, always at hand, always within call, no Burden
in a Journey, no Load in a Voyage, men may carry it with them wherever they go;
when they are traveling, when they stay at home; in company, and out of
company; when they are walking, when they are sitting down; when they go to
Bed, when they rise; they need not run beyond Sea to fetch it, nor evolve many
Books to be Masters of it; they need not fail to the Antipodes to compass it,
nor dig underground to find it; they need not ransack the Indies to enrich
themselves with it, nor venture shipwracks to bring it home; they need not sell
Lands and Houses to purchase it, nor run the hazard of Sword and Fire to secure
it; they need not clamber Mountains to possess it, nor wade through Rivers to
inherit it. They carry this Treasure in their hearts, and it must be mere
sluggishness, if they let it lie there, and make no use of it. The fire is hid
under the ashes, and they need but stir it, and blow it, and it will soon flame
out; and God has made the duty so easy on purpose, that men might not be
deluded by the Devil, into a belief of its impossibility. Strange stupidity!
they do not think it hard to carry Talents of Lead, or Mountains of Sin on
their backs, and yet they think Consideration hard; even that Consideration,
which like a faithful Friend would tell them how to be rid of that heavy Load
they bear, a Load, which would immediately sink them into Hell, but that the
Devil puts under his shoulder, and helps them to carry it, and so they feel it
not. They do not think it hard to dig into Hell, and yet they think
Consideration hard, which would teach them a way how to quench that fire. They
do not think it hard to be oppressed by a most bloody Usurper, and yet they
think Consideration hard, which would show them how they might shake off that
yoke which neither they nor their Forefathers were ever able to bear. They do
not think it hard to obey every little Slave, every silly Lust, every common
Soldier, in that Camp of which themselves might be the Generals, and yet they
think Consideration hard, which would free them from that Tyranny, and acquaint
them with a way how they might be Kings and Priests unto God, and shine as the
stars in the firmament for ever.

O men unwise, and flow of heart, to believe all that the Prophets have spoken;
you that have courage to meet an Army in the field, and, to use Job's
expression, have confidence to laugh at the glittering spear and the shield,
Job 39.23. you that have courage to plough the Sea, to face a Cannon, to mock a
shower of Arrows, to stand under a volley of shot, to fight Duels, to expose
your Lives, to lay Siege to a Fort, to endure the noise of Guns, to hear the
clashing of Swords, to lie on the cold ground many nights together, or to have
an Arm or Leg cut off, to preserve the founder parts of your bodies, you that
have courage to do all this, and do not think it hard, shall you think
Consideration hard? even that Consideration that would make you live like men,
and free you from the ^ubbish, the lapsed posterity of Adam lies groaning
under: you that do things every day almost much harder, and much more difficult
than Consideration is, will you scruple that which may be performed with
greater ease, and which you are more obliged to, than adventuring on the
Dangers I have mentioned?

II. Impediment.
II. Love of the World, and being continually employed about sensual objects.
This is another impediment of Consideration. And indeed we need not wonder to
see men neglectful and careless of this great and necessary work, when the
world takes up their hearts, and engrosses their affections; when we see how
all their Plots, Designs, Contrivances, Desires are for the world, and when
they mind only fleshly things, as the Apostles phrase is, Phil. 3.19.

What I mean by the world, none can be ignorant of, that has either read what
wise men have written concerning it, or has heard the Word of the Gospel
sounding in his ears: For indeed, it is not the least part of our Commission to
dehort and dissuade men from fixing their Affections on these sublunary
objects, and but that continual inculcating of the same thing would make our
Auditors nauseate the most wholesome Lessons, we could not do them greater
service, than by making such Dehortations the perpetual Subject of our Sermons.

All that is in the world, is the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes,
and the pride of life, says the great Divine, 1 John 2.16. Whatever outward
object serves to gratify sense, whatever here below is most commonly desired
and lusted after, whatever makes for satisfaction of the flesh, or of our
sensual appetite, all is comprehended under this name.

And indeed it is with these worldly comforts, as it was with the garden of
Eden; some are for food, some for trial; some to keep our bodies serviceable to
our souls; some to prove our souls, whether they will rest on these broken Reeds,
or seek their rest and acquiescence in him, that is the Creator of all. And
accordingly the Almighty thought fit to limit the use of these terrestrial
felicities, and to signify in his Word, that his intent in giving them, was,
that they should be our servants, not our masters; that he designed them as
advantages to us, not hindrances in admiring and adoring the immense goodness
and bounty of God, and that he appointed them for our use no farther, than they
would serve to promote his glory, and the eternal felicity of our immortal
souls. But here we find men generally live the reverse of Gods designs and
intentions, and instead of using these visible comforts in order to a greater
end, make that their home, which was intended only for their Inn, and are for
erecting Tabernacles to dwell there, which God designed only as a thorow-fare.

And to this unhappiness, preposterous education, which most men are subject
to, does very much contribute. For whereas we should be educated into Reason,
and a right apprehension of things, we are usually educated into sense and
deceptions; and those that have the care of us, and should teach us self-denial
in these outward things, and by that means, engage our souls to fix on nobler
objects, do commonly present us with nothing but sensual satisfactions. All
their Discourses to us are of the World, and of the magnificence, greatness,
splendour, and ravishing aspects of these outward gayeties; and the first
principles they teach us, are how to please sense, and to pamper our appetite;
and though now and then they teach us some little Notions of Divinity, yet it
is in such a sensual way, that it amounts to no more, than a formality and
divertisement, and being a thing that is taught by the by, it makes little or no
impression upon our affections.

But whatever disadvantages men lie under upon the account of their sensual
education, one would think when they come to the full use of their reason, and
are capable of understanding the vanity, emptiness, unconstancy of these lower
objects, and of apprehending that they were only intended as Ladders, to raise
us into contemplations of our great Benefactor in heaven, when they arrive to
this ripeness of understanding, come out of their apprenticeship, set up for
themselves, become as it were their own masters, and enter upon the possession
of that estate, which before was managed by others, one would think, I say,
they should then begin (as there is commonly an alteration of our temper, upon
the alteration of our fortunes) to rectify those sensual principles, which
their Nurses and Tutors have shed into them, and wash away the stains those
fond Masters (as indeed men may be killed by kindnesses, and like that Olympian
Victor, be stifled with Posies) have unluckily imprinted on their souls.

But alas! there are so very few, that having gone thus far, stop and attempt
to captivate their appetites to the obedience of Reason and Religion, or seek
to elevate their souls above the dung and trouble of the World, according to
the intent of their Maker, that most men sink deeper and deeper into the gulf
of sensual desires, open the gates wider, make the door larger for sensual
satisfaction to enter in, nay, if it be modest and loath to enter, compel it to
come in, and to give their spirits an infusion of carnality, to water and keep
warm the seed of worldly inclinations, and find out ways to increase their
Thirst, to add heat to their Fever, to provoke their sensual appetite to
enlarge it self as Hell, and fearing they have not been sufficiently, or
faithfully enough instructed in the enjoyment of these worldly felicities, they
try experiments and conclusions to find out new satisfactions, and thus plunge
themselves into the main Sea, being charmed by the Sunbeams playing and
glittering upon the water, and the curling of the waves. And the impressions
which were made on the wax when soft and tractable, remain when it is grown
harder, by a continual hurry of worldly cares and businesses, which they are
content to admit of, they make their souls the least object of their
solicitude, and were they asked as that profane Duke, What they think of
Heaven? it is like they would answer in his language, or think so, or at least
act as if they thought so, That they have so much business on earth, that they
cannot think of Heaven. Thus their very spirits become flesh, and their souls
turn to earth, as well as their bodies.

Whence it comes to pass, that their minds being altogether sensual,
impregnated with worldly cares and satisfactions, and all their faculties
employed in contriving how to get a greater share of earth than they have
already, or at least to keep and preserve what they have, there is no room for
this Consideration of their spiritual estate or condition. They hearken to
nothing with any zeal or attention, or life, that does not carry either some
worldly profit or pleasure with it, and that which charms or wins them, must be
the music of temporal interest.

Consideration how they shall be saved hereafter! there is no Lands to be
bought with it, no Manors to be purchased, no Houses to be built, no Countries
to be conquered, no Honors to be got by it. It brings in no Riches, it fills
not their Coffers with gold and silver, it does not give them respect and
credit with Princes, and Men of Quality, it does not cover their Tables with
dainties and delicacies, it does not furnish them with portions for their
children. It does not feed their bellies, nor put them into a condition to lie
on beds of ivory, or to be clad like Dives, with silk and purple. It does not
maintain their great Retinue, nor present them with soft Airs. It does not
provide for their Families, nor keep up their pomp and grandeur; were it such a
powerful thing as the Philosophers Stone is fabled to be, and did it enable
them to turn their Iron into Gold, and did it make their Trade to flourish, and
did it make their garners full, affording all manner of store, and cause such
fruitfulness among their flocks, that their sheep might bring forth thousands,
and ten thousands in their streets? Did it raise them to the power of
Senacherib, to the magnificence of Nebuchadnezar, to the pleasures of Solomon?
Did it promise a Kingdom, and whisper in their ears, that they should enjoy
ease and plenty, without all peradventure nothing should have so much of their
care or hearts, as Consideration of their ways: But having none of these
baits, and their hearts being fixed on the world, they can find no time for
this exercise.

Cannot, did I say? They will not allow themselves time to retire and consider,
that they have such things as souls, or that these souls are capable of
punishment and glory, when they shake hands with their old companions, their
bodies. They think that time misspent, that is bestowed upon Consideration of
another world, and what minutes or hours are taken from their fleshly
satisfactions, or from prosecuting their worldly concerns, they look upon as
flung away.

By worldly concerns, I do not only mean businesses which an Estate, or Trade,
or Family, or office or sensual pleasures cause, but business of study and
learning too; and one may be as much taken up with his study, as another is
with his Trade, and consequently be very loath to allow any time for this
Consideration we speak of. To be studious, and yet inconsiderate, implies no
contradiction, and a man may contemplate God and Heaven, and the whole
Creation, and yet not contemplate them in order to a holy preparation for
another life, or with an intent to mortify his sins and corruptions, and to
imitate God in holiness, without which it cannot be Consideration, and the best
name we can give it, is an empty Speculation, so that a spiritual Meditation
may be but a worldly business, if that which puts me upon it be my profession,
whereby I get a livelihood; if that which makes me study and meditate, be
temporal profit, or honor, or applause; if it be not undertaken with an intent
to edify my own soul, as well as the souls of others; if it be done either to
please the fancy, or to please the gentle Reader, by publishing it to the world.

And indeed where worldly concerns fill all the channels of the soul, there can
be but very little employment for serious Consideration. A continunl hurry of
business sheds darkness upon the soul, thrusts out that eye, whereby it should
reflect upon it self, and makes it intent only on things which tickle and
please the flesh, and like Felix, when any motions to serious Consideration
arise, replies, Go thy way for this time, and when I have a convenient season,
I will call for thee, Acts 24.25. It fares much with Consideration, as with
that Princes invitation, Luc. 14.16. worldly cares and businesses like those
guests when the soul feels any suggestions or invitations to Consideration, are
presently ready with excuses, and a thousand things are pretended why they
cannot come, or stoop to the gracious message or vocation, and these briars and
thorns choke the good seed that is thrown among them.

Thus earth keeps out Heaven, and the world, like shutters of a window,
excludes the light that would irradiate the room, not but that the business of
our worldly callings may lawfully be performed and followed, and men ought to
work with labor, and travel night and day, rather than be chargeable to
others, 2 Thessalonians. 3.8. But where the World is made God, and fills men's minds as
well as their hands, and all the time that can be got, is spent in embracing
and grasping of it, it is impossible Consideration should find entertainment
there; it is like a heartless prayer may, for that can be hudled up, and
requires not much time, and leaves them as worldly as it finds them, and does
not hinder or cross them in their fondness to the world, which they are afraid
Consideration will do. And indeed they guess aright, for Consideration would
shake their love, make them unquiet in their amors, and unsettle their
affections, pull down that high esteem they have of the world, and make them
see that there is not that beauty, that glory, or that happiness in things
below, which their sickly fancy dreamed of before; it would show them that all
these Gaudes are but a Pit covered with curious flowers, where people may
irrecoverably perish, if taken with the treacherous flowers they smell on them,
and admire their odor and fragrancy. It would show them the vanity of heaping
up riches, when they know not who shall inherit them; and represent unto them
^he folly of flattering their souls with an Ede, Bibe, Lude, Soul, take thine
ease, eat, drink, and be merry, thou have much goods laid up for many years. It
would show them how false, how perishable all these outward comforts are, and
that they have something more than this deceitful world to look after.
Consideration, like a faithful Counselor, would undeceive them in their fond
opinions of this treacherous friend, discover to them his base designs, the
mischiefs he drives at under all his smiles, the Serpent that lies under those
green herbs, and bid them beware of him. But such is the love they bear to the
world, that they are jealous of all things that would subvert their love, and
hate Consideration as an enemy, because they are afraid it will discompose
those embraces, and break the league between them, and these earthly
satisfactions, and put their hearts that lie close to the world, out of their
place, dispossess them of their earthly mindedness, and prompt them to lay up
in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, and lay
hold on eternal life: A strange fondness this! which does not only marry the
heart unto the world, and makes them two one flesh, but sends out Spies to
watch against all the endeavors of this faithful Monitor, viz. Consideration,
that it may not break the match, or dissolve the bond, or make the heart
sensible of its adulteries.

O God! How is thy similitude in Man defaced? How is that glorious Image thou
did once shed into his breast, blotted and defiled? Is this the Man that
received a Soul to mind Heaven most? Is this the Man, over whom thou did
spread thy skirts, whose nakedness thou did cover, and with whom thou did
enter into an everlasting Covenant, whom thou do draw by cords of love, whose
soul thou did betroth unto thee for ever in righteousness, and in judgment,
and in loving kindness and in mercies? Hos. 2.19. False treacherous Man! Is the
world become his Master? Is his servant become his Sovereign? And is that which
was intended for his footstool, become his Throne, whereon he braves all the
messages of grace and pardon? Shall so great a Soul be married to so mean a
slave? So great a Spirit joined to so pitiful a vassal? And shall that which
was designed for him to trample on, and despise, domineer, and use him like a
Prisoner, put fetters about his feet, and shackle his Soul, that it may not
return to that husband to whom it has sworn fidelity, and promised allegiance
and subjection? How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning,
and thou who had once power given thee to ascend into Heaven, and without a
metaphor to exalt thy Throne above the stars of God, to ascend above the
heights of the clouds, and to be like unto the most High, How art thou brought
down to Hell, to the sides of the Pit? How art thou cut down to the ground? How
is thy pomp brought down to the grave? Isa. 14.11, 12, 13.

III. Impediment.
III. Unwillingness to part with their sins. This certainly is the greatest
Impediment of Consideration, and the chief cause of Men's neglecting this most
useful work. Their consciences, or their hearts give them, that Consideration
will discover the deformity and odiousness of their vices, and will put them
upon forsaking their darling lusts; they are afraid it will raise doubts and
jealousies in their heads about their present condition, disturb them in their
slumber, discompose them in their golden dreams, drive them from their softs
and ease, and make their Candle burn dim and blew, which for the present gives
a very delightful shine, and therefore they are loath to apply themselves to it.

I have heard of some rude and savage Indians, who being decently clothed by
our Merchants (for in their own Country it seems they knew no other ornaments,
but dung and guts of Beasts about their naked bodies) and brought over into
England with an intent to civilize them, and make them instruments, upon their
return to teach their own Nation, modesty and decency, as they were walking
about the streets of London, and beholding the stately houses that adorned that
goodly City, they were observed to sigh and groan, and to look very melancholy;
those that took notice of them, charitably believed, that their dejected looks
were no other but characters of their mourning at their unhappy Countrymen,
who were strangers to such Edifices, such Pomp, such Glory, such Plenty, such
Magnificence and Gallantry. But being sent over into their own Country again,
they quickly betrayed the reason of their sighs, and soon discovered that their
melancholy was caused by their being delivered from their nastiness, and
beastly way of living. For they were no sooner come to shore, but they tore off
their clothes with indignation, fell about the necks of their Countrymen with
joy, and betook themselves to their dung and guts again, and in these ornaments
they came triumphing to the English. There cannot certainly be a fitter emblem
of Sin, where Men are enamored with it. They delight in their Plague-sores,
rejoice in their wounds and bruises, wounds not bound up nor mollified with
ointment. They are afraid of Plasters, and do so desire to be let alone in
their misery, that they are jealous of a Cure, and dread a Physician. Their
filth is so pleasing to them, their itch so amiable, that he that offers to
free them from it, attempts tearing of their bowels from them, and that is it
makes them afraid of Consideration.

For indeed Consideration would anatomize their sin, show them the venom
that is spread through every part, show them who that God is who professes
himself offended at it; show them, that he who is provoked by it, is that God
who breathed into their Nostrils the breath of life, and gives them the meat
they eat, the drink they drink, and the clothes they put on, that has the same
power over them, which the Potter has over his Vessel, and can create and
destroy them at his pleasure, that sits on the circle of the earth, and before
whom all Nations are as a drop of a Bucket, and are counted as the small dust
of the balance, before whom they are as nothing, yea, less than nothing and
vanity, from whom all their spiritual and temporal mercies do descend, without
whom they could not be one moment out of Hell, who is their best, their
greatest, and most constant Benefactor, who lets his Sun shine upon them, and
his Rain drop down on their fields and pastures, who sends his holy Angels to
watch their steps, and to keep them in their ways, who hears the Heavens for
them, and makes the Heavens hear the earth, and the earth to hear the Corn, the
Wine, and the Oil, and commands all these to relieve them, who preserves them
from danger, prevents their being hurt, and charges all the elements to spare
them, who keeps them by his Providence, supports them by his Wisdom, protects
them by his Power, and thinks nothing too good for them, if they will but
approve themselves obedient children, and live like persons who are sensible of
the obligations of the Highest.

Consideration would let them see, that this God who could undo them, wooes
them to Repentance, and that there is nothing in the world God hates more than
sin, and that this is it his Soul abhors, being holiness it self, and of
infinite purity; Consideration would let them see, that their sin controlls the
will and wisdom of that God, who feeds them, sets up Laws of its own making in
opposition to those commands, which the holy Angels dare not mention without
trembling. This would let them see the majesty and glory of that God whom they
do affront, a God who charges his Angels with folly, and on whose brightness
those blessed Ministers cannot look, without covering their faces with their
wings, and crying out in amazement, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Hosts.

Consideration would represent to them the various mercies and opportunities
they do slight, and how hard it will be for them to kick against the pricks;
this would show them what resisting their own mercies means, and what fighting
against their own happiness imports; how blessings slighted will turn to a
curse, and mercies abused will aggravate their g^ilt; how stubbornness makes
God weary of showing mercy; and how refusing to come in, while the gates are
open, provokes the Master of the house to protest, That the invited Guests
shall never taste of his Supper; how opportunities of being serious, if
neglected, may be snatched away, and the Scepter of grace, if looked upon with
contempt and scorn, may never be stretched forth again.

Consideration would let them see, what grief their sins do cause in Heaven;
how they make the eternal God complain; how loathsome, how abominable they make
them in the sight of God, and how they treasure up unto the owners wrath
against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. This
would show them Christ Jesus on the Cross; this would bespeak them in the
language of the Prophet, Who is this that comes from Edom, with died garments
from Bozrah? Wherefore is he red in his apparel, and his garments like him that
treads in the Wine-fat? Isa. 63.1, 2. This would show them, that the blood
which trickled down from that sacred head, trickled down upon the account of
their follies and transgressions, that their oaths and curses, and blasphemies,
were the thorns that pricked his head; that their lasciviousness and
fornications, and adulteries, were the spears that opened his side; that their
boldness in sinning, their resolutions to be damned, made the tears gush from
his eyes; that their hatred, their malice, their envy, their revengeful desires
were the hands that did buffet him; that their covetousness, and
worldly-mindedness, and neglect of their duty toward God and man, were the
Rods that smote him; that their evil thoughts, and idle words, and extravagant
actions, were the furies that spit into his face; that their perfidiousness,
their treacheries, their hypocrisies were the nails that were struck through
his hands and feet; that their laboring after Hell, their endeavors to be
miserable, their contempt of the goodness of God, made him sweat drops of blood
in the garden of Gethsemane; that their delight in abusing God, and in
trampling on his Laws, was that which made him shreek out, to the amazement of
Heaven and Earth, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? that the heat of
their lusts was the cause of his drought, and proved the gall and vinegar that
was given him to drink; that their sinful lives killed him, and their deadness
in duty murdered him; that their impatience and unbelief haled him to the
Cross, and their impenitence was the cause of that purple flood, which the
Angels, for the rarity and strangeness of it, descended from Heaven to behold.

Consideration would lay before them all the curses of the Law, the terror, the
consumption, the sorrow of heart, that anguish that attends sin in the end, the
troubles of Conscience it will raise ere long, the frights, the disquiet it
will produce. This would represent to them the flames that Dives felt, and made
the Wretch cry out for a drop of water to cool his burning tongue. This would
show them what blackness sin does cast on their understandings, and that their
being baptized into the Christian Faith, does signify little, except they
leave their sins; and that they do name the Name of Christ in vain, without
they depart form iniquity. This would show them their error in flattering
themselves with the hopes of Gods mercy, and demonstrate to them, how
ridiculous it is to believe, that God will pardon them, because they pardon
themselves; or that he will forgive them, because they are loath to suffer. This
would show them, that God sees and hears them, and will judge them, and set
their transgressions in order before them, for all the seeming delay of his
vengeance.

Consideration would discover to them the pardon and reconciliation they must
go without, if they do not speedily return; the blessings they deprive
themselves of, the comforts they bid defiance to, the light, the favor of God,
and the mercy of Christ Jesus they must for ever want, and be destitute of, if
they fly not into his arms with the greatest expedition and alacrity. This
would aggravate their sins, make them appear in their proper colors, and show
that they are no better than Cockatrices Eggs, and Spiders Webs. Have not you
seen the crafty Spider weave a Net, and then lie close in an ambush, till the
silly Fly, dazzled perhaps with the curiosity of the Net, hastens to those
unhappy Labyrinths; but while she is sporting her self in those chambers of
death, out comes the Murderer, and leads the Captive wretch in triumph home.
Consideration would show them, that thus it is with sin, and that with much
fair speech, as that Harlot, Prove. 7.21, 22, 23. it causes the sinner to yield,
with the flattering of her lips, she forces him. He goes after her straightway,
as an Ox goes to the slaughter, or a fool to the correction of the stocks:
till a dart strike through his liver, as a Bird hastes to the snare, not
knowing that it is for life.

This kindness Consideration would do them. Thus and thus it would tell them;
and this is it men are afraid of, and therefore care not for entertaining it.
Their sins afford them present satisfaction, and the pleasure they promise is
brisk and lusty on their fancies; their body feels it, their eyes see it, their
ears hear it, their tongue tastes it, it tickles all their senses, it makes
them merry and jovial, and makes their blood frisk and dance in their veins. It
makes them forget their sorrows, and puts the evil day far from them. Frequent
converse and long acquaintance, has made their friendship with sin inviolable.
And though it is really the greatest evil, and the cause of all evils in the
World; though it murders while it laughs, and poisons while it smiles and
cringes; though it is so merciless, that not contented to kill the body, it
attempts the soul too; yet having like the Prophets Ewe Lamb, 2 Samuel 12.3. been
nourished, and kept by its owners for many years, and being grown up together
with them, and having eaten of their meat, and drank of their Cup, and lay'n in
their bosoms, and been to them as a Child, the fondness is grown so great, that
nothing can make them willing to part with it. Hence it is, That Consideration
is looked upon as a saucy, ill-bred, unmannerly Messenger, that would part the
dearest friends, divide sin from their souls, and cause a civil War in their
bowels, destroy the reigning power of Vice, attempt its strong holds, and storm
its fortifications. They lie encircled in its arms; and though they hang all
this while over Hellfire by a twined Thread, though God all this while shakes
his Rod over them, and while they hug the sin, is preparing the instruments of
death, and whetting his Sword, and bending his Bow, and making it ready, yet
it seems such is the present hearts-ease sin affords, so sweet is the sleep it
yields, that men care not for being awaked by Consideration!

We should wonder to see a man that is ready to starve for want of food, refuse
the bread or meat which we offer him; and wonder to see a person that is ready
to perish with cold, reject the fire and clothing we have prepared for him;
and wonder to see one who is blind, scorn the help of him that would certainly
restore him to his sight; and wonder to see one who is fallen among Thieves and
Robbers make light of the assistance of a Prince who offers to rescue him out
of their hands. And do not thou wonder, O my soul, at the insufferable
stupidity of sinful men, that enticed with the milk and butter swimming in a
Lordly dish, enter into a Tent, where they will certainly meet with a nail and
hammer, and yet are afraid of that which would assuredly prevent their being
pierced and stricken through their temples? Mourn over them, lament their
wretchedness, grieve for them, that will not grieve for themselves, call for
Rivers of Tears, wish for a fountain of Water! Behold sin has blinded them,
Consideration would open their eyes, but they love darkness better than light.
Sin does expose them naked to the contempt and scorn of God, and his holy
Angels, and they rejoice under that weight. Sin deprives them of the bread of
life, and their souls are ready to die for want of the hidden Manna, and they
laugh under their want and misery. What Changelings does sin make men! Lord!
how it does unman them! how much below themselves does it make them live! unto
God, and his holy Angels they appear perfectly distracted, as the poor Wretches
in Bedlam seem to us; only herein their wretchedness exceeds the others misery,
that they may be released of their distractedness, and will not, the other if
they would, cannot; the former deliration is voluntary, the other forced; the
former has malice in it, the other weakness only; and whereas the latter
challenges pity and compassion, the former deserves nothing but wrath and
indignation.

IV. Impediment.
IV. Ignorance of the pleasure of Consideration, is another Impediment. It Is
ignorance of the price of Pearls that makes the Idiot slight them. It Is
ignorance of the worth of Diamonds, that makes the Fool choose a Peble before
them. It Is ignorance of the satisfaction learning affords, that makes the
Peasant despise and laugh at it, and we see very ordinarily how men tread and
trample on those Plants, which are the greatest restoratives, because they know
not the virtue of them; and the same may justly be affirmed of Consideration,
the reason why men meddle no more with it, is, because they are not acquainted
with the pleasantness of the task.

There is certainly such a thing as pleasure of the mind, and all delight
consists not in sensual satisfaction. We see with what pleasure men spend
their time in the study of the Mathematics; the Professors of it could live
and dye in those studies, and desire no greater satisfaction on this side
Heaven; their minds are so pleased with that Harmony, Symmetry, Order,
Proportion, they spy in things, that they could dispense with the coarsest
diet, so they might but have leave to enjoy that mental pleasure.

And indeed if knowledge be a pleasure, if to be acquainted with our selves be
satisfactory, if to discover the impostures, falsehood, designs, and ambuscadoes
of a dangerous enemy be delightful, Consideration must needs be so; for this
gives us an insight into our hearts, let us us see what we are, points at the
Nets which are spread for us, and manifests the temptations of the Devil, which
like Lime-twigs are designed to catch us into death and ruin. That the Devil,
or rather his Emissaries, the evil spirits that are under his power and
dominion, are daily walking to and fro, and observing our actions and designs,
and behavior, the company we converse withal, the circumstances we are under,
our constitutions, complexions and dispositions, and seeking whom they may
devour, the Holy Ghost has made so evident, 1 Pet. 5.8. Matthew. 4.3. Ephesians. 6 12.
and our own experience does so clearly demonstrate, that he that doubts of it,
must be a man that is altogether guided by sense, and takes notice of things no
more than the Beasts that perish; these evil spirits, whenever they tempt, they
tempt with a design to hurt; they try men to do mischief, and provoke them to
actions as may pull down the wrath of God upon their heads. And as the
instruments or engines they make use of in their temptations are various,
sometimes prosperity, sometimes adversity, sometimes our own corrupted hearts
giving them advantage to spur us on to sin, so the temptations vary according
to the several degrees and conditions, and tempers of men; for it is certain,
all men will not be dragged or seduced into Hell the same way, and a temptation
which will fit one, will not fit another; and a motion which one will
contentedly swallow, will not go down with another; several constitutions, must
have several suggestions; and according as men change, the temptation changes,
and the Devil takes other measures. David cannot be persuaded the same way that
Saul is wrought upon, and the arguments which prevail with the former, are of
no great force with the latter. Paul is not tempted the same way that Judas,
nor Peter the same way that Herod. The Drunkards temptations differ from those
of the Abstemious, and the Adulterers from the suggestions of him that is dull
and phlegmatic, and has not inclination to vices of that nature. The
melancholy man is oppressed with imaginations different from those, which the
merry and jovial meets withal; and we cannot suppose that the Prodigal is
tormented with the same suggestions that the Covetous acts by: It Is true, in
the end, all these Temptations agree, the intended end being destruction, and
offending God; but still they are of different kinds and complexions, and how
pleasant must it be to see through all these wiles and devices of the Devil, a
prospect which Consideration alone can afford.

There are many Temptations which seem to solicit to good, when indeed they
provoke to evil; as when a man, who wallows in sin and uncleanness, is prompted
to trust to Gods mercy, and to lay hold on the merits of Christ* and to apply
to himself the comforts of the Gospel. The things he is tempted to are good in
themselves, but the design of the Temptation being to render the Sinner secure
and presumptuous, and careless of a serious life, it cannot but be a pleasure
to any man that is sensible of his spiritual interest, to discover the cheat,
and this discovery is made by Consideration of the nature, design and tendency
of the flattering motion, Men are not only provoked to commission of Sin, but
too often to neglect of their duty toward God and toward man. And he that is
not tempted to Murder, to Theft, to Adultery, to Fornication, to contempt of
his Parents, to bearing False Witness against his Neighbor, is yet enticed to
Idleness, to Flesh-pleasing, to neglect of Prayer, of Meditation, of Charity,
of Faith, of Hope, of Confidence in God, of Zeal, of Fervency, of speaking for
Christ, of vindicating his Honor when abused, of improving his time to Gods
glory, and his own eternal good.

The young man rejoices in his youth, and lets his heart cheer him in the days
of his youth, and walks in the way of his heart, and in the sight of his eyes,
hates gravity and seriousness, and admits of such motions as these: The
precepts of the Gospel sure were not intended for me, who have youth and blood,
and spirit, to fit me for recreations, I have heard young Saints make old
Devils, and I believe it; for when in their riper years they reflect what time
they have lost; and how they have spent that age which was fittest for
pleasure, in retired devotion; they cannot but turn profane out of despite,
and strive to redeem the time they have misspent, in following the advice of
melancholy Scholars. Religion is a thing fit only for those who are either
discontented, or grown weary of the World, for men who can sin no more, and
whom age has mortified into forsaking of their Vices; shall I forbear my mirth
and amorous Songs, and witty Talk, my Railleries, and modish Accomplishments,
for I know not what? The men in black speak for their own interest, and God
sure is kinder to men, than to give them an appetite to sensual satisfactions,
and then forbid them to use it; what needs this haste, and why should I apply
my self to a religious life so early, when I have some forty, fifty, threescore
years before me, and can shake off my follies any time hereafter?

Thus the weak Youngster pleads, and embraces these motions, as Cordials for
his sickly passions, as Elixirs for his heated blood; Consideration would let
him see that these Temptations are Messengers of the Devil, Threads to lead him
into darkness, into captivity, into perfect slavery, and none but a mad man
could forbear rejoicing at so happy a discovery.

When the gray and hoary head from his great age infers the greatness of his
graces, and from the multitude of his years concludes the multitude of his
virtues; flatters himself that God loves him, because he has had little or no
affliction in the world; and from his impunity here, draws an argument to prove
his impunity hereafter, and sooths himself with Gods favor upon this account
chiefly, because he never discovered his anger in signal judgments, and bids
his Soul trust to it, that he stands fair in the good opinion and esteem of
God, because his labors in the world have been crowned with success; and
because he has a Garden of Eden here, securely promises himself a Paradise
hereafter; and will not be persuaded to the contrary, but that his plenty here,
is but an earnest of a fuller Vintage, and richer Granary intended for him in
the Land of Canaan; and that his long life on earth, is a pledge of his eternal
Life in Heaven: What are these but Temptations which Consideration would
discover to be Impostures, and consequently shed both light and joy into the
Soul.

When the poor from their outward conclude their spiritual poverty, and will
needs think that they are in a state of grace, because they are in a state of
want; and fancy they may securely pilfer, because God has made no other
provision for them; and that they shall receive their good things in the next
world, because they received their evil things in this; that they shall be rich
in Heaven, because they were destitute of conveniences here on earth; that they
must necessarily be Lords hereafter, because they were Beggars here; and shall
certainly rejoice in the nex life, because they mourned in this valley of
Tears; and cannot but be blessed for ever, because they had a very large
measure of misery here. When the rich from their prerogative on earth, conclude
their prerogative in Heaven; and because they are advanced above other men,
think they may use greater liberty in offending God than others; and because
they have greater estates than the meaner sort, may therefore sin more boldly,
and more considently than they. When from their power they infer the lawfulness
of their extravigances, and because they can stand it out, and brave the World,
fancy, they may oppress the poorer sort, and may swear and curse more boldly
than their Tenants, and resent and affront and revenge injuries, with greater
justice than Clowns and Peasants; when from the custom of the age, they infer
their privilege of being more sensual than other men; and because persons of
the same quality are not, argue that they need not be so cautious and
circumspect in their words and ways, as other men.

When the gentiler sort of people feel inclinations in themselves to be ashamed
of the Gospel, and to forbear professing any zeal or fervency for Religion in
company; where Christ's blood and wounds are abused, where God and Heaven are
rallied, where the precepts of the Almighty are laughed at, and the Gospel
turned into ridicule; when they find an unwillingness seize upon their spirits,
to reprove either their equals or inferiors, for some notorious impiety they
commit. When they think it is below them to pray with their Families, to exhort
their Servants to seriousness, and to show a good example to those that are
under their charge; when they find a disposition to comply with lewd society,
to laugh and smile, and consent to their frothy speeches, and abusive
reflections, and to conceal the truth, where it ought to be professed and
spoken.

When the Tradesman thinks of putting off his naughty Commodities to the
ignorant Chapman, and of circumventing, and deceiving his Neighbor, where his
Neighbor understands not what he buys; when he is willing to put off his
devotion, upon every trivial worldly business that comes in his way; and to
create business rather, than obey the checks of his Conscience, that chides him
for not minding his spiritual Concerns more. When he is loath to do acts of
Charity, because he has a Wife and Family to maintain, and is afraid he may
want himself. When he thinks, that Piety may procure Poverty, and strictness of
life may lose him his Customers, and following the ways of God may make his
acquaintance leave him, and that to be idle in his shop, is better than reading
or meditating, or employing his mind in contemplations of Gods goodness and
mercy, and the various blessings he has bestowed upon him.

When Parents are unwilling to correct and admonish their Children, are
persuaded to let them take their course, abuse others, despise those they have
a grudge against. When they are loath to instruct them in the fear of God, loath
to initiate them in the love of their faithful Creator, are apt to be more
angry with their Children and Servants for neglecting their commands, than the
service of God; and apt to be delighted more with their industry and pains in
Temporal concerns, than with their attempts in the affairs of their everlasting
salvation, apter to teach them how to maintain the punctilio's of their honor,
than assert the glory of God; and apter to encourage them in vindicating their
credit and reputation, than in securing their everlasting Treasures, or making
their Calling and Election sure.

When Children (provided they are able) are loath to relieve their Parents, loath
to administer unto them necessaries if in want, unwilling to obey those
wholesome counsels, which their Parents guided and encouraged by the Word of
God, impart to them, unwilling to imitate them in their seriousness and
heavenly-mindedness, are apt to obey their Parents more than God, and apt to do
evil, because their Parents bid them, though God enjoins the contrary; when
they sind in themselves an inclination to mourn more for displeasing their
Parents, than offending a gracious God; and to be more pleased with the smiles
of those which have the government of them, than with the light of Gods
countenance.

When Servants are moved to backbite, and revile their Masters according to the
flesh, find an unwillingness upon their spirits to honor the froward as well
as the gentle, are apt to be unfaithful to them, to imbezel their goods, and to
wrong them in things they have committed to their charge, when thoughts of
revealing the secrets of the Family merely to sport themselves, arise in their
minds; when they find inclinations to be industrious in their Masters presence,
careless and lazy in their absence, to put them off with eye-service as
Men-pleasers, to murmur against their lawful injunctions, to answer again if
rebuked for their faults, and to conspire against them by way of revenge.

What are all these motions and inclinations, but Temptations of the great
destroyer of Men's Souls. These are some of the ginns and stratagems, whereby he
does insensibly ruin the greatest part of Mankind; and we may confidently
affirm, That whatever Thought, Reason, Argument, Suggestion, Proposition,
Imagination would discourage us from a close adherence unto God, from a fervent
love to our gracious Redeemer, from earnest breathings and pantings after him,
from relying on him, and obeying him, and encourage us to any thing that is
displeasing to God, or contrary to Christ's rules and injunctions, or
prejudicial to the honor of God, or to the welfare of our Neighbor, or to a
good Conscience, whether the suggestion be immediately like lightning shot and
darted into the mind, or conveyed immediately by our corrupted hearts, or by
the world, or be adversity, or by prosperity, or by good report, or by evil
report, they are Temptations of the Enemy, which how plausible soever, design
nothing but our decay in goodness, and in the favor of God, and the loss of
our spiritual comfort and refreshment. Consideration examines the end of all
these motions, and finding out the mischief they drive at, discovering the
Tempest they aim at, it cannot but give great satisfaction to a rational Man,
that would not be a stranger to himself.

Indeed none are more sensible of the pleasure of this Consideration, than
those whom Gods Spirit has raised from the death of sin, and who have escaped
the pollutions of the world through lust. These reflect with more than ordinary
delight on the snares, from which they have in a great measure been delivered.
And though they are still subject to Temptations, yet that which very much
contents them, is, that they are not ignorant of Satan's devices. They see the
windings and turnings of the Enemy, and can laugh at the miserable shifts he
uses to deceive them. They see his goings and his ways, and can trace the Foe
in all his stratagems. They see his juggles, and how he tears the sinner day
and night.

Look, O my Soul, look upon yonder Sinner, that has renounced his follies, and
yet goes drooping under the burden of his sins. Do not thou see the Enemy
behind him? The Foe can make him presume no longer, and therefore he seeks to
drive him to despair; and he that before told the Wretch of Gardens, and Walks,
and Pleasures, now shows him nothing but Hell, and a burning Lake. He that
before represented God to him as a mighty Sardanapalus, one that does not mind
such little things, as sins, now sets out God, arrayed in a habit of vengeance,
and as one who does but watch for an opportunity to condemn him. He that before
made the burden lighter than straw and stubble, now makes his little finger
heavier than his loins, and assures him, that what seemed but a Cloud before,
is all Hill and Mountain now. He that before talked of nothing but mercy seats,
now changes his note, and knows of no other remedies, but Tribunals of
judgment. He that before made the silly wretch believe that God had no voice
but that of mercy, no scepter but that of love, makes God all thunder and
lightning now.

Judas believes him, and is lost; Mary Magdalen sees the imposture, and
escapes; she rests upon Christ's word, and is convinced, that there is no sin
that is capable of true repentance, but is capable of pardon too; and that
Christ is so far from casting those away that come to him with an humble and
contrite spirit, that the greatest ease and refreshment is their portion. She
sees that the poor in spirit have a right to the Kingdom of Heaven; and that
those that mourn, shall never be destitute of comfort. She is sensible, how
happy that person is, that feels his heart bleeding and melting upon the
account of his former sins, and can make his Bed to swim with tears. She is
sensible the Holy Ghost moves upon these waters, and that such a person is
indeed baptized with water, and the Holy Ghost.

This she beholds, and beholds with pleasure. Consideration gives her a
prospect of the Devils subtilty, and her eyes gush out with tears of joy. And
certainly, if it be a greater pleasure to see than to grope in the dark; a
greater pleasure to know the precipices I am hurried into, than to have them
hid from mine eyes; a greater pleasure to see the brink of destruction I do
stand upon, than to be ignorant of it; Consideration must be a pleasure, for
this shows me the steep Rock Temptation, this ignis fatuus, would have led me
to; the Ditch this false light would have flattered me into; the fatal Sea this
false star would have seduced me into.

How have I seen a Traveller rejoice, when waking in the morning, he has seen
the Water, or the Mine, he must have necessarily tumbled into, if he had gone
but one step farther, and had not stopped where he did; how does he admire the
Providence which has preserved him, and how does he go on in his way
rejoicing, that he has seen the gulf he might have rusht into, and escaped
it! And O sinner, do not thou think thou should rejoice, to find by
Consideration, that thy aversness from Religion, thy backwardness to Devotion,
thy unwillingness to spend time in private Meditations, thy excusations of sin,
thy palliations of extravagant desires, thy pleadings for Licentiousness, thy
Apologies for pleasing the lusts of thy flesh, thy eagerness to run into evil
company, thy desires to wallow in uncleanness, thy longings after things Gods
Word forbids, thy inclination to unbelief, that all these are Temptations of
the Devil, Corn which that Fowler spreads and scatters before the unwary Birds
to kill, and to destroy them. Consideration would dismantle Satan, pull off his
mask and vizard, and convince thee that the sweetness of the Potion, is but to
make the Poison go down more glib; and however the Pill may be gilded, it is
but to dazzle thee into love with eternal ruin.

V. Impediment.
V. Danger of losing their unlawful gain* It Is a thing not unusual for men to
thrive by sin, and to prosper by iniquity; to grow rich by oppression, and to
advance in wealth by unlawful callings; to get money by pleasing other men in
their lusts, and to procure a livelihood by injustice, and complying with the
Vices of the Age we live in. The Devil must have some rewards to bestow, else
his Kingdom would soon expire; and though his rewards as well as temptations
are deceitful, yet rewards they are, and being present and visible, and
consequently apt to make the deeper impressions, they invite more strongly, and
caress men into desire and appetite. Men many times would not venture on sin,
but that they believe it is the way to gain, and the known road to advantage
and emolument. And as sin is judged to be the way to profit, so they look
upon it as the only means to preserve what they have got and acquired.

If Absalom had not had a Kingdom in his eye, he would hardly have dared to
rebel, and Viper-like, to prey upon the bowels that did feed and nourish him.
Demas sees how plentifully the Heathen Priests did live, what credit, what
honor, what wealth and glory they enjoyed, and that makes him forsake
Christianity, and embrace their ways. It was gain made Demetrius so zealous
for the worship of Diana, and the Masters of that Damsel that had a familiar
spirit so earnest for telling of fortunes, and unlawful divinations. And we
know who they were that told the Prophet Jeremy, As for the word that thou have
spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee: But we
will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own mouth, to burn
incense unto the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, for
then we had plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no evil. But since we
left off to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out
drink offerings unto her, we have wanted all things, and have been consumed by
the Sword, and by the Famine, Jer. 44.16, 17, 18.

And indeed, this principle, that a sinful life, is the only profitable life
does so spread, and infect the hearts of men, that most are afraid to sit down
and consider their ways, for fear Consideration should make them weary of a
sinful life, and consequently make them quit and cashier the gain and profit,
they do reap by it. Profit is the great Goddess the world adores, and to
preserve that, men employ their strength and friends, and make use of all
opportunities to secure it; it is that which they are truly jealous of, and
which is as dear to them, as their lives, and which makes them climb rocks, and
clamber mountains, and fight their way through all impediments that would
oppose and cross it: Touch that, and you touch the apple of their eye; and
whatever cause they are zealous for, though other reasons may be pretended, yet
profit and interest commonly is the true cause that inflames their passions,
and makes their spirits fervent; and they seldom matter whether it be by
lawful, or unlawful ways, that they have made their fortunes, so they be but
made and advanced to such a pitch, they will be sure to protect, what they have
purchased, and it is not an easy matter, shall snatch it out of their clutches.

Consideration that unruly faculty would create ill thoughts of such gain in
their minds, and therefore as men that are loath to meet their Creditors, and
when they see them afar off, turn out of the way, that they may have no
occasion to speak to them; so the generality of men do carefully shun
Consideration, as an unhappy Remembrancer, that will put them in mind of things
they do not desire to hear, and touch the sore they would not have handled or
meddled withal, and search into those wounds they would not have healed up, or
come under the hand of a Physician. I do but think, what a world of Religious
men we should have, how men would flock to Christ from all corners, what a
number of pious Souls would appear in all places, if we could assure them, that
a serious life will for certain furnish them with an estate answerable to their
luxurious appetite; and I am apt to believe, were men confident, and could they
trust to it, that they should get an estate of 9 or 10000 l. per annum, by
frequent reading, praying, meditating, and obedience to Christ's commands, the
greatest part would make a hard shift to consider how to leave their sins and
vices, and apply themselves to reformation, we should hear no more of the
excuses they now make, that they have no time, or that their condition is such,
that they cannot serve God, as they should. The impossibilities they now
pretend, would all vanish; and they that now rack and torment, and tire
themselves for a little profit, upon prospect of so considerable an advantage,
would turn their pains and labor another way, and become very devout
worshippers of the Holy Jesus, and find no such trouble in a circumspect life,
as now they do.

Should Christ appear in a visible shape from Heaven to the Swearer, or
Drunkard, or Fornicator, or Adulterer, or Covetous, or any other of the sinful
Herd, with vast glittering Treasures in his hand, nay, could we the Ministers
of the Gospel secure such a Lo^dship, such a Principality, such a Kingdom, such
an Empire, to any of these sinners, upon condition, they would part with their
Vices, sure, it would be a mighty Temptation to them, to shake hands with their
darling impieties; for I see they sell their Souls to the Devil, for 2, 3, or
400 l. many times; and I am so charitable as to think, they would save them for
a far more considerable sum.

It Is like some would be so brutish, so swinish, so sottish, (and yet but very
few neither) that would rather starve, than leave their sins; dwell rather in a
Hogs-stie, than renounce wallowing in the mire of their follies; and live upon
bread and water rather, than deny their lustful desires; and stoop to the
meanest, lowest, and most sordid condition in the world rather, than bow to the
noble commands of Christ Jesus; but one might engage safely for the generality
of sinners, profit and riches being the great loadstone, that makes men willing
to do any thing.

I see, how if a Prince, or other great person, men depend or hope for
something from, dislike such a sin, they are guilty of, they can forbear it,
and comply with their Princes will and devotion. I see how a person of quality
can frown all his family into seriousness; and the most vicious servant he
has, for fear of losing his Masters favor, and the good place he has under
him, will find a way for profits sake to subdue his inclinations, and take
leave of a sinful pleasure, since it is so that he cannot enjoy that and his
Masters good will together. And therefore could we promise Temporal Crowns and
Scepters, and Estates, and were we able to perform our promise upon men's
quitting of their sins, it is very probable, Holiness and Seriousness would be
mainly embraced and followed, and what is now out of fashion, would be as much
the mode then; and a person that would not conform to the rules and orders of a
serious life, would look like an Antic as much, as he does now, that dares be
truly good in a sinful, and adulterous generation.

But seeing all the Divinity we teach, cannot increase their Trade, and make
their rocks drop with honey, and sill their trunks with shining clay, they look
upon that holiness, we press and recommend to them, as a very beggarly
business, and mind it only on the By, when they have nothing else to do.

And this is it, confirms them in their fancy, That a loose and vicious life is
the only gainful life, a Maxim notoriously false, and which Consideration would
soon scatter, were it but called in to do its office; this would represent to
them, how their gain, which has so ill a foundation, must necessarily be a
Moth in their Estates; and how promising soever their gettings may be for the
present, they will soon bring a consumption on their fortune, and prepares for
their greater sorrow and vexation. This would represent to them, how such gain
does purchase the wrath of God, and procures treasures of Gods indignation, how
it prognosticates a more plentiful condemnation, and is a presage of richer
flames hereafter. This would lay before them that saying of Christ, Matthew.
16.26. What shall it profit a man, if he gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? This would show them
their stupendous folly, in venturing eternal torment for a little trash; and
discover to them, how dear they buy their plenty.

Consideration would let them see, That a serious life is, in despite of all
the suggestions of the Devil to the contrary, the way to the greatest gain, and
yields the most durable profit, and lays a foundation for riches, which grow
not old, and fade not away; and that peace with God. is a far greater treasure,
than all the gold of Ophir; and reconciliation by the blood of Jesus, a nobler
possession, than all the jewels and pearls of the Indian Monarchs; and that the
Apostle was in the right, when he counted all things but loss and dung for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3.8.

This would show them, That Friendship with God, and fellowship with the
Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, is worth more than Ten thousand worlds, and
represent to them the groans of the damned in Hell, who, were they to live over
their days again, would sell all they had to purchase this Pearl, and give Ten
thousand millions of gold, if they had them, for this friendship, because this
friendship would blow out their flames, and cool their burning Tongues, which
all that mass of wealth will not do.

Consideration would lay open all the riches, a serious life procures; it would
let them see, that the intercession of Christ Jesus is entailed upon it, a
blessing inconsiderable in the eyes of the world, but which men will one day
set a higher price upon, when it is too late. To have an Advocate in Heaven,
who answers all the cavils and exceptions, and accusations of the Devil against
our sincere endeavors, who controlls the rage and malice of the enemy, steps
in, while the Foe is arguing against us, shows his merits, his wounds, and the
marks of his nails, and makes our imperfect services pass for current Coin in
the Court of the Highest, covers the weaknesses and infirmities of our duties,
perfumes our devotions with the precious odors of his satisfaction, offers up
our prayers in his golden Censer, throws his garment over us, stops the Lions
mouth that is opened against us, contrives our happiness, promotes our interest
with God, and pleads, not to cast us away from his presence, nor to take his
holy Spirit from us; what profit there is in having such an Intercessor, none
will ere long be more sensible of, than those who have been destitute of the
benefit of this intercession, and indeed none share in that mercy, but men that
dare apply themselves to that serious life, whereof Consideration is the Key.

Consideration would show them, That this serious life gains the assistance and
illumination of Gods Spirit. And indeed, to have the mind so purged, as to see
the vanity and emptiness of all sublunary objects, the beauty of holiness, the
odiousness and loathsomness of sin, the transcendent excellency of God, the
designs of Gods Providence, the methods of Gods Mercy, the reasonableness and
equity of his proceedings, and to be so assisted from above, as to dare to
oppose the most pleasing Temptations, though they charm never so wisely; and to
esteem one hours communion with God, above all the preferments and glories of
the world; (for in this manner the Holy Ghost assists those that apply
themselves to a serious circumspect life) he that sees no profit, no gain, no
advantages in this privilege, may justly be supposed to be quite blinded by
the god of this world.

Consideration would let them see, that the Promises of the Gospel are other
gets riches, than plenty of Corn and Wine, and Oil; that there is no distress,
no calamity, no misery, wherein these Promises cannot hold a Believers head,
and support him against fainting; that these can give content, when nothing in
the world can quiet the Soul; and that these can make men triumph, when they
are made as the filth of the world, and as the offscowring of all things.

Consideration would let them see the unspeakable gain which attends the
serious, sincere, and self-denying Christian when he comes to dye. This would
show them, that the immarcessible Crown of glory, the reward of a serious life,
does infinitely transcend all that the world can imagine advantageous and
profitable.

Nay, Consideration would discover to them, That a serious, circumspect life,
entitles men to temporal gain, as well as to spiritual and eternal advantages.
This would show them, that more men are ruined in their estates, by a Vicious,
than there are by a Religious Conversation; and that Drunkards, Whoremongers,
Adulterers, Ambitious, and Quarrelsom men, break sooner and oftener in the
world, than those whose business it is to keep a Conscience void of offense
toward God and man. This would show them, that this worlds Goods are not
engrossed, or possessed altogether by men, who slight God and their own Souls;
but that even many of those, who truly fear God, have a very large share in
temporal plenty and prosperity; and that many times men thrive the better for a
serious life, and a secret blessing attends them, plenty steals upon them
beyond expectation; and as if some good Angel were at work for them, riches
flow insensibly upon them, and every thing they undertake does prosper,
insomuch that themselves cannot but wonder at their increase.

This would convince them, that many men who during their ungodly Conversation,
could not thrive, have signally prospered in the world, as soon as they have
applied themselves to a serious life; and that a serious man is best qualified
for getting profit, and increasing an Estate; and that the generality of men
had rather deal with a conscientious man, than with a person who is careless of
all things, but his own interest, as knowing, that being conscientious, he
dares not cheat, or deceive them, but will think himself obliged to deal justly
and honestly with them, and do by them, as he would have others do by him; and
that this is the great misfortune of ungodliness, and the glory of a serious
life, in that one wicked man dares not trust another, but both good and bad
dare trust him, who stands in awe of God, and makes it his great care and
study, how to please him.

This would show them, that the serious man in being charitable, takes the
readiest way to prosper in his secular Concerns; and that as great a Paradox as
it may seem to sensual men, there is not a greater truth in the world, than
that which Solomon speaks of, Prove. 11.24. There is he that scatters, and yet
increases. This would lay before them the Examples of men, who by consecrating
a great part of their Estate and Incomes to pious and charitable uses, have
enlarged their fortunes, and by casting their bread upon the water, have found
it again with interest after many days, who have denied themselves in their
superfluities, and yet are grown rich, given away, and gotten more than they
had in times past. This would lead them into the pleasant field of Gods
Providence, and show them how that wise and gracious God wheels and turns
things about for the good of those that dare trust him for a recompense, and
makes that money which was laid out for the use of the Needy, return with
advantage and usury.

Consideration would let them see, how various Gods temporal blessings are,
which very often light on the head of a serious religious man; and though he
has no Trade, which stands in need of augmentation, but a standing revenue,
how yet God may watch over him so, that he shall lose little, and all he
undertakes shall prosper; that his houses shall be preserved from fire, and his
Cattle from decay; that his fields shall bring forth plentifully, and his lands
be as the garden of the Lord; that he shall see his posterity advance in wealth
and honor, and his childrens children grow as the lillies, and spread their
branches as the Cedars in Lebanon.

Consideration would let them see, how a whole Kingdom thrives, where
seriousness and the fear of God is encouraged with vigor and sincerity. What a
darling a serious Prince is to his Subjects, how well they love him, how highly
they esteem him, and how plentifully and contentedly they live under his
shadow. This would refresh their memories, how upon a public humiliation God
has been entreated, and the judgments under which a Nation groaned, have been
averted; and the Heavens which before were turned into brass, have visited the
Earth again with showers, and the former scarcity has been transformed into
plenty and abundance; and how God has seen their works, that they turned from
their evil ways, and has repented himself of the evil he had said, he would do
unto them, and has not done it.

Consideration would let them see, that though a serious man should decay in
the world, and his conscientiousness be the cause of his ruin, yet he would
have more to support him under his losses than another man, and it could not
but be a very great satisfaction to him, that it was not any vice of
licentiousness, that broke him, but a good Conscience, which is its own reward,
and the best preservative, against murmuring, repining, and despair, and very
often a presage, That God will set him up again, and as it was in Job's case,
make the latter part of his life more prosperous than the former.

By such representations as these, Consideration would scatter this suggestion
of the Devil, That a sinful life, is the only gainful and advantageous life.
But what argument can prevail against Experience; and where men have found
already, that their sins have proved profitable, and that their carelessness of
Religion has procured them no small advantages? Their great care and study now
must be, that they do not put themselves into a way of losing them; and
therefore exhort them to consider, what the end of these things will be, and
whether this be a likely course, to get a title to the inheritance
incorruptible reserved in Heaven for Believers; they will be ready to reply,
What, part with my livelihood? Quit that which must support my Family? Would
you have me starve and perish? Will your Religiousness give me bread? Would you
have me precipitate my self into ruin? Will nothing less serve the turn, than
leaving all, and following Christ? Why should I despair, when God blesses me;
and think ill of my way of living, when God, by prospering my endeavors,
declares his approbation of my deportment? My gain is his mercy; and if he did
not allow of what I did, he would withold his benediction. His giving success
to what I do, shows his love; and I have reason to believe he is not angry with
me for taking this course, because he never crossed it by his thunders. God
would have me live in the World, and since I have no other way to thrive but
this, I must suppose it is that which God has called me to. My industry is in
obedience to his command, and why should I fright my self with his indignation,
when my prosperous fortunes speak his smiles and sunshine!

Consideration would let them see, that God does not bless them for their sins,
but does it to invite them to amendment. Nay, this would suggest to them, that
it may not be God that blesses them, but the Devil; and that he that is
permitted to show them all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glories of them
in a moment, has power also to reward iniquity; and that prosperity which is
acquired by sin, cannot be of Gods making, but is an effect of the Devils
bounty, who never gives, but with an intent to murder; and makes Presents for
no other end, but to make the Soul a prey to his fury; who gives, like the
Grecians, only to overcome; and seems kind, only to get an interest in the
sinner, and to take advantage against him, when there shall be occasion; who
blesses with a design to curse, and rewards to harden men in their contempt of
the Almighty, who lets men reap profit, that they may venture confidently on
sin, and is contented, they should have something for their pains, that they
may dedicate themselves more entirely to his service.

But what can you expect from men, that are resolved not to s^e, and are so
wedded to their gain, that they are frighted with the very thoughts of a
remedy, that would clear their sight, and show them the fatal hand, that gives
them their prosperity, and discover to them, the Fiend, that conveys the gain,
they get, into their houses, and bribes them into everlasting Tortures.

O poor besotted sinners! And do you lose Heaven for this? Is it for this, you
leap into destruction? Is it for this, you hazard the favor of God? Is it for
this, you scorn the gold of the Sanctuary? Is it for this, that the riches of
grace and mercy, are vile and mean, and despicable in your eyes? Would any man
think, you had rational, immortal Souls within you, that sees you live thus?
Would any man imagine that you believe a reward to come, that sees you so
greedy after a present recompense? so greedy, that you fight your way through
Oaths, Curses, Lies, Oppression, Extortion, Injustice, Covetousness,
Uncleanness, Blasphemy, Flatteries, Railings, Slanders, Abuses, Drunkenness,
and through the most sneaking, most sordid, and most disingenuous sins, to get
it? To see this, what sober man would not bless himself? What man of reason
would envy such advantages? Pity you he may, but he can never wish for your
happiness, for that which you call happiness, is misery in grain, and must
shortly die into endless lamentations, Verily I say unto you, you have your
reward, Mat. 6.5.

VI. Impediment.
VI. Fear of being melancholy with so much seriousness, is another Impediment.
And as the Devil ceases not day and night to instill this principle into men's
minds, so it usually prevails with the jolly Crew, and such as are all for
mirth and raillery, and hate sadness as their most deadly Enemy. Consideration
they are afraid will strike them into dumps, and a view of the odiousness and
loathsomness of their sinful life, deprive them for ever of that merry temper,
kind nature has bestowed on them. Consideration of their danger, they fear,
will put them in mind of the severe Duties of Religion, and suggest something
to them that will lie gnawing within, and make them, that they shall never
enjoy a merry hour again. They look upon men abroad, who have applied
themselves to Consideration of their ways, and studied how they shall be happy
after death, and find, it had spoiled their triumphs, and caused them to walk
about discouraged, and dejected. They see how some, that think much of their
salvation, hang down their heads, like a bulrush, fold their arms, and spend
their days in tears, and weeping. They see how uncomfortable Consideration has
made their lives, how it has filled their hearts with sorrow, and grief, and
anguish, and they are afraid, this will be their fate, and the effects it has
wrought in others, fright them, lest they should be as disconsolate as they.
While they maintain their jolly temper, they can live quietly, and with
content; and while they have little or nothing to do with those serious things,
Divines do talk of, they feel no disturbance; and why should they meddle with
Consideration, which will certainly infuse sad thoughts into their minds, and
give them gall and vinegar to drink?

And are not these excellent Arguments against Consideration? Are not these
very lofty and pregnant Reasons, to confute the necessity of so great a Duty?
Wretched, deluded men! Consideration would let you see, that there is a great
difference between melancholy and seriousness; and that every man that looks
grave and sober, is not therefore dejected, and discomposed within; and that
it is possible for men not to rant, and tear, and swagger, and yet to enjoy
great calm and quietness in their Souls. That a man is not therefore sad,
because he will not swear and drink, nor therefore Hypocondriack, because his
Conscience will not digest those sins which you can swallow down without
chewing.

Consideration would let you see, That you who allow your selves in sin and
vanity, of all men have least reason to be merry, who have the King immortal
and invisible, for your Enemy, and the blood of Jesus speaking against you, and
Gods Spirit bearing witness of your disobedience, and know not how soon God
will open the flood gates of his anger, and how soon your portion will be in
outward darkness; who have no title to the benefits of Christ's passion, and are
dead while you live; who have your understandings darkened, your inward and
outward man polluted, and your garments spotted by the flesh.

Consideration would let you see, That your joy and mirth is but slight and
superficial, so far from being solid, that oftentimes in your very laughter,
your heart is sorrowful; and as fair as you carry things outwardly, your
Consciences cannot but fright you with an approaching storm sometimes; and as
merry as you seem to be, you now and then feel terrors, which make you flee,
when no man pursues you. This would let you see, how short your mirth and
pleasures are, and how they perish in the very enjoyment, and are no better
than Butterflies; which when you have with great labor and industry got into
your hands, their curious colors decay with a touch, and you can boast of
nothing but a squalid Worm. This would show you how weak a thing it is with
Lysimachus, for a cup of cold water to lose a Kingdom, and to hazard an
eternity of joy for mirth, which at the best is but as a morning cloud, and as
the early Dew, which soon passes away.

Consideration would let you see, That your mirth is worse than sadness and
sorrow, because it proceeds from a stupefied Soul, and from a hard heart; and
that it is rather a man's felicity to be a stranger to your mirth, than
unhappiness, because your mirth is so vain, your delight so frothy, and your
joy usually has such a fearful end, an end, much like that of Belshazzar, who
made a Feast to his Lords, drank Wine before them, and to make the Deboshe
complete, and to make the blood of the grapes drink with greater briskness,
called for the golden Vessels, which his Father had taken out of the Temple of
Jerusalem, as if it increased the pleasure of drink to profane those Vessels by
drunkenness, which were consecrated to God, and Wine out of a Bowl of the
Sanctuary, gave greater life to the spirits, and revived the heart more than a
common Cup. But while their hearts danced and leapt for joy, an unknown hand
from Heaven writes the dreadful Mean Mean Tekel, Vpharsin, upon the Wall, and
on a sudden, the Kings countenance changes, and his thoughts trouble him, so
that the joints of his loins were loosened, and his knees smote one against
another, Dan. 5.6.

Consideration would let you see, That your joy does not deserve the name of
joy, and that your mirth is nothing but wantonness, and how much below a great
spirit such pleasures are, how unworthy of a man created after Gods image and
similitude, how empty they leave your souls, and how like the Sea when ebbing
in muddy places, leave nothing but stink and filth, and nastiness behind them.

Consideration would let you see, That none can rejoice so heartily as those,
who make it their business to please God, and to be happy for ever. This would
show you, That light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in
heart, Psalm. 97.11. And that no persons in the World have greater reason to
rejoice than they, whose great care and study, is first to seek the Kingdom of
God, and his righteousness, as being persons, who are acquainted with a lively
faith, and know by blessed experience what that hope means, whereby men purify
themselves even as God is pure, and what it is to be strengthened with all
might unto all patience, and long-suffering, and what the constraining love of
God implies, and what it is to be married to him, who is altogether lovely, and
what it is to have union and communion with him.

Consideration would show you, that peace of Conscience, and honor with God,
and the Spirits making intercession for us with groans unutterable, and pardon
of sins, privileges which attend a serious preparation for a better World, are
a continual Feast, and consequently afford matter for greater joy, than all the
rarities and curiosities of this present life. This would let you see, That
that one blessing, pardon of sin, which a serious man enjoys, is a mercy which
he may justly rejoice and triumph in, more than the greatest Monarch of this
world in his boundless Empire. This would lead your thoughts to take a view of
the present condition of the unhappy spirits in Hell, to whom pardon of sin
would be a greater comfort and refreshment, than all the pleasures of this
World distilled into quintessence. Should a Proclamation be made in that dismal
Vault, by some Angel sent from Heaven, that all the Prisoners are freed from
their guilt, by the new and living way, even by the blood of Jesus, and that
God has condescended at last, and is prevailed withal to forgive their
iniquities, what leaping, what dancing, what joy, what gladness, what
exultation of spirit, what serenity of face, what a cheerful air would appear
in every corner of that loathsome Prison! How would one Wretch jog the other,
and bid him break out into praises and celebrations of his Maker, for so great
a favor! How like Heaven would Hell look on a sudden, and all their
exclamations which grief and anguish did draw from them, change into
exclamations of gladness! How would their hearts swell, and dilate themselves,
and transport them into an ecstasy of joy! How sordid, how mean, how pitiful,
how inconsiderable would all their former sensual delights seem to this
pleasure or satisfaction!

Consideration would let you see, That whatever men that are become vain in
their imaginations, may prate, there is no pleasure, no felicity like that
which flows from walking in the ways of God; that in this Garden are the
sweetest Roses, the most odoriferous Flowers, the most fragrant Plants, Roses
which have no prickles underneath, like your carnal delights, flowers which
wither not away, like that frothy mirth which the laughter of Fools affords,
Plants which feed, and nourish, and heal, and poison not, like those airy
satisfactions which flow from making provision for the flesh. This would
represent to your minds the examples of millions of Saints, Who are able from
their own experience to affirm, that the ways of seriousness, are truly ways of
pleasantness; and that all her paths are peace; that they have found more
satisfaction in being door-keepers in the house of God, than they have done in
being Masters of the most glorious Tents of wickedness; that they have had more
joy from contemplation of Heavens glory, and from reflecting on the beauty of
holiness, in one hour, than ever they received from running up and down many
years together, after the things the vain World is enamored withal; that they
would not be in that miserable, unregenerate estate again, if they might have
whole Kingdoms to entice them; and that there is no condition in all the World
so full of Briars and Thorns, and Anguish, and Pain, and Disquietness, and
Trouble, and Vexation, as a sinful life, and an unconverted state.

Consideration would let you see, That those serious persons who look dejected
and melancholy, have joys within which no stranger intermeddles withal, and
as little show as they make of cheerfulness, they carry that within their
breasts, as can make their life a perpetual Jubilee. So far is Consideration
from making men melancholy, that it points at the things where the greatest joy
is to be found; and as Consideration it self is a pleasure, as we proved
before, so it is a guide to lead men into such a Paradise, as they would be
content to lose themselves in, and desire no greater felicity on this side
Heaven.

VII. Impediment.
VII. Fear of going distracted with poring on things too high for their
capacities. The aversness from a truly, serious, circumspect life, in most men
is so very great, that they will entertain the absurdest, silliest, and most
childish pretenses, rather than be persuaded to that course, God and his holy
Angels, Scripture, Conscience, Ministers, and all the Providence of God do
call and invite them to. And such a shift is that we have before us, a plea so
impertinent, that we might justly ask the question, Whether those that make use
of it, are not distracted already? Men had as good give us a downright answer,
and tell us plainly, That they will not take their everlasting state into
Consideration, and will have nothing to do with salvation, as make us conclude
so much from their unsteddiness and tergiversations. They love to leave God and
themselves, and their Neighbors in the dark; and we find, they halt between two
opinions, unresolved, whether they shall follow God or Baal. They would
neither, displease God, nor the Devil. The Devils favor they keep, and
maintain by their secret aversness from a serious preparation for another life,
and Gods good will they court, by pretending that they would follow him, were
it not for such and such obstacles and impediments. And indeed their flesh does
no sooner suggest an excuse to their minds, but they presently flatter
themselves, that that shift will be a sufficient Apology for neglect of their
duty. And though going distracted with Consideration, be a thing very unlikely,
next to impossible, yet a pitiful shift being better than none, this comes in
with the rest, and helps to rock the Soul into a sleeping slumber; it seems
their brains are strong enough to contrive, how to promote their own fall, but
will not serve them to ponder, how to keep themselves from ruin.

One would think they could not be worse mad than they are already, and
therefore they might venture upon a serious Consideration of their ways
without danger. Take a view of thy actions, sinner! Go into houses where mad
men are kept, and see whether thy deportment and practice be not as like
theirs, as one thing can be like another: it is the character of mad men to
choose means altogether unsuitable to the end, they design, if they offer to
kindle a fire with shining brass, or attempt to build a house without
materials, or think that a Net will secure them against the bitterest Frost, or
hope to be Masters of a Trade without learning of it, or talk of being
acquainted with such a language, when they have neither Books nor Men to
converse withal, we justly look up on them as distracted, and would not one
think thou art besides thy wits, that hears thee hope for Heaven, without
taking the way that leads to it? And talk of being saved, when thy actions
savor only of preparation for eternal misery? To hope to be saved by following
the dictates of thy flesh, is as wise an act, as to hope to be warm by sitting
upon Ice, or by surrounding thy self with Snow-balls. Thou would take that
man to be besides himself, that should choose to lie all night in mire and
dirt, when there is a convenient Bed provided for him; or that should-prefer
sleeping on a Dunghill, before reposing himself upon a cleanly Couch. And do
not thou act the same madness, when thou preferrest lying in the Arms of an
Enemy, before resting in the bosom of a gracious Redeemer? And had rather
rest in sin, more odious and loathsome to God than any Dunghill, than delight
thy self in him, whose service is perfect freedom.

Can there be greater madness, than to prefer Stone before Bread, and a Serpent
before a Fish? And is not thy Distraction as great, to esteem a sinful pleasure
more, than the favor of God? And set by the Dross and Dung of this World more,
than by the excellency of the knowledge of Christ? Is this thy wisdom, to
neglect thy weightiest Concerns, and spend thy time in admiring Bubbles? Is
this thy wisdom, to prefer a few drops, before an immense Ocean of blessedness,
an Atom before an Infinite, and the small dust upon the balance, before Mount
Zion, which can never be moved? Is this thy wisdom, to thrust away salvation
with both Arms, and to oppose the endeavors of that God, that would even
compel thee to come to the Supper of the Lamb? Is this thy wisdom, to lie in a
Dungeon, when a Palace is prepared for thy reception? And to be enamored with
deformity it self, when thou art courted by him, who is altogether lovely? Is
this thy wisdom, to rely on broken Reeds, rather than on the Rock of Ages? And
to trust more to Castles in the Air, than to him, who is the Ancient of days,
and has promised neither to leave nor to forsake those that call upon him
faithfully?

And when the case stands thus with thee, when thou art as mad as thou can
well be, sure thou need not be afraid, that Consideration of thy ways will
make thee so. Consideration? Why this would make thee sober: This would bring
thee to thy right senses again. This would make thee live like a rational man
again. This would restore thee to thy Wits again. This would cure the
Distempers of thy Brain. This would be so far from promoting, that it would
chase away all madness and distraction. This would clear thy Understanding, and
rectify thy Will and Affections, and make all thy faculties move more orderly.

Consideration would let thee see, what madness it is to despise him, whom thou
stand most in need of; and to neglect that now, which upon thy Deathbed
thou will wish, thou had minded day and night. This would show thee, what a
folly it is to slight the Fountain of living waters, and to hunt after broken
Cisterns, which can hold no water; and to esteem a Wilderness, a Land of
Deserts, and of Pits, a Land of drought, and of the shadow of death; a Land
which no man passes through, and where no man dwells, infinitely more than a
plentiful Country, Jer. 2.6. This would show thee, what a folly it is to
forfeit the favor of him, that must be thy Judge one day; and to make him thy
Foe, without whose mercy, thou must fall a prey to Hellish furies; to scorn
that Provision now, the crumbs whereof thou will be glad to gather one day; and
to mock his kindness now, when one day thou would rejoice at the least smile
of his countenance, if thou could but have it. This would show thee what a
folly it is to be ravished more with a painted Coronet, than with the real
glories of a Kingdom; and to rejoice more, in the present pomp and adoration of
a Stage, than in thy right to the reversion of a Crown; and what distraction it
is to think, that the great God, who changes not, will make those blessed, who
renounce his bliss; and quench Hellfire for men, because they are resolved to
run into it; to make those like unto the Angels of God, that will live like
Beasts here; and prefer those to this Throne, that would not have him to reign
over them. This would show thee what a folly it is to make merry at the brow of
a Pit; and to sing Care away, when thy sins call for mourning and lamentation.

Consideration, sinner, would let thee see, That there is no Wisdom like that
Wisdom, which makes men wise unto salvation; and that those who deny all
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, living soberly, righteously and godly in this
present world, looking for that blessed hope, and that glorious appearing of
the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, are the only men, that are in
their Wits; and that the rest who forget their calling, and walk not worthy of
the vocation wherewith they are called, do really unman themselves, and live
below their reason. This would let thee see, that those who give all diligence
to add to their faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge,
temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and to
godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity; and are not
barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, are the men
that choose the fittest means for the greatest end; and that he that works to
day in Gods Vineyard, and so numbers his days, that he may apply his heart
unto Wisdom; and lives like a person, that remembers he has a Soul to be
saved, is the man, who governs his Affairs with discretion. This would let thee
see, that men do pretend to Learning in vain, while they are ignorant of
mortification of their members, which are upon the earth; and of that spiritual
life, which is every man's greatest interest. That the Logician, who resolves
all knotty Arguments, is but a Fool, while he knows not, how to keep himself
from the snares of the Devil; and that the Grammarian, who rectifies the errors
of Speech, is but a mad man, while he takes no care to rectify the errors of
his life. That the Astronomer who tells the stars, and calls them by their
names, is vain in his imaginations, while he has not his conversation in
Heaven. That the Metaphysitian that speculates things above sense and nature,
is but a very indiscreet person, while he takes no heed to make God his highest
comfort and delight. That all Optics are Nonsense, which do not teach men to
behold the mighty God that made them. And all Geometry but confusion, which
leaves men ignorant of the height and depth of the love of God.

Consideration would discover to thee, how irrational a thing sin is, what
strange, unmanly Actions it puts men upon, Actions which they must be ashamed
of, if ever they are saved; and must renounce, and detest, when they have done
them, if ever they arrive to inward peace and satisfaction. This would set
before thee the Euges, the Applause, the Honor, God bestows on those, who are
so wise, as to take their leave of sin, before sin leaves them; and exercise
themselves unto godliness, that they may attain unto eternal life.

But what will not Prejudice do? It was that which made the Jews call Christ a
Samaritan, a Devil, a Wine-bibber, a Friend of Publicans and Sinners. It was
that made them hale the Apostles to their Governors, and cry out, Away with
them, it is not fit they should live upon the earth. It Is this sets men against
Consideration of their ways, and makes them give out, that it will crack their
brains, and disorder their understandings, Indeed it will cause a tumult in the
Soul, a conflict between the Spirit and the flesh, between Christ and Belial,
but such a strife, as will end in a glorious calm. When Consideration enters,
Madness vanishes, as wild Beasts do creep into their Dens at the approach of
daylight. The World may make men go besides themselves, Consideration reduces
the whole man to sobriety. Consideration indeed may put men upon actions, which
in the Worlds apprehension may be madness, but of this none can judge, so well
as he that is the fountain of Wisdom, even that God who is Wisdom it self; and
if he set the mark of Wisdom on them, the verdict of the World is to be
regarded no more, than the judgment a blind man gives of colors. I know, he
that will deny himself in sensual pleasures, trembles at a sin, which others
laugh at, and is afraid of offending God even in smaller matters, and prays
with all prayer and supplication, watching thereunto with all perseverance,
passes for a mad man, with men whose Consciences are defiled; but such men's
tongues are no slanders: and Consideration would show, that nothing is more
agreeable to the rules of Wisdom and Prudence, than to live in conformity to
the Will and Pleasure of him, who is the great Sovereign of the World, and has
given us Souls capable of being governed by moral Laws, and Precepts, and is
resolved to scourge him with Scorpions, that knows his Masters Will, and does
it not.

It was sin, made the Prodigal distracted; and in this he discovered his folly,
that he left his fathers house, and traveled into a far Country, as far from
Heaven and Holiness as he could, and there wasted his substance with riotous
living, whence it came to pass, that a Famine arising in the Land, he would
fain have filled his belly with the husks the Swine did eat, and no man would
vouchsafe them to him. Consideration brought him to himself, and to his
happiness again, and his pondering, How many servants of my father have bread
enough, and to spare, and I perish with hunger? I will arise, and go to my
father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before
thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired
servants, Luke 15.17, 18, 19. This, I say, brought his reason into order again,
and consequently prepared for his quiet and happiness. And indeed the
confession of men, who put off the old, and put on the new man, created after
God in righteousness, and true holiness, shows what we are to think of
Consideration. When they come in good earnest to reflect on their former sinful
life, they are ready to call themselves a thousand Fools, and Beasts, and Sots,
and wonder how it was possible for them to live so long directly contrary to
reason, and to all the principles of gratitude and humility. Consideration sets
all to rights again, and they would not for any thing, but that they had
ruminated on their folly, and compared it with the interest of their Souls, and
the Will of God, in order to a just aggravation of their madness; for now they
are sensible, that before they understood nothing to any purpose, and acted but
like Changelings, contrary to all the dictates of the Law of Nature, and their
own Consciences. Thus Consideration, as Ananias did to Saul, comes in, and
immediately there fall from the sinners eyes, as it were scales, and he
receives sight forthwith, and arises, and is strengthened, Acts 9. And Wisdom
enters into his heart, such Wisdom as before he was a stranger to: The
Merchandise of it, is better than the Merchandise of silver, and the gain
thereof than fine gold: she is more precious than Rubies, and all the things
thou can desire are not to be compared unto her: she is a Tree of life to
them that lay hold upon her, and happy is every one that retains her, Prove.
3.14, 15, 16, 17.

VIII. Impediment.
VIII. An opinion, that Conversion, or turning to God, as Divines do represent
it, is not necessary to salvation. We may charitably believe, that most men,
who are averse from Consideration, come to Sermons, and we may suppose, that as
careless as they are in hearing the Word of the living God, sometimes before
they are aware, something strikes their hearts, and sticks with them; which
when they are any way sober, or free from business, will goad and sting them
into Consideration of their ways, and not seldom with Agrippa, they are almost
persuaded to take their sinful lives into serious Consideration, and feel good
purposes, and wishes, and intentions, and desires in their Souls to set time
apart for pondering how they may be converted, and dedicate themselves
sincerely to Gods service, in order to their everlasting bliss. But in such
cases, either the Devil, or their corrupt hearts are ready to whisper in their
ears, that Conversion is not so operose, so laborious, so dreadful a thing, as
is described in public discourses; and that the men that preach, stretch it
farther than needs; and consequently Consideration, how to get into that state,
that is recommended to them, is altogether needless; for if that strictness, and
close walking with God be not necessary, why should any man break his brains
with Consideration how to attain to that humble, self-denying, circumspect
life, as is said to be the essential ingredient of Conversion.

I know not how Conversion can be made more necessary, than Christ has made
it. It Is that which Heaven is entailed on, and without which, Men (if they dare
take the word of that Jesus, whom they do believe to be the Son of God) can
look for nothing else but everlasting destruction: Except ye be converted, and
become as little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
Matthew. 18.3. are the express words of him, who came from Heaven, to reveal his
Fathers Will, words, which do not only import the absolute necessity, but
represent the nature and manner of true Conversion. And if the words added by
way of Explication, be thoroughly weighed, it will appear to any rational man,
that that laborious Conversion, which the Ministers of the Gospel press, and
recommend, is no other, but what Christ requires in order to salvation; for
what can be the meaning of this phrase, becoming as little children, but that
men must learn to be children in malice, 1 Cor. 14.20. pull down their
passions, watch over their inordinate affections, overcome themselves, and
harbor no grudge, no hatred, no revengeful thoughts in their hearts, against
those that have offended them, and like new born Babes, desire the sincere milk
of the Word, that they may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. i. e. with all humility
and alacrity submit themselves to be guided, and ruled, and governed by the
precepts and injunctions of Christ in the Gospel, without disputing or
contradicting his commands, though levelled against flesh and blood, as much as
children leave themselves to the guidance and direction of their Nurses, and
have neither strength, nor will, nor malice, to oppose the will or order of
those that do lead them; Not that Christ forbids examining either the Divinity,
or reasonableness of his Doctrines and Injunctions: No, God is not afraid to
have his Will tried and examined by right reason; for as it is the effect of
the highest reason, so it must needs be most agreeable to reason, it being
impossible, that truth can be inconsistent with truth; and therefore Christ
does so little discourage men from trying the Divinity of his Sayings and
Commands, by the rule of right reason, that in several places he bids the
Pharisees, and whoever were his Adversaries, to judge impartially of the
Arguments he gave for the divine original of his doctrine. And without all
peradventure, this liberty every man has to examine, and satisfy himself,
whether the injunctions of Christ and his Apostles, were things that dropped from
heaven or no. But then where men are convinced, or have sufficient reason to be
convinced, that these Precepts are the peremptory Will of God concerning their
salvation (as any person who is not a Changeling, or mere Natural, may find
upon due examination and inquiry, if he will) there God expects most justly,
that all pretenses, and excuses, and carnal reasonings should fall, and the
Soul submit readily to the yoke of Christ, and resign its will to Christ's Will
(though it cannot for the present comprehend the true reason of some commands)
and suffer itself to be acted, and guided by these Laws, without contradiction,
or opposition, or tergiversation, denying and renouncing every apprehension, or
suggestion, that would solicit or tempt it to start aside from sincere
obedience, and all discourses, that would dash or impede its willingness and
readiness to embrace them.

And indeed this is all we mean by true Conversion, viz. ceasing to obey the
dictates of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and endeavoring seriously to
live up to the precepts of the Gospel, without asking our lusts, or vain
desires, whether they are willing to it, or no; a sincere resolution to get
from under the yoke of sin, and to make the Lord Jesus, who bought us with his
own blood, our Supreme Ruler, and Governor. And since there can be no
Government without Laws, and we never heard of any other Laws Christ gave, but
what we have in the Gospel, we cannot, and dare not but conclude, that to live
up to these Laws of the Gospel, is true Conversion.

And indeed the primitive Christians took no person to be converted, that did
not make these Laws the great Rule of his Life; and showed by his Actions, that
he prized and esteemed, and valued these Laws, above all the Orders, and
Decrees, and Constitutions of the greatest Monarchs. When we do entreat and
admonish men to be converted, what do we do, but persuade them to mortify
their members which are upon the earth, Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate
Affection, evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness, which is Idolatry; and to put
off Anger, Wrath, Malice, Blasphemy, and filthy Communication of their Mouths;
and to put on Bowels of Mercy, Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness,
Long-suffering, so as to forbear one another, and forgive one another. To let
the Word of Christ dwell in them richly, in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing with
grace in their hearts unto the Lord; and whatever they do in word, or deed, to
do it all in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, giving thanks unto God and the
Father through him. To be poor in spirit, to be meek, to hunger and thirst
after righteousness, to purify their hearts, to follow peace with all men as
much as in them lies. To be patient under Slanders, Reproaches, and
Persecutions. To live in a sense of future Joys, and of an everlasting
Recompense. To avoid all apparent occasions of Evil, even things that are
harmless in themselves, if they provoke, or tempt to Sin. To avoid Swearing in
their ordinary Discourses, and Communications; to love their Enemies, to do
good to them that hate them, to pray for them which persecute them, and
despitefully use them. To give Alms without any sinister ends, to pray without
affectation of vain Applause, or laying any stress upon the length of their
prayers. To fast without ostentation, to lay up their treasure in Heaven, to
trust Gods Providence in their respective Callings and Conditions, to love him
better than the World, to use the World as if they used it not, to seek first
Gods Kingdom and his Righteousness. Not to judge rashly, but to forsake their
greater sins, before they find fault with the lesser transgressions of their
Neighbors. To walk in the strait way, and take pains for Heaven. To avoid
Hypocrisy, and to manifest their Profession by their Lives; both to hear and
to do what they hear, and to bring forth Fruits mete for Repentance; and to let
their Light so shine before Men, that they may see their good Works, and
glorify their Father which is in Heaven. To be faithful unto Death, and to
hold out to the End; and to suffer for the testimony of Jesus, if God think fit
to call them to it; and to do good, though they have no prospect of a present
Recompense. To feed the Hungry, and cloth the Naked, and visit the Sick; and
to hope, and to believe, that they shall be rewarded at the Resurrection of the
Just.

These are the great Lessons we beg of men, that they would hearken to, these
are the things, we would have them labor after, when we entreat them to turn,
or to be converted unto God; and what are all these Performances, but Duties
enjoined by our Lord and Master, upon pain of Damnation. He has protested,
that those who wilfully neglect these Laws, and do not think themselves obliged
to obey them, when yet they profess themselves to be his Disciples, shall find
by woeful experience, what it is to tread under foot the Son of God, and to turn
away from him, that speaks from Heaven. He is unchangeably resolved, where Men
make light of his invitation, and slight these reasonable terms of salvation,
and entertain his Message with contempt, and neither repent of that contempt,
nor testify their repentance by tears, and sorrow, and reformation, and
obedience for the future, to let them have that eternal misery, that
unquenchable fire, whereby he thought to fright and wean them from their Lusts,
and to drive them into Paradise, and which is so far from terrifying of them,
that they run into it most greedily, seem to invade those flames, and be in
love with endless Agonies.

And now let any man in his wits judge, whether Coversion, in that sense we
speak of it, both in public and private, be not indispensably necessary? And
whether Consideration how to be converted, fall not under the same necessity?
Our Natures are not so very prone to goodness, that we may yield to these Laws,
without examining, and thinking what way we ought to take, to work our hearts
into a holy willingness to submit; For its swimming against the stream,
climbing up a Hill, running counter to our inclinations, and therefore the Soul
had need be seasoned with thoughts of the admirable contrivance, goodness,
profit, benefit, and advantages of these Laws, and of the love and compassion
of God that shines in them, and of the harmony, order, calmness, peace, and
satisfaction Obedience causes, before we can conform our wills to his will, who
is resolved that Dogs and Swine shall not enter into Heaven.

But what shall we say? when Men are resolved to live like Swine, and will not
believe that God demands that holiness of them the Scripture speaks of, when
they believe God to be altogether such an one as they themselves, a friend to
sin, and false in his threatenings, when they believe, that Discourses of
Divines about Conversion, are no more but talk, a cast of their Office, and
that themselves give no credit to the things, they preach to others, when they
believe, that God denies them nothing, that their Nature prompts them to, and
is pleased with their Frolicks, and Divertisements. When they believe, that the
great end of their Creation, is to get Money; and that they have a Being given
them in this world, to fill their Bellies with all the Dainties they can get;
when they do not heartily believe a judgment to come, and look upon the flames
of Tophet, but as painted Fire; when they take worldly Felicity for their
Heaven, and wish there were no other Beatitude after this life, but Mahomet's
Paradise. When they do so, we had as good tempt them to knock their heads
against a wall, as persuade them into a serious Consideration of their ways.
Without all peradventure, its worth considering, that God intends something by
the aforesaid Precepts, and that they are not designed for Beasts and
irrational Creatures; that God does not think so light of them, as we do; and
has a sense of Honor, and will not let a wilful contempt of things so sacred,
and so venerable, go unpunished; that obedience makes men like unto God, and
causes them in some measure to approach the Holiness of his Nature; that those
certainly must be in a better condition, when they come to dye, who follow
these Rules, than the other, that know no Laws, but the dictates of their own
licentiousness; that these Laws enjoin nothing, but what agrees with, and
promotes the prosperity of Mankind; and that if we believe God to be jealous of
his Glory, to obey these Laws, must in all probability be the most likely way
to please him; that these Precepts do signally advance the dignity of Humane
Nature, and show the generosity and greatness of a Man's Soul, who dares live
above the common level of Mankind; that to become subject to these Laws, is the
safest course, and a Man can lose nothing considerable, by that subjection, if
there were no other world; that all those that submit to these Laws, cannot be
Fools, and if the wisest of Men close with these Injunctions, it must, to speak
moderately, be very great imprudence to laugh at them.

But where Conversion is thought a thing superfluous, no marvel if
Consideration be looked upon, as a task fit only for Men, who have nothing else
to employ their time in. When People despise the House, they will have no great
value for the Porch. And when the end seems needless, they will not trouble
themselves much about using the means that lead to it. And such persons we must
leave to be convinced of the necessity of Conversion, by their punishment.
Since Reason cannot persuade them, judgment must take away the vail from their
eyes. What Exhortation cannot effect, Thunder must produce. What they will not
believe upon the Word of God, they must be forced to give assent to, by the
flames they shall ere long feel the rage and fury of; and God who could not be
glorified in their Conversion, must glorify himself in their everlasting
confusion?

IX. Impediment.
IX. Mistaking the Nature of Consideration. As the way to life is but one, so
the ways that lead to destruction are infinite, and without number. And such
root does a sinful life, if not checked betimes, take in Men, that if they can
but find the shadow of an excuse, they will not fail to lay hold of it, that
they may not part with what they love so dearly. It Is from hence, that all
their little attempts to perform their duties, pass with them for the duties
themselves, as if lifting up or moving a piece of Lead, were as much as
carrying of it from one place to another. They would be angry with their
servants, if demanded what work they have done, they should reply, that they
have executed their Masters commands, when they have only touched the Plow with
a finger, or played with it, to divert them, and take it very ill of a
Waterman, that should ask money of them for carrying them to the place they
intended for, if he should but give a stroke or two with his Oar, and so give
over, and laugh at that person, that should pretend he has made them a Fire,
when he has laid but two or three sticks together. The Folly they find fault
with in others, they practice themselves, and while they attempt to take the
Mote out of their Brothers eye, they are insensible of the Beam that is in
their own; for thus, we find, they do proceed, when exhorted to a serious
Consideration of their ways; they take every sad thought of their spiritual
Concerns for Consideration, and a rambling imagination of their danger, passes
for contemplation of their spiritual wretchedness.

Because now and then, when some loss, or afflictions befall them, a melancholy
conceit steals into their minds, and when some great Man has cast them off, or
their Friends are displeased with them, they do slightly reflect on the never
fading compassion of God, and cast a careless look on their sins, that may have
deserved the trouble they are under, they give out, they consider the things
that belong unto their peace, and if those flashes do not produce these effects
in them, the Holy Ghost expects, they are apt to charge Consideration with
insufficiency, and cry out against it, as a means improper to produce that
seriousness of life, which God requires of them, in order to everlasting
happiness, wherein they appear to me like young and hasty Chemists, that are
impatient, and will not let the Menstruum stand long enough, but would have the
Experiment perfect, before the matter be ripe for operation, and thus they come
to miscarry.

To think how Men play the fool with Religion, how aukwardly they go about it,
and how silly the Apologies are, they make for this neglect, cannot but make a
sober Man admire, how it is possible for them to sink into such simplicity, or
fondness rather, to delude their own Souls. They know it is not a stroke, or
two that will Fell a Tree, nor knocking twice or thrice, that will pull down a
House, nor blowing slightly, that will make green Wood burn; and yet that they
should be so sottish, so impertinent, so abominably careless in the greatest
concern of their lives, and fancy, that a few careless thoughts now and then,
will produce that circumspect life, God commands and urges, betrays so great a
shallowness of reason, and is an act so weak, that I know not, how to give it a
name disparaging, and low enough.

Alas! Consideration, as has been hinted before, is a frequent reiterated
lively representation of the danger of a sinful life; and SINNER, did not
thou go about it like a Man that is in jest, thou would see, what wonders it
does cause. Did thou set upon this thoughtful task in sober sadness, and if
the first and second, and third Consideration, would not weaken the
fortifications, or strong holds of iniquity, assault them with fresh supplies
of thoughts, and aggravate the sins thou would be rid of, and (...) how often
slighted convictions border upon the sin against the Holy Ghost, and move God
to swear in his wrath, that such men shall never enter into his rest, thou
would not find that relish in sin, which now thou do; thou would find it
has more of the Gall and Wormwood in it, than of the Honey. Thy sensual
appetite would lose much of its heat, and fury, and thy passions would be
brought into a cooler temper. One great Error Men lie under, is this, That they
consider the pleasures of sin more, than the benefits of a serious Religious
life; and whatever has most of my Consideration, must necessarily prevail most
with me. Let but the Concerns of your Souls have more of your Contemplations,
than the satisfactions of the flesh, and you will see other effects.

But where Men suffer the sensual satisfaction, they have either felt, or heard
of, to play upon their fancy, and to sport itself with their imagination, where
they dandle the soft conceit, and call the smiling pleasure to mind oftener,
than the real, and solid pleasures of Holiness; there the former cannot but get
the better, and play the Sovereign, and rule the Soul, as will appear (to
mention no more) from these two instances. Such a man is troubled with
lascivious thoughts, and lustful desires; when the sinful thought shoots first
into the mind, if he do presently call in Considerations of Gods prohibition,
and anger, and of everlasting burnings, and set before his eyes the fate of
Sodom and Gomorra, the brevity and transitoriness of these fleshly
satisfactions, the tears, the anguish, the grief it must cost him, if ever God
should accept of him; the uncertainty of his life, the hazard he runs of being
cut off, before he may have a heart to repent; the multitude and variety of
sins, his Lusts will engage him in; the diseases and infirmities he may
procure; the unquietness of Conscience he shall pull down upon himself, etc.
and resolve to enlarge upon these discouragements, and do it, as often as he
finds his flesh grow unruly and troublesome, he will certainly get the victory,
and captivate his Lusts to the obedience of Christ Jesus. But when these
Considerations are called in only for formalities sake, and that which
gratifies his sickly passions, suffered to be the chief Guest of his
understanding; when instead of Arguments against these Lusts, he lays out for
Topics* and Considerations, which may diminish and take off from the greatness
of the sin, as, that God will not be angry for one sin; and that sure, God
remembers how frail and weak his nature is, and that he does not intend to
allow himself long in it, and that he would fain avoid it but cannot, and that
the strength of his passion will excuse the heinousness of his crime, and that
most men have had their frolicks in their younger days, etc. where he suffers
the circumstances of his last nights Revelling to roll in his mind, how soft
such embraces were, how kind the person was that loved him, how sweet her
addresses were, how melting her smiles and favors, how pleasing what she said
and did, how merry the meeting was, how easy he was under those sensual
raptures, how glad other persons would be to have such an opportunity as he
had, how he was heightened by such a Cup, how elevated with that curious Drink,
how that Liquor with the strange name disposed him for Caresses, how such an
one applauded him for his wit, how taking that jest was, how delighted the
company was with his Railery, etc. Where, I say, the mind dwells upon such
light, and frothy conceptions, and what ever would dash them, is but shown as
it were to the mind, is not suffered to enter in, to take possession, beats
only against the fancy, is not permitted to mingle with it, or if it enter, is
quickly thrust out again, if it be allowed a seat there, is soon dismissed, and
turned away again; there certainly the man must continue a slave to his
corruptions and passionate desires, and the Considerations which were to
produce seriousness, and obedience in him, cannot but be ineffectual, because
they do not lie on long enough, as salted meat will not lose much of its
saltish taste, if but dipped in water, nor cloth imbibe a tincture, that is but
sprinkled upon it.

Another receives a signal injury, the affront he suffers, is great and
notorious; on a sudden his passions are up, represent to his mind the sweetness
of revenge, the dismal aspect of the indignity, the unsufferableness of the
disgrace, the ways and means how to compass the vindictive design, the shame
that is thrown upon his honor, the baseness of the injury, the sordidness of
the action, the ingratitude that is shown in it, the uncivility the offender
has discovered, the verdicts of his acquaintance, in case he does not reward
the offender according to his work, the blot that will be upon his Family for
ever, the various advantages he formerly had against the wretch, which yet he
scorned to take, etc. And while his mind is filled with these imaginations,
it is possible, reflections on the folly of his anger, on the charity he owes to
all Mankind, the example of Christ, and his Apostles, praying for their
Persecutors, the generosity of pardoning an offense, and forbearing of revenge,
when it lies in our power to be even with the offender; such thoughts as these,
I say, may strike his mind, but if he suffer the motives to revenge to lodge
more quietly in his mind, than the motives to patience and forgiveness, it is
soon guessed which of these will be Conquerors. Let but his mind ruminate and
enlarge more upon the great duty of forbearing revenge, than upon the pleasure
of taking revenge; and the thoughts which inflamed his spirits, and made the
blood boil in his veins will cool by degrees, and the motions of the flesh will
give ground to those of the spirit.

The same may be said of all other sins, which he that names the Name of Christ
is obliged to depart from; he that would be rid of them, must not let the
transitory satisfaction those sins afford, hover in his mind more, than the
great worth of an immortal Soul; where the latter is made the most
frequent-object of our thoughts, the other will dwindle away, and at last
expire.

To make this appear, we need no other proof, but common experience; and though
after a man has ruminated on the odiousness of a darling bosom sin, he may
fall into it again, yet the arguments, which make against it, and prompt him to
part with it, being called in again, and again, and laid on afresh, and as they
wear out, or decay, renewed and strengthened with greater enforcives, it will
be found, That he who sinned with courage, and confidence before, begins now to
sin with trembling, and reluctance of mind, and at last is moved to bid an
eternal farewell to it. The frequent thinking on these reasons, the renewed and
reiterated contemplations of the horrid ingratitude against God, and of the
shame and sorrow, the sin must end in, first weaken, and loosen the Tree, then
break it, and at last do quite root it up, and destroy it.

X. Impediment.
X. Converse with evil Company. There is not certainly a greater encouragement
to real holiness, than religious society, and good examples. That innocence, we
see, makes deeper impressions on our hearts, than that we hear of, and our eyes
afford greater motives to imitation, than our ears. A Religious Friend charms
me into that Piety, he embraces, and his kindness instills his devotion into my
Soul. I am apt to imbibe his principles of virtue, with his kind expressions,
and frequent converse, makes his goodness as familiar to me as his person. The
severest mortifications, if I see them performed by those, I love, lose much of
their rigor, and dismal aspect, and become amiable, and as unpleasing a thing,
as Self-denial is, it looks more easy, and facil, when he I am intimately
acquainted withal, shows me, that it is practicable.

There is no sense works upon the affections, like that of sight, it makes the
object live in the understanding, and from thence the will and affections are
solicited into embraces of it. This was the reason, why the Christians of old,
when they would in sober sadness apply themselves to a truly Christian life,
retired into Deserts, where some devout Hermits had their Cells, that by
looking on their exemplary devotion, they might be tempted into a cheerful
imitation of their goodness.

And as it is with Religious Society, it both makes the task of the greater and
weightier matters of the Law less difficult, and kindles desires in our breasts
to follow so excellent a pattern, so evil company on the other side does as
much discourage men from performances, as are somewhat troublesome to flesh and
blood, and hereof Consideration of their ways, is not the least. This implies
some self-denial, and the sound of the words imports making War with the soft,
and sickly desires of their flesh, and having wrought their own hearts into a
detestation of this duty, they fright others from it, as from some Medusa's
head, which will certainly turn them into stones, or insensible creatures; they
care not for sincere devotion themselves, and would not have others live
stricter and preciser than their Neighbors; they have a low esteem of the ways
of God, and would not have others prize them at a higher rate. They delight in
sensual satisfactions, and look upon other men's discourses concerning spiritual
delight, as Nonsense. They are averse from subjecting themselves to the Will of
God, and would have others as disobedient as themselves. They think, it was a
far better World, when there was not so much Praying, and Preaching as there is
now, and would have others slight Christ's invitation to the Supper of the Lamb,
as much as themselves.

He that makes such his familiars, and looks upon them as discreet and rational
men, must necessarily continue a stranger to Consideration of his spiritual and
everlasting Concerns; for as they are no admirers of discourses, which may
advance the welfare of a Soul, and seldom take the Name of God in their mouths,
except it be in their Oaths and Curses; so to be sure, they will tell very
dismal, and doleful stories of Religion upon all occasions, and represent the
severer performances of Piety in such an antic dress, that he, who prizes
their company or acquaintance, shall applaud their invention, admire them for
their witty conceits, and despise all serious thoughts concerning things of
everlasting consequence.

The Age we live in has taught the world, to vend Profaness under the name of
Wit, and to contemn Religion under the Mantle of Repartee, and quickness of
fancy; and he that loves to be with these beaux Esprits, will, in all
probability, learn to be as careless, and as secure as they. Evil company,
where a man delights in it, will infect him do what he can; it he have any good
in him, they will waste, and consume it; if he be destitute of virtuous
Principles, they will keep out all Considerations, as shall either discompose him
in his folly, or shed resolutions into his Soul to come away, and seek a better
Kingdom; insomuch, that it may be truly said of such a man, as of him in the
Gospel, who Traveled from Jerusalem to Jericho, That he is fallen among
robbers, who strip him of all, and leave him miserable, Luc. 10.30.

Evil Companions are the Devils Agents, whom he sends abroad into the world to
debauch Virtue, and to advance his Kingdom; these are his Factors, and by these
he draws men into eternal darkness. By these he pecks up all the good seed,
that is sown in us, and infuses bad qualities into our better part. These laugh
men into destruction, and damn them in kindness. These fawn men into misery,
and tickle them into an eternity of torments. These turn Religion into Jests,
and make the Precepts of the Gospel, matter for Raillery. These are true
Devils, that delight in the murder of Souls, and sinking into the bottomless
Pit, pull down their Adherents with them.

And what likelihood is there, That a man should consider the interest of his
Soul, that consorts with persons, who do as much as lies in them, depretiate
the value of it, and strive to put all serious contemplations out of his head?
What probability, that a man should sit down, and set before him the terror of
the Lord, and be transformed by the renewing of his mind, who when the Holy
Ghost exhorts him to prove what is the holy, acceptable, and perfect Will of
God, to be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, to rejoice in hope, to be
patient in tribulation, to continue instant in prayer, to bless them, which
persecute him, Romans 12.2, 11. gets presently after into company, where all
those Lessons are derided, where the contrary Vices are commended, where
Consideration, how to be Master of these Graces, is exploded, as a thing fit
only for Almsmen, and Hospital Boys, where these serious Exhortations are
drowned in laughter, and such things suggested, as render a man wise only for
the world, and for the flesh, and make him sagacious, how to gratify his
headstrong passions, and inordinate affections?

He that considers his ways, and yet frequents such Society, imitates a
foolish Gardener, that after he has sown his Seed, and sees it come up, lets
in Hogs to devour, and tear it away. Consideration (as I shall prove in the
Sequel) requires separation; and when God calls, Come out of Babylon, O my
people; it is not only, that they may not participate of their punishment, but
that they may not share in their sin, and consequently, that they may be at
leisure to consider how to prevent, and avoid both.

I do not deny, but men may deal and traffic with men of a loose Conversation,
and not lose their seriousness, nor be discouraged from a holy preparation for
a better life; but there is a great difference between Traveling through
Aethiopia, and dwelling there; the former may not change the complexion, but
the latter will infallibly do it. I wrote unto you in an Epistle, not to
company with Fornicators, yet not altogether with the Fornicators of this
world, or with the Covetous, or Extortioners, or with Idolaters, for then you
must needs go out of the world; but now I have written to you, not to keep
company; if any man, that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or
an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such an one,
not to eat, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11. It Is one thing to converse
with a man, as with a Stranger, another to converse with him, as with a
Brother; one thing to pay the duty of Civility to him, another to admit him
into the number of my Friends; one thing to be necessitated to discourse with
him, another to delight in it; one thing to go into such company with
cautiousness, and circumspection, another to rush into it without fear, or wit:
the former does not import a necessity of pollution, the other makes the
infection inevitable.

Society in sin strangely takes off from the heinousness of it; it makes the
sin appear with a fainter red; it does not look so dreadful, when men have
companions in their offenses; they think, there is some comfort in having
Associates in misery, and dare to sin more freely, when the are not alone in
the transgression. They are afraid, their single Valor will never be able to
dwell Gods wrath, and indignation, but having others joined with them, they may
make a shift to weather out the tempest of his anger. They hope God will not
damn a multitude of poor creatures together, and fancy the great number of
sinners may fright the Almighty into compassion; if they suffer, they think,
they shall not fare worse, than their Neighbors; and if they smart for their
Rebellion, they shall be able to bear it, as well as their Confederates in the
iniquity.

Ill example draws out the inward corruption into action, and the inbred evil
concupiscence may be, would lie quiet, or dye, if such patterns did not put it
into fermentation. Many Children would be modest, did not their Parents
behavior seduce them into love of their Vices. Some servants have ingenuity in
them, and durst not venture so far into sin, as they do, did not their Masters
example encourage them. Adam sins for companies sake, and it is like would have
continued steadfast in his innocence, if he had not seen the Woman eat of the
forbidden Tree, and been solicited to imitate her desperate enterprise. The
Israelites being mingled among the Heathen, learn their works; and having
conversed long with the Egyptians, who were great worshippers of Oxen, erect a
Calf in the wilderness of Sina. Joseph comes to be familiarly acquainted with
Pharaoh's Courtier, and an Oath, By the Life of Pharaoh, goes down with him
without bogling, or reluctance. Lot had lived among men, who made nothing of
the vilest uncleanness imaginable, and soon after consents to an incestuous
Copulation. Solomon by his intimacy with his Concubines, learns to worship
Devils, and his son Rehoboam, by making the young Gallants at Court his
Familiars, grows rash, even to his own destruction. Had not Peter gone into the
High Priests Hall, it is like he would never have been persuaded into Cursings,
and Imprecations. Converse with Drunkards, by degrees causes approbation of the
sin, and at last delight in it. And thus it must needs be in the case before
us. Inconsiderate men, make others as supine, and negligent as themselves; and
he that lets his acquaintance with them, grow into familiarity, will be apt to
think, that sure he may neglect Consideration of his ways, as well as they, if
they venture, why may not he? And if they think not the omission prejudicial to
their spiritual interest, why should he terrify himself with counterfeit
thunder? If they hope to do well after all this, why may not he? And if they
fear no revenging Arm, why should he make his Life miserable, by thinking of
punishment?

Imprudent men indeed! you may have seen others hang, or drown, or burn
themselves, but is this a Temptation to you to follow them? Because such a man
ruins himself and his Family, have you a mind to do so too? Because such a one
does not mind his Trade, but lies in Alehouses and Taverns, must you
necessarily make him your pattern? Because such a man disregards the favor of
his Friends, that are both able and willing to assist him, is that an argument,
that you must learn his ways? Because such a one lets his Garden run to Weeds,
must you therefore fill yours with Briars and Thorns? Because such a one
imbezles his Estate, must you therefore spend yours in riotous living? And will
you storm the gates of Hell, because others are so desperate, as to do it? Will
you howl with Devils, because others delight in that Music? Will you scorn the
offers of salvation, because others will not be drawn by cords of Love? Will
you run the hazard of losing the light of Gods countenance for ever, because
others know not, how to prize it?

O my Soul, be not thou tempted by these weak Arguments, follow not a multitude
to do evil. Let not the way that leads to destruction invite thee, because many
there be that find it; Company, whatever refreshment it may be in Chains, or
Prisons here, can afford but little consolation in eternal flames. Company
there, will rather increase Men's Sorrows, and Society heighten their Woes and
Torments, in that one will not be able to help the other; and the shreeks of
him that was seduced into sin, will but aggravate the groans and anguish of the
Seducer, when he must remember, that he was that Devil, that dragged the other
into endless tortures. Strive, strive, O my Soul, to walk in the strait way.
Let not the small number of Travelers fright thee; it is the likelier way to
Heaven, because the great, the mighty, the wise men of this world, will not
stoop to this narrow Gate; for Gods ways, are not our ways; nor are his
thoughts, as our thoughts; what the world admires, he despises; and what
sensual Men make light of, he crowns with glory and splendour, and immortality:
so thou can but be saved, no matter, how small the number is of those that
arrive to happiness. As small as it is, to these belongs the promise, Fear not
thou little Flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom
of Heaven, Luke 12.32.

XI. Impediment.
XI. Neglect of consulting with the Ministers of the Gospel about this
necessary work. It was Gods command of old, The Priests lips should keep
knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the Messenger
of the Lord of Hosts, Mat. 2.7. How mean soever the Age, we live in, thinks of
this Function of Men, as if they were needless Members of a Commonwealth, yet
there was never any Nation so barbarous, bur after they were Civilized into
Societies and Government, judged these Men most useful, and most necessary, for
the preservation of their Commonwealth, for Kingdom. And indeed the great
eternal God, ever since he has vouchsafed to plant a Church in the world, has
been pleased to make it one great character, and mark of his favor and bounty
to Her, to give Her Teachers and Prophets, and Evangelists. And the Commission
he has granted these Men, the Titles, and the Honors he has conferred on
them, and Love, and Reverence he has commanded all Men to express toward
them, evidently declare, That they are Ambassadors of the great King of Heaven,
which in Christ's stead, beseech men to be reconciled unto God; and that he that
receives the Word, they deliver from the mouth of God, receives him that sent
them.

In these Gospel-dayes it is true, there is shed abroad a larger measure of Gods
Spirit, than was formerly known under the Jewish Economy, and men under the
New Covenant are promised to be taught of the Lord. They shall not teach every
man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord, for all
shall know me from the least to the greatest, Hebr. 8.11. yet that does not
make this function of men needless, but enforces rather the absolute, and
indispensable necessity of their office, and authority. For besides, that this
promise does eminently relate to the Primitive Christians, who were made
partakers of the miraculous effusion of the Holy Ghost, and had their knowledge
and learning from above, thereby to fit them the better for the propagation of
a new Religion; if we suppose, that the Prophecy must extend to all, that
profess themselves Christians, the meaning of it can be no more, but this, that
God will use a more gentle way in converting men under the Gospel, and in that
Conversion, or inclining their hearts to his commands, give such lively
representations of the reasonableness of them, and so convince them of their
agreeableness to the Law of nature, or the Law written in their hearts, that
they shall not need to be put in mind by their Neighbors of their justice, and
equity, and spirituality.

But then this gracious promise does not exclude, but presupposes still, the
means of Conversion, of which the Ministry of the Word, is not the least; and
if the Ministry of the Word be intended as a standing Ordinance, in order to
those kindly operations of Gods Spirit, in the heart of those that shall be
converted; and God be peremptorily resolved by the preaching of the Word to
work on the Souls of men, none has reason to find fault with the contrivance
of the Almighty, but rather to admire his wisdom and goodness, that shines
through this dispensation; not to mention, that as God under the Gospel obliges
men to greater knowledge than formerly, so it is fit, there should be men
eminent for knowledge and piety to instruct others, and who like Candles set on
a Candlestick, may light the rest, and by the Vrim and Thummim, of their
doctrine, and purity, lead them, and encourage them to prepare for Heaven. And
if notwithstanding the prodigious gifts of the Holy Ghost poured out in the
primitive Times upon all flesh, God thought it necessary to give Apostles, and
Teachers, and Pastors, when the illapses of the Spirit could teach men, what
their Pastors were to teach them; how much more necessary may we think, must
the Ministry be now, when those extraordinary gifts have ceased, and the
generality of men are sunk into monstrous ignorance, inconsiderateness, and
stupidity.

Indeed these are the men, whom God has placed in the Church, to direct others
in the way to salvation; these are the men with whom the ignorant are to
consult, what they must do to be happy for ever: And as upon a wrong
information given by the Teacher, God is resolved to require the seduced
parties blood at his hand; so no man, that has a tongue in his head to
enquire, can with any justice excuse himself from enquiring of these men what
it is, that the Lord his God requires of him. And were this method followed in
the case before us, and did men seriously demand of them, which way to compass
an effectual Consideration of their Soul-concerns, here they might be informed,
and instructed, and undeceived in the errors of their ways.

The truth is, some are so civil, as to send for us, when the breath is going
out of their body, and give us leave to come and teach them, what they must do
to be saved, when the Physician gives them over, and they ready to be summoned
to appear before the great Tribunal; they are contented, we should give them an
Epitome of their Duties, when they are past working in Gods Vineyard; and
furnish their minds with thoughts of Heaven and Eternity, when their
understandings are as weak, as their bodies; and their inward man, as languid,
and feeble as their outward. But there needs no great store of Arguments, to
convince any rational man, That this is mere mocking of God, and his
Messengers. It Is a sign, they have a pitiful low esteem of another world, who
think Heaven worth no more, than a feeble thought, when they can serve the
Devil and sin no longer. It Is a sign, they look upon eternal glory, as some
poor, beggarly happiness, who cannot vouchsafe it a serious look, till their
eyes grow dim, and the Sun, and the Moon, and the Light, and the Stars are
darkened, Eccl. 12.2.

Would they but send for us, or come to us, while marrow is in their bones, and
blood brisk, and lively in their veins, their reason strong, and their
understanding in its full vigor and glory, and advise with us about these
everlasting things, we would then tell them, what eternal life means, and how
no man can be a man, or be said to act with common prudence, that does not with
all diligence make his Calling, and Election sure, we would then let them see,
how many thousands perish for want of thinking of Eternity. We would let them
see, how miserable those men's condition must needs be, who have their portion
in this life, who after this life, must look for nothing else, but everlasting
chains of darkness. We would prove to them, that these are not things to be
laughed at, but deserve their most serious contemplations, and that the saving
of a Soul is not so light a thing, as they may imagine. We would let them see,
that the pious Kings and Princes, and Philosophers, Confessors and Saints, and
Martyrs of old, whose memories we adore, were no Fools, when they kept under
their Bodies, and brought them into subjection, lest they should become
Castawayes; when they looked upon all the losses, and troubles, and miseries,
that could befall them for Righteousness sake, as things, not worthy to be
compared, with the glory, which ere long should be revealed in them, when they
did not count their own Lives dear, for the Gospel of Christ, and were ready to
pass through the most daring flames to Heaven. We would let them see, that
those men had brains, and were men of wisdom, and discretion, as well as they,
and living so near the time of Christ and his Apostles, could not possibly be
ignorant of what was to be done in order to everlasting happiness; and if they
had not been very confident of the truth of Christ's promises, and known for
certain, that without strictness, and contempt of the World, and watching
against Temptations, there was no entering into their Masters joy, they would
never have striven so much to enter in at the strait gate, as they did.

We would let them see, how different men's thoughts are when they come to dye,
from those which they have while they enjoy strength and health, and liberty;
and that a melancholy thought now and then concerning their sinful life, is not
repentance, nor leaving such sins, which would blemish their credit and
reputation in the World, doing whatsoever Christ commands them; nor talking now
and then of the vanity of the World, using the World, as if they used it not.
We would let them see, what the Scripture means, by working out their salvation
with fear, and with trembling; and how dreadful that saying is, If the
righteous be scarcely saved, where will the wicked, and sinner appear? We would
let them see, That the expressions, the Holy Ghost uses concerning our
Traveling to the Land of Promise, imply very great care, and industry, and do
plainly intimate, that God will not part with his Heaven to men, that do not
think it worth seeking, or being at any trouble about it. We would let them
see, that if any thing in the World deserves their pains, and care, Heaven
deserves it infinitely more, as it is of infinitely greater consequence, than
the most boundless Empires, or Principalities. We would let them see, that God
is no respecter of persons; and that, as he has fitted Religion for all men's
capacities, insomuch, that though all cannot be wise, or learned, or great, or
rich, yet all may obey him, and keep themselves unspotted from the World, so he
will one day summon every man to give an account of his stewardship, and bring
every work into judgment, with every secret thing whether it be good, or evil.
We would let them see, that what satisfies men now, will not give them any
great content, or satisfaction then; and though now some sprinklings of Piety
may lull them into good conceits of themselves, and of their worth, yet these
like blown Balls, will then be all upon the least touch shattered into Atoms.

By such discourses as these, we might by degrees engage them to a serious
Consideration of their spiritual Concerns, and warm them into resolutions, to
lay by for some time their Farms, and Oxen, and ruminate on things which carry
so much Terror and Majesty with them. And indeed such things, were they heard
without prejudice, they would in some measure confound and startle men in their
courses; and if they are not given over to a hard heart, or to a reprobate
mind, rouse their spirits into nobler thoughts and contemplations.

But alas! they shun our company, except it be to talk of worldly affairs, or
to ask us about some nice Points of Divinity, and are ashamed to make their
condition known, and to own themselves ignorant of the path, that leads to
glory. They either excuse themselves with this, that their Neighbors, and their
Friends, will laugh at them, for making Ministers their Oracles; or plead, that
they know as much as the Man of God can teach them; would God, they did! and
that all the Lords People were Prophets. But if they did, is there not some
difference between knowing these sacred Truths, and having them set home upon
the Conscience? That shall stick in a familiar discourse, which in reading we
take no notice of; and a word in private conference, may drop from a holy man,
and may be spoke with that zeal and honesty, as shall strike the Soul into a
change, or renovation of mind, which perhaps many years study, or a large stock
of knowledge would not have effected: so that if the question be asked, Is
there no balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician there? Why then is not the
health of the daughter of my people recovered? We may truly say, We would have
healed Israel, but they would not be healed.

XII Impediment.
XII. Deluding themselves with the notion of Christ's dying for the Sins of the
World. Why should they consider, how to be rid of Sin, and lay the pleasures of
Holiness before their eyes? Why should they torment themselves with thinking,
how Gods favor may be purchased, and involve themselves in anxiety and trouble
about their transgressions? When Christ has done all that is to be done,
appeased his Fathers wrath against the lapsed Progeny of Adam, and purchased
them a glorious freedom from the slavery of a severe Law. If he has satisfied
God for the injuries he received by any sins, why should they make a new
satisfaction by holiness of their Lives? Is not that it, which all Pulpits ring
of, That the Eternal dyed, that we might not dye eternally; and that God would
suffer, that we might escape Torments for ever? That Christ would be Crowned
with Thorns, that we might have an incorruptible Crown of glory hereafter; And
that he endure'd Reproach, and Calumnies, and Contradictions of Sinners against
himself, that we might inherit everlasting Honor? And why should they
disparage Christ's sufferings so much, as hope to gain Heaven by mortification
of their Lusts, and poring upon their sin and misery? This would be to
undervalue so great a blessing, and to tell the world, that Christ's purchase
of eternal glory for us, was imperfect, and without there be an addition of our
own works and merits, that redemption signifies little, and has not strength
enough to pass, what was designed by it?

Thus men prevent Consideration of their spiritual Concerns, and dash the
checks and motions of their Consciences, when prompted to call their ways to
remembrance. They examine not the end of Christ's death, nor their own
obligations. They run away with the notion, that Christ dyed for them, and are
not at all careful to know, what his death signifies, much like heedless
servants, who before they have half their errand, run away, and when they come
to the place they are sent to, know not, what message to deliver. The Doctrine
is pleasing to their flesh, and that they may not lose that pleasure, they will
be sure not to enquire, what the true meaning of it is.

Would they but cast their eyes upon that Bible, which they believe contains
the Oracles of Heaven, they would find, that the great reason, why Christ gave
himself for us, was to redeem us from all iniquity, and to purify unto himself
a peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. They would find, St Paul
was of another mind, when he wrote to the Romans, In that Christ dyed, he dyed
unto sin once; but in that he lives, he lives unto God: likewise reckon ye also
your selves to be dead unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our
Lord; let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it
in the lusts thereof; neither yield ye your members as instruments of
unrighteousness unto sin, but yield your selves unto God, as those that are
alive from the dead, and your members, as instruments of righteousness unto
God, Romans 6.10, 11, 12, 13. And that the Apostle is constant to himself,
appears from 2 Cor. 6.15. Christ dyed for all, that they which live, should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him, which dyed for them, and rose
again.

And indeed, this is no more, but common gratitude; so great, a mercy
challenges no less than Reformation, and Obedience. Do men gather Grapes of
Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? He that redeems another from Barbarian slavery,
does it so much as enter into his thoughts, that the Wretch can ever be so
inhumane, as to despise, and scorn, and vilify so great a Benefactor? That God
could have given man access to his favor, and reconciliation, some nearer way,
than through the Cross and Death of Christ, is very probable; but it seems he
would not. This remedy was his choice, he would pitch upon this stupendous
way, to amaze, and to astonish men into holiness and seriousness. He thought
men could not possibly avoid being Converts, and heavenly-minded, when they
should see the Son of God wading through blood and death, to rescue them from
Hell. God looked upon the mercy to be so dreadful, and the kindness to be so
full of majesty, and compassion together, that he thought the
incomprehensibleness of the favor would carry terror with it, and fright men
into repentance, and contrition.

He thought, men would have so much sense and modesty in them, as not to rush
through agonies, and, torments, and groans, and sobs, and sighs, and tears, and
wounds, and stripes of the Son of God into eternal destruction. He thought
those Thorns, and Nails that wounded that sacred Head, would scratch, and sting
them into awe and reverence of so great a love, as they were rolling to eternal
flames. He thought they must divest themselves of all Humanity, and Self-love,
if under the Cross of Christ they could work out their own damnation, and make
the streams of that blood, a River to carry them into eternal darkness.

But thou have seen, O God, and beholdest, and can not but behold it with
sorrow, and indignation, how these men that pretend to be Christians, live the
reverse of thy designs! How they improve the Cross of Christ, into affronts of
thy power and glory! How under that Tree of Life, they work out their own
death; and how that precious Blood does but encourage them to bid defiance to
Heaven, and the sweat, and toil of the Son of God, under the burden of their
sins, makes them sweat, and toil, to fall a Prey to the merciless Clutches of
the Devil!

God indeed reconciled the World unto himself, and Christ by his death,
purchased that reconciliation, and eternal life, but there is a great
difference between the purchase of these blessings, and the application of
them, between the possibility of possessing, and the actual enjoyment of them.
A man may buy an estate, and intend it for the use of such and such persons;
but when he has bought it for them, may lawfully tie them up to certain
conditions, upon which they shall enjoy the estate, or in case of neglect of
these conditions, go without it. A King that is justly offended with his
Subjects, and for their notorious Rebellion, has designed them all for ruin
and destruction, upon some noble attempt, and generous enterprise of his only
Son, the Prince, may be moved, or brought to a willingness to pass by their
crimes; but when the Kings good will is obtained, the Prince may justly appoint
some condition upon which the condemned Wretches shall receive their great
Masters favor. And as upon the Kings good inclination to be friends with his
Subjects, it does not follow, that he is actually reconciled to every one,
there being some conditions required, upon which the Pardon shall be signed and
sealed to every one of them in particular; so neither do all men effectually
share in that reconciliation to God through Jesus Christ, but those that turn
to God with all their hearts, and with all their souls, and are weary of sin,
and heavy laden with the sense of it, and in sober sadness resolved to submit
to Christ's yoke, and government; for though all mankind share in the
possibility of enjoying this reconciliation, and the Pardon may be truly said
to be purchased for them, and for their use, yet all are not made partakers of
the actual possession of it, because all men will not consent to fulfill the
conditions upon which that reconciliation is offered them, viz. unfeigned
repentance, and sincere obedience for the time to come.

Shimei was a man condemned to death, 1 Kings 2.36. it is like some Courtiers of
Solomon got him his Pardon, the King grants it, but requires this one thing of
him, that he shall build him a house in Jerusalem, and dwell there, and go not
forth thence any whither; and fulfilling this condition, without all
peradventure, he might have lived happy, and safe, as the best of his
Neighbors; but when he must needs be running after his servants, and prefer a
small advantage before perpetual safety, he justly suffers the punishment the
King appointed for him. The Son of God by the blood of his Cross, has in truth
gotten all Christians their Pardon, but is resolved none shall enjoy it, but
those, that will forsake their sins, and resign themselves to his guidance and
direction. A reasonable demand, a condition so equitable, so just, so easy,
that no man in his wits but must say, as Shimei unto Solomon, The saying is
good, As my Lord the King has said, so will thy servant do. But then, if the
Pardon, the Son of God has obtained for them, appear so inconsiderable a thing
in their eyes, that they do not think it worth enjoying, (and certainly they do
not think it worth enjoying, that will not agree to so reasonable a condition)
no marvel, if they fall a prey to that wrath, from which the Son of God is
ready to deliver them; and if their blood be upon their heads, that do despite
unto the Spirit of Grace, and count the blood of the Covenant wherewith they
were to be sanctified, an unholy thing. So that, although a true Believer, and
a sincere Penitent, may boldly say with the Apostle, That Christ has redeemed
him from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for him, Gal. 3.13. And that
ChriSt has washed him from his sins with his own blood, Rev. 1.5. And that he
has an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the
propitiation for his sins, 1 John 2.1. And that Chris't has made his peace
with God, Col. 1.20. Yet men that are strangers to the sanctifying work of Gods
Spirit, cannot be said to have at present, during their unregenerate estate,
any other benefit by the death and passion of Christ, but a possibility of all
those great, and glorious advantages, and it is possible for them to be freed
from the Curse of the Law, to be admitted into the number of those, that shall
be saved; to enjoy remission of sins, to escape the wrath to come, and to see
God face to face in Heaven, and all this by virtue of Christ's death; if they
will but shake hands, with their darling Vices, and agree to a practical love
of their Maker, and Redeemer, and Sanctifier. To think that unconverted sinners
do actually enjoy these benefits, is to contradict Scripture, and to give the
Apostles of our Lord the Lie, who unanimously tells us, That these mercies are
not effectually applied to the Soul, till the Soul by sincere repentance, and
reformation of life, applies herself to Christ Jesus.

And indeed, this is the prodigious mercy of the second Covenant, that God, for
Christ's sake, will accept of sincere repentance, in stead of perfect
obedience, (which was the great condition of the first agreement between God
and man) and looking upon the precious blood of his Son, will pass by whatever
Men have done before, if they will be in love with sin and destruction no
longer, and sincerely endeavor to please him in those commands, which design
nothing but our interest and happiness.

These things are not very hard to be understood, but the generality of
Christians, seem resolved not to understand them, that they may not be obliged
to take their ways into serious Consideration. This Doctrine, That Christ has
freed them from the wrath of God, in their sense, makes Religion sit soft and
easy upon them, and does not disturb them in their sensual enjoyments. It Is a
comfortable Doctrine to flesh and blood, never could any thing have been
invented more agreeable to their Lusts; and if God had studied to do them a
kindness, he could not have done them a greater, than to let his Son suffer all
that is to be suffered by them, and so after their delights, and sinful
satisfactions here, conduct them into a far more glorious Paradise. If it be
so, truly Consideration is Vanity, and the Preachers are Fools and mad Men to
press it upon their Auditors. But who sees not that this is an invention of the
Devil, first to darken the sinners understanding, and when the Candle is out,
to rob him of his everlasting happiness!

And Sirs, will you be robbed thus quietly of your bliss and glory? Will you
suffer yourselves to be stripped of all you have, without the least opposition?
Is it possible for you to believe, That the Son of God came down from Heaven,
to encourage you in offending God; and made himself of no reputation for you,
that you might render your selves contemptible in the sight of the Almighty;
and dyed for you, to give life to your sins, and follies? How absurd, how
impertinent, how contradictory is this Belief? Love God, and encourage sin?
Holiness itself, and find out a way, to promote iniquity? Can there be any
thing in Nature more silly, or ridiculous? This is abusing the Cross of Christ,
not trusting to it; and you that make it an occasion of sin, take heed, it do
not prove a stumbling block unto you; and instead of Crucifying sin in you, do
not harden you in it. It is a thing not unusual with God, to punish sin, with
sin; and if Men will be filthy, in despite of all endeavors to purify them
from their filthinesses, to doom them to continue filthy still, and to make
that their judgment, which at first was only their transgression; so great a
love, and written in such legible characters too, slighted, and abused, and
made a help to sin, improved into licentiousness, may justly be supposed to
draw down that judgment we read of, Isa. 6.9, 10. Go and tell this People; Hear
ye indeed, but understand not: and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the
heart of this People fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes: lest
they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their
heart, and convert, and be healed.

But what is worse than all this, the death of the Son of God, which thus
instead of mortifying, makes sin reign in your mortal bodies, will be the
greatest witness against you in the last day. The stone shall cry out of the
wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer against the oppressor, says
the Prophet, Hab. 2.11. And then sure blood has a louder voice, the blood of a
crucified Savior, Hebr. 12.24. will be one day the greatest evidence against
you. This, like oil, will increase your flames, and prove the brimstone, that
shall make the fire blaze the more. That Jesus, whose Cross thou despisest now,
will be thy Accuser then, and woe to that man, that has the Judge himself for
his enemy. That dreadful spectacle, the Crucifixion of the Lord of Life, which
cannot engage thy Soul to consider, and look upon him, whom thou have pierced,
will be the great Argument then, that shall cover thy face with everlasting
confusion. When thou shall see in that day, the spirits of men made perfect,
the men in white, who have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood
of the Lamb; when thou shall reflect on their happiness, a happiness which thou
might have had, as well as they, (if that blood could have persuaded thee to
cleanse thy self from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit) how will thine
eyes flow with tears, to think, what strong delusions thou have lay'n under, in
thinking, that this blood was only spilt, that thou might wallow more freely
in the mire. The Lamb which was slain from the foundation of the world, and
came to take away thy sins, as well, as thy Neighbors, only thou would not be
clean. That Lamb, I say, as harmless, as its looks are now, will then change
his aspect; and thou, that now think, a Lamb can be nothing but kind, wilt
then find by woeful experience, that there is such a thing, as the indignation,
and wrath of the Lamb.

CHAP. V Of the various Mischief's arising from Neglect of Consideration. The
want of it proved to be the Cause of most Sins. Some Instances are given in
Atheism, Unbelief, Swearing, Pride, Carelessness in Gods Service, Lukewarmness,
Couetousness, etc.
FRom what has been said, we may safely draw this Conclusion, That want of
Consideration is the unhappy spring, from which most of the miseries, and
calamities of Mankind flow. Indeed God, Isa. 5.12, 13. makes this the great
reason, Why his people were gone into Captivity, why their honorable men were
famished, and their multitude dried up with thirst; why Hell had enlarged
herself, and opened her mouth without measure, and their glory, and their
multitude, and their pomp descended into it. It Is the want of it, which in all
Ages has procured Gods judgments, which by Consideration might have been
stopped, and prevented. Had Adam improved his solitariness in the Garden of Eden,
into serious Consideration of the Nature of the Precept his Master gave him,
and reflected on the wisdom of the Supreme Lawgiver, that made it, on the
immense bounty, his great Benefactor had crowned him withal, on the abominable
ingratitude he would make himself guilty of, by breaking so reasonable an
Injunction. Had he but recollected himself, (when tempted to eat of the
dangerous fruit, under a pretense, that it would open his eyes, and make him
wise, as God) and thought, that the Creator of Heaven and Earth knew best, what
degree of wisdom, and knowledge, became a creature of his quality, and
condition; and that he that was all love, and beauty, and kindness, would not
have interdicted him that fruit, if the food might have any way advanced his
happiness, and that therefore there must be some cheat in the Temptation; That
the Angels which were lately thrown down from their glory, could not but envy
the felicity he enjoyed, and for that reason would appear in all manner of
shapes, and try a thousand ways, to weaken the favor of God toward him; and
that it was without all peradventure the safest way to prefer an express
command, before an uncertain suggestion. Had his mind taken a view of such
Arguments, as these, and of the uninterrupted prosperity, and immortality, he
was promised upon his obedience; it is not the Charms, or Rhetoric, or soft
language of a Wife, nor the subtilty of a Serpent, nor the pretended
Omniscience the Devil flattered him withal, would have made him leave that
happy state, which the infinite goodness of Heaven had placed him in. But while
he suffers the pleasure of a Garden to transport his Soul, and to blind it,
fears no ill, no mischief, no danger among the Roses, and Flowers of Paradise,
embraces the deceitful suggestion, without examining the cause, the manner, or
the end of it, swallows the fatal bait without chewing, believes a Wife, and a
Beast, without considering the consequence of the fact, and inquires not how
God may resent his curiosity, he falls into death and misery, and drags all his
Posterity after him.

Had the Inhabitants of Sodom, and Gomorrah, reflected like rational Men on the
Reproofs, and Admonitions of righteous Lot, considered the kindness of the
Almighty, in sending them such a Preacher, and thought with themselves, That
sure it could not be the Preachers interest, to set himself against their
Vices; That except Conscience, and a Divine Commission had prompted him to
attempt their Reformation, it was not probable, he would enrage a debauched
City against himself, and make himself obnoxious to the fury of the People;
That the righteous Man spoke nothing but reason, and sought nothing but their
good; That Gods patience, would certainly be tired ere long, and his
long-suffering turn into vengeance; That the fire of their Lust, would shortly
pull down other fire; and the heat of their unclean desires, break into more
consuming flames; That God would not always put up affronts, nor suffer his
methods to reclaim them, to be baffled everlastingly; That they could not hope
to escape Gods indignation, no more than the men of the first world; and when
their sins were equal, Gods judgments would overtake them, as well as they did
their Brethren; That God could intend them no harm, by calling them to
Repentance; and being the great Preserver of Men, could not but design their
interest and happiness.

Had they suffered their thoughts to dwell on such truths as these, made such
Considerations familiar to their Souls, they would have melted and humbled
themselves, and kept back that fire and brimstone, which afterward consumed
them. Want of Consideration made them secure in sin, and that security prepared
for their devastation.

Indeed there is no sin almost, but is committed for want of Consideration. Men
consider not what sin is, nor how loathsome it is to that God, who carries them
on his wings, as the Eagle does her young, nor what injury they do to their own
Souls, nor what the dreadful effects and consequences of it are, and that makes
them supine and negligent of their duty.

To give a few instances: Did the Atheist but look up to Heaven; Did his
swinish and brutish appetite, but give him leave to contemplate that glorious
Fabric, the orderly Position of the Stars, the regular Motion of those
Celestial Lamps, and the Mathematical contrivance of that curious Globe, how is
it possible but he must spy a most wise, most perfect, and most powerful
Architect, even that God, who commanded them into being, and still preserves
them from decay and ruin?

Would he but consider, how things that have a beginning, could not make
themselves, unless they were, before they were, (which implies, a
contradiction) and therefore must certainly be made, and produced at first by
some supreme cause, that is eternal, and omnipotent. Would he but reflect on
the universal consent of Mankind, how not only the civilized, but the most
barbarous Nations in all Ages, have had a sense of a Deity; and how improbable
it is that all Mankind should conspire into such a Cheat, if there were no
Supreme power, how rational it is, that when Men of different Constitutions,
Complexions, Principles, Desires, Interests, Opinions, do all, or most of them
agree in one thing, there must necessarily be something more than ordinary
in it, and the Notion must be supposed either imprinted by God on the hearts of
all men, or carefully delivered to Posterity by the first Planters of the
world, which in all probability they would not have done, except they had had
very good ground, and reason for it. Would the Fool, I say, but think seriously
on these familiar Arguments, how could he say in his heart, There is no God?

How could the wretch deny a Providence, if he did but take notice, how all
things are preserved in those stations, spheres, and tendencies, they were at
first created in. How things contrary to one another, are kept from destroying
one another. How every thing prosecutes the end for which it was produced. How
the Sea that is higher than the Earth, is yet kept from overrunning, and
drowning it. How Kingdoms, Empires and Commonwealths are continued and
conserved in the world. How one Country is made a scourge to the other for
their sin; and how the soberer Nation many times conquers the more debauched
and vicious, till the formers Sobriety dying, proves a presage of the funeral
of their happiness. How men are suffered to tyrannize, and to rage, that their
fall afterward may be more grievous, and terrible. How sin, is punished with
sin; and with what measure we mete, with the same other men mete to us again.
How strangely Murder is found out, and secret Villainies discovered, Sucton. in
Calig.
arraigned, and condemned. How Caligula, that bids defiance to Heaven, and
threatens Jupiter to chastise him, if he sent rain that day, his Players were
to Act; how the poor miserable creature hides his head in a Feather-bed, when
it thunders; and how the stoutest sinners tremble, even then, when no man
pursues them. How light is frequently produced out of darkness; the greatest
felicity, from the greatest misery; and even sin itself so ordered, that it
proves an occasion of the greatest good. How miraculously men are preserved,
and how prodigiously rescued from dangers, that hang over their heads, and
threaten their destruction. How one man is punished by prosperity, another
favored by wanting of it. How one man's blessings are turned into curses, and
another man's curses into blessings. How men perish, that they may not perish;
and are suffered to grow poor, that they may be rich; and are deprived of all,
that they may arrive to far greater plenty. How strangely many times men are
preserved from sin, and something comes in, and crosses their sinful attempts
and intentions, that they are not able to put their purposes in execution. How
men are fitted for several employments, and no office or business so mean, and
fordid, but some men have a genius, or inclination to it. How beasts, which are
stronger than men, are yet kept from hurting men; and men themselves, that
intend mischief to their Neighbors, are prevented in their designs, and in the
Net they spread for others, their foot is taken. How by very inconsiderable
means, very great things are effected; and sometimes without means, very signal
changes and alterations are produced. How the greatest Enemy, sometimes becomes
the greatest Friend; and he that hated another unto death, is on a sudden
convinced of his folly, and loves him as his own Soul. How kindly the Heavens
dispense their former, and latter rain; and how upon solemn Prayers and
Supplications, some great Judgment is averted, and men restored to their former
peace and tranquillity. How even in things fortuitous, Justice is executed; and
the Arrow which such a man shot at random, is yet so guided, as to hit the
person, guilty of some heinous Crime. How such a man's ruin, proves another
instruction; and he whom Education could not engage to Prudence, learns to be
wise by another fall. How men ignorantly contrive their Neighbors good, and
while they least intend the happiness of others, take the readiest course to
make their labors successful and prosperous. How a word that drops sometimes
from the Preachers mouth in a Sermon, shall make that impression on the Hearers
heart, as to change it, and work him into another man.

He that would take such passages as these into serious Consideration, how were
it possible for him to question a Providence, that orders, and rules, and
governs all, and extends its care even to the least, most minute, and most
abject, and contemptible creature? How could he forbear to admire God, as the
most wise, most knowing, most lovely, most perfect, most holy, and most
beautiful Being, whose eyes run to and fro, to show himself strong in the
behalf of those, whose heart is upright toward him.

The Unbeliever, that does not believe the Scripture to be the Word of God, and
fancies there is no other World, no Judgment after Death, and thinks it
irrational, That temporal sin should be punished with an eternity of torments;
it is want of Consideration, makes him continue Infidel:

For, I. As for the Scripture, which contains the Sum and Substance of the
Christian Religion, would he but take a walk in the Field, or in his Garden, or
in his Chamber, and weigh the Arguments, which make for the Divinity of this
Book, and consider, what he can object against it, and whether his objections
be equal in strength, and weight, with the reasons, that fetch its pedigree
from Heaven, he would soon be of another mind, and pity the weakness, and
sauciness of those Youngsters, that play upon the Oracles of God in Alehouses,
or Taverns, or Theaters. He need only dispute with himself in this manner.

I see the whole Christian world for so many Centuries together has embraced
these sacred Volumes, as a Treasure of Gods Will, and Ordinances, as a
Directory dropped down from Heaven, to teach them, how God will be worshipped,
what Notions they are to entertain of God, and what they are to do to save
their Souls for ever. It Is very probable, that God, wherein all goodness, all
mercy, and of infinite pity, and has made this world to serve man, and endowed
him with a capacity of knowing, and adoring God, would not leave him destitute
of such helps, and means, as might best promote his knowledge of him; but find
out a way, to manifest himself to him, especially when it is evident, that
without some better directions, than Nature gives, men are so very apt to fall
into errors, and misapprehensions of his glory, and majesty. Whether this Book
contain therefore the true Revelations, which God has been pleased to make to
mankind, is the question.

Upon examination I find, That there is nothing in this Book, either promised,
or threatened, or commanded, but what is Deo dignum, fit for a God to promise,
and threaten, and command.

Whatever is delivered here, seems to be very agreeable to his Majesty, and
Sovereignty, and Divine Nature. The rewards, as well as punishments, are
Godlike; and the Duties pressed here, are but the necessary consequents of his
Goodness, and Justice, and Government, and Supremacy, which consequences,
because man, by reason of his corruption, was not able to deduce from the
Notion of a God, God thought fit to reveal, and manifest to him, by various
Passages, Histories, Prophecies, Parables, Precepts, and Conclusions.

Upon inquiry I perceive, that the designs of this Book are at least very
harmless, its great aim being, to make men good, and just, and honest, and
live like men of reason. Whatever verity or truth the light of Nature, or
Reason dictates, is here to be found; and this Book is so far from
contradicting, or abolishing any thing of that nature, that it improves, and
refines it. If I search all the Volumes of the ancient Heathen Philosophers,
men, who ransackt Nature, and tried what Nature would discover of God, and
anatomized the Law written upon men's hearts. If I peruse all the Lessons, and
Rules of Morality, they gave and prescribed to Mankind, I find them all
delivered in this Book, much purer, and much clearer, than those Philosophers
were able to propose them.

The Sacred Writers, whoever they were, for ought I see, were men of very
noble, and generous spirits; for their great endeavor is, to instruct and
edify mankind, and to teach them such delights, as are fit for a rational Soul
to embrace. I see, they exhort men to live like themselves, like persons
capable of conversing with God. I see they are all for preservation of humane
Societies, and to this end, they speak against all that is evil, and encourage
Justice, and Peace, and Unity, and Charity, and Obedience to Governors, and all
that is good and holy, and condemn al Hypocrisy, commend upright dealing, and
sincerity of heart, and proscribe even those sins, which the world can take no
notice of, sins of thoughts, sins of the heart, and sins of secrecy, and urge
a hearty, unfeigned love to our Neighbor. Their great care, and solicitude is,
that men may not be kept unacquainted with themselves; and though they lived in
different Ages, at different Times, and were of different Educations, yet they
all agree in their great endeavor and design to purify men's hearts, and to
keep their Consciences void of offense toward God, and toward men. They would
have God worshipped, and honored like a God, in Spirit, and in Truth, and
require the cream and marrow of our endeavors, our dearest and tenderest love
to be given to him, which indeed is a worship fit for him, that is our Supreme
Ruler, and Governor, in whom we live, and have our Being.

They condemn all Sensuality, which makes men live like Beasts; and all
impatience, and discontent, which makes their Lives miserable; and all Pride,
and Haughtiness, which makes their near Neighbors hate, and despise them; and
all base Selfishness, which makes them uncompassionate. They prescribe the
greatest Cordials against Crosses, and Afflictions; for they promise a better
life after this, a life of everlasting joy and bliss; and suppose there were no
such life, yet would the fancy of it be mighty pleasing in distress, and
calamities, and serve to bear us up under the greatest burdens; and should we
find nothing of that nature, when we come to dye, to be sure there would be no
body to laugh at us.

They represent God as infinitely merciful to wretched men and willing to
accept of those that repent, and turn, and sincerely fear him, and to make them
everlastingly happy; and yet that men may not presume, and turn the grace of
God into wantonness, they represent him just withal, that will take vengeance
on, those, who provoke his patience, and mock his compassion, and abuse his
mercy into contempt of his Laws. They represent him as a very reasonable
Master, that lays upon his servants no more, than they are able to bear, and
expects returns answerable to the favors he bestows on them, and such services,
as are in some measure proportionable to the means he has afforded them, which
is no more, but what we expect from our servants. All which is highly rational;
and I must needs imagine, since no men, that ever lived in the world, could
give the world such exact Rules for the improvement, and advancement of a
rational Soul, as these Writers do, that they must have had some Divine Spirit
to guide them. To exalt the Soul, and to elevate it above Sense, and Earth, and
Dross, and Dung, and to make it fit to be admitted to familiarity with its
Maker, seems to be the very drift and design of this Book; and if it were not
Divine, or Inspired, it might however deserve the reputation of maintaining the
greatest, and most generous designs, that ever were carried on by mankind.

But sure, its original, is more than humane; and the persons who deliver these
things, had certainly a Divine Commission. When I look either upon, Moses, and
the Prophets in the Old, or upon Jesus, and his Apostles in the New Testament,
Men who were the chief Promulgers of the Truths, delivered in these Books,
methinks there appears something extraordinary in them, and I cannot but see
the Finger of God, that did direct and help them. If I believe any thing, that
I never heard, or saw my self, I have the greatest reason in the world to
believe, that that Moses, whom both Jews and Heathen call the great Leader, and
Captain General of the Jews, was inspired from above, when he gave his Law to
the whole Nation of the Jews. That he wrought those stupendous miracles which
are recorded in Scripture, the Jewish Nation has firmly and constantly
believed, ever since they were wrought; and how 600 000 men before whom they
were wrought, and who did feed upon many of those Wonders, and who have
delivered the real performance of those Miracles down to their Posterity, and
so imprinted it on the hearts of their Progeny, that neither Sword, nor Fire,
could ever make them deny it. How, I say, this vast multitude of men could be
mistaken in those Miracles, and give credit to his Law, observe every punctilio
of it, upon the account of those Miracles, if they had not been confident of
the truth and reality of them, is altogether unaccountable to a rational man.
These Miracles he could never have wrought without a supernatural power, nor
can I imagine any other reason, why God should honor him with that
supernatural power, but only to confirm the Law, and Statutes, he gave to the
Jews, and to testify unto them, and to assure them, that they came from God,
and that the punishments threatened, would certainly attend the wilful
neglecters of that Law.

That the Prophets foretold things, some 200, some 300, some 500 years, before
they came to pass, is so evident from the History of Josias, Cyrus, and the
Messiah, who was to come, that he must profess himself a stranger to all
History, that denies it; for I find the Jews had those Prophecies by them many
years, before they were fulfilled, and therefore cannot be supposed to have
forged those Prophecies, after the things pretended to be foretold in them,
were come to pass.

But had we no other testimony that the Writings of the Old Testament are
inspired, and of Divine Original, but that of Jesus, and his Apostles,
(provided we can prove, that these came with Divine Authority) there would be
enough to satisfy any person, that does not delight in disputing against
light, and reason.

That we owe the Doctrine of the New Testament to this Jesus, and his Apostles,
the whole Christian world has unanimously believed for 1600 years together;
and I must needs suppose, there could not have been such a stir in the World,
for so many hundred years together, about the Religion of Jesus, if there had
not been such a person in the world. But in this I find the whole world agree;
That there was such a person, not only Christians, but their greatest Enemies
both Jews and Heathen, do confess it. This Jesus as he does aver and maintain,
That God spoke by Moses, and the Prophets of old, so he could not but be
himself a person sent from God to reform the world, and to let them know the
will and pleasure of the Almighty, concerning their everlasting happiness.

For I find he wrought such Miracles, Works so exceeding Art, and Nature, that
they were the wonder, and confusion of the World; Nor do I upon examination
perceive, that the Jews deny it; only they give out, that being well skilled in
the Art of Magic, and dealing with the Devil, he made all that stir and noise
in the World, and drew so many followers after him, which to any man in his
wits seems the filliest Plea imaginable; for his Doctrine, Life, Miracles, all
tended to the destruction of the Devils Kingdom. His first work was to forbid
Idolatry, and to pull down the Worship of Devils, and to encourage real
Goodness, and Piety, and abhorrency not only of all evil, but of all appearance
of evil; and, if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself, and how
then shall his Kingdom stand? Matthew. 12.26.

I find that the Art of Magic in those days, was in great request with all
the Grandees of the Jews, and they arrived to very great perfection in it. And
if this Jesus wrought his Miracles by that Art, why could not those great
Masters of Magic, imitate those wonderful Works; not to mention, that at his
Crucifixion, when they alleged all that Malicce, or Hell could suggest against
him, none of his Adversaries, whatever some of them had done before, durst be
so abominably impudent, as to charge him with that black and dismal crime. Nero
certainly had the greatest advantages of any man that ever lived, to know the
utmost reach of Magic; for as his extreme viciousness and debauchery made him
the Devils Darling, so he had all the Magicians in the World to teach, and to
instruct him; yet with all the tricks and juggles, that either Men or Devils
could furnish him withal, I do not find, that he was able to Cure a cut Finger.

As great an Enemy as Julian the Apostate was to the Christian Religion, as
much as he hated, and persecuted it, yet by what is Recorded by very faithful
Men, I see, he could not deny, but that Jesus did open the eyes of some blind
Men, and Cured others that were Lame, and dispossessed not a few, that were
molested with evil spirits; and though he makes light of these wonders, yet to
a Man that is not possessed with prejudice, those Works will seem Divine and
Supernatural; not but that Cataracts, and accidental dimness of the eyes, may
be redressed by natural means; but where Men that are born blind, are restored
to their sight with a word, it cannot but argue a Commission from Heaven.

I cannot readily comprehend, why Tiberius should have been so fond, to have
this Jesus ascribed into the number of the Roman Gods; or why Severus should
worship him in his Closet among his other Deities; or why Adrian would have
purposed to erect Temples, without Images to his Honor, if they had not looked
upon him as some extraordinary person, and had not been sufficiently assured of
the many wonderful Works he had done.

The Evangelists (whose Writings I have no more reason to question, than I do
the Writings of Tacitus, or Seneca, or Cicero, or Livy, they having been
universally acknowledged to be theirs, and no man having ever been able to
confute their relation, or to give any satisfactory Argument, why they should
not be believed) these Evangelists, some of them being Eyewitnesses, I find,
make mention of several Miracles that were wrought before great multitudes of
people; and certainly some of them would have found it out, if there had been a
cheat, or juggle in it: Nay, is it rational, that the Apostles of this Jesus
would, or durst have with that freedom boldness, and confidence, have affirmed,
asserted, and abetted both his Resurrection, and his Miracles, in the very
Metropolis of Judea, in the City of Jerusalem, where it had been an easy
matter to discover the fraud, if there had been no such thing? From all which,
I must necessarily conclude, as Nicodemus, John 3. ver. 2. Master, we know that
thou art a Teacher come from God; for no man can, do these miracles that thou
do, except God be with him.

Indeed, if I will not put a Vail over my face, and wilfully blind my self, I
must needs conclude, That his Doctrine must necessarily be Divine, whose
Miracles were so; nor can I suppose it possible, that God would suffer that
person, whom he entrusted with his own power of doing Miracles, to obtrude unto
the World false and idle Tales, or unnecessary and impertinent Doctrines, and
Injunctions. I cannot conceive, why God should communicate to him the power of
doing Miracles, except it be to confirm the Divinity and indispensable
necessity of his Doctrine and Precepts; so that, if the works he did, had a
Divine original; his Doctrine and Commands must be derived from Heaven too,
else it would follow, that God had been very unwise in his choice, and had
exerted his omnipotent power to little or no purpose, only to make a show in
the World, or to increase the Kingdom of darkness, than which, there can
nothing be imagined more absurd, or incongruous.

If I consider the progress of this Gospel, I find it is altogether miraculous,
not only because the Apostles, who propagated this Doctrine, had the power of
Miracles conferred on them by this Jesus, which proves him to have been in the
form of God, but because in less than 200 years, without force or arms, in
despite of Sword and Fire, and the direst Torments, it spread over all the
known world. That the Mohammedan Religion made a stupendous progress, after its
first rise, is not denied; but he that shall reflect on the means whereby it
enlarged its power, viz. by Sword, and Violence, by depopulating Countries, by
killing and murdering all that resisted, will judge it rose from Hell rather,
than came down from Heaven. But I find the Gospel spread to a Miracle only by
innocence, and patience; by doing good, and suffering evil, the proper Arms of
Heaven.

I see how in despite of all the Arts, and Stratagems, the Devil could invent
to stop its progress, in despite of all the endeavors of Nero, Domitian,
Trajan, Decius, Dioclesian, to root it out, it mocked their rage and fury. I
find how the blood of Martyrs, that was spilt this day, brought forth a greater
number of Confessors the next; and multitudes of Christians, that were
sacrificed this week, were seconded by a greater Army in a few days after, and
men seemed to glory in being designed for death, and serving as Apprentices of
Martyrdom; and though here and there a Mohammedan may die for his Religion, yet
such a number of Martyrs no Religion can show; and what can I think of so many
Myriads of men, that being offered Ease, Plenty, Riches, Honors, Preferments,
despised them all, and would suffer the most exquisite Tortures, Tortures which
the Executioners themselves trembled at, and which made the very Heathen blush
to see such inhumanity, rather than deny that Doctrine, which they had upon
indubitable Testimonies received as Divine? what can I think, I say, of these
men, but that they had sufficiently searched into the truth of this Gospel, and
were most certainly assured, that it was the Word, and Will of God; and that
this Jesus would most certainly fulfill his promises to them, and give them
eternal life, if they could be content to lose their lives on earth for his
sake; That so many Hundred thousand men, many of them learned, and wise, and of
noble blood, and ingenious education, should throw away their lives in a humor,
without very good ground, that what they believed was really Divine, and could
not but be so, is a thing altogether unaccountable to a rational man.

I read, how in and about Christ's time, either just before his coming, or
shortly after his departing out of this world, by confession of the Heathen
themselves, the Heathen Oracles, and the Voices of Devils ceased. And can I
think the Devil would have left deluding the world, by his ambiguous Oracles,
gone off of the Stage voluntarily, and quietly, except he had been forced, and
compelled to it by this prodigious person, whom God sent into the world to
reveal his glory? Certainly it could not be one that was mere man, whom these
evil Spirits would have veiled and bowed to; without he had been more than man,
they would have disputed their power, and maintained their possession, and
defended their universal Empire, and made men know, that the arm of flesh was a
very inconsiderable weapon to control, or dethrone the Rulers of the darkness
of this world.

I find wherever this Gospel came, the Devil fled away, this destroyed his
Service, Priests, and Altars, the gates of Hell could not withstand it; nor can
I see which way the Gospel could have effected all this, without its power and
efficacy had been Divine.

I read what strange alterations it made upon all Peoples tempers,
dispositions, and affections, who embraced it; what should make so many great
men, so many subtle Philosophers, so many learned Men, so many Sages, men of
the greatest wit, and judgment, and apprehension, both in the Eastern and
Western Empire, yield and submit to it, and throw away their vain Philosophical
Learning, and humble themselves to the Cross of Christ, except they had seen
the stamp of God upon it? I find, that the greatest Orators, and Logicians, and
the ablest Disputants, that came with an intent to deride it, were captivated,
and conquered by it, and submitted to its Laws and Doctrines, The change it
wrought upon Peoples spirits, was wondrous strange; the Choleric, the Envious,
the Drunkard, the Fornicator, the Adulterer, the Worldling, the Oppressor, the
Timorous, the Pusillanimous, were on a sudden transformed into Love, Meekness,
Sobriety, Chastity, Temperance, Charity, Liberality, Fortitude, and
Magnanimity; and they that before trembled, at the thoughts of Fire, and wild
Beasts, offered themselves to flames, and took it ill if they were put by, and
deprived of the Honor of riding in such fiery Chariots to Heaven.

Nay, I see at this day, how wonderfully it works on the Souls of men, makes
them act against their natural inclinations, without any prospect of temporal
interest, go against the bias of their corruptions, and stop in their career to
Hell, which they were running to with most eager appetite. I see how it makes
them hate that evil company they formerly delighted in, and how insipid it
renders all the jests of their old Associates, how it makes them love their
Enemies, do good to them that hate them, pray for them that persecute them, and
despitefully use them; how it makes them live above sense, and seek their
greatest satisfaction in the ways and ordinances of God. In a word, how from
Beasts, it changes them into men; and from men, into more than men. And what
can I ascribe all this to, but to a Divine Spirit, that by this Gospel subdues
the hearts, and brings the lusts and affections of men into obedience to Christ
Jesus.

He that shall take such Arguments as these into serious Consideration, may
easily satisfy himself, that in these Volumes is contained the true Will of
God, at least, that this, of all things extant, is most likely to be the Will
of God, nothing in nature having those circumstances, and characters, and
testimonies of a Divine Original, as the Rules contained in these Books, we
call the Bible, have; and whatever seeming Contradictions and Tautologies may
be found there, to a Considerate man it would appear, that as long as the main
thing, the true way to happiness, is secured, such accidental things, as
frequency of the same expressions, and Chronological mistakes committed by the
various Transcribers, may be passed by, without offense; That many things which
have seemed Contradictions, upon examination of the Customs, and Circumstances
of the Age these Books were written in, have been found no Contradictions; and
that thus it may be in all the rest, if we knew all those ways of speaking,
and reckoning, and naming things, and all the Proverbial expressions then in
use; That in the substantial things of these Books, there has been no
alteration, or corruption, for so many Ages together; and that the plain way of
writing, used here, and repeating the same things often, does but argue honest
simplicity, and want of guile, and unwillingness, to impose upon the world, in
those that have written these Books.

And as Consideration would chase away all infidelity of this nature, so the
want of it, we find, makes men Sotts, and Beasts, and talk against things they
understand not, and cavil at things most sacred, and full of reason and
majesty. This is it, makes them break jests on that which they ought to tremble
at, and speak lightly of those mysteries, which require and challenge our
greatest veneration.

This 2dly is the Reason, which makes the sensual man question another world,
He considers not, what a Divine Angelical Spirit is within him, nor how
improbable it is, that the rational part of himself (a thing certainly distinct
from his body, and which consists not of matter capable of corruption, and can
voluntarily move it self, which matter cannot do) should perish, as the Beasts
of the Field; would he but consider how this Notion of an after-retribution is
spread all the soberer world over, and certainly this Notion must have a
beginning, something or other did occasion it in men's minds; the usual Plea,
that Politicians did invent it, to restrain men from secret Villainies, which
they saw present Punishments would not do, seems to be strangely impertinent;
For not to mention, that there was never any History in the world, that we
could hear of, that gave us an account of such a thing, or of the beginning of
it, we cannot suppose, that these Politicians, if they were wise men, and
expected to see the fruit of their labors, would ever have adventured to plant
this Notion of a future judgment in men's understandings, had not they either
believed, and been persuaded, that there was a possibility of such an
after-retribution, and that the notion was very suitable and agreeable to man's
reason; or observed, that there was in most men a very great inclination to
believe it, else they might have persuaded, the world, that black is white, or
that it is better to be blind, than to see, Maxims, which would have exposed
them to scorn and contempt. And whence should this sutableness of the Notion to
man's reason, or that easy closing of the Soul with the Notion, or men's
readiness to embrace the Notion upon the first hearing of it, whence can all
this be, but from the stamp and impression the great Creator has made on the
hearts of men, when first he gave them a being in the world; nor can we think
so mean of this first cause, as to suppose, that he made this Notion so suitable
to the rational Soul of man, or endued the Souls of men with a proneness to
entertain it, without there had been really such a thing, as a future
retribution, else it would follow, that this Supreme Being had given us a
proneness to believe a Lie, or a thing, which is not, and consequently imposed,
and put a cheat upon his creatures, which is equally absurd, and blasphemous.

Nor could melancholy men be the first Broachers of it, as is pretended by
some; for we do not find, that melancholy fancies do ordinarily spread so much.
He that fancies he sees such and such things in the Air, or in his House, or
entertains Notions that are out of the common road, gets but very few to
imitate, or to follow him, or to think as he cloth. But this Notion of an
after-retribution takes posession of the greatest, and learned men, nay, the
most airy constitutions embrace it, men of all complexions and tempers imbibe
and cherish it, and they cannot stand out against the Notion, it appears so
reasonable; so that still we must have recourse to him, that first made Man,
and made this Notion so agreeable to his reason; and this he would not, could
not have done, if such a thing had never been intended.

Would the sensual Wretch but ruminate upon these circumstances, the
Consideration would confound his foolish principles, and childish conclusions;
would he but take time to consider how hard a matter it is, to eradicate this
Notion out of the mind, after it has once taken root there, what pains some
daring men are forced to use, to lift or eject this principle out of their
Souls; how they are forced to drink and swear, to be rid of it; how they must
turn Beasts, unman themselves, turn day into night, and night into day, caress
all sorts of temptations, make themselves slaves to their lusts, court the
vilest of mankind, seek out jovial society, run through a perfect discipline of
Vice, are afraid to be alone, are ever in a hurry, dare not make use of their
reason, are forced to banish all serious thoughts, are constrained to entertain
all that is light and frothy, encourage themselves in nothing but sensuality,
avoid all sober and grave discourses, be always in the noise of Drums and
Trumpets, I mean in the noise of idle Tales and Divertisements, damp all the
checks of their own Consciences, read Plays and Romances, and busy themselves
about nothing but trifles, things, that School-boyes would be ashamed of, and
all this to root out this one poor Notion of an After-judgment; and yet when
they have done all this, debauched their virtuous principles, ruined nature,
dethroned their reason, made themselves greater slaves to the Devil possibly,
than the Devil would have them to be, they cannot totally banish it, it will
come again, and fright them; and the Notion sticks so close, it is so riveted
in the Soul, that neither the blood of the grapes, nor all the frolicks and
merriments they can think of, nor all the mistresses and strumpets in the
world, can totally blot, and deface it.

Would he but consider all this, an easy matter would make him conclude, If
there be no such thing, and nothing but Education produces and causes those
needless apprehensions of an After-judgment, then why is it so hard a matter to
eradicate this nothing? One would think, if it stands for a Cipher only, it
should be no hard matter to unravel Education; for a Vice I see though it be
become a second nature, may be unlearned by degrees; but this Notion of an
After-judgment, though the sinner may suppress, and smother it for some time,
yet that it should break out again, and when the Wretch thinks he has
conquered it, should return with greater violence, nay, beat so much stronger
upon the mind, by how much more a man strives to put it out, as if it would not
be denied, and would have admittance, in despite of all opposition, and mocked
all the weapons that Nature, and the wit of Man can use against it; This sure
makes it more than probable, that it is a Plant, which God himself has planted
in the Soul.

Would he consider with himself, I believe there is a God, and I cannot but
allow that God impartial justice. To deny him this, is to deny him Perfection,
and consequently to deny his Being; for the notion of a God, implies absolute
perfection; If this God be just, how shall I judge of his Justice? I have no
other rule to go by, but that justice, which all Mankind believes to be
justice. If God be our Governor, (as certainly none has greater right to it,
because in him we live, and breathe, and have our being) he cannot but be a
righteous Governor, and how can he be a Righteous Governor, without
distributive justice, without making a just difference by rewards and
punishments, between the obedient and disobedient? and When I see God makes no
just difference in this life, by rewards and punishments, between those that
serve him, and those that despise and contemn his Will; what can I conclude,
but that he intends to make it in the life to come, or after this life is
ended? Which way he intends to do it, is not material for me to know, as long,
as I am assured that this Soul I carry within me, will be the principal subject
of these joys or miseries. He is most certainly able to preserve that Soul
which he has made capable of being governed by moral Laws and Precepts, and to
be wrought upon by moral persuasions into obedience to his Laws; he is most
certainly able, I say, to keep our Souls in being, even when they leave the
Earthly Tabernacle of their Bodies, and to punish, or reward them according to
their Works; these Souls being the principal Agents in good or evil: and he
that was able to create the Body, is certainly able to raise it again, and
unite it to the Soul, that so both may participate of the same fate. Nay, the
necessity of these after-rewards and punishments enforce a necessity at least,
of Gods preserving the Soul, for these rewards and punishments; and what way
soever God has to preserve our intellectual part after death; its enough to
me, or to any rational man, that according to the notion and apprehension, we
have of justice, he cannot be just, without he does preserve it, either for
reward or punishment.

For, that God does not sufficiently reward and punish Men in this life, daily
experience gives me sufficient testimonies. The wickedest of Men, are very
often the greatest in the World; and those that oppress such as truly fear God,
swim in all manner of plenty, and ease, and riches, and honor. And though its
true, that such men have sicknesses and dye, yet those are things common to
good and bad, and can be thought no just differencing retributions, Those that
make it their business to observe Gods Laws, labor to approve themselves his
most obedient Subjects, and his most faithful Servants, ordinarily suffer great
injuries, are unjustly arraigned, condemned, executed, undergo tortures of
cruel mockings, of scourgings, of bonds, of imprisonments. And their Accusers,
or Judges, may be, have all that heart can wish; their Eyes stand out with
fatness, neither are they plagued like other Men, or if they be sometimes
afflicted, the affliction is not at all answerable to the horridness of the
crimes they commit.

How gently do many of these Monsters dye upon their Beds, no Lamp expires more
leisurely than their breath, while the other, that meditates in Gods Law, day
and night, dies with disgrace and shame, or is most barbarously murdered, and
butchered. Can I look upon all these passages and occurrencies, and not
conclude another world? I must eiher conclude there is no Governor of the
World, or if there be one, that Governor will certainly find a time, if not
here, yet hereafter to manifest his Justice, to reward the Innocent, and to
punish those that bid defiance to Heaven.

Either Man is a nobler Creature, than a Beast, or he is not, if he be not,
what means his Reason, his Speech, his Power to express his Mind, and to
examine the nature, manner, ends, causes, and designs of all things, his
dominion over all the Beasts of Earth, etc. If he be, we must not affirm that
of him, which will certainly declare him more miserable than the Beasts, whose
spirit goes downwards, If there be no other World, no Judgment to come, no
after-retribution, why is man possessed with the fear of it? This fear is a
thing of that consequence, and has so great an influence upon Men's Lives, that
from that fear, according as Creatures are either possessed with it, or want it,
they may justly be called either happy or miserable. Beasts I see, are not
capable of these fears, and consequently cannot be disturbed with the
apprehension of such things, and therefore must necessarily be more happy, and
nobler Creatures, than Men, who are not only capable of such apprehensions, but
by a natural instinct, feed and cherish such thoughts as these.

And can there be any thing more absurd, than to call an Ox, or Lion, or
Elephant, a nobler Creature than Man? and yet this must necessarily follow, if
there be no other world. Man would be the most miserable Creature in the world,
being so apt to be tormented with those fears, if he did dye into annihilation:
and he might justly wish himself a Beast, and lament, that God had put such a
clog to all his delights and merriments and accuse his Maker of Injustice, or
Cruelty, for frighting, or possessing him with fears of that which never was,
nor is, nor will be,

Such considerations would most certainly satisfy any rational, impartial Man,
and deliver him from halting between two opinions, and convince him, that he
does not cease to be, when he dies, that there is a just Judge, and that he
will in a short time find it by woeful experience, if a serious return to God
prevent it not, that when the jolly sinner banishes all thoughts and
contemplations of this Nature from his Mind, he turns Monster, Changeling,
Devil, nay, worse than Devil, for the Devils believe a world to come, and
tremble, and its merely want of consideration makes him so.

3. The same defect makes him wonder at the malapertness, and impertinence of
Divines, that in every Sermon almost, pronounce Eternal Flames, to be a due and
just punishment for Temporal sins.

Let the vain man but call his thoughts together, and summon his understanding,
to take a view of such Topics as these. Why should I think it incongruous to
Gods justice, to punish sins committed here, with an Eternity of pain and
anguish? Has not he power to do with his own what he pleases? May not he
affright stubborn sinners, with what punishment he has a mind to? Had I a
Servant, to whom I were as kind as to my own Child, whom I had raised out of
the Dust, and heaped innumerable Favors upon, and promised all my Estate to,
after some few years service, and should that Servant, instead of honoring me,
despise me, where ever he comes, instead of obeying me, laugh at my reasonable
commands; instead of Working, play his time away, instead of going to the place
I send him to, run to Brothel-Houses, or Taverns; instead of loving me, hate
me, and affront me, slight both my actual kindesses, and my future smiles, and
notwithstanding my continual exhortations to another course of life, continue
wilfully in the way he has begun, merely to gratify his foolish Lusts, and
when he is convinced too of the unreasonableness of his doings, knows it is
Ingratitude in the highest Degree, and yet will be guilty of it; and when he
might do otherwise only out of malice, and to vindicate his own humor,
resolves against it; what punishment can there be too great for such a wretch?

Were this mine, or my neighbors case, we should certainly doom such a monster,
to all the Tortures that severity can invent, or inflict; and why should I have
any hard thoughts of God, for punishing the sinners Ingratitude, with eternal
pain and loss, an ingratitude so great, all things considered, that the worst
returns one man can make to another, cannot sufficiently express the horror and
vileness of it.

God for ought I see in condemning wilful sinners to Eternal misery, gives them
but their own choice, and if that old saying be true, Volenti non fit injuria,
To him that is willing, can be done no injury, God certainly cannot be accused
of cruelty, for he gives the stubborn sinner but that, which he deliberately
pitched upon, and affected; and though no man does ordinarily choose punishment,
much less everlasting calamity for its own self; yet as long as they do with
vehement affection, long after that, which has this calamity inseparably
annexed, we justly suppose that they agree to suffer the calamity, as well as to
enjoy the thing, which is the others inseparable companion. He that is certain
that the smell of such an Herb, or Flower is poisonous, and will kill him, if
notwithstanding this conviction, he will smell to it; its apparent he makes
choice of his death and ruin.

There is not a sinner, that lives under the Gospel, but he must know, that he
who does not practically believe the Gospel, or, which is all one, lives in
wilful contempt of the Laws of the Gospel, shall certainly be damned; for the
Gospel is so full of these threatenings, that he, that does but come to any
place, where this word of life is preached, if he be not deaf, he must
necessarily hear it; nay, if he will but make the least enquiry, and set
himself to consider seriously, whether that Gospel be of God or no; he cannot
but find, that it is the Son of God, even he who can as soon loose his being, as
tell a lie, that has, with all the protestations imaginable, threatened this
everlasting condemnation to Men, that are resolved to prefer satisfaction of
their Lust, before all his wisest and wholsomest Precepts.

This being known by all, that have any reason or understanding, as much as
that Felony, or Burglary, is death by the Law, if in despite of this
knowledge, and persuasion, the hard-hearted wretch will venture upon a life of
disobedience and contempt, to which damnation is inseparably annexed: What can I
think, but that the vain Man is in Love with his own Eternal destruction?

In Love with it! So one would think, that sees him drive to everlasting death,
as furiously as Jehu did to Jezreel, and make more haste to invade the Gates of
Hell, than Elijah, for all his fiery Chariot, did to get to Heaven. The Man
that runs through Swords and Daggers, breaks down Walls and Fences, poisons the
principles of Sobriety, Providence has lodged in his Breast, strangles the
kind suggestions of his own Conscience, cracks the Bolts and Bars of a
virtuous Education, seeks out Dangers, and precipitates himself into them, and
with the noise of his riot, strives to overcome the calls of the Holy Ghost
within, defies all present convictions, dis-regards the Groans and Cries, and
Tears, and Wounds of a crucified Savior, that would keep him from being
undone, vanquishes Gods methods to catch him into Repentance, breaks through
all the prohibitions of the Gospel, through Vows and Promises, and Sacraments,
and most solemn Engagements, charges all the threatenings of a jealous God, and
fights his way through Rocks of oppositions, and all to get to Hell and
Damnation, sure makes that his choice, and if so, God does him no injury, in
giving him his own hearts desire.

A Sheep or a Horse, certainly can never counter-ballance the life of a Man,
yet he that knows, he shall be hanged if he steal either, and will in despite
of the penalty, venture, merely to gratify his sickly fancy, justly suffers the
punishment, which seems to bear no proportion with the things he stole; the
justice of the punishment, is founded in the malefactors choice. And so we find
it in the case before us, the Blessing and the Curse, is laid before the
sensual Man, Life and death are proposed to him, he is put to his choice which
of these he will have; He freely, and wilfully chooses Death, and the Curse,
maugre all that God, or his Angels, or his Ministers can say to the contrary;
and it is but just, since he thus fights against God, and seems resolved to
cross all God's endeavors, to purify and turn him, and will have his wrath and
indignation, and scorns his Mercy, God should let him have that Fire and
Brimstone, which is the portion of the Sinners Cup, and which he is so very
greedy after, as if he were afraid, he should never be so happy, as to obtain,
or be master of it.

Indeed, the more I think of it, the more I find that its not God so much that
condemns him to Eternal misery, as the sinner himself. It Is he that is thus
barbarous to his own Soul, and adjudges himself to that worm which dies not. He
kisses that consuming Fire, as if it were the Light of God's Countenance, and
seems to envy the Devils their unhappiness, he does so long to be a sharer of
it. He snatches Damnation out of the hands of God's Justice, and while God
offers to keep it from him, makes a long Arm to reach it.

God alas! does what he can to save him, his bowels yearn over him, and nothing
would please him more, than to see his penitential Tears. He is ready with the
good Father, Luk 15.20. To run, and to have compassion on him, as soon as he
does but resolve to leave the Kingdom of Darkness; even that God who would have
all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth; He waits to be
gracious, and justly expects that the Vineyard on which he has bestowed great
cost, and pains, should bring forth Grapes: He does not afflict the Children of
Men willingly, he delights not in their tortures, he dehorts and discourages
them from being accessory to their own ruin. He gives them time and space to
repent, he caresses them with his Heaven; he can do no less in justice, than
prepare a Hell for the stubborn offender, this is the only way to vindicate the
honor of his Law; but then he would have him shun that Tophet, and walk in the
way that leads to Life, and promises him to rejoice over his Repentance, and to
crown his serious endeavors with all that is rich and glorious. All the
Mercies, Afflictions, Judgments, Providence he sends upon him, are to
dissuade him from walking in the way to destruction; He wooes the proud
Creature to his dying day, and stands between him and eternal anguish, while
the wretch faucily thrusts the Eternal God away, and will storm the fatal Gate;
God would hold him, but he breaks loose from him, and flings himself into the
Devils Arms, and then sure it is not God that so much that condemns him to
everlasting horror, and anguish, as himself.

But if it were not so, that there is such a punishment threatened in the
Gospel, is beyond dispute. And this threatening to be sure is not like the
Ceremonial Law, which was but a shadow of things to come, and so fell of it
self, when the substance appeared. In this threatening, there are no Types, and
therefore we can look for no Abolition; This is God's peremptory determination,
this way he is unalterably resolved to proceed, and most certainly God is not a
Man, that he should lie, or a Son of Man, that he should Repent; His Word is
engaged, and the Honor of his Veracity concerned, to see this threatening
executed; should God dispense with it, it would follow, that God either did not
know what he did when he made this sanction, or that he repents of it, as
unjust, or that he did not foresee the inconveniences, which were like to ensue
upon the execution of this threatening, all which consequences are monstrously
absurd, and unreasonable.

The terms and conditions, upon which Eternal Salvation is offered, are so
reasonable and so just, and I may say, so easy, that the wilful neglect of them
deserves no less than loss of the great Salvation, God offers; were the
conditions God requires, in order to everlasting Bliss, attended with
unconquerable difficulties; did God require a thousand Rivers of Oil, or the
Sacrifice of out Firstborn; or dragging the Cattle upon a thousand Hills to
his Altar, did he require us to wade through stinking Ditches full of Leeches,
and venomous creatures, as the enemy of Mankind is said to advise some of the
Indians; did he enjoin us to suffer our selves to be crushed to death under
Chariot-wheels, as some of the Heathens of Indostan do, out of respect to
their Idol Jagannath; indeed then, to neglect this promised felicity would
admit of some excuse, the difficulty of the enterprise would qualify the crime,
and the omission be capable of some slight Apology.

But when God requires no more but a practical Belief, and submission to those
rules, His Son came down from Heaven to teach us, the observance whereof
advances our Temporal Interest, as well as our Spiritual; keeps us in health,
and in a good temper, makes us live quietly and contentedly, even in this
present World, where the duty is profit, and obedience brings its present
reward with it, there to slight an incorruptible Crown of Glory; common reason
will tell us, that we justly loose it. He that will not accept of the greatest
Treasure imaginable, if he may have it but for asking; we our selves confess
it is pity, he should ever enjoy it, and then when a practical Belief of the
promises and threatenings of the Gospel, is all the trouble God desires us to
be at, in order to endless Felicity; the condition being so facile, so
equitable, we cannot, if we our selves were to be the Judges, but acknowledge,
that we deserve never to possess it, if we despise or neglect so reasonable a
condition.

The high quality of the person offended, certainly makes a fault the greater;
He that kills a King, commits a greater crime, than he that kills a Peasant:
And if the dignity of the person injured, aggravates the sin, it may justly
aggravate the guilt and punishment too. And therefore he that has affronted
his Prince and Sovereign, deserves to lie in Jayl longer than he that has
wronged his equal or inferior; and consequently he that offends, and wilfully,
without need, and maliciously, and for many years, and in despite of all the
Courtship of Ministers to leave off, offends an Infinite, Eternal,
Incomprehensible God; why should not the offense amount to a demerit of
Infinite and Eternal punishments? Certain it is, that the obstinate sinner
slights an Eternal Redemption, and had he lived for ever, he would without all
peradventure have sinned for ever; and since the Man that would have committed
Treason, is deservedly executed for Treason; why should not he suffer
Eternally, who, if he had lived, here to all Eternity, would have affronted
God, and abused him to all Eternity. The more I reflect on the nature of sin,
the more dreadful it appears to me. If I think of God's Wisdom, I see how sin
controuls that, as if God had made very foolish Laws to govern Mankind by: if I
ruminate on God's Power, I see how sin mocks that, as if all his threatenings
were but Bugbears, and God did threaten more than he could perform: If I cast
my Eye upon God's Truth, and Veracity, I see how sin would make him a Liar,
changeable, unfaithful, inconstant to himself: if I take a view of his justice,
I see how sin would dash and abolish it; for in that it makes the sinner hope
for impunity, when he has affronted his Maker, as much as he can, what does
it, but enervate God's Righteousness, shake off God's Government, and prompt
the sinner to resist, and fight with him, whose Eyes are like flames of Fire
and whose Feet are as Brass glowing in a Furnace; and that such a continual
contempt of the Almighty, should justly, and deservedly, pull down perpetual
torments, is a thing not at all contrary to reason; Nay, for ought I see the
sinner makes nothing of Eternal Damnation while he lives here; the loss of 50
or 100 l. shall, fright him more than, Everlasting banishment, from the
gracious Presence of Almighty God, whereby he tacitly confesses, that the
punishment is very slight, and inconsiderable, and what wrong does God do him,
in inflicting a punishment upon him, which by his own acknowledgement, is so
trivial, and so slight, that he will sooner endure it, than the loss of a Friend
or Relation; nay, many times wishes for it in his common discourse, as if it
were some pleasure to see Eternal Flames about his ears.

How soon would Consideration of such Arguments, as these, undeceive the
worldly wretch that talks, he knows not what, when he finds fault with' God's
dooming, careless, wilful, obstinate sinners to unquenchable fire. But its want
of Consideration, makes his discourse so loose, and wanton. It Is this makes him
embrace every little conjecture about the shortness of Hell torments, before the
solid arguments that evince an Eternity of God's displeasure against stubborn
sinners: It Is this makes him prefer a May-be, before a Real-known-Truth, and
the man that makes sport with Eternal misery, shall he be more acceptable
company, than the gravest, and most judicious Divine, whose Reasons he cannot
answer.

Alas! did the Drunkard, When he comes to himself again, Smite upon his Thigh,
and say what have I done? how odious is this Vice I indulge my self in? How
like a Beast do I live? How unworthy of that Reason which the wise Creator has
bestowed upon me? How unworthy of those Mercies I daily enjoy? How would many
of the sober Heathens, have scorned a temptation to such a sin? What follies
and extravagancies does it involve me in? How do I prostitute, and expose my
self to the contempt and scorn of Men that know me? How can I hear the Apostle
protest, that no Drunkard shall enter into the Kingdom of God, and go on; Will
not God take an account one day and examine, how I have spent my time and can I
spend my time worse, than by exceeding irrational Creatures in sensuality! What
brute but a Swine would disorder it self, as I do my Body? What can I plead in
excuse of so soul a crime? ls this renouncing the Devil and all his works, as I
vowed to do in Baptism? Is this adorning the Gospel of my Savior, as my
Profession requires? If I fear not Hellfire, why do not I fear impoverishing
of my self and Family? How do I dispose my self for all manner of sin, by this
enormity! What crime is there that I am not fit for, when my Reason is
overwhelmed with Drink? How do I embezel the Gifts of God, when I abuse his
Creatures thus! How do I pervert the end of Gods bounty when I make that to
ruin and destroy my nature, which was intended to preserve it? What difficulty
is there in leaving so gross a vice, which threatens so much mischief and
misery? Is it such a pleasure to make a Pond of my Body? is it such a pleasure
to deprive my self of Reason? Is it such a pleasure to be laughed at by all men
that maintain Sobriety? What hurt has God ever done me, that I should thus
wilfully affront him? How soon might I vanquish this sin? if I would in good
earnest resolve to be allured by my old companions no more? And why should they
be dearer to me than my God, my Soul, and a good Conscience? Will these
companions save me when I come to dye? Will it not be far more comfortable to
have none of this load to burden, and oppress my Soul? What if God should
strike me dead in a drunken fit? Does not Dives, his calling for a drop of
water to cool his burning Tongue, affright me? How do I prepare for Diseases by
this Vice? and if there were no Hell, no Judgment to come, how should the
inconveniences, which attend this sin, discourage me? Lord! if neither the
Plagues which wait upon the offense in this World, nor the terror of that which
is to come, can dissuade me, how justly may God pour out all the Vials of his
wrath upon me? How justly may he plunge, me into the Red Sea of his
Indignation, and leave me to the rage and malice of that Devil, whose voice and
suggestions I do now obey.

Did the sot but blow those sparks of Reason he has left, into such
considerations as these, how horrid, how nauseous would the sin appear? but
want of consideration makes him transform the Image of God, into the Image of a
Beast, and makes him drink away the Poors relief and his own Estate: This is it
makes him a Thief, for he robs the poor, and sometimes hiS own Family, of that
sustenance and support he owes them, as he is a Man, and pretends to be a
Christian; this is it makes him laugh, when he should wish for rivers of Tears,
and for a Fountain of Water, to deplore the sadness of his condition on here,
and the more dreadful state of his Soul hereafter.

Did the swearer but seriously consider, what a foolish, weak, sordid, and
impertinent thing it is, to mingle profanations of God's Name, with his
Speeches, he would soon take pains to avoid it, and set a mulct upon himself,
for running upon the same Rock again. Would he but think, good God! how
irrationally do I act! if I believe there is a God, what can I fancy that God
to be? sure I must fancy him such a Deity as the Heathen worshipped, one that
has Eyes, and sees not, Ears,' and hears not; a Deity of Brass or Stone, that
I can securely play withal; a Deity, that is not at all jealous of his Honor
and Glory, and can sit down under every affront that is put upon him; should the
meanest of my Servants make use of my name in every trifling discourse, in
every foolish story, and whenever he is pettish or peevish, I should take it
very ill at his hands; and why should I think, God will endure that from me,
which I would not allow in my Footboy, or Valet de chamber? I must confess,
there is no bait, no temptation to this sin; He that robs upon the highway, is
tempted by an apparent profit; that the Covetous huggs his Gold, and pays
Adoration to his Money, as to his Saint; That he beholds the Sun when it
shines, and the Moon walking in brightness; no marvel, for he sees it has a
kind of Almighty power, can make foes, friends, unlock Gates, break the
strongest Bars, give him admission into company of the highest quality, etc.
The dissembler hopes he may save his credit and reputation, and fortune, by not
speaking what he thinks, but in swearing, I can have no prospect of advantage,
and I must only act the Devil, love sin for sins sake; Fornication and Adultery
do yet pretend some pleasure, but this I cannot do in swearing; the greatest
Masters of pleasures, never reckoned this sin as an ingredient of carnal
satisfaction, and though there is no real necessity for any sin, yet for this I
can pretend no necessity at all; were a knife set to my Throat, were my Life in
danger, were I to dye presently upon the spot, if I did not swear, I might have
some color of argument for it, but when there is nothing compels me to it, but
my own wilfulness, I deserve no pity, no compassion, if God lashes me with the
severest Thunders. 'There is no sin that is more in my power to avoid than this,
the most barbarous Heathen can shun it, and shall I pretend impossibility? I
see it engages me to very great uncivility, I cannot but offend all sober
company by it, they must needs be uneasy in my society, and to hear God abused,
and how ill I do with to my own Soul, cannot but grate upon a heart, that has
any sense of Religion or Honesty; nor do I see that people believe me any whit
the more for swearing, but I render my self ridiculous, and make people think
me dishonest, unfaithful, and treacherous, who make so little conscience of
what I say; How can any man trust me, that hears me abuse the best, and dearest
friend I have; or what credit can any man give to me, that sees me so
treacherous to God, to whom I owe all I have? Can there be greater ingratitude
in the World, than I am guilty of by this sin? the Air I breathe in, the Earth
I tread upon, the Ground which nourishes me, the Fire that warms me, are all
the Gift of God; and is this the return I make to take his Name in vain, that
supports and maintains me? Do I make nothing of God's threatenings? How often
does he manifest his displeasure against this sin in his Word, and can I think
I am not concerned in the commination? what hope can I have, that Christ's
Blood will save me, when I swear it away, and thrust it from me with both Arms?
how justly may God damn me, that do so often wish for it, and is there any
thing in nature so barbarous to it self, as I am in praying to God, as it were,
to deliver me up into the clutches of the Devil? No Devil would wish himself so
ill, as I do my own Soul, and is there, nothing in the inhumanity, and horror
of the sin, to discourage, and terrify me from it?

Did the Swearer but ruminate on these disswasive arguments, how would it cool
his courage; but neglecting that, he neglects his restorative, and speaks as if
he would be revenged on his Maker, for giving him a Tongue.

How soon would the bladder of Pride break, did the proud man but consider,
that he is Dust, and what a wretched sinful creature he is, and how much worse
than other men, and how much he forgets the Humiliation of the Son of God, who
being in the Form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but made
himself of no reputation, becoming obedient to the death of the Cross, how
odious this lofty Spirit is in the sight of God, how amiable Humility, how God
detests the one, and embraces the other; how pride keeps out the operations and
influences of God's Spirit, and how the Holy Ghost refuses to come and lodge in
that Soul, that swells with vain conceits of its own worth; how pride keeps him
a stranger to himself, how it makes his neighbor hate him, raises him enemies,
and makes him an object of contempt and scorn; how all the gifts, and
blessings, and privileges he enjoyes, are but the effects of God's charity;
how the stately Fabric, which his Soul does animate, must shortly return to
the earth, from which it was taken, what condescension God uses toward him,
how God, who commands Heaven and Earth, becomes an humble suitor to his
Creatures, and instead of consuming, courts them to yield to his requests, and
injunctions, how noble and generous it is to imitate him, who is eternally
happy in himself, how in the Grave all distinctions dye, how unfit that person
is to be a Christian, that is a stranger to meekness and humility, how those
that have domineered in this World, and trampled upon Men, and have thought it
their interest and glory, to despise their equals and inferiors, are now
roaring in the burning Lake; and how they would now be contented to be the
poorest, meanest, and most contemptible creatures in the World, provided, that
they might be but freed from that never-dying Worm, that gnaws their Souls, and
how shortly this pride and haughtiness, if not seriously, and timely repented
of, will end in weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Were but these things rightly,
and seriously pondered, it would cause a very strange alteration in the lofty,
censorious Man's designs and resolutions; but while these observables are
passed by, as things, out of his element, no marvel if he idolizes himself, and
like a Hedgehog, wraps himself up in his own soft Down, and turns the Prickles
to all the world besides.

Let the Soul, that is careless of God's service, and lukewarm, neither hot nor
cold, but try it, and reflect, Lord! And is this a service fit for him, that is
of purer Eyes, than to behold iniquity! Is this slovenly Devotion a sit Present
for him, who searches the Hearts and the Reins? should my Servants serve me as
I do God, how ill should I resent it! and dare I offer the blind, and the lame
to God, which I would scorn to accept of from my Slaves and Vassals! I would
have my Prayers heard, and answered, but how can I hope they will pass for
acceptable sacrifices in Heaven, when they want the fire of the Sanctuary to
give them Flame! will God mind a Supplication, in which I do not mind his
Greatness, Majesty, and Holiness? or can I think God is so fond of answering my
requests, that he matters not, with what frame of Heart I approach his Throne?
when the Primitive Christians, that certainly knew best, what was to be done in
order to Salvation, as having converse with the Disciples, and Apostles of our
Lord, when they consecrated that time, when their spirits were most lively, to
pious exercises, and looked upon that Religion, as dead, that had not fervency
for its ingredient, shall I hope to come off at a cheaper Rate? Is the King
immortal, invisible, blessed for evermore, to be put off with the chips and
shavings of Devotion? should not I give him the cream and marrow of my
endeavors, that has greater power over me, than my Master, my Father, or my
Prince? so great a God, and so mean a Sacrifice, so infinite a Majesty, and so
pitiful a Present? How deliberate, how circumspect am I in my addresses to my
King, and is not God a greater Prince than he? what is my careless devotion,
but mocking of God, and my drowzy Prayer, what is it but playing with him, at
whose Presence the Mountains tremble? Am not I afraid of vengeance, or can I
think God will suffer a wretch, that lives upon his mercy, and makes no better
return, go unpunished? How justly may he deny me his Grace and assistance, who
do not seek it more earnestly? How justly may he say, Depart from me, I know
thee not, who am so indifferent, whether I enjoy the light of his countenance
or no? How justly may he refuse to be found by me, who seek him, as if his
favor deserved no pains, or trouble? Strive, as it were for your lives, to
enter in at the strait Gate, says the Great Redeemer of Man, and is this
taking the Kingdom of Heaven by force, when I look upon it as a thing, that may
be had at any time, upon a Lord have mercy upon me? Is this wrestling and
striving, when I suffer any outward worldly concern, though never so slight and
trivial, to take me off from minding the great concern of my Soul! Is this
giving all diligence, to make my calling and election sure, when I am
infinitely more concerned, how to secure a small sum of Money, than I am to
secure those Treasures, which fade not away? Will God give a reward, to Men,
that stand yawning, and stretching themselves in his Vineyard, unresolved,
whether they shall work or no? A reward indeed they shall have, but such a
reward, as hypocrites receive, a reward, from which Good Lord deliver us. And
am I so stupefied, that nothing of all this can move me, neither the Glory of
God, nor the interest of my Soul, nor all that can be said against my want of
Zeal, and fervency of Spirit?

Were these reason laid home by serious consideration, it would rowze the Soul
from her slumber, and make her see, how dangerous her rest is, and how deer
that sleep will cost her, she is for the present lulled in, if it be not
suddenly dispelled and scattered; but want of consideration, makes the careless
sinner fancy God such a one as himself, one that is pleased with his
indifferency in Religion, as well as himself; this is it makes him entertain
very gross, absurd, and unreasonable conceits, concerning that all Wise, most
Excellent, and most lovely Being, despise a Treasure of infinite, value trample
on the pearl of price, and forget what the hope of God's calling is, and what
the riches of the glory of his inheritance is in the Saints.

Had the Covetous but a Heart to think with himself, vain foolish man! How
loath am I to confess my self guilty of this vice? How do I deceive my self
with the fair names of good Husbandry and Frugality? but will these delusions
stand the fire? Will these Paper Walls be proof against everlasting burnings?
if there be such a sin, as covetousness, and that sin so odious to God, and his
Holy Angels, as Christ and his Apostles make it, and so great an impediment to
everlasting happiness, as the Scripture represents, it, it must needs be worth
knowing, whether I am infected with this plague, especially since my behavior
and actions look as if I were; why should the Apostle call this sin Idolatry,
but because it makes men set their affections on the World, more than upon that
which is to come, and more on their Riches, Estate, or Incomes; than upon God,
and everlasting Glory, whereby God is robbed of his Honor, and that high Esteem
and Love which is God's due, as he is God, is given to be creature, which in
Gods sight is Lighter than nothing, and vanity; and is not this my case? How is
my Soul fixed upon this World? How close does my heart stick to the profits and
advantages it affords? How is my Soul bound up with my Corn, and Wine; and Oil?
How do I fancy that all my happiness is gone, when these outward comforts are
gone! Did sin ever grieve me a quarter so much as a temporal loss? Did
offending a Gracious God, ever cost me the tenth part of the Tears, I shed for
being deprived of a little shining Clay? How hearty is my joy, under the
blessings of Gods left hand? How little am I affected with the blessings of his
right? How far greater satisfaction does my thriving in the world give me, than
my thriving in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ? How loath
am I to honor God with my substance? How unwillingly, how grudgingly, do I
part with any thing considerable, for Charitable uses? How loath am I to part
with any of this worlds Goods, for Gods service? How happy do I count my self,
when Religion does cost me nothing? How loath am I to be any at charges for
Heaven? How does it grieve me, when I spend any thing upon Religion? How do I
dote upon these sublunary vanities? How far greater pains do I take to be rich,
than to be happy for ever? How can I dispense with a sin for profits sake? How
little of my desires and breathings, has God and a bleeding Savior? How dull
am I under the most lively descriptions of the joys of Heaven? How dull under
the stupendous offers of Grace and Mercy? How dead under the joyful message of
pardon? How dull when tempted by all the ravishing arguments of Gods love, to
love him above all? What means my unwillingness to take God for my greatest
portion? What means that quickness, sagacity, and wisdom, when my, Riches,
Plenty, or worldly, prosperity is concerned, and that strange dumpishness, when
God courts and beseeches my Soul to lay hold on Eternal Life? Are not these
evident signs, that the World draws and attracts my Heart most powerfully? God
sees my Heart is not upright with him, he sees I am afraid to take up with him
alone; he sees how covetousness has possessed my Soul, and can I cherish this
root of an evil in my Breast, and not tremble at the danger my Soul is in? Am I
by the Apostles verdict, an Idolater, and do I make light of so great a guilt?
if no Idolater must expect a Crown of Glory, alas! what can I look for but
Eternal Darkness? when I read, that it is easier for a Camel to enter through
the eye of a Needle, than for a rich man, who sets his heart on his Riches, to
enter into Heaven, am not I frighted with the expression? I find how this sin
deprives me of a Holy communion with God, and shall I loose my greatest comfort
and support, and satisfaction for it? If any man love the World, the love of
the Father is not in him; and can I be contented without the love of God? if
God be not my friend, what does the friendship of the whole World signify; When
my Soul must leave this Tabernacle, and appear before Gods Bar, O God, I shall
have so many witnesses against me, that I shall not know what to say, or
whether to betake my self for refuge; the Poor will accuse me, because I have
not opened my Hand and Heart to them; my own Conscience will accuse me, because
I have not been a good Steward of the means God gave me; the Ministers of God
will accuse me, because whatever was laid out upon my, Pride and Lust, was
thought too little; and the least, kindness I showed to those that wait at Gods
Altar, too much; The Devils will accuse me, because, having a Soul so great, so
noble, so precious, I did employ it chiefly in scraping a little Dross, and
Dung together, nay, the Lord Jesus will accuse me, because his example of
contentedness, and Heavenly mindedness, would not allure me into imitation; God
will accuse me, because having furnished me with all the motives, and
encouragements imaginable, to mind Heaven more than Earth, I preferred this
Earth before all the joys of Heaven; and how shall I bear up under all this
weight?

Would the poor deluded Worldling but let such thoughts sink into his Heart,
what a damp would it strike on his strong desires after the World, and how
would it make his immoderate love to these sublunary Riches, break into
longings after a nobler Inheritance? but neglecting this, he Serpent-like feeds
on Dust, and prepares for anxiety, discontent, and vexation of Spirit, and for
a miserable death, like a Hog, lies, rooting in the Earth, and buries his Soul
in a Chest of Money, despises all admonitions to, Charity; and like the Smiths
Dog, can hear the hammering and beating of his Master, and endure the sparks
flying about his ears, without being stirred or concerned at it.

Hypocrisy is a sin, which the painted Christian does not easily part withal,
yet would he reflect, like a person that hates to sow pillows under his own
Elbows; can I read Christ's discourses against the Pharisees, and not ask my
own heart, whether the Pharisees temper be an emblem of my complexion? Have I
no self-end in any Religious Duty? What is it puts me many times upon doing
good, applause from Men, or the love of God? Do not I pretend God's Glory
sometimes, when I aim at nothing but mine own? Do not I draw nigh to God with
my Lips, when in my heart and conversation I deny him? Do not I by pretending
to please God, neglect my Duty to my neighbor? Am not I more severe in pressing
the lesser concerns of Religion, than I am in urging the greater? Do not I
commend that in a rich or great man, which I can reprehend in my inferiors, or
meaner persons? Do not I require those Duties of other men, which my self am
loath to practice? Do not I applaud my self for my own sanctity, while I
despise others, whom I fancy not so Holy as I am? Am not I more curious to know
other men's conditions than mine own? Am not I more zealous in public, than I
am in private? Am not I Religious for filthy lucre's sake? Do not I make a gain
of Godliness, and use Religion as a cloak, to cover my secret sins? Do not I
make Devotion a scaffold to erect my own credit and profit by? What is
hypocrisy, if this be not? Though I can hide it from the sight of Men, can I
conceal it from him, who knows my down-sitting, and my up-rising, and
understands my thoughts afar off? Can I remember the fate of Judas, and not
think of a serious repentance? Can I hear the Son of God call so often, Woe,
Woe, to ye Hypocrites, and hug the sin in my bosom? Shall I harbor a Snake
there, which will sting me into endless gnawings of Conscience? How shortly
will all these delusions be discovered? Before I am a few days older, God may
summon me, and lay open all my deceits and juglings in Religion; Do I think to
blind the Eyes of him, in whose Book all my Members are set down? Is the
portion of Hypocrites no discouragement? What promise in the Gospel can I lay
hold of, during this condition? They all run to the upright in heart, and must
I go without these Cordials? Must I see others run away with these Treasures,
while my self can expect nothing but Gods curse and anger? Must I see others go
to possess the Promised Land, while I must stay behind in a Wilderness! Must I
see others gather Manna, and feed upon the rich clusters of Canaan, while my
own Soul must perish for want of that Bread of Life! Lord! who shall abide in
thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy Holy Hill? He that walks uprightly, and
works righteousness, and speaks the Truth in his Heart. And must I have no seat
in yonder Mansion? No House in that Jerusalem which is above? No habitation in
that City, which has foundations, whose Maker and Builder is God? O my Soul,
stay not here in Mesheck, dwell no longer in the Tents of Kedar: Away, and hate
this Garment spotted by the Flesh.

Such serious thoughts would check Hypocrisy, but the vain man hardens his
Heart against them, locks them out, will give them no entertainment, and that
makes him serve God to please the Devil, and turn Religion into a mere show,
and formality, burn in Words, and freeze in Deeds, and like that Son in the
Gospel, say I go Sir, but he goes not.

From the Premises, we may easily guess what to think of other sins, viz. that
the great cause of them, is want of consideration, and therefore the Holy
Ghost, likens men that live in any sin, or indulge themselves in any
transgression, to a Horse that rushes into the Battle, and considers not what
he does, ventures among Swords and Arrows, and the greatest dangers, without
recollecting, what will be the issue of it. Jer. 8.6. Consideration is the
Bridle, that must govern our sense and appetite, take that away, and the Beast
runs away with the Rider, and hastens him into a thousand inconveniences.

CHAP. VI. Of the various advantages of serious consideration; it is that, which
makes a man master of all Christian Duties; it helps a man to improve sublunary
Objects into Heavenly Contemplations. It Is the greatest support under
afflictions; disposes a man to be a worthy receiver of the Lords Supper:
Prepares him for an Angelical Life on Earth; makes him prudent and discreet in
Secular affairs, and businesses.
THough in the preceding Chapters, we have already, in a great measure
discovered what Men may hope for from Consideration, and of what use it is to a
truly, serious, and Christian life; yet we must not leave so rich a subject
thus, without giving an account of some other positive advantages, which do
render it very desirable to a rational man; And

1. It has most certainly a very great influence upon all Christian Duties;
whatever qualification Christ, or his Apostles require, or recommend it is by
consideration of the excellency, and dignity of that Duty, that Men must expect
to arrive to it.

The first and great Commandment is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all
thy heart, and will all thy Soul, and with all thy mind. But he shall never be
master of this Duty, that does not frequently and seriously consider the
immense and stupendous love of God to him, and indeed then I may hope to be
acquainted with a sincere, and cordial love to God, when I give leave to such
considerations as these, to impregnate my understanding. O my God, can I think
of so great, so holy, so infinite, so merciful, so munificent a Being, and
forbear to be enamored with thee? whence are all my Mercies but from thee?
thou art the Spring, the Fountain of them all. Whatever Blessings are conveyed
to me by the hands of Second Causes, they come originally from thee, and thou
mov'st and order'st those Second Causes, to come in to my assistance. By thee
have I been upheld ever since I was born; when I lay in the shades of nothing,
thou did awake me into a Being, gave me a rational Soul, a Soul capable of
admiring, adoring, and worshipping thee, and ever since thy mercies have
followed me, and thou have been a pillar of a Cloud unto me by day, and a
pillar of Fire by night; what Parts, Gifts, or Abilities I have, they are thy
Gifts and Characters of thy Compassion. Thou order'st my steps, thou art about
my bed, and about my paths, and do preserve me in all my ways; many a time
should I have stumbled, and fallen, and perished irrcoverably, but that thou
have supported me, and given charge to thy Holy Angels, to be my Guardians. O
my God! how often have I deserved thine anger? and yet in the midst of thy
wrath, thou think upon mercy. What judgments might not thou have
inflicted on me for my wilful sins? but thou have sent none as yet, and all to
magnify thy mercy: every morning thy mercies are renewed upon me, and with the
natural there rises upon me the Sun of righteousness, with healing under his
wings. Thou prosper'st my endeavors, give success to all my lawful
undertakings, thou preserv'st me from those disasters which befall other men.
How wisely do thou order my affairs? How often do thou bring light out of
darkness, and turnest my affliction into the greatest joy? How wonderufl are
thy Providence to me and mine? How often have I feared such an accident would
be my ruin, and God has turned it into the greatest good? How wisely have
thou many times denied me temporal mercies, because thou had a mind to enrich
me with spiritual Blessings in Heavenly places? What Friends, what Benefactors
have thou raised me? How miraculously have thou turned the hearts of Men many
times into mercy and compassion for my good? How often have thou heard my
Prayer, and granted me the request of my Lips? When I have been in the greatest
straits, how have thou shown me a way to escape? How strangely have thou
wheeled things about for my deliverance? How have thou allured me by the
various tokens of thy Love, to love thee better than the World? How great has
been thy care of my temporal concerns, but how far greater thy care of the
weighty concerns of my Soul? How strong have been the convictions thou have
vouchsafed me? How great the light thou have imparted to me? How bright that
knowledge thou have revealed to me? How numerous the checks of my own
conscience which thou have sent me? How frequent the motions of thy spirit thou
have shed into my Soul? How often have thou reasoned the case, and expostulated
with me, and as the Angel did to Balaam, stood in a narrow way, where there was
no turning, neither to the right nor to the left, and all because thou would
not have me stand out any longer against thy most Gracious offers of Salvation?
How have thou adjur'd me by the bowels of Jesus, by the wounds and agonies of
the Son of God, to dye unto sin, and to live unto righteousness? How strange
has been thy condescension, and does not all this deserve my love? Is not here
enough to warm my affections toward thee? False, stubborn heart! What can
thou plead for thy averseness from God, after such a prospect of his favors?
Notwithstanding my long contempt of these loving kindnesses of the Lord, I am
alive yet, and on this side Hell? How may I stand amazed at this prodigious
long suffering of my God? Had any man but shown me the ten thousandth part of
that love, which God has manifested to me, how should I love him? how should I
adore his Name? How should I study to please him? What pains should I take to
manifest my gratitude? How should I revere his memory? How should I speak of
his favors? How should I praise his munificence? Can man's kindnesses be so
prevalent, and shall not the goodness of God fire my Soul into a practical love
to his Name? Can I do less than love him, to whom I owe all I have? To love him
is my happiness, my interest, my greatest felicity; O my God, shall I love a
little shining Clay, a little Dust, a little Earth, and not love thee, who art
worth more than ten thousand worlds? Shall I love Father and Mother, and not
love thee, who have been better to me than my Parents, and when my Father and
Mother have forsaken me, have taken me up, and with everlasting kindness
visited me? Shall I love my Friend, and shall not I love thee my Joy, my
Treasure, my Hiding Place? But how can I love thee, except I keep thy
Commandments? How can I be thy Friend, except I do whatsoever thou command
me? Shall I love thee in words only, who have loved me in Deeds? Shall I
flatter thee with my Lips, and hate thee in my Heart? Shall I ( Judas like,)
kiss thee, and betray thee? love thee, and love my sins, which are thy greatest
enemies? did I but love thee as I do a dear friend, how easy would all thy
Precepts seem? How little reason should I have to complain of the tediousness
of thy Yoke? What great, what noble, what generous actions would thy love put
me upon? Should I pretend to love my Prince, and affront his Law, how soon
would my love be accused of a lie? How can I be said to love thee, while I hate
to conform my self to thy Will and Pleasure? How vain will my love appear in
the last day, if it has been a stranger to obedience here? The Angels love
thee, and they have no other way to demonstrate their Love, but by running at
thy commands? Do I hope to be like unto the Angels of God hereafter, and shall
not I take pattern by their obediential love, while I sojourn here! O my God,
thou art the proper object of my love; I rob thee of thy Honor, and commit
Sacrilege, if I love any thing here below better than thee I am married to
thee, and I must love nothing above thee. When no eye pitied me, to have
compassion upon me, when I was cast into the open field, to the loathing of my
Person, Ezekiel. 16.5, 6, 7, 8. thou did pass by me, and saw me polluted in
mine own Blood, and said unto me when I was in my Blood, Live; thou did
cause me to multiply as the bud of the field, and when it was the time of Love,
thou did spread thy skirt over me, and coveredst my nakedness, and swearest
unto me, and entredst into a Covenant with me, and I became thine, and shall my
Soul be married to so great a Prince, and play the Harlot? O my Lord, have thou
united me so close unto thee, and shall I defile my self, by setting my love on
trifles? What Man, what Devil can hurt me, while I love thee, without whose
command no creature dares stir or move? What should discourage me from loving
thee, when I have all the promises of the Bible to prompt me to it? If I loose
in this World by loving thee, have not thou Treasures enough to recompense my
losses? If men despise me for loving thee, have not thou Honor and Glory
enough to crown me withal? If I do not thrive in outward Riches, by loving
thee; have not thou who art rich in mercy, a pearl of price to bestow upon me
when this life is ended? I Will trust thee, O my God, and when my lusts invite me
to act like a Beast I Will obey thee, and strive to be perfect as thou art
perfect; when Men entice me to sin, I Will hearken to thee, and venture the
disgrace or injury they can inflict upon me; when the World tempts me to be
careless of my Salvation, I Will follow thee, and work out my Salvation, with
fear and with trembling. Thus I Will manifest to the World, that thou art dearer
to me, than all that is great, or rich, or glorious in the World.

Delight in God, is a Duty as necessary as the former, but how is it possible I
should ever arrive to it, without I summon my Soul by consideration, to take a
view of the Glory and Beauty which sparkles in that amiable Being; I shall
quickly feel my Heart in another temper, than ordinarily I do, if I bespeak it
in such language as this, Delight in God! O my Soul, can thou name that
charming name of God, and feel no joy, no gladness in thy affections? Is God so
dull an object that it cannot stir, or rouse thee from thy Lethargy? where
do thou see a more lovely Being? survey the World, where is there so
ravishing an object? Can there be a lovelier Being, than he, from whom whatever
is beautiful in Men or Angels flows? How beautiful must he be, to whom all
these inferior Beauties owe their Being? If the streams be so lovely, what must
the water in the Fountain be? Alas! what is the Sun, but a dark Lanthorn, in
comparison of God? What is all the light our Eyes behold, but a rush Candle to
him that is the Father of Lights? Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant
thing it is for the eyes to behold the Sun, Eccl. 11.7. Indeed whatever is
rich, and to be admired in objects, would signify nothing to us without light,
and if created light be so delightful, O God, how amiable must thou be, who
dwell in a Light inaccessible! If the Sun, and Moon, and Stars deserve my
delight, how more justly may the Great Creator of all these, challenge it,
whose Glory does infinitely transcend all the little twinklings, and
radiations, which shine in sublunary objects! O my God, were thy Beauty viewed,
as it shines in the works of Creation, as it sparkles in thy wise ordering and
management of the World, as it blazes in the redemption of Mankind, as it
glisters in Regeneration of the Soul, as it dazles the eye in the glorification
of a sinner, how lovely would thou appear? And since neither thy Being nor
thy Works are in vain, since what thou art, and what thou do, must needs be
for some certain end; what can I conclude, but that thou discover'st so much
Beauty and Splendour, and Glory to poor Mortals, because we should rejoice, and
delight in thee, and be ravished with thee? O my Soul, without this delight in
God, thou can never be happy; God is thy adequate Object, and thy Center, and
he alone can give thee rest, and except he fills, and satisfyeth thy powers,
they will be forced, like Noah's Dove, to flutter and fly up and down, wander in
a desert, and loose themselves in a barren Wilderness. When thou delight'st in
God thou art at rest, and thy rest declares thy happiness. How can thou hope
thy Religious exercises will be accepted in Heaven, while thou know not what
this Holy delight does mean? The Heathens guessed at the acceptance of their
Sacrifices, by the cheerful burning of the Fire upon the Altar; The greater thy
delight is in God, the stronger Argument thou have, that thy Devotion meets
with applause and approbation in Heaven. Variety is strangely delightful to
thee here on Earth, and why then has God so little of thy delight? though God
be but one, yet in that one God are so many pleasant objects, that were thou to
live here a thousand years, in this one God thou might every day meet with
fresh objects of delight, with this God, thou art to be ravished to all
eternity, and then sure, there is variety enough in him to revive, and recreate
thee for a few years in this present World. Survey all his blessed Attributes,
his Holiness, his Omnipresence, his Omniscience, his Immutability, his
Immensity, his Wisdom and Eternity; survey his Goodness to Mankind, his
Perfection, his All sufficiency, his Willingness to advance Man to the
enjoyment of that Glory, which the blessed Angels do possess; survey his
Revelations, his Manifestations of himself to this dark ignorant World; his
Statutes, and Judgments, and Laws, and the Reasonableness, and Equity of them
all; survey his various Dispensations under the Old and New Testament, his
Methods of converting Men, and the various degrees whereby he has proceeded in
the reformation of the wretched Progeny of Adam; survey his wonderful love in
Christ Jesus, and his pity and compassion to Rebels, to Traitors, to his
greatest Enemies; survey the benefits and advantages, which arise from Christ's
Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession. Survey his Promises and
Threat'nings, his mercy to the penitent, his justice to the unbelieving sinner;
Survey his mercies both public and private, both Spiritual and Temporal, and
his various favors to all Mankind, to thy fellow Christians, to thy Relations,
and thy self; Survey the privileges he allows to those that fear him how he
gives them leave to call upon him, answers them when they call, permits them to
call themselves his Children, his Darlings, his Favorites, his Jewels, his
Friends, and the apple of his Eye; Survey the Glory which God receives from all
his creatures, in that all conspire to fulfill his Will; Survey the Joy, the
Glory, the Happiness, the Triumph, the Songs, the Halelujah's which he has
designed for his Servants, whereof they have a taste here, and which e're long
they shall enter upon, to their Eternal content and satisfaction. O my Soul,
who can express all the pleasing objects, which are in this Glorious God thou
do adore?

Vast Ocean of Delight! How can my Soul be weary of Delighting in thee? where
every object is of a multiplying Nature, and the farther I go, the more charms
I meet withal; every Beam, every Ray that darts from thy Throne, every work of
thy Power (and Oh how infinite is the number of them!) administers Delight. And
sure, he deserves to be starved, that may come to those Waters of Life, and is
invited to participatte of this Milk and Honey, and to delight his Soul in
fatness, preferrs the stolen waters of sin, before these living Waters, which
like those in the Aesculapian Well, are not capable of putrefaction.

Look O my Soul, look with pity on the poor distracted World, that delights in
things hellish, and sinful, worldly, mean, and trivial, they dream they eat and
drink, and are at a great Feast, but in the morning when they wake, they find
themselves empty. A rational complacency in God, is Angels food, this is the
meat thou must live upon for ever; thou delightst in a curious Picture, why not
in him that is altogether lovely? Thou delightest in a delicate shape, why not
in him that is fairer than the Children of Men? Thou delightest in a pleasant
Garden, in well-ordered Walks, in flowery Meadows; why not in him, whose
Gracious Presence, can make a Dungeon a Paradise? Hoise up thy Sails O my Soul,
let thy desires crave all that is rich, good, and magnificent; why, in God thou
have it all, in a most eminent manner; while others delight in their plenty,
thou can delight in him, who is plenteous in mercy unto all them that call
upon him, while others delight in knowledge, thou can delight in him, in whom
are all the treasures of wisdom; while others delight in the protection of
their friends, thou can delight in him, who is a present help in the time of
trouble; while others delight in a stately Seat, thou can delight in the
Secret place, and in the shadow of the Almighty. O my God, thou satisfiest the
hungry Soul, and fillest the thirsty Soul with goodness. They that cannot
delight in thee, have strange brutish Souls! they see not how thou go, how
thou my God go in the Sanctuary; they never felt thy Holy influences; they
know not, what peace thou speak unto thy People, they are not sensible how
thou do encourage those that serve thee; they are not sensible how great the
rewards are, thou have laid up for Men, that forget what is behind them, and
seek first thy Kingdom, and its righteousness. O my God I see, how all the
pleasant things of the World perish, but thou art the same, and thy years do
not fail, and thou endurest from one generation to another; here therefore I Will
fix my delight; on this Rock I Will build my joy; while others delight in
numbering their bags, I Will delight in numbering the loving kindnesses of my God;
while others delight in their preferment, I Will delight in being adopted into
the glorious liberty of Gods Children; while others delight in the greatness of
their Relations, I Will delight in having the great Savior of the World, for my
Elder Brother; while others delight in their Farms, and Oxen, I Will delight in
my Title to the Tree of Life; while others delight in Kingdoms and
Principalities, I Will delight in him who has made me a King and Priest unto
God, and to his Father; I will delight my self in the Lord, and he shall give
me the desires of my heart, Psalm. 37.4.

Did the man, who is almost persuaded into Charity, but seriously consider,
what a stress the Gospel lays upon this Pious liberality; how Christ in the
last day is resolved to insist more upon this Duty, than upon any other; how he
is but a Steward of those blessings he enjoyes; and how God gave him that
Estate, he has, with this very intent, that he should be beneficial to those
whom providence has made objects of his Bounty; how great an impediment his
extreme fondness of this worlds Goods, is to his future happiness; how it
darkens his Graces, clouds his Comforts, hardens, his Heart, fears his
Conscience, enslaves him to the Devil; how difficult, nay, how impossible it
is, for a man that dotes on these outward Comforts, to become a true Disciple
of Christ; with what earnestness all the Prophets and Apostles of old, have
recommended this honoring of God with our Substance, and with the First Fruits
of our Increase; how kindly God has declared himself to this Duty; how great
Gods condescension is in being willing to accept of that, as done to himself,
which is done to his servants, or Christ's distressed Members; how signally he
blesses this Virtue, how all Faith is dead without it, how vainly that man
hopes for Heaven, that has no bowels of compassion; I say, would the man, that
is unresolved whither he shall deny himself, and give away considerably to
Pious uses, but ponder all these arguments, by the assistance of God, it would
make him resolve to lay by such a portion of all his gain, and in-comes for
Gods service, and keep to it, and stop his ears against all the suggestions of
the Devil to the contrary, and resign himself entirely to God's Providence, and
leave it to God, how, and when, and where to make him amends for it, and
believe that it will most certainly be recompensed to him in the resurrection
of the just.

Meekness in so great a Duty of the Gospel, that Christ makes it the
distinguishing character of his Disciples, and indeed, none is more likely to
arrive to it, than he that makes it his business to consider how famous some of
the Heathens were for this Virtue, how unworthy of a Christian it is to do
less, with all the helps of Grace, than the other, by the assistance of Nature
only; how this is to have the same mind which was also in Christ Jesus; what
mischiefs sudden anger hurries men into, how severely the Great Redeemer of the
World checks his Disciples, that call for fire from Heaven to consume the Men,
who had denied their Master Lodging; how great the conquest is to subdue those
passions, which would engage us to wrath and fury; how discreetly that man can
act, that curbs those unruly affections; how this excellent quality adorns the
Gospel of our Savior; how it disposes Men for a satisfactory discharge of
their Duty toward God; how great evils and inconveniences it prevents; how
many times it melts the offender, if there be any ingenuity in him, and wins
more upon him, than all the fierce proceedings we call use; how great a
preparative it is for a good name, and how Men who understand what
self-conquest means, cannot but commend, and celebrate it; how Heaven cannot
but applaud it, to see men strive to be perfect, as their Father in Heaven is
perfect; how great wisdom it argues, to be zealous in Gods cause, when his
Glory is affronted, and meek in our own concerns, and injuries; what peace,
what satisfaction it causes in the Soul, what blessings are entailed upon it;
how comfortably those, who have endeavored to be masters of this temper, may
leave this World, and dye, as the Jews say of Moses, the meekest of men, at the
kiss of God into Eternal Glory.

Sanctification of the Lords day, or which is all one, consecrating that day to
Gods service, or spending it in public and private Religious exercises, in
meditating, hearing the Word, praising of God, good Works, and Spiritual
Conferences, is a thing which devout Christians have in all ages, thought
themselves obliged to observe; and certainly he will find great reason to
follow them, that shall engage his Soul seriously to consider some such
circumstances as these. How Holy is this day! How should my Soul rejoice at the
dawning of it? this is the day which the Lord has made, and which is to put me
in mind of the greatest mercy that was ever vouchsafed to Mankind; Can there be
any thing more costly than the redemption of Man? or can I spend too much time
in commemorating so glorious a Favor? when God allows me six days in the
week, to follow the business of my lawful Calling, cannot I allow one day
entire for his service? Are the concerns of my Soul so trivial, that they do
not deserve one day in the week? or is Salvation so easy a thing, that to spend
much time in the contrivance of it, is altogether needless? I can allow a whole
day, sometimes two or three for the recreation of my Body, and must my Soul
have none, to feast it self upon God, and endless Glory? Alas! how little do
those flashes of contemplating God in the week days, which are so often
interrupted by worldly businesses, warm the Soul? how little are men's
affections wrought upon by those sits of Devotion, except they take a whole day
to warm their Souls at the beams of the Sun of Righteousness? Alas! How little
seriousness do I see in those Families, where this day is not Religiously
spent, where every person is permitted to use their liberty, and where the
public Exercises in the Church, are not seconded by private Discourses, and
Prayers and Celebrations of the goodness of God? where is my self-denial, if I
cannot deny my self in my worldly discourses, or thoughts one day? how can I
hope my Spiritual wants, and necessities should ever be discovered to me,
except I do in my closet apply, what I have heard in the House of God, and
water the incorruptible Seed that is sown in my Heart, by self-examination,
that it may grow and sprout, and bear Fruit? O the joy, the comfort, the
satisfaction I might reap from the sincere sanctification of this day! how
quietly might I lie down at night, after so sweet a converse with God all day?
how soft would my rest be, having worked in God's Vineyard so many hours? how
joyfully might I rise next morning, and comfort my self with the happy
remembrance of the blessings, my Soul has received the day before? Thus to
observe, and to improve this day, would be a Prologue to my everlasting rest, a
Preface to my Eternal repose in Abraham's bosom; a Presage that I should ever
long rest from all Tears, and sorrow, and pain, and anguish, and from all the
temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and be admitted into the
Quire of Angels, to praise him day and night, who lives for ever and ever.

In this manner all other Duties may be compassed, the Beauty, Glory,
usefulness of them thus spread, before the Understanding, Will, and Affections,
are apt to work upon these Faculties, and they being prevailed upon, the Eyes,
the Ears, the Hands, the Feet will quickly do their part, and show their
readiness to obey the commands of their superior Officers.

II. It helps men to improve external objects, into very comfortable
contemplations. When I take a view of the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, or reflect
on the Air, Fire, Earth, and Water, Consideration may furnish me with very
excellent Truths, and the noblest Lessons of Religion. Consideration can
metamorphose objects, and spiritualize them, and find out the secret designs of
the Almighty, in those Creatures, which the sensual man looks upon, and like a
Beast, passes by without any admiration; for after this manner it may argue,
Take wings O my Soul, fly up to yonder Heaven, where the Almighty has set a
Tabernacle for the Sun, which is as a Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, and
rejoices as a Giant to run his race; Behold how this glorious Planet, when he
rises, revives every living thing with his kindly beams, and will not the
increated Sun, from whom this bright star borrows his shining rays when he
shall rise unto the Spirits of Men made perfect in the last day, fill them all
with unspeakable joy and gladness; and as a dismal uncomfortable darkness
succeds, when this created Sun does leave our Hemisphere, so think how
dreadful, how full of horror, and disconsolateness that darkness must be, which
must unavoidably fall on wretched impenitent sinners, that would take no
warning, when the increated Sun shall withdraw from them his beatifical
Presence for ever: behold this created Sun, how many thousand kindnesses it
bestows upon Mankind, and does not this put thee in mind of the Father of
Lights, from whom every good and perfect Gift descends? how much bigger is this
shining Body, than the whole Earrh; and do not thou remember, how before thy
God, all Mankind are as Grasshoppers, or rather as the dust of the Balance,
nay, lighter than nothing, and vanity. The Sun, that he may enlighten the whole
World, is forced to go from one place to another, but thy God, at one and the
same time, without moving his station, can fill Heaven and Earth with his Glory.

Behold, O my Soul, the next great Light, the Moon, which the nearer it
approaches the Sun, the brighter it grows in that part, which looks toward
Heaven, though it becomes darker in that part, which looks toward the Earth,
and when it is opposite to the Sun, looses all that brightness, it had in its
conjunction with the Sun, and is only clouded in that part, which respects this
lower World, and do not thou see a very lively emblem of a converted, and an
unconverted sinner in this luminary? Behold, the nearer thou approachest the
Sun of Righteousness in purity and holiness, the greater luster, and the
greater happiness thou receivest; the Inhabitants of Heaven behold thy
brightness and Innocence, and applaud it, though sensual Men, may be, think
thee all darkness, all obscurity, because thou do not wallow in Works of
darkness with them; they, may be, look upon thee as mad and distracted, because
thou art so busy, so earnest, so zealous to please thy God, and spendest so
much time in praising, and magnifying, and glorifying of him; but those that
dwell in yonder Region of Light, and Bliss, know, that then, and not till then,
thou art master of thy Reason, and do act like a person that is capable of
being, made partaker of the Divine Nature. On the other side, when thou turnest
thy back upon God, walk'st opposite and contrary to him, whatever respect and
credit thou may have from the World, God and his Holy Angels look upon thee
as darkness; thy understanding, which is that part, which properly looks
toward Heaven, looses all its brightness, and no marvel, for God alone can
satisfy it, and he being gone that part must needs be perfect night, and no
marvel, if upon this darkness, thy love runs altogether for the world, and thy
affections are altogether carried out after the dross and Dung of this
transitory Earth, if thy thoughts are all engaged about the World, all thy
Speeches employed about the World, and thou becom'st Wise for the World, and
loosest all thy wisdom for God, and for Salvation.

O my Soul, can thou look upon the Sun and Moon, and not remember how
differently God deals with Triumphing Saints in Heaven, and his militant Church
here on Earth? they enjoy a perpetual Sunshine, we are allowed no more but
Moonlight; we see as it were, through a Glass darkly, they face to face; their
light like that of the Sun, never lessens, ours like that of the Moon, is
sometimes greater, sometimes less, and sometimes we have none at all. How often
does the afflicted Believer walk in darkness? God hides the Light of his
countenance from him, and he is troubled: sometime he is all joy, by and by all
darkness again; sometimes he is like St. Paul, wrapped up into the third Heaven,
sometimes like Men, that see God's wonders in the deep, he goes down again to
the depths, and his Soul melts because of trouble; how clear are the
apprehensions sometimes, he has of the love and mercy of God! and he seems to
be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the depth and breadth of the
love of God? how often on the other side, is a vail drawn over all these bright
Conceptions, and he grovelling in the dust? What floods of Consolation does God
sometimes pour out upon his Soul? whereas at other times those comforts come
down in drops, which use to come in showers; how great sometimes is his
strength against temptations, how weak his courage at another? how cheerfully
sometime can he cry out, I can do all things through Christ, who strengthens
me; how mournfully is he forced to express himself, at another? I, see a Law in
my Members, warring against the Law of my Mind, and bringing me into captivity
to the Law of Sin?

Behold, O my Soul, the vast number of the Stars, and Lamps of Heaven, how
wise, how powerful is that God that made them? who can look upon those curious
Lights without admiring their Creator? Behold, they rise and go down at his
command, and do not fail one minute of their appointed time; how should this
teach thee obedience? how cheerfully should thou run at the command of thy
God? these glorious Stars, though their number be vastly great, yet they never
clash, or disagree one with another; how should this engage thee to unfeigned
charity and peaceableness? how should this put thee upon promoting peace, and
concord, and agreement among thy neighbors? and do not these Stars put thee in
mind, how e're long thou shall shine as the Stars in the firmament for ever?
Happy hour! Blessed day! when thou shall be clothed with splendour and
immortatity, when thou shall see night no more, and shall need no candle,
neither light of the Sun, but the Lord shall give thee light, and thou shall
reign with him for ever.

Come down lower, O my Soul, I have not done yet with Gods wonderful Works,
reflect upon the Air, in which all sensitive Creatures breathe, without this
Air, the whole Creation would dye; it is this, that keeps Men and Beasts, and
all Plants, and Herbs alive; and is not the Holy Spirit of God, O my Soul, the
very same to thee, that the Air is to all creatures; without this spirit of God
to enlighten, to move, and to direct thee, thou have the name that thou live,
but thou art dead, it is this spirit, must give thee life, it is he that must
warm thee into a practical Love to God; it is he must teach thee how to pray;
it is he must help thy infirmities, and bear witness with thy Spirit, that thou
art a Child of God; beg this rich gift at the hands of God, and thou shall have
it, seek it, and thou shall find it, knock at Heaven Gate for it, and God will
open, and grant thee thy hearts desire.

Behold, O my Soul, how vain and foolish these men are, that will not believe
the Being of Angels, or of Spirits, because they never saw any; can they see
the Air, and why do not they question, whether there be such a thing as Air, or
no? this Air supports all Creatures, so does thy God much more; The Eyes of all
do wait upon him, and he gives them their meat in due season, he opens his hand
and fills the desire of every living thing Psalm. 145.15, 16. When this Air
yields to all gross Bodies, and lets them pass without opposition, how does it
read to thee Lectures of Patience and Humility? in that flexibility thou may
see the sinfulness of thy inexorable temper, the odiousness of thy revengeful
desires, and reviling again, when thou art reviled, and giving the offender as
good as he brings; the Air reproves thee when thou art deaf to all entreaties,
to be reconciled to him, that has injured thee, when thou will not yield to
the humble supplication of distressed creatures, and when thou opposest thy own
humor to all the rational persuasions of wiser men, than thy self.

Look upon the Fire, 0 my Soul, and behold how differently it acts upon Bodies,
it meets withal, how it consumes the Hay and Stubble, and cleanses and
purifies Gold and Silver; do thou not see here, as in a Glass, how thy God
destroys the workers of iniquity, and advances, and increases, and purifies the
desires and affections of a devout and religious Soul! thou see how hard and
black Iron is, when it is not near the Fire, and how bright and tractable it
becomes in the fire, and is not this the true picture of a sinner? while he is
a stranger to the Law of God, he hardens his heart as Flint, and Adamant, no
threatenings pierce him, no promises prevail with him, no judgments fright
him, no providence move him, no mercies melt him, he feeds upon Gods
Blessings, as Swine do upon Acorns, without minding the hand that throws them
down; he hears Sermons, but they awake him not, he is entreated, and he slights
the invitation; he is reproved, and laughs at the reprehension; but when that
Holy Fire, the love of God enters into his heart, how flexible, how tractable
does he grow: how does the love of God constrain him to avoid sin, and to bid
defiance to all the works of Darkness? he that before scorned to hear the glad
tidings of the Gospel; how does he now submit to Christ's easy yoke? he that
before thought such a duty unfit, and improper for a person of his quality, how
cheerfully does he now bow, and yield to it? he that before had a thousand
excuses, why he could not do what Christ enjoins him; how does he now lay all
those idle apologies by? he that before was churlish, becomes now affable and
courteous; he that before was apt to be very angry at the least affront, now
bears it more quietly; he that before put off the Eternal God with the meanest
of his endeavors, now is willing to give him the fat and strength of his
affections; he that before could hear Ministers call to him, and call again
without effect, now cries out, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? he that before
could not be persuaded to walk in the strait way, now runs in the way of God's
Commandments. Blessed Fire which consumes not, but illuminates, never suffers
the heart to be hardened, but purifies it, does not straiten the Soul, but
elevates it; does not clog it, but refines it; does not confound it, but
sublimes it; destroys the dross, but preserves the Gold, and burns away all
unclean and inordinate passions, and all immoderate cares of this world, but
raises the Soul above the world, and engages it to fly above those things,
which serve only to fill men's hearts with anguish and vexation.

Let this object rest a little, O my Soul, and look upon that Earth thou
walk on; this is the place our Bodies must necessarily rest in; but, when
thou see that center of of all heavy Bodies, forget not to think, who it is
that is thy proper Center, and Resting Place; This is a groaning, bleeding,
dying Savior; think O my Soul, on Solomon, what pains that Monarch took to
find Rest for his Soul; He gave himself to Wine, laid hold on folly, made him
great Works, built him Houses, planted him Vineyards, made him Gardens and
Orchards, and planted trees in them of all kind of Fruits, got him Servants and
Maidens, procured great possessions of great and small cattle, gathered Silver
and Gold, got him Men-singers, and Women-singers, and all the delight of the
Sons of Men, and whatsoever his eyes desired, he kept it not from them. Eccl.
2, 3, 4. etc. He withheld not his heart from any joy, yet behold, when he
looked on at the works his hand had wrought, he found it was nothing but vanity
and vexation of Spirit, in all this his Soul found no rest, till it came to
learn this great lesson, Fear God and keep his Commandments, and then Peace
and rest did flow in upon his Soul with a Springtide. God is thy rest indeed,
O my Soul, and when thou can hide thy self in the wounds of thy Great
Redeemer, then, then thou art safe, and the Gates of Hell are not able to
prevail against thee.

Can thou see how plentifully the Earth provides for Mankind, and forget what
provision God makes for thee, that thou may not miss of the Crown of
Righteousness hereafter? and when thou see how all things the Earth produces,
praise their Creator in their way, and show forth his Glory; can thou be
silent, or forbear to be perpetually extolling the goodness of that God, that
has given thee a tongue on purpose, to speak those praises, whereof other
creatures make but a dumb show? thou see how this Earth produces Gold and
Silver, and if this Earth be so Glorious, what will Heaven be? if the House
which God vouchsafes to his enemies, be so splendid, what will his own Palace
be, where none but himself and his Servants shall dwell for ever? if the
outward Court be so magnificent, what must the Presence Chamber of the King of
Kings be? if Gold and and Silver by their glittering, dazzle the eyes of
spectators here, what will the beatifical Presence of Almighty God do, which
is beyond all the shine and luster that Gold, and precious Stones afford?

From the Earth, 0 my Soul, launch out into the Waters, how useful are the
Lessons, suggested to issue by this Element? can thou look upon water, and
not reflect on the grace of God, which has appeared to all men; how this
washes the Souls of Believers from all filthiness, both of Flesh and Spirit;
how it quenches the fire of sinful Lusts in men; how it takes away men's thirst,
and greediness, after there sublunary comforts; how it cools the Soul under the
greatest heat of misery; how it makes many of one mind, as the innumerable
Atoms of Flower go together in water, to make up one loaf of Bread, and
unites millions of Men, under one Head, the Lord Jesus Christ. Behold the
Springs, and Fountains, which like Pearls, adorn the curious Fabric of the
Earth; can thou call them Fountains, and does not that name put thee in mind
of the Fountain of life, the Fountain of Wisdom, the Fountain of living Waters,
and the Fountain opened for the House of Juda and Jerusalem, for Sin and for
Uncleanness? do but think what riches flow from that everlasting Spring! Thy
God is the very Fountain of all Beings; in him, and to him, and through him are
all things; he depends on no Causes, he has need of no assistance, nothing can
hurt him, but all things depend upon him; he is the beginning of all things,
without a beginning, the end without end; the great Cause without a cause;
infinite, unlimited, immense, and incomprehensible: Refresh thy self, O my
Soul, in this never-fading, and inexhaustible Fountain; admire him, serve him,
love him, desire him, despise all other things in comparison of him, for he
alone can supply all thy wants and necessities, content thy affections here,
and fill thee with everlasting comforts hereafter.

III. It wonderfully supports men under afflictions, for our impatience lies in
our minds, and when the disease begins, then its fit the cure should begin, but
which way should the mind be cured, but by Consideration? it is this must answer
all the objections that Flesh and Blood suggest to the mind; it is this must
silence all the arguments, which seem to justify our murmures against the
dismal providence we meet withal, and the thoughts which cause our discontent,
must be expelled by thoughts of our demerits, and Gods justice; and without all
peradventure, that man shall be able to bear his tribulation better, that thus
reasons the case with himself, why art thou cast down, O my Soul, and why art
thou so disquieted within me? has thy God a hand in this affliction, or has
he not? if he has not, where is his Providence? if he has, why do thou
grumble? Does not thy God know better, what is expedient for thee, than thy
self? Is he all wise, and does not he know what medicines are fittest for thee?
thou art his creature, and may not he do with his own what he pleases? thou
have sinned against him, and must not he correct thee? thou have affronted him,
and must not he use his Rod? thou have forsaken him, and must not he show his
displeasure against thy ingratitude? do not thou correct thy Child when he is
stubborn? and do thou let thy Servant go without chiding, that does neglect
the business thou have recommended to his care? may be, thou have served thy
God, and led a sober life, but was it a life so blameless, that it had no
defects, and must not those defects endure that fiery Trial, that they may be
burnt away? Have thou received the good at the hand of the Lord, and shall not
thou receive the evil also? how long has God spared thee, who might long ago
have poured out the vials of his wrath upon thee? have not thou reason to thank
him for chastising thee, but now, who might have done it much sooner? Alas! why
should thou think he does thee wrong, by sending this cross upon thee, who
have deserved no less than damnation? are not Rods gentler than Scorpions? and
drops of Gods anger more tolerable, than floods of his displeasure? thou art in
pain, but what is this to Hellfire? thou art in torments, but what is this to
the Agonies, the unhappy Spirits in the burning Lake endure? how great a mercy
is it, that it is not worse with thee? The Waters of Marah which are but to the
Ancles now, how soon might God increase them to the Knees, and make them a
River that could not be passed over? and he that does but frown now, how easily
might he thunder? Consider, O my Soul, thou art not called to Persecution, to
Gibbets, to Fire, to the Sword, to Grid-irons, to wild Beasts, as the Martyrs
of old were; if thou complainest now, what would thou do, if thou were called
to Martyrdom? Look upon Jesus, the Author, and Captain of thy Salvation, who
was made perfect through sufferings; art thou better than the Son of God? look
upon the Apostles, look upon the Primitive Saints that were torn assunder,
stoned, slain with the Sword, wandered about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins,
were destitute, tormented, afflicted, and art thou a greater Saint than they?
why should thou expect better dealing at Gods hands, than they? thou art not
alone in misery, thou have whole Armies of Holy Men to bear thee company; can
thou look upon yonder Heaven, and repine? can thou behold that Glory, which
God has prepared for thee, and think much of these fiery Trials? the hopes of
a Kingdom makes a Captive Prince merry, though he is in prison, and shall not
the hopes of yonder joys, keep thy heart from sinking? when a Socrates can
cheerfully submit to the unjust Sentence of the Athenians, upon no other
account but this, because it was God's will, shall thou, who art a Christian,
lie fretting at thy trouble, as if thou meanst to resist and control God's
will? wilt not thou give God leave to use that privilege in his great House,
the World, which every Peasant uses in his Cottage, and lay what burdens he
pleases on his Servants? Shall he say, Suffer thou this affliction, and will thou answer with that ill-natured Son in the Gospel, I will not? Look O my
Soul, look upon the benefit thou will receive by this providence; thou wast
proud before, stay awhile, and this calamity makes thee humble; thou did
despise thy God before, have a little patience, and this trouble will drive
thee hence to thy Fathers house; thou did play with the bread thy Father gave
thee, this cross will teach thee how to prize it; thou did trust too much to
thine own strength; this calamity will make thee rely altogether upon him, who
has promised not to leave us, nor forsake us; God knows what thou want, and
how thy wants must be supplied; He prosperity would undo thee; he therefore
takes it away, and, like a tender Father, cries, Do thy self no harm; He sees
such a blessing would make thee surfeit; he therefore wisely prevents thy
disease by depriving thee of that mercy; He sees such a comfort would be but a
Knife, or Sword in thy hand, and kill thee; he therefore snatches it away,
because he would preserve thee from Eternal ruin; he sees thou art too much in
love with this world, he therefore embitters thy sweet morsels, to make thee
weary of this barren wilderness, and in love with that Kingdom which fades not
away, Do thou blame a Physician, because he gives his Patient a bitter
potion, and will thou blame thy God for not pleasuring thy palate with
dainties, which would increase thy distemper? would thou followthy Savior in
Sunshine only, and not go with him into the Garden of Gethsemane? would thou
inherit his Crown of Glory, without wearing his Crown of Thorns here? would
thou be with him on Mount Tabor only, and not accompany him to Golgotha?
would thou be about him only, when he rides in triumph into Jerusalem, and
forsake him in the Desert? would thou follow him only while the loaves do
last, and abandon him when he wants bread for the multitude? would thou own
him only when men cry Hosanna, and run away from him, when they cry out Crucify
him? will thou eat of the same Bread he does, and not drink of his Cup too? God
would save thee by that burden which lies upon thee, and do thou prefer a
little froth before an Eternal weight of blessedness? had thou rather enjoy
thy good things here, than lie with Lazarus in Abraham's bosom? God sees thou
can not be happy without this affliction; and will thou prefer living
deliciously for a few days, before the rich Banquet God has prepared for his
favorites in Paradise? O my Soul, its but a little while yet, and thy Prison
will be changed into a Palace, thy Poverty into Eternal Riches, thy Bondage
into perfect Liberty, thy Persecution into endless Joys, thy mourning Songs
into Halelujahs, thy Sorrow into Rivers of Delight. Alas! what is a Prison?
God's Presence can make it a Heaven, Walls cannot keep out the Smiles and Glory
of the Highest; What is poverty? it may consist with being a Favorite of God;
and he that has nothing in this world to boast of, may have an incorruptible
Crown to lay hold of, and be really richer, than the weakliest of Mankind. What
are slanders and reproaches? they cannot hurt the Soul, whatever injury they
only do the Body; they come sometimes from Men, whose tongue is no slander, and
this may consist with honor from God, and reputation in the Court of the
Almighty: What is persecution? a Cloud, which soon passes away, and he that
cheerfully endures it, great is his reward in Heaven. Despair not O my Soul,
thou have to deal with a God, who will lay no more upon thee than thou art able
to bear, but with the temptation will make a way to escape that thou may be
able to bear it; one that does not afflict the children of men willingly, one
that will certainly, if thou obstruct not his operation by thy unbelief, cause
all these troubles to work together for thy Eternal good.

May be thy troubles are altogether Spiritual, and thou do not complain so
much, because thou art destitute of outward conveniences, as because thy God is
departed from thee: a deep sense of thy sins afflicts thee, thou see the
wrath of God hovering over thee, and God hides his face from thee, thou art
afraid, thou do not belong to him, thou see not thy former tokens, nor
feel'st those Gracious influences, which formerly watered and enriched all thy
faculties; but have thou such low conceits of the everlasting kindness of thy
God, O my Soul! why should thou believe he has forsaken thee, when he does
give thee daily testimonies of his Love? what greater assurance, can thou
have of Gods love to thee, and of Christ's kind thoughts toward thee, than thy
weariness of sin? Have not thou heard thy Savior call, Come to me all ye that
are weary and heavy laden, and I will give ye rest? Art not thou weary of
iniquity? had not thou rather be rid of that burden than keep it? if thou
art not heartily resolved to part with it, why do thou complain? what makes
thee cry out, O wretched creature that I am, who shall deliver me from the body
of this death? what makes thee wish, that what thou have done against God, were
undone? what makes thee afraid of offending God? why do thou weep? why do
thou watch against thy corruptions? what makes thee angry with thy self for
displeasing God? what makes thee breathe and pant after Christ, as the wounded
Heart pants after the Waterbrooks? what makes Christ so sweet, and sin so
bitter to thee? what makes thee ashamed of looking up to Heaven? whence is it,
that all the preferment and riches of this World cannot tempt thee to sin
wilfully? whence is it that thou delightest not in the company of sinners, but
thy delight is chiefly in them that fear the Lord? If these be not signs of
Grace, what character of mercy would thou have? has not thy God said, that
he will love those that do love him? if thou love him not why art thou restless
till thou enjoyest him? if thou love him not; why do thou desire him? why
art thou willing to follow him through misery, and the greatest troubles, to be
forever with him? thou have infirmities to wrestle withal, but has not thy God
promised thee, that he will bruise Satan under thy feet shortly? thou can not
totally master such a corruption, but do not thou fight against it? thou
meetest with temptations, but do not thou grapple with them? Satan follows
thee, but do not thou resist him? thy Conscience terrifies thee, but have not
thou the Cross of Christ to fly to? if God had a mind to kill thee, would he
have shown thee all these things? if God were gone from thee, would not his
Spirit be gone too? if thou have not the Spirit of God, what mean thy longings
after God? what means thy love to a Spiritual life? why do thou pray so
earnestly for the fruit of the Spirit? why art thou altogether for a clean
Heart, and for renewing of a right Spirit within thee? are not these signs that
Gods Spirit warms thy affections, and makes intercession for thee with
groanings, which cannot be uttered? God seems to go away, that thou may cry
more earnestly after him, and clouds his comforts, that thou may sue for them
with greater importunity; he lets thee sink a little, that thou may cry with
a louder voice, Lord save me, or else I perish, and falls asleep in the Ship,
that thou may take the greater pains to wake him. He sees thou grow'st weary
of his favor, he therefore darkens it, that thou may be at some trouble to
recover it, and having recovered it, set a greater price upon it, he withdraws
himself for awhile, that at his return, thy joy may be fuller, and bids his
gracious influences stop awhile, that when they flow in upon thee again, they
may fill all thy faculties with greater gladness; thou can not perform thy
Duties with that alacrity and cheerfulness thou desir'st; but have not thou
reason to bless God, that thou do in good earnest desire to do better? was
Heaven purchased in a moment, or Sin conquered in an hour? is not the way to
life a race, where men must run on till they reach the mark? Go on O my Soul,
go on, the farther thou proceedest in Gods ways, the sweeter thou will find
them; the more thou strivest, the more thou wilt conquer, and the oftener thou
do address thy self to God, the more thy dullness and weariness will vanish;
and the more thou look upon the everlasting recompense, the greater mind
thou will have to go on from strength to strength. O my Soul, hope in God, for
I shall yet praise him; who is the health of my countenance, and my God.

IV. It disposes a man to be a worthy receiver of the Lords Supper, Indeed I
do not see how without it, a man can receive any benefit by that blessed
Sacrament: for it being an Ordinance designed, chiefly to impregnate the Soul
with very strong longings, and breathings after a crucified Savior, with a
deep sense of the incomprehensible 1ove of God in Christ Jesus, and with
earnest resolutions to love and to obey him, before all the dictates of Flesh
and Blood, and of our carnal Interest, it is not to be conceived, which way the
Soul should arrive to all this, without considering the end, nature and
advantages of this Sacrament; and its probable, a man may then be affected with
this sublime mystery, when he rowzes his Soul some such way as this. Do thou
rightly understand, O my Soul, what this great, and tremendous Ordinance means?
Behold, thou art going to feast with that God, who stretches out the Heavens
like a Curtain, and lays the beams of this chambers in the waters, and makes
the clouds his chariot, and rides upon the wings of the wind; What? Feast with
so Glorious a God, and come without a Wedding Garment? What? Sup with him, who
dwells in the Heavens, and not purify thy self even as he is pure? Can two
walk together except they be agreed? what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? and what communion has light with darkness? What concord has
Christ with Belial? What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? This is
the great Ordinance, O my Soul, which must either promote thy everlasting
happiness, or aggravate thy everlasting condemnation; how happy may thou be,
if this Sacrament charms thee into a fervent love to thy dear Redeemer? but how
will thou escape, if thou neglect so great a Salvation? Here are the greatest
engagements, the greatest motives to a life, as becomes the Gospel of Christ;
here God adjures thee, (to use the words of the Church) By Christ's agony and
bloody sweat, by his cross and passion, by his death and burial, to bury thy
unclean desires, and inordinate affections, and to dedicate thy self, and all
thou have to his service; Here is represented the greatest love that ever was
vouchsafed to men; here the Son of God appears all bloody to fright thee from
thy sins; here Christ is as it were crucified before thine eyes, that looking
upon him, whom thou have pierced, Thou may mourn, as one that mourns for his
only Son. Here Christ appears laden with all the blessings of Heaven; here the
everblessed Trinity seems to use its utmost endeavors to persuade thee into a
Heavenly conversation: here the desert of sin is discovered in the wounds and
torments of an infinite God; and hither thou come, O my Soul, to renew thy
Baptismal vow; hither thou come to enter into a solemn Covenant with God, and
faithfully to promise him to resign thy self entirely to him; to fall out with
him no more, to defile thy Garments no more, to dishonor, to betray him no
more, to be faithful to him, to vindicate his Glory, to esteem his friends as
thy friends, and his enemies as thy enemies, and to live up to those laws which
he has sealed with his own Blood; to this end, thou eatest of his Bread, and
drinkest of his Wine, and thus thou sealest the Covenant. Do not thou
remember, O my Soul, how the world Was lost by eating of the forbidden Tree?
Behold, by eating of this Tree of Life, thou shall be saved for ever; in the
breaking of the consecrated Bread, thou see, how Christ's Body was broke for
thee; in pouring out of the Hallowed Wine, thou see, how Christ's Blood was
spilt for thee: when the Holy Bread is reached out to thee, thou see Christ
reaching out his crucified Body to thee, that thou may see in his hands the
print of the nails, and put thy finger into the print of his nails, and thrust
thine hand into his side, and shelter thy self under that wounded, and mangled
Body, against the wrath and indignation of God. When the sacred Wine is given
thee, thou see how Christ offers thee his Blood, for the remission of thy
sins. can thou behold so great a love, and not loose thy reason in the
admiration of its greatness? when thou see such condescension, such kindness,
such compassion, O can thou forbear crying out; O my Lord! what do I see?
what mean these longings of Almighty God after my happiness? what means this
industry of that incomprehensible Being, to be at all this charge, and pains,
to make me blessed? God that might sport himself with my everlasting groans;
what need he have cared, whether I were saved or no? God, Who can be happy
without company, and needs no society but his own; whence is it that this
mighty God humbles himself thus to dust and ashes, lays aside his Robes of
Glory, and wooes me to be content to lie for ever in his Arms and Bosom? would
no other remedy serve turn to recover me, but the death of the Son of God? God,
on whose Laws I have trampled, Whose Authority I have slighted, whose promises
and threatenings I have undervalued! that he should be thus concerned for my
welfare, and contrive how to advance me unto Glory, and contrive it, by such
stupendous means too! will God suffer that I may not? will the Eternal dye,
that I may not fall a prey to the second Death? will God be crowned with
Thorns, that I may wear an incorruptible Crown of Glory? will God be affronted,
abused, and scorned, that I may inherit Glory and Honor, and immortality! what
manner of love is this? where is the spring of it? what is the impulsive cause
of it? how full of miracles is every circumstance here? how pleasant is this
contemplation? What! God love a little slime and earth? O my God! how wonderful
is thy love? it is all Ocean; here is no shore to set my feet on! be astonished
at it, O ye Heavens, and tremble O thou Earth: the Eternal, the Immense Creator
of Heaven and Earth, stoops to a miserable creature! the God, who fills Heaven
and Earth with his Presence, bows down to a poor inconsiderable worm! he that
sits on the circle of the Earth, and before whom all the Inhabitants of the
Earth are as Grasshoppers, humbles himself to take notice of a poor forlorn
wretch! Here is love indeed; Stay me with flaggons, comfort me with apples; my
Head grows giddy with the Precipice: here is an abyss of Love, which I cannot
fathom; my head swims at the sight of it, Sense can furnish me with nothing
like it, I am silenced; here is a love answers all arguments, that are brought,
for going on in sin. Help me, O thou blessed Spirit, Help me, O thou who art
fairer than the Children of Men, Help me, thou who art all Love and Life, Help
me to admire thy Love. In this Love are a thousand charms; in this Love are
omnipotent enforcives to love God above all the world. Run, O my Soul, run into
this Banqueting House, the Banner whereof is Love. Is it so, and must thou have
perished and been undone for ever, if the Son of God had not come in the Flesh,
and expiated thy crimes, and does not that Almighty love, deserve thy Love? see
how the ambitious love the applause of men, and wilt not thou love him who is
brighter than the Sun? see how the rich man is enamored with his stately
Palace, and can not thou love him, who has done that for thee, which no
Friend, no Money, no Gold, no Silver could have purchased, viz. reconciled thee
to an offended God? will thou slight this Love, and hope to go unpunished? will thou make this Love a refuge for wilful sins, and hope for the light of Christ's
countenance? will not he, who loved thee beyond all presidents and examples,
double and treble his indignation upon thee; if this Love cannot melt thee into
a truly Spiritual life? could the Devils but have such an offer, of being
partakers of the love of Christ, how would they rejoice and triumph, and Love,
and Honor, and Obey their God again, as once they did when they were
inhabitants of Heaven! and will thou beworse than a Devil, and spurn at that
Love, which Angels stand astonished at? were it thine own case, O my Sou!,
would not thou revenge such ingratitude with all the severity imaginable, and
doom the wretch that should affront such condescension to the direst Flames? Be
wise, O my Soul, and provoke not that God to swear in his wrath, that thou
shall never enter into his rest, who flees unto thee on the wings of mercy, to
embrace thee; thou can never have a more glorious sight of Gods love, on this
side Heaven, than is discovered to thee in this Sacrament, and if ever thou
would be persuaded to resign thy self entirely to thy Blessed Redeemer, make
his Will thy Will, and desire what he desires, and hate what he hates, and love
what he loves; O come hither to the cross, and see the Son of God weeping for
thy sins; come hither and see him sweat drops of Blood for thy iniquities, and
offering thee pardon and reconciliation, and peace with God, and access to the
Throne of Grace, and union and communion with him, and if this be not enough a
title to Eternal Happiness, or a right to that Throne, himself does sit on.

But why so backward, O my Soul, to come to the Table of thy Lord, where thou
may drink Wine and Milk without Money, and without Price, where thou may be
satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and eat of the living Bread, whereof
whoever eats, shall live for ever? have thou forgot the peremptory command of
Christ, Do this in remembrance of me? Is this remembering thy dearest friend, to
think of him solemnly but once or twice a year? should not thou remember him
as often as thou have an opportunity? should thy Savior remember thee no
oftener than thou do his death and passion, how fearful would thy condition
be? can thou represent his Love too often to thy mind and affections? can
thou remember thy sins that brought him to the Cross, too often? art thou
afraid of thinking too much of this Love, and consequently of being too
Religious? art thou afraid of being too much enamoured with this Jesus? art
thou afraid that the sight of his broken Body will break thy Heart too much?
art thou afraid that the sight of his effused Blood, will make thee pour out
too many Tears and Prayers, and Praises of his Love? considering how dull, how
dead thou art, thou had need come frequently to the Cross, to have thy
Affections suppled and softened with this precious Blood: how frail is thy
memory, and had not thou need of refreshing it often, with the sight of
Christ's incomprehensible love? art thou afraid of renewing thy Repentance, thy
Faith, thy Hope, thy Charity too often? The oftener thou do resort to this
blessed communion, the greater will be thy acquaintance with thy best of
friends; the greater sense thou will get of the need, and want of him, the
greater encouragement thou will find, to imitate him in his Holiness, Meekness,
Patience, and Humility; and the greater assurance thou will get of his Love and
Favor, and Pardon, and everlasting Mercy; and are these Blessings to be
scorned and undervalu'd? thou pretendest want of preparation, but whose fault
is it that thou art not prepared? what can hinder thee from preparation, but
love to sin? and shall love to a sensual careless life, hinder thee from laying
hold of the greatest Treasure? will this Plea hold, when thou shall appear
before the great Tribunal? O my Soul, this is to excuse sin by sin, and to
despise God's Ordinance, because thou despisest his commands, and how will this
aggravate thy folly one day, and fill thee with shame and horror! O play not
with everlasting mercy, let not business hinder thee from advancing thy
Spiritual, and Eternal interest; Remember what became of the men, that
pretended they had Farms to see, and Oxen to try, and Wives to marry, when they
were invited to the Supper of the Lamb; can thou think of the protestation of
the Master of the Feast, against these stubborn wretches, and not conclude thy
fate by their being excluded from Gods Favor forever? if it be a sense of thy
own vileness, and unworthiness, that keeps thee away, thou mistakest, and
misrepresentest the goodness of thy Lord and Master. No persons more welcome at
this Table, than the humble and brokenhearted; none meet with a more
favorable reception, than the poor in Spirit; these the Crucified Jesus prays
for on his Cross, Father forgive them, and the everlasting Father hears, and
says to them, Be of good cheer, your sins are forgiven you.

V. It prepares a man for an Angelical life here on Earth, for he that
frequently considers and contemplates the Joys, the Triumphs, the Scepters,
the Crowns, the Diadems of yonder Kingdom, the everlasting Love and Peace, and
Satisfaction, which Angels, and glorified Saints enjoy, cannot but think
himself, during that consideration, in Heaven, and participating of that
content and happiness, which is possessed by the general Assembly of the
Firstborn, which are written in Heaven. Indeed this is to make Earth a Heaven,
and to change this Wilderness into a Paradise, a Closet into the Seat of Glory,
and a Desert into those Regions of Bliss and Happiness. How like an Angel may
that Man live, that is often engaged in such considerations as these. Heaven!
what do I hear? Heaven! the harbor of all laden and wearied Souls! Heaven! the
end of all my sorrow and miseries! Heaven! the Port I have been sailing to
these many years! Heaven! the inheritance of those that keep themselves
uspotted from the World! Heaven! the rest of Gods Servants, and the habitation
of the Mourners in Sion! Heaven! the great mark of my Desires, the anchor of my
Hope, the foundation of my Confidence! Heaven! the University, where we shall
know, even as we are known? how undisturbed, how quiet do all the Inhabitants
of those blessed Mansions live! there rest those Saints, who were made as the
filth of the World, and as the offscouring of all things; how different are
the thoughts of God, from those of the World? these men the world regarded not,
behold, God remembers them, and when he makes up his Jewels, spares them, as a
man would spare his own Son that serves him! There rests that Mary Magdalen,
that stood behind Christ at his feet, weeping, and washed his Feet with her
Tears, and did wipe them with the hair of her Head, and kissed them, and
anointed his Head with ointment. There rests that Lazarus, who desired to be
fed with the crumbs, that fell from the rich man's Table. There rest that David,
that made his Bed to swim, and watered his Couch with his Tears. There rests
all the Prophets of old, who through Faith, subdued Kingdoms, wrought
Righteousness, obtained Promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the
violence of the Fire, escaped the edge of the Sword, out of weakness were made
strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to slight the Arms of the Aliens. There
rest all those Souls, that looked for the blessed hope, and the glorious
appearance of their Savior Jesus Christ. There rests all those Martyrs and
Confessors, that were ready, not only to suffer, but to dye also, for the name
of the Lord Jesus. There they rest, encircled with an Eternal calm. There they
rest, encompassed with an innumerable company of Angels. There they rest,
surrounded with the Gracious Presence of a merciful God. There they rest from
all the calumnies, and slanders of this poor envious world. There they rest
from all Darkness, in Eternal Light, and in the beams of the Sun of
Righteousness forever.

Awake, O my Soul, awake, advance into yonder regions of Glory, retire into
yonder Paradise, leave this world, and go higher; let thy thoughts transcend
the Sun, and Moon, and Stars; get before the Throne of God; take a view of the
still waters, whereof the vast Armies of Glorified Spirits drink, where they
are, there are no Wolves, no Tigers, no Bears, no Lions, as in this barren
wilderness; in those happy shades is no noise, but that of Halelujahs; no
discontent, no War, no dissentions inhabit there; there all agree, there
Ephraim is no more against Manasse, nor Manasse against Ephraim, nor they both
against Juda, but all are delighted with the everlasting Glory and Love of God;
there they hunger and thirst no more, Wonderful change! Here O my Saul, thou
art ever thirsting after God, as the dry Land thirsts after water; there thou
shall be satisfied with him to all Eternity; here thou longest after the hidden
Manna, there it will never be taken from thee; here, like Solomon's Bride, by
night on thy Bed thou seek him, who is altogether lovely; there his Beauty
and Presence will ravish thee for ever. Here, though thy desires after the
Blessings of Gods left hand be subordinate to thy desires after spiritual
Mercies, and thy esteem of God, preponderates, and is higher, than thy esteem
of any outward felicities; yet, while so nearly allied to Sense, thou can not
so abandon Nature, as to have no longings at all after external comforts, and
conveniences; but in Heaven, all perishing sublunary objects are forgotten,
there those Friends and Relations, those Children, those Honors, those Riches,
which too often made too great an encroachment on thy Love, will be no
attractives; there thou will be contented without Bread, satisfied without
Drink, the want of Clothes will not trouble thee, thou will have nobler
friends, than Father, and Mother, and Brethren, and Sisters, to converse
withal, nobler Food, than the Delicacies of this world; nobler attire, than
Silk, or the softest Down can make; there will be no need of contriving how to
get a livelihood: Palaces will not tempt thee, Gardens will not entice thee,
Gold will not dazzle thee, the greatness of the world will affect thee no more
than Pebles; the glittering Diamond will make no impressions on thee, and all
thy wants and necessities, will be fully supplied by an immortality of Joy, and
Glory. Here the warm Sun of Prosperity makes thee sometimes forget, and neglect
the great work of thy Salvation, makes thee apt to grow weary of Fasting and
Prayer, and mortification, and self-denial, and apt to yield unto Satan's
temptations, but there the tempter must tempt thee no more, he dares not fully
those Christalline Walks with his steps, he dares not come near that Holy
place, it is past his skill, how to incommode, or molest, a glorified Spirit.
Here, often like Jonas, thou fittest rejoicing under the Gourd, or Vine, and
while thou art solacing thy self, the Gourd withers, and the Sun scorches thy
Body, and thou growest faint; there this annoyance will have an end, there thou will live above the Sun, and that which is now thy Ceiling, shall be then thy
Footstool. On Earth, when Christ is pleased to communicate himself unto thee,
its here a little, and there a little, and he gives thee but sprinklings of his
Grace, for while thou art in this Tabernacle of Flesh, thou art not capacious
enough to receive or entertain that stupendous Light in its full virtue, and
Power, and Majesty, but when thy Vessel of Clay, thy Body shall be shattered
into Dust, and Atoms, and thou shall be freed from thy Prison, and live like
thy self, all Understanding, all Intellect, all Spirits, the Sun that shines,
in the highest Heavens, and irradiates the Throne of God, even the Lord Jesus
Christ, will then reveal himself to thee, in his full splendour and Glory, thine
Eyes will then be strong enough to look upon that glorious, and immense Globe
of Light, and thou shall be like unto the Angels of God: thy extravagant
passions will then cease forever, thy grief, thy sorrows will have no
admittance into those Seats of Bliss, thou wilt be refined then from all those
turbulent motions, which do now so often discompose thy rest. Here the death of
a near Relation, troubles thee, there thou will be above all trouble and
vexation; here thine anger, like that of Moses, does often wax hot, because
thou see thy God dishonored, and his Commands trampled upon; there thou will
see no such dismal sights; here a sin thou fallst into against thy will, makes
thee wish for rivers of Tears, there thy grief will be buried in eternal
exultations, there thy passions will all be calmed, and like water after a
storm, look smooth, and quiet; there will be no disorder in thy affections, but
like a Quire of tuneable Voices, they will meet in everlasting harmony; there no
affliction must come after thee. Here with Moses thy Body, may be thrown into
the Water, with Joseph cast into prison, with Shadrach, Meschek, and Abednego,
flung into a fiery Furnace, with Daniel hurried into a Lions Den, stoned with
the Prophets, crucified with St. Peter, thrown down from a Precipice with St.
James, cast into a Kettle of boiling Oil with St. John, thrust through with a
Lance as St. Thomas, bound to a tree with St. Andrew, flead with S.
Bartholomew, burnt with Polycarp, torn by wild Beasts with Ignatius, in all
which afflictions thou can not but sympathize with thy individual companion
for it is, by thee, that thy Body feels the torments, it endures, but in that
Heaven, that glorious Heaven, no Enemy can reach thee, no Devil fright thee, no
storm surprise thee, no Monarch frown on thee, no sickness break thee, no
distemper crush thee, no age waste thee, no danger shake thee, no Tyrant
threaten thee, no Lions meet thee, no Tiger tear thee, no Sword pierce thee, no
public commotions startle thee, the Sun shall not light on thee, nor any heat,
for thou art secure under the shadow of the Almighties wings for ever. The Lamb
which is in the midst of the Throne shall feed thee by his everlasting saciety;
here it is, A little while and you shall not see me, and again a little while
and you shall see me; but there with open face, and without a glass, thou will
look upon his Majesty for ever: here Christ comes, and departs, there he will
never remove out of thy sight, there his everlasting love will support thee,
there his kindness will be subject to Clouds and Eclipses no more, there thou will not be able to turn thy Eyes away from him. This is that Lamb, that will
give thee to drink of his everlasting Springs, Springs which can never be drawn
dry; Springs, which can no more decay, than the Son of God decays; he is the
everlasting Fountain of Delight, and in this Fountain, thou shall bathe and
recreate thy self forever, his Attributes, his Kingdom, his Beauty, shall charm
and ravish thee for ever; there thou shall be in an everlasting ecstasy of joy,
there thou will not need to cry out with St. Bernard, Hold Lord, for my heart
is not able to contain those joys, which thou do so liberally pour out upon
me; that everlasting Fountain of joy and content, and satisfaction, shall both
fill and enable thee to bear, that fullness of joy and light, which shall then
appear unto thee; the remembrance of Christ's merits, and benefits, and what
Christ has done for thee, will then transport thee into everlasting Praises
and Celebrations of his Goodness, Songs as endless as thy duration will be. The
Rivers that water that Garden of God, shall be a perpetuum mobile, running and
flowing to all Eternity. In this Paradise are living, no standing waters; when
millions of ages are past, thy Glory shall be still green, and lively, and
after many thousands of years, thy happiness, like Aaron's Rod, shall bud and
blossom, and bear Fruit. O my Soul, when that inexhaustible Fountain fades,
then, and not till then, need'st thou be afraid, that thy delights will fade;
there God will put an end to all thy Tears; what Rhetoric can reach the
favor? the Tears thou did shed for sin, the Tears which a deep sense of thy
Spiritual poverty did force from thee, the Tears which Tribulation and Anguish
did command from thine Eyes, these will all then be washed away.

How amiable are thy Tabernacles, Lord God of Hosts? my Soul longs, yea even
faints for the Courts of the Lord? my Heart and my Flesh cries out for the
living God, when shall I come to appear before thee? when shall I shake off
this clogg of the flesh, and praise thee day and night in thy Temple? when
shall I be freed from this Earth and Dross, and do thy Will, O my God, without
Let, or Interruption?

O my Soul! do thou believe such a Heaven, where no good shall be absent, and
can thou be hunting after the husks, and empty shells of sensual pleasure?
how little do the Inhabitants of that New Jerusalem mind the pomp and grandeur
of this world? they have nobler objects to mind, and more delightful
employments to take up their minds and thoughts: did thou live more in this
Heaven, O my Soul, how would thou look down upon this Earth, as an
inconsiderable trifle? how little would thou regard, what man can do unto
thee? how contentedly might thou part with all that the world counts dear and
precious, for Christ his sake, as knowing, that there is laid up for thee the
Crown of Righteousness, which the Righteous Judge will give to thee one day,
and not only to thee, but to all those that love his appearance? Look upon the
Primitive Martyrs, O my Soul, they broyled in Flames, but loo'kd upon that
Heaven, and smiled. St. Stephen has a thousand Stones flying about his Ears,
but looks upon that Heaven, and the Glory of God appears upon his face. Abraham
sojourns in the Land of Promise, as in a strange Country, dwelling in
Tabernacles with Isaac, and Jacob, but looks for a City which has foundation,
and goes on triumphing. Moses suffers affiiction with the people of God, but
has respect unto the recompense of reward, and esteems the reproach of Christ
greater riches than all the Treasures of Egypt. The Apostles are scourged, and
beaten for the testimony of Jesus, but look upon this Heaven, and depart from
the Council, rejoicing, because they were counted worthy to suffer for the Name
of the Lord Jesus. St. Paul, five times of the Jews receives forty stripes save
one, thrice is he beaten with rods, once he is stoned, thrice he suffers
shipwreck, a night and a day he is in the deep, in journeyings often, in cold,
and nakedness; but what ails the Man? he sings, his heart dances for joy, under
all these troubles. O my Soul, he saw, he saw, that his light affliction which
was but for a moment, would work for him, a far more exceeding, and eternal
weight of Glory.

O my God, give me but my portion in this Heaven, and I desire no more; Come
what will come, Sword, Fire, Imprisonment, Hunger, Thirst, Nakedness, Disgrace,
Reproach, Perils by Sea, and Perils by Land, Enemies, Devils, Friends, Poverty,
Sickness, Exile, etc. Here is a Jewel, will counterballance all. O give me but
a room in that great House, made without hands, Eternal in the Heavens, and
then cut, burn, torture, and afflict, let storms, and tempests come, I Will fight
against them with my Title to that Inheritance, which fades not away: this
shall quench all the fiery Darts of the Devil, this shall bear up my Head above
water, this shall hush all my discontented thoughts; this shall be my refuge in
a storm, my hiding place in flames, my portion in poverty, my pillow in great
anguish, my liberty in prison, my cordial in temptations, my Elixir in a
swound, my prop when I stumble, my Laurel when it thunders, my Rock in
persecution, my Safeguard in destruction, my Light in the midst of darkness, my
Goshen in this Egypt, my Ship under the fiercest Billows, my Shield, when I am
assaulted, my Helmet when I am in danger, my encouragement when I do resist, my
Crown when I conquer, my Manna in the Wilderness, my Food in the Desert, my
Rose to smell to in a Dungeon, my Guide in my journey, my PoleStar in my
voyage, my Staff in my Pilgrimage, my Song in my misery, my All, when Death and
Hell conspire unto my ruin.

VI. It makes a man prudent and discreet in secular affairs and businesses.
Consideration, as it is a very great improvement of Man's Reason, so it cannot
but be very useful to him, in governing his secular affairs with discretion.
Consideration makes a man master of his Reason, and that man must needs act
more wisely, that has his reason at command, than he that makes it a slave to
every flattering passion; and since it is confessed, that the fear of God has
that influence upon all humane affairs, that it disposes a man to a wise and
prudential management of them; Consideration must of necessity be of the same
Virtue, and Efficacy, for this fear of God is the immediate product of
Consideration. I deny not, but men wise in Spiritual, are not always so in
Temporal concerns, for either their scrupulous Consciences, or fear of having
their hearts carried out too much after the world, or their giving themselves
wholly to Heavenly employments, may make them careless and unmindful of things
belonging to this world, but still in its nature and tendency, this
circumspection in things, which concern a Christians Soul, is able to shed
wisdom and discretion, into his carriage and behavior to things which
appertain to this present life; hence, from a man who seriously considers he
has a Soul to be saved, you may expect great order in his Family, a prudent
foresight of dangers, and a moderate care to shun them, great temper in
discourse, and exact justice in his dealings, and rendering to all their Dues,
Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor
to whom Honor; as the Apostle's phrase is, Romans 13. 7.

In all probability it was the attentive consideration of his Spiritual
concerns, that made David both valiant and prudent in matters, as he is called
1 Samuel 16. 18. and to what can we ascribe Joseph's and Daniel's discreet
Government of themselves, and their secular affairs, but to that Piety and
Goodness, which by long and serious consideration they had settled in their
Breasts. When (...) man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his very enemies
to be at peace with him, i. e. He does not only by an extraordinary providence,
turn their hearts toward him, but infuses wisdom and discretion into his Soul,
so to behave himself toward his enemies, that they cannot but bury their
hatred, and return to their former friendship, and civility, Prove. 16. 7. He
that considers his ways with reference to his Eternal state and condition, his
ways cannot but please the Lord, and such wisdom, if he stand not in his own
light, will surely fall to his share, and hereof we need no other proof, but
common experience.

The man, who truly minds his everlasting interest, and so considers the
account: he must give to God, when this life is ended, as to provide for that
great and dreadful Audit, thinks himself obliged to use what cautiousness he
can, that he may not wrong his God, his Soul, and his Neighbor; and this
cautiousness cannot but make him prudent in his Secular Vocation; hence such a
man has commonly his Wife, Children, and Servants, in better order than other
men, and mingles that sweetness and kindness, with his gravity or severity,
that they may have encouragement to love him, and dread offending a far greater
Master in Heaven; there is not that discontent, that emulation, that ill
language, that backbiting, that luxury, that extravagance, that tumult in such
a man's Family, as is to be observed in Houses, where little of God and Eternity
is regarded. Such a person spends in his house no more but what is decent, and
convenient, and so provides for those of his own Household, as not to forget
doing good to the Levite, and to the Widow, and to the Fatherless; his Speech
is commonly with Grace, seasoned with Salt, full of meekness and gravity, and
therefore less offensive, and he takes heed that it may not be laid to his
charge, that he has bestowed more to feed his pride, and luxury, than Christ's
distressed members; and in public affairs, or places of great Trust, such a
man as minds first Heaven and then Earth, usually discovers far greater wisdom,
in management of State affairs, than those who first mind Earth, and Heaven,
when they have nothing else to do; for his Principles lead him so to carry
himself to man, as not to affront his God, and to advise his King to nothing,
but what is truly great, and glorious, and beneficial for the Realm he governs:
and as a Prince may confide in such a person, more than in a sensual Man, so he
has reason to believe, that all things will prosper better in his hand, than
in the others, because he first seeks the Honor of God, and then the happiness
of his King, and the Honor of that Nation, he is a member of; which is a thing
so pleasing to God, that there is nothing more frequent with him, than to bless
such honest endeavors, and to crown them with success, and prosperity.

And certainly he that can consider, how to keep himself from the everlasting
evil, may with greater ease, prevent temporal mischief, and danger, which
depend upon the imprudence of his actions; he that can row against the Stream,
may with greater facility row with it; he that can cheerfully go up the Hill,
will find no great difficulty in going down, he that can do that, which his
Nature has more than ordinary aversion from,, may more easily do that which
his nature has a strong bias and inclination to: and he whose mind will serve
him to turn away the ever-burning wrath of Almighty God, cannot want judgment
and prudence to prevent the wrath and anger of those men he converses withal:
and he that can by serious consideration, make sure of a Seat in Heaven, cannot
want power to consider, how to manage the Estate God has given him in this
world, to Gods Glory, and his neighbors good: and though men that are very
considerate in their Soul concerns, do not always use that prudence we have
mentioned in the concerns of this present world; yet it is sufficient, that if
they will make use of that light, and those arguments, which their reason thus
improved by consideration, does furnish them withal, they may most certainly
arrive to this wisdom, and discretion in secular concerns and businesses, which
we have been speaking of. Indeed it is very rational, that he that exercises his
reason much, and examines the nature, ends, causes, circumstances and
consequences of things, as he must do, that seriously considers the things that
belong unto his everlasting peace, should arrive to more than ordinary wisdom
in other things, and that he that is prudent in the greater, should be able to
proceed prudentially in lesser matters; that he who is faithful in much, should
be faithful in a little also; and that he who is just in the true Riches,
should be very just in the Mammon of unrighteousness too, as we read, Luke 16.
10, 11.

CHAP. VII. A pathetical Exhortation to men, who are yet strangers to a
serious, religious life, to consider their ways; wilfulness of their neglect,
how dangerous it is; How inexcusable they are, how inhumane to God, and their
own Souls; How reasonable God's requests are, and how justly God may turn that
power of consideration, he has given them, into blindness, and hardness of
heart, since they make so ill a use of it, etc.
ANd now Reader, whoever thou art, that do yet wallow, or allow thy self in
any known sin, and art not sincerely resolved to close with the terms of
Christ's Eternal Gospel, let me adjure thee, by the mercies of God, not to
reject, or superciliously to despise, what here we have proposed. As thou art a
man, and owe civility to all creatures, that have the signature of man upon
them, be but so kind and civil to this Discourse, as to allow it some serious
thoughts. Either thou have a rational Soul, or thou have not; if thou have, let
me entreat thee, by the Bowels of Jesus, to consider, whether this present
world be all the Sphere that God intended it should move in; If it be not, and
if how to secure the happiness of the world to come, be the chief thing, this
thy Soul is designed for, why will thou frustrate God in his expectation? why
will thou go contrary to all creatures, and not prosecute the end, for which
thy Soul was made, and shed into thy Body. That there is such a thing as a life
to come, and an Eternity of joy and torment; the one promised to a strict and
Heavenly conversation, the other threatened, to a loose and careless, or
sensual life, cannot be called into question by him, that shall impartially
reflect upon the premises: it is certain, the things which concern that other
life, are not discovered by our senses, and therefore thou can not hope to be
affected with them that way. It Is thy reason only that can, and must apprehend
that future state, and so apprehend it as to work upon thy affections: But
which way is it possible thy reason should so apprehend it, as to fright thee
from thy evil courses, except it be improved by consideration? Sinner, I do
here, in the presence of God, conjure thee by all that is Good, and Holy, by the
interest, and welfare of thine own Soul, by all the Laws of self-interest, by
the Revelations of the Son of God, by all that God ever did for Mankind, by
that love which transcends the understandings of Men and Angels, by the groans
of those miserable Souls, which are now in Hell, by all the joys of Paradise,
by the testimony of thine own conscience, by all the motions of God's Spirit in
thy Heart, by all the mercies thou do receive from Heaven, by that allegiance
thou owe to God, by that Faithfulness, thou owe to thine own Soul; I do
most seriously conjure thee to tell me, whether thou art not able to consider
the evil of thy courses, the beauty of Gods ways, and the sad consequences of
sensuality; thou deniest thy own Being, deniest Gods Favor to thy Soul,
deniest the Glory of thy Creation, deniest the most visible, and the most
apparent thing in the world, if thou deniest thy ability in this point, and if
thou art able to consider so much, what injustice can it be in God, to demand
an account of this consideration? wherein does he do thee an injury, if he does
ask what thou have done with this power? were thou in Gods stead, would not
thou require the same account of thy servant, on whom thou had bestowed such
a Talent? if thou art able, and wilt not take thy faithfulness into serious
consideration, can there be any thing more just in the world, than thy
damnation? how easy were it for thee to lay home the danger thou art in, and
seeing it is so easy, how just is it with God to let thee perish in that danger
thou art resolved, in despite of all Gods endeavors to the contrary, to fall
and sink into? O Christian, how dreadful will it be for thee, when Christ shall
depart from thee, with this doleful exclamation; How often would I have
gathered thee, as a Hen does gather her Chickens under her wings, and thou
would not? would not? This is it, that makes thy everlasting torments just.
O Sinner, that God should invite thee to Heaven, and thou put him off with this
answer, I will not! that God should carress thee to become his Darling, and
thou voluntarily, and freely, list thy self in the Catalogue of the Devils
favorites and votaries! that God should leave no means untried, to melt thy
stuborn heart, and thou desperately fight against his Heaven! and when he would
thrust thee into it, violently to break loose from him, and lay force upon
damnation! How inexcusable will this make thee? What Man, what Angel, can, or
dares plead for thee. after such horrid wilfulness? by it thou shutst up all
men's compassion against thee; were thy error an infirmity, or had invincible
ignorance caused thy folly, some or other possibly might be moved to speak in
favor of thy concerns, but that thou knowing the will of God, and having power
to think, what the end of thy courses will be, and power to avoid the danger,
and power to pray for help, a gracious God to encourage thee, a glorious reward
to entice thee, Eternity to fright thee, the everlasting gulf to startle thee,
should in despite of all these motives, wilfully and maliciously shun thine
own cure! this is a malady, which no creature can justly shed a Tear, or frame
an apology for. Be astonished, O ye Heavens, and tremble O thou Earth! ye
Angels that rejoice at a sinners conversion here on Earth; O all ye that pass
by, behold and see, whether there be a sorrow, as such a sinners sorrow is? We
have read of men that have eaten their enemies, of Monsters that have devoured
their own Children, but here is one devours himself; inhumane to a prodigy! one
that contrives how to shut himself out of Heaven, plots how to undermine his
everlasting Salvation, and studies how to sink into the dungeon of desperation.

Sirs, what is it, that we are exhorting you unto? is it to dig down Mountains?
is it to exhaust the Sea? is it to pull down the Sun from his Orb? is it to
reverse the course of Nature? is it to work miracles? is it to unhinge the
Earth, or to stop the flux and reflux of the Ocean? one would think by the
earnestness, and vehemence of expressions we are forced to use, that it must be
something beyond the power of man: but no, all that we keep this stir for, is
only, that you would consent to be happy, contrive how to inherit an
incorruptible Crown, and think seriously how to escape your own torment; and
needs there any entreaty for this? one would think you should run to us, break
down the doors of our Habitations, pull us out of our studies, interrupt us,
though we were never so busy, and importune us, as that Widow did the Judge,
and follow us day and night to be satisfied; the thing is of that importance;
And O, did you but believe an Eternity, you would do so. Believe? why what
should hinder you from believing it? what arguments can you desire that you
have not? can there be any thing surer than the word of God? can there be a
greater witness, than the Son of God? God cannot deceive you, he cannot impose
upon you, he cannot delude you, dare to believe him: though you have not looked
into Hell, yet certainly there is one, though you have not seen the joys above,
yet such joys there are, and to consider, to study, to ponder how to arrive to
them is the great thing we press upon you, as being sensible of your danger,
sensible that death will arrest you, before you are aware of it, sensible that
many thousands are for ever miserable for neglecting such exhortations. O Sirs,
we do not envy your worldly happiness, we dare assure you, that it is not any
grugde, we have against your prosperity, that makes us put you in mind of these
unwelcome Lessons; we have a God calling upon us, to stop you in your
earnestness for the world, woe to us, if we give you no warning! woe to you if
you take no warning! If making provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof, would make you happy, if rioting and drunkenness, chambering and
wantonness, and rouling in all the pleasures, that your flesh does promise, and
your fancy pay, could contribute any thing to your felicity if solacing your
selves in the wanton streams of sensual delights, would lead you into Paradise
we promise you, we would not molest or disturb you in your ways; nay if you had
not Souls to be saved, did your Spirits dye with your Bodies, we would not
stint you in your jollities; But oh, can we read how the wrath of God is
revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of Men, and
see you fall a prey to that indignation? Can we read how tribulation and
anguish shall certainly fall upon every Soul that does evil, and not speak to
you to prevent it? Can we read, how the Lord Jesus will ever long, come from
Heaven in flames of Fire, to take vengeance of those who have continued to
disobey his Gospel, and to punish them with everlasting destruction, from the
presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his power, and not call to you,
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand? Can we read how the unprofitable
Servant, that made no use of his Talent, but buried it under ground, and would
not watch, or make himself ready to meet his Master, shall be thrown into
outward darkness, where there is howling and gnashing of Teeth, and not beg of
you to trim your Lamps, and arise from the dead, that Christ may give you
Light? Can we remember how many millions lie now roaring under the fears and
terrors of their own Consciences in another world, that would not be persuaded
to part with their Darling, bosom sins; till death tore them away from them,
and not testify unto you, least you also come into that place of torment? Can
we see you stand upon the brink of destruction, and be so cruel, as not to
acquaint you with the bottomless gulf that's underneath? Would you have us to
be as tyrannical to you, as you are to your own Souls? Or would you have us
leap into everlasting burnings with you, for not reclaiming you from venturing
into that fire?

Sirs, what is it that does discourage you from a sincere consideratiori of
your Spiritual condition? What are you afraid of? Why do you loiter? Why do
you deliberate whether ye shall or no? Why do ye dispute the case? Why do ye
stand musing? What hinders you? Is there any impediment that you may not
remove, if you will? Had you been but a quarter of an hour in Hell, would not
you call all those men sots, and fools, that now excuse their wilful neglect of
this work? Would not you see the vanity of their pretenses? Would not you
confess, that all those pretended cloggs are mere cobwebs, which may be broke
through with the greatest ease? Would you be frighted from this duty by any
temporal losses, as now you are? Are you afraid men will laugh at you for being
serious? Had not you better be laughed at here, than be scorned by God, and his
Holy Angels to all Eternity? Had not you better be jeered here, than have the
great King of Heaven laugh at your endless calamity, and mock when your
everlasting fears do come upon you? If a fool laughs at you, do you regard it?
and why should you regard such men's scorn any more, than the laughter of fools?
Alas! they are distempered in their brains, they see not the things which
belong to their peace, they know not what Religion means! Will any man give
over the study of Divinity, or Law, or Physic, because the ignorant Peasant
sneers at him? Will a Tradesman leave his Calling, because such a man makes
Songs and Ballads upon it? if you are persuaded that Consideration, and looking
after your Spiritual concerns, is the way to real happiness, Will you be
miserable, because another man would not have you to be happy? Will that man
who laughs at you for despising the world, save you harmless at the day of
Judgment? Will he bail you out, when Gods thunder shall break out upon all
disobedient sinners? Will he undertake for you, when God will be abused and
mocked no longer, and the day of his wrath does come? Will he be your Advocate,
when you shall have your Consciences pleading against you? Alas, poor forlorn
wretches! he will not be able to answer for himself, how then should he plead
your cause? and if he can do you no service, cannot secure you against the
anger of the Almighty, why will you be persuaded by the anger or displeasure of
a man, though never so great and powerful, to omit that, on which your Eternal
welfare does depend?

Sinner, as light as thou make now of this serious reflection on thy Spiritual
concerns, thou must consider them one time or other, if thou will not here, God
will force thee to do it in Hell, whether thou will or no: here consideration
may do good, but there it will but aggravate thy torments; here it may snatch
thee like a brand out of the fire, there it will increase thy flames; here it
may be a means to enlighten thee, there it will be a means to confound thee
forever. Proud, self-conceited man, who can find no time for serious
consideration here! in Hell thou will have time enough, and O how many sad
hours will it cause to consider, how thou have misspent thy time, how thou have
flung away so many precious hours, upon thy unlawful pleasures, how thou have
derided such a Sermon, hardened thy Heart upon such a discourse, slighted Gods
motions to repentance, smothered the checks of thine own conscience, preferred
the World before Heaven, obeyed Man more than thy Creator, suffered every
trivial outward respect, to call thee away from Devotion, mistrusted Gods
Providence, taken his name in vain, laughed at the wholesome Counsels of thy
Parents and Teachers, despised thy neighbors, censured, their actions more than
thy own, taken thy fill of sin, been weary of following Christ, backward to any
thing that is good, delighted with nothing but vanity and folly, dishonored
God, disgraced Religion, exposed it to contempt and scorn, drawn others into
vice, laughed Men into folly, dragged them into Hell, murdered their Souls as
well as thine own, neglected thy Prayers, disregarded the Poor, oppressed the
needy, been greedy after the World, and undervalu'd the pains and cost, God did
bestow to entice thee to enter into his Rest! At this time thou wilt be forced to
consider, how great a blessing thou have refused, what comfort thou have
deprived thy self of, what a wise course those took, that would not be
persuaded by the vain careless world, to cast Gods Law behind them; but alas!
these considerations will then be too late; time was when thou might have
considered the odiousness of sin, and turned from thy evil ways; time was, when
thou might have considered the absolute necessity of despising the world, and
dedicated thy Self, thy Children, thy Life and Wealth to Gods service; time
was, when thou might have considered, that Gods Mercy and Patience did lead
thee to Repentance, and so have turned to God with all thy heart, and this had
been to secure Gods Favor, and to enter thy name in the Book of Life; but in
Hell, such thoughts do but gnaw and sting thee more, there they do but augment
thy sorrow, and indignation against thyself, there they do but make thee weary
of thy life, and the worst of it is,, that there thou can not be rid of these
considerations, they will come into thy mind against thy will: here thou did
take pains to keep them out, there thou can not hinder them from burthening,
and oppressing thy Soul; here business and mirth diverted them, there thou
can not shake them off, with all the industry and labor thou can use; thou
needst no accuser there, these considerations will be sufficient witnesses
against thee, there, there thou wilt wish, O that I had believed the Preachers of
the Word! I find those men were in the right, I find they saw more than I did,
I find they were not mistaken; if I had followed their advice, I had built my
House upon a Rock, I find they spoke no more but reason, I find they exhorted
me to nothing but what was safe, and beneficial to my Soul. Forgive me, ye Men
of God, pardon my contempt of your Zeal and Fervency; O send some Lazarus, that
he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue; if your Prayers,
if your Tears, if your Entreaties, if your Intercessions can prevail with God,
O help, help, for I perish in this gulf; Plead with your God, solicit for me
at the Throne of Grace double, treble your cries and supplications; try whether
God will have mercy on me, who have had no mercy on my self, I am frighted, I
am troubled on every side, I would stab my self and cannot, dye and must not,
escape and dare not; pity, pity a poor miserable worm! will none relieve me?
do all forsake me? do Men and Angels leave me? is there no body to speak
comfort to me? is there no door for Consolation open? are all the avenues to
mercy shut? Hear, hear ye Inhabitants of Heaven! are you deaf to my groans? are
you grown strangers to compassion? where is your wonted clemency? will no
repentance touch the Heart of God? will no sorrow move him? will no anguish
melt him? where is that Joshua that prayed for the Suns standing still, and it
stood still in the midst of Heaven? has he no Prayer left to stop my calamity,
and to give a truce to my torments? where is that Elijah, that prayed, that
there might be no rain, and there came no rain, for three years, and six
months? and cannot he pray that this fire may go out?

A thousand such cries will then be in vain; Consideration now would most
certainly prevent those cries; this would represent the groans of those
wretches in that dismal prison, in such lively characters to thy mind, that
thou would be restless, till thou did get into the strait-way, that leads
to life, and art not thou ready to embrace it? what Fiend, what Enemy, what
Devil, what Charm quenches the fire of thy resolutions? Do thou own God for
thy Creator and Governor, one that has greater reason to command thee, than
thy Prince, or Master, or Parents, and do thou refuse to obey him? Do thou
believe, that what ever is in man, and can challenge obedience, is more
eminently in God, and do thou scruple to comply with his Will? will thou
prove a Rebel to thy Prince, a prodigal Son to thy Father, an unfaithful
Servant to the best of Masters? why should not thou trust God with thy Soul?
why should not thou run at his call? what is it sinner, that would make thee
take thy ways into serious consideration? would a miracle do it? why, thou have
as great reason to believe, that those miracles which are recorded in the
Gospel, to have been wrought for confirmation of Christ's sayings, were really
wrought and performed, as thou have to believe the reality of a miracle, if
thou should see one wrought before thine eyes; either thou believe that
those miracles were wrought by Christ and his Apostles, or thou do not; if
thou do not, why do not thou examine the circumstances to be satisfied? if
thou do, what need there any more miracles? if those miracles will not
persuade, thee, how should a new miracle do it? nay, how shall we be sure that
the sight of a new miracle would work upon thee? how soon would time wear out
the memory of it, and leave thee as careless as it found thee? thou feast
miraculous providence every day, and yet they move thee not; that God spares
such a rebellious sinful wretch as thou art, so long, and after so many
thousand provocations, is a miracle; thou see Water turned into Wine every
year; for the insipid Liquor of the Vine is changed into a different taste;
thou feast how from a dry Acorn, a mighty Tree does grow, which gives
protection to Men and Beasts, and to the Fowls of the air; thou know how
from that liquid Principle Job does speak of, A man clothed with skin and flesh
and fenced with bones and sinews rises; what mighty miracles would these be, if
they were not common? and yet none of all these stir thy Soul to reflect
seriously, what thou must do to be saved? Would an audible voice from Heaven
do it? why, how could thou be sure it came from Heaven? and should a voice
come to thee from the regions of bliss, should God vouchsafe thee such a
message, immediately from the Clouds, as this, Wash ye, make you clean, put the
evil of your doings from before mine eyes: why it would be no more, but what
God has said already, it might for the present surprise and startle thee a
little, but if that Precept written, cannot work upon thy Soul, it is to be
feared, the Precept spoke from Heaven, would make no very lasting impression
upon thee. Thou art sufficiently assured, so assured, that a man of reason
cannot justly desire better grounds, that God has spoke those words to thee
already, and if Gods repeating this Duty so often in his Word, can do no good,
what hopes is there, that repeated again, it would draw thy heart away from
sin, and from the world? would a man's rising from the dead do it? Why, Christ
is risen from the dead, and is become the First Fruits of them that slept, and
he does, with all the protestations, that are fit for a God to make, assure
thee, that he that believes not, that is, shows his Faith by his Works, shall
be damned, and would engage thy mind to ruminate upon that threatening, and to
think which way thou may flee, and be freed from that destruction he speaks
of; and why wilt not thou give credit to what he says? nay, if thou should
see a Spirit, the Ghost of one that has been thy acquaintance formerly, a
Ghost that should by woeful experience inform thee, that those things the
Scripture speaks of, are undoubtedly true, and that God will proceed exactly,
according to what he has promised, and threatened there, it would more satisfy
thy curiosity, than advance thy Piety: and the question still may be, whether
it would satisfy thy curiosity? for its possible thou may imagine, that it
might be a deception of sight, and so forget it, and slight it, and make little
of that motive. Thou confessest Christ's resurrection, and why he should not be
believed before a Spirit, especially when a Spirit could say no more, than he
has said, I cannot well conceive.

Sinner, who sees not, that all these pretenses, are like the wishes of sickly
men, that wish for this or that Fruit, for this or that Dish, and when it is
brought, it is so far from curing them, that often it makes them worse, and
increases their distemper? who sees not, that these are but inventions, to give
some color of reason to thy unwillingness, to shake off the sins which do so
easily beset thee? who sees not, that these are only arguments suggested by the
Devil, to keep thy Soul from her true food and nourishment? and who is the
looser all this while? thou would fain impose upon God, and make him believe,
that it is not want of Will, but want of Assurance, that this serious
consideration of thy ways is necessary, that makes thee stand out against it.
And alas! the cheat thou seek'st to put upon God, thou putst upon thine own
Soul; and is thy Soul so inconsiderable a thing, that thou make nothing of
deluding, and circumventing it?

What think thou Sinner? suppose thou did see a Senate, or Parliament,
made up of very grave, wise, sober, judicious men, who should unanimously give
their verdict in a Cause, and determine it; and while these men, after serious
deliberation, give their judgment in the case proposed to them in comes the
malefactor, against whom they have given sentence, accuses the Decree of the
Senate of injustice, charges their Vote with a lie, and takes a great deal of
pains, to make the world believe a tale of his own making; whom would thou
believe, that grave, wise, judicious Senate, or the Malefactor? the Senate
sure; and then when God Angels, and Men, the wisest, the gravest, the learned
of them, do all unanimously determine, that without a serious consideration of
thy Spiritual concerns, thou can not arrive to any sincere reformation of
life, can never know the danger thou art in, or what thou must do to escape
unquenchable fire; and that without it, thou art a truly miserable man, and
do take the way that leads to destruction, have thou the impudence to oppose
thy sickly opinion, which arises from a distempered, ed head, and a more
distempered conscience, to the grave, sound, and orthodox judgment of Men,
infinitely wiser than thy self? when all with one consent affirm, that thou art
sick to death, and nothing but consideration can recover thee; will thou cancel
their verdict, by prescribing to thy self medicines of thine own making? all
cry out against thy inconsiderate course of life, God does not justify it,
Angels do condemn it, the Preachers of the Gospel confute it, Philosophers
arreign it, thy Reason has arguments against it, thy Conscience chides thee
for it, thy sober neighbors reprove it, and wilt not thou subscribe to their
sentence? what insolence is it to think thy self more knowing, than he that
knows all things? Behold sinner, here lies the way to Heaven, God is entreating
thee to walk in it; the Devil is busy to discourage thee from it, God says,
Here I will be found, the Devil suggests that the Sons of Anack dwell there,
God wishes thou would yield, and live; the Devil, that thou would stand out
and dye; God seeks to crown thee, the Devil to rob thee of thy Diadem; God
assures thee that this is the Garden, where thy Graces must grow; the Devil
argues, that nothing but Weeds and Thistles grow there; All the dispute is, who
shall have thy Soul, God or the Devil? think sinner, for God's sake, think who
is the Rewarder, and who is the Tormenter, who is the King that can save thee,
and who is the Executioner that studies only to ruin thee shall not God
prevail? wilt not thou give him thy heart? and shall Satan go away with thy
Soul? shall he possess that Treasure, which Angels are ambitious of? for shame,
let not God go away empty; think what a condescension it is in God, to be
willing to accept of so inconsiderable a Present, as thy Heart? what is thy
Soul to him? what benefit does he receive, by offering thee his bosom? if thou
have such a mind to be the Devils slave, what need God take pains to rescue
thee from that bondage? do thou think he cannot live without thee? do thou
think thy being in his Heaven, does add any thing, to his felicity? cannot he
as well be glorified in thy Torments, as he can in thy Salvation? cannot he
make his Justice, triumph over such a stubborn wretch as thou art? wherein does
his advantage lie? may not he be God, and Great, and Glorious, and admired by
Angels, while thou friest in Hell? thou have very highly obliged him, indeed,
that he need be at all this trouble to make thee in love with his ways?
should not thou stand amazed at his Favor? should not thou wonder, that
this immense, and infinite Majesty will vouchsafe a gracious look to so vile a
worm as thou art? and can thou see a God court thee, and grow coy? does God
offer to kiss thee with the kisses of his Lips, and do thou scorn his
embraces? can thou see him carress thee, and turn away thy face? will thou
prefer the motions of a lying Devil, before the Oracles of the Great God of
Heaven? had thou rather go along with him, that will murder thee, than
accompany him that will encircle thy Head with a Crown of Glory? shall God
magnify his Mercy upon thee, and will thou fall in love with his enemy? does
God intend by making love to thy Soul, to give a character to the world of his
infinite goodness, and compassion, and dare thou be so bold, as to lessen
that character, by thy contempt and ingratitude?

Behold sinner, God is willing to lay aside his Flaming Sword, thou shall hear
of him no more in the Earthquake, or in the Storm, or in the mighty Wind, that
breaks the Rocks in pieces, but in the still small voice, the voice of
Boanerges shall sound no more in thy ears, he will blow his Trumpet of War no
more, all his frowns shall be done away, he will fright thee no more with
Hellfire; if his Grace, his Mercy, his Compassion, can but allure thee to
bethink thy self, and close with him, and so to consider the concerns of thy
Soul, as to resign thy self altogether to his guidance, and direction; his
Aspect shall be kind, his Countenance shall be nothing but smiles, his Face
shall be a perpetual Sunshine, if by consideration of thy ways, thou will
become sensible of thy former folly, and throw it away, and take up with him
alone: if his kindly Beams can thaw thy frozen Heart, if his calm can win thee,
and make thee prostrate thy self before the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Heaven
and Earth shall be no longer in conspiration against thee, and thou shall not
need to look any more for Thunders and Lightnings from that Heaven; stand still
sinner, and see the Salvation of God; behold Grace and Mercy lies weeping at
thy Feet, the free, the sovereign, the extensive, the attractive Grace of God
comes wooing to thy Soul, and does bespeak thee in this manner; Hold, Hold thou
poor besotted creature, whither do thou run? Hear, hear, I bring thee the
joyfullest tidings, that ever were brought to the ears of Men; God will be thy
Father, the Lord Jesus thy Savior, the Holy Ghost thy Comforter, the Angels
thy Companions, thy Life shall be a perpetual Holyday, thou shall be a friend
of God, an Heir of Heaven, and Coheir with Christ, thy sins shall all be done
away, thy iniquities shall be remembered no more, all the promises of the Gospel
shall be thine, God will vouchsafe to live with thee, the Holy Ghost will make
thy Soul his Temple, thou shall have strength to overcome Hell, and Devils,
Flames and Swords, and be more than a Conqueror through him that loved thee,
the Lord Jesus Christ: ask a Heaven, and thou shall have it, a Crown, and it
shall be thrown into thy bosom, a Kingdom, and it shall be thine, ask all the
Treasures of Glory, and they shall not be denied thee; from this time forward
thy name shall be enrolled among the Favorites of Heaven, and in thy Soul, as
in Jacob's Ladder, the Angels shall be continually ascending, and descending,
and thy Head like Gideon's Fleece, shall be watered with the dew of Heaven,
while the unbelieving World shall be dry, and all this shall be thine, if my
Love, my Mercy, my Kindness can prevail with thee, and engage thee to think
seriously, what thou must do to please God, and to be happy for ever. O sinner,
had those who now lie sweltring under the burning wrath of Almighty God, such
an offer as this, how would they leap and triumph, and agree to so reasonable a
condition, and thank God upon their bended knees, day and night, and praise him
without intermission, that he will vouchsafe to receive them on no harder terms
than these! O sinner, is thy heart of stone, that it does not dissolve at this
Gracious Message? Can the Rock hold out against these bowels of compassion?
poor stubborn wretch! were not thy Heart all steel, were not thy Conscience
seared, how could thou forbear being pricked at the heart, had thou but the
least spark of good nature left in thee, what might not these Golden Chains,
these Silken strings, these Cords of Love, do with thy immortal Soul? The only
reasons that the Servants of Benhadad had, to humble themselves to the King of
Israel, was this, We have heard that the Kings of Israel are merciful Kings.
Sinner, have not thou both heard and seen, and see it to this day, that the
true King of Israel is a merciful King, and will not this prevail with thee, to
throw thy self down at his feet, and kiss his Scepter, and consider thy
imprudence, in deviating so long from the end of thy Creation and Redemption,
and make thee contented to part with all the strong holds of iniquity within
thee, and with all imaginations, that exalt themselves against the obedience of
Christ Jesus?

O do not tell me, that thou will most certainly bethink thy self sometime
hereafter, when sickness and approaching death shall take thee off from thy
worldly businesses; Vain foolish man! How do thou know thou shall live till
tomorrow? for, What is thy life, even a vapor that appears for a little time,
and then vanishes away? How many thousands are cut off, as they are going up
the hill, in the noon of their days, before half their race be run? and what
Patent have thou from Heaven, that it shall not be thus with thee? God laughs
at that repentance, which men begin, when they can keep sin and the world no
longer; he sees it is forced and squeezed, and weak, and feeble, and will God
accept of thy Devotion, when thou have exhausted the cream and marrow of thy
Bones in the Devils service? How sinner? consider thy ways upon thy deathbed?
Mad man! do thou know what Consideration means? the Soul must be in its full
strength, that considers the sinfulness and sad consequences of her life. Do
not thou see how in sickness the Soul sympathizes with the Body? how the Mind
languishes with the Flesh? how weak, how feeble the thoughts are upon a
Deathbed? how the mind is employed with thinking of the pain and anguish, and
uneasiness of the Body? how Men's weakness scarce gives them leave to repeat the
Lords Prayer entire, without interruption? how settling their Estates, and
disposing of their worldly affairs, and sorrow, and vexation, that they have
not managed their secular concerns, with greater prudence, takes up their
cogitations? and how transitory, and superficial men's thoughts of sin, and of
another world are, except they have gotten a habit of Heavenly-mindedness, by a
long and constant practice of Holiness, in the time of their health, and
liberty before? And does Salvation deserve no more, but a few slight and skin
deep reflections, when thou lie a dying? Can thou have such low thoughts of
everlasting Glory, as to let Consideration of it, come behind all the
satisfactions of thy flesh? Can thou entertain such pitiful, sneaking
conceits, concerning that mighty Heaven, God out of his singular, and
unparalleled mercy, has condescended to promise to his Saints, as to delay
thy contemplations, and thy taking a view of it, till thy Heart Strings break,
and thy throat begins to rattle, and the House is falling? Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Alas! when men are a
dying, the time of working is past, that is the night, wherein no man can work;
that is the time indeed to reap comfort of our former conscientious practices,
but not the time to work out our Salvation in; that is the time of rejoicing,
because our redemption draws nigh, not the time of setting out from the Gates
of Hell; that is the time to finish our course with joy, not the time to begin a
Holy life. Alas! the strength and vigor which must be used in a Heavenly
conversation, is then gone, and men are just upon the point of reckoning with
God, their accounts must then be ready, not to make up, so that if thou art not
ready now, to take thy Spiritual concerns into serious consideration, thy heart
will be hardened every day more and more, and the longer thou live, the less
mind thou will have to set about it; and if thou do not think it worth thy
trouble, to spare now and then an hour from thy worldly businesses, to mind
this one thing necessary, thou do as good as tell God, that thou will have
none of his Heaven, and judge thy self unworthy of Eternal life.

O Sinner, the present time is the day of Salvation, this is the acceptable
time, now strike, and thy sins will fall, now strive, and the Crown will be
thine, now fall to work, and promise thy self Eternal Rest; thou can call no
time thine own, but the present time, that is only in thine hands; make use of
that, and save thy self from this untoward Generation. Extricate thy self from
the delusions of the flesh, take courage, and be gone, stay not in Sodom, now
accept of Mercy, now lay up thy Treasure, and secure thy right to the Tree of
Life, now remember thy Creator, and God will remember thee, when he makes up
his Jewels, and spare thee as a man would spare his own Son that serves him.

Hear then this, Men, Fathers, and Brethren; the God of your Fathers, the God
of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob has sent us to you, to tell
you, that his Supper is ready, and the doors are open, and the Guests are come,
and yet there is room, and that you may fill the room which is left, is the
message we come to acquaint you withal from him, who delights not in the death
of a sinner, but would have him turn, and live. Hear this ye Great ones, ye
Nobles, ye Mighty Men, and consider your ways: Consider, whether that
voluptuous life you lead, is like that life which that Savior, in whom you
pretend to believe, does prescribe in his Gospel? Consider, whether you are not
obliged to practice all those Virtues, and Duties, that the meaner sort
perform? and whether in framing to your selves, a new way to Heaven, a way
different from what the word of God does represent, you are like to be happy in
those Castles of Air you build, and like to arrive to that Glory, which you
wish for, and hope to be received into? Consider, what your pride, and
sensuality will at last conclude in? and whether you will dare to brave it at
the great Tribunal, as now you do on Earth, where you have no body to control
you? Ye that are Magistrates, whom providence has placed over others to
execute justice, and to show a good example, Consider your ways. Consider, how
heavy your connivance at the most notorious sins, Sins, that offer to pluck,
even God out of his Throne, will lie upon your Consciences one day! Consider
what hurt you do, how many Souls you ruin, by your debauched and luxurious
lives! Consider, whether you can satisfy God, as easily as you can do Man, and
whether that injustice, that oppression, that covetousness, that lewdness you
make nothing of now, are not sins weighty enough to bear you down into the
Burning Lake? Ye Learned Men, whether Ministers or others, who see and know
more than the Vulgar do, Consider your ways. Consider whether that great
Knowledge you have, will not procure ye double stripes, if you improve it not
into a higher degree of seriousness, than common people use; Consider what a
ridiculous thing you make Religion, if being persuaded and convinced of the
rationality of it, you do not express the power of it, in your conversations.
Consider, whether building Heaven with your voices, and Hell with your
behavior and deportment, will not bring down upon you the severest Plagues,
that are written in the Book of God! Ye that are hearers of the Word, and
frequent the Temple of the Lord to be taught his Statutes, and his Ordinances,
Consider your ways. Consider, whether so many entreatings, warnings, reproofs,
and admonitions, in season, and out of season, which you take no notice of,
will not be brought in one day, as evidences to justify your everlasting
condemnation? Consider, how God is like to resent your barrenness, and
unfruitfulness, under the richest means of Grace, under the droppings of his
fatness! Consider, how justly God may punish your not digesting, and applying
his Commands and Precepts to your selves, with hardness and blindness of heart,
and whether this judgment be not more frequent, than the world is aware of,
and whether you do not participate of that judgment? Hear this, all ye that
carry rational Angelical Souls in your Breasts, Consider your ways. Consider,
what shall it profit a man, if he gain the whole world, and loose his own Soul?
or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul? Sirs, you stand upon the
brink of a bottomless pit; who, but a man, whose brains are cracked, would not
look about himself? the least push, or thrust sends you thither; who would not
take some pains to get into a Harbor? the Ship is ready to be cast away, the
Masts are split, it is leaking on every side; who would not lay hold of a Plank
to save himself from drowning? If you know not what to do with that power of
Consideration, God has given you, marvel not, if God takes it away, and since
you will not bethink your selves, how to be freed from sin and misery, protests
in his anger, that you shall not be able to make use of that power any more, in
order to obtain Eternal life; since you will not take up that sword of the
Spirit, to cut the cords of Sin and Disobedience, no wonder if God blunts and
dulls the edge of it, that it shall be of no use to you, when you would employ
it. O Christians, there is no jesting with a merciful God; where the greatest
mercy is scorned and rejected, what can ye expect but the severest judgments?
Be wise therefore, before the black Decree be irreversibly Signed and Sealed
against you, you will bless the hour, and the day, which bears the Date of your
entire and sincere agreement to Gods Will, in this particular; and when you
shall find by blessed experience, that this serious consideration of your ways
is the Gate to Paradise, you will admire the Bounty, Wisdom, and Goodness of God,
that moved your hearts to embrace the motion, and you will not be able to
forbear breaking out into singing the Song of Moses, and the Song of the Lamb,
Blessing, Honor, and Glory be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the
Lamb, for, ever and ever.

CHAP. VIII. Of Retirement, and Prayer, the two great helps to consideration.
Retirement proved to be necessary to make Consideration of our Spiritual State
more quick, and lively. Prayer calls in the assistance of Gods Spirit, and
renders the work effectual. A Form of Prayer to be used upon this occasion.
I Will charitably suppose, that the preceding exhortation, may have made some
impression upon my Reader, and made him in some measure, willing to think more
of his Soul, and of the danger it is in, and of his Eternal State, than
formerly he used to do, and therefore to show him how this consideration must
be managed, that it may in truth conquer, and subdue his inordinate affections,
and make them subject to the best of Masters, I shall lay down some necessary
helps to Consideration, and these are to mention no more, Retirement and Prayer.

I. Retirement, Though I readily grant, (and do commend it too) that Men, as
they are walking with others, or traveling, or going abroad about their
necessary occasions, or standing in their Shops, or other rooms, where company
goes in and out, may think, that the course they have taken hitherto, is not
safe, and therefore it is high time to change, and alter it: yet seeing those
thoughts are too much diverted by sensual objects, and apt to go no farther
than the mind or understanding, and reach no deeper than speculation; it must
necessarily follow, that Retirement is requisite, to make it reach the
affections, and to spread it as far as the Life and Conversation.

By Retirement, I do not mean absconding, or hiding ones self in a corner in
the Country, or in a Wilderness, but retiring in our own Houses. Let the place
we live in be never so populous, to be sure we have Chambers to be private in,
and as the rich may make their best room a Desert for this work, so the poorest
may convert any corner in their Houses into a place for this Exercise; its not
the neatness of a Closet, that cleanses the Soul from filthiness, nor the
curiosity and convenience of a Withdrawing room, that fits the heart for him,
that made it; but as Christ made sometimes a Mountain, sometimes a Ship,
sometimes a Cross, his Pulpit; so a man may make a Meadow, a Field, a Wood, a
Garret, any corner in his House, a place fit to retire in, to consider
seriously how the case stands between God and his own Soul. I know what Men do
commonly object, the very same thing they object against Consideration it self,
and whereof we have sufficiently spoke in the second impediments viz. That they
have a great deal of business, and they can spare no time for this retirement.
Business, no doubt, must be done, but there is a time for every thing, and a
season for every purpose under Heaven, and then sure there must be a time for
this Spiritual retirement too, if there be not, we are obliged to find time for
it; he that cannot, or rather will not, had as good say, he has no time to be
saved, and he that cannot sometimes neglect the concerns of his Body, or
Estate, for the concerns of his better part, derides Salvation, and does not
believe, that there is such a thing, or if there be, that it is of so much
value, as the dirt and dung he grovels in. It Is true, Manasses retirement was
forced, much against his will, yet still it was privacy that contributed much
to his amendment, for while he was encompassed with his Courtiers and
Flatterers, and his fawning crew, he thought Religion a thing below him, and a
New Creature but a canting term; but being alone, none but God and his calamity
about him, having nothing (...) take off his thoughts, from reflecting o^ his
Apostasy, behold, how Consideration melts him, his Conscience sets upon him,
makes him ashamed of his unfaithfulness to his God, makes the Tears stand in
his Eyes, and so great is his change, that he who had exceeded all the Nations
round about him in Idolatry, and lewdness, immediately takes away all the
strange Gods, and the Idols out of the House of the Lord, and all the Altars
that he had built on the mount of the House of the Lord, and in Jerusalem, and
cast them out of the City, and commanded Judah to serve the Lord. 2 Chronicles.
33.15.16.

So pleasing is this retirement to God, that he does expressly call himself, Our
Father which sees in secret, Matthew. 6.4. When Christ had a mind, his Disciples
should see his Glory, he does not carry them to Jerusalem, leads them not into
the Marketplace, does not mingle them with the multitude, bids them not attend
him at Herod's Court; for he knew these places, would rather distract, than
help their Devotion: but he summons them to go up with him into a high
Mountain apart, bids them retire from secular businesses, leave their sensual
affections at home, separate themselves from such worldly employments, as were
apt to take up their minds, that their thoughts might be more at liberty, to
contemplate his Glory, and the transfiguration might affect them more, and make
the deeper impressions upon them.

For indeed we find, that as a man's reason is more free in such retirements, so
God is the readier to meet him, as the Angels did Jacob, in this privacy, and
to display to him the vanity of that world, he has doted on, the Scarlet dye
of those sins, he has delighted in, and that miraculous love, he has
undervalu'd, and trampled on, with the vengeance, he has procured, and been
greedy of: for now it appears, that the man is in good earnest to be saved, and
to such, God never denies his favor, for most men play with Religion, go
about it, as if it deserved no pains, and therefore here God does no mighty
work, as being loath to cast his pearls before Swine. He that retires to
consider, what he must do to be saved, makes Religion his business; and those
that seek me thus shall find me, says the Eternal Wisdom, Prove, 8.17. Such
men's minds he is willing to over-shadow, with the power of the Highest, such
men prepare to meet their God, and God certainly will not fail them. And
Christians say you what you will, either the Gospel is no Gospel, or you will
find by woeful experience, that without you are at some trouble about your
everlasting concerns, and deny your selves in your time, profit, ease,
pleasure, and punctilio's of greatness, to mind your Spiritual interest, and
without Heaven does cost you something more than ordinary, God has no Heaven
for you.

He that retires, and sets aside his worldly business, and makes bold with the
company he is in, and leaves them to take a view of his duty to God, and Man,
that Man lays force upon the Kingdom of Heaven, I am sure offers violence to
his carnal interest, violence to Flesh and Blood. The Heathen could say, that
the gods fell all their Gifts and Riches for diligence, and industry, and we
find it to be true of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that
person who retires, and takes pains with Zachans, to see Christ, may expect the
same gracious return, which was made to that Publican. This day Saivation is
come into thy House.

The truth is, should God discourse sinner, that is in company with other men,
or going about his secular affairs, he would find him yawn and gape, and
stretch himself, and gain as much attention, as he that tells a story to a man,
whose mind is employed about other objects: he seems to give him the hearing,
but when a great part of the tale is told, he starts up, and asks, What do you
say? but in private, where there is none but God and his own conscience, God
can best answer the sinner's objections, against a serious conscientious life,
and the sinner is most likely to attend to God's proposals; for here, if his
Flesh and Blood does plead, that the sin he is to leave, is sweet, and
pleasing, and profitable, God can presently argue with him; Do thou call that
sweet which is most bitter and grievous to thy God, and must expire into the
bitterest groans? is that so pleasing to thee, which offends, and grieves thy
blessed Redeemer, who descended into Hell to snatch thee out of it, and can any
profit here counterpoise the Eternal loss of thy Soul? so if he plead, that the
sin he harbors, is but a little one, his Conscience can immediately dash the
Plea, and reply; How! can that be little which offends an infinite Majesty? Can
that be little which nailed Christ to his Cross? since thou know, that this
little sin is injurious to God's Holiness, what delight can thou take in
affronting him, in whose power it is, either to save thee, or to damn thee? the
less it is, the greater shame it is, that thou should plead for keeping it;
the less it is, the sooner it may be parted withal; O flatter not thy self, thy
great love to this sin, makes the sin it self great; and can thou be said to
love God, that can hug that, which thou know runs counter to his Honor
and Glory?

In the same manner, all other exceptions nay be answered, and the sinner
finding, that the reasons he formerly thought invincible, are so easily dashed,
and blown away, is most likely to hearken to the far stronger arguments of God,
and his own Conscience: the rather, because he retired on purpose, to have a
clearer sight of his ways, than before he had; and since God does vouchsafe him
so distinct a prospect of his Folly, and preposterous Love, he justly thinks,
that not to yield to God's reasonings, is to mock him, and savours of such
ingratitude, as admits of no excuse. Indeed, without retirement our Thoughts
and Considerations flow at large, like Water in the Sea, and we can make no
great observations concerning them: but in retirement, they are much like Water
in a Weather-Glass, and by them we may guess, what temper our souls are in,
whether hot or cold, more exactly than men do at the warmth or coldness of the
weather, by the rising and falling of the liquor in those Glasses. In such
retirements, a Holy awe and reverence seizes on the Soul; and when I see men
can retire to drink, to play, to sleep, and to debauch themselves, I see no
reason but they may, (I am sure they have greater reason to do it) retire to
consider the good, and welfare of their immortal Souls.

I have already proved, that Consideration must be frequent, and consequently
this retirement must be so too, not that a man must never reflect on his
actions, or mind whether they be good or bad, but when he retires; No,
Consideration is either occasional, or a solemn and set Duty; either a habitual
guide, or an extraordinary remembrancer; the former, as it is universally
useful, and a great means to prevent sin in a true Believer, to check him when
he would commit it, to engage him to repentance, when he is fallen, to direct
him what he must do, and to encourage him to those Duties, which are proclaimed
in his Ears, as necessary to Salvation; so it is a necessary companion, where
ever we are, or what ever we are doing; and these occasional Considerations
need no retirement; but then where the stream of man's life must be turned, or
the actions of the day reviewed, how far they have been agreeable to the will
of God, how far they have been contrary to it, or where a strict mortification
of sin must be used, or where a long neglected duty must be made a familiar
guest in thy Soul; in a word, where the work to be done, is of some more than
ordinary difficulty, there those occasional reflections will not serve turn,
but more solemn considerations must be called in, and these solemn
considerations, are properly the things which require retirement, and as its
fit they should be used once a day at least, so he does truly mind the interest
of his Soul, that some time every day retires, and considers how he has
behaved himself that day toward God and Man, whether his heart has not been
too much carried out after the comforts of this world, what incroachment they
have made upon his love to God, and how they will fill the garden of his Soul
with weeds, if he do not stop their progress betimes, and root them up, what
company he has been in that day, what he has done in his Closet, what his
thoughts, words, desires, actions, affections have been that day, whether he
has not been more concerned for the trash, and perishable riches of this life,
than the Glory of God, and the Salvation of his Soul, and how necessary it is
for him, having had a fall that day, to be more careful, and cautious, and
circumspect the next. This Consideration is the pulse of the Soul, which while
it is beating, it is a great sign that there is life in the Soul, and a good
argument, that God will increase and enlarge that life. And as edification, and
progress in goodness, ought to be the real design of retiring, from the World,
so it does necessarily import, that men ought to choose the liveliest hours, or
the hours when their Spirits are most active, and freest from drowziness, for
so great a work. When men are drowzy and sleepy, Considerations may often come
in, but they are so weak, and faint, that they leave the Soul as cold as they
found it, and put it into the circumstances of that man in the Gospel, who took
Men for walking Trees, saw something, but knew not what to make of it, or what
name to give it.

While I am discoursing thus, methinks I see the sensual Reader smile;
retirement thinks he, this were to make my self a prisoner in the soft times of
Peace, and to deprive my self of that freedom, which God and Nature have given
me; This were to go into a Monastery, and submit to the se verities of a
Convent: this at the best, can only befit a Priest, but can be no qualification
of a Gentleman: indeed, if Gentlemen had no Heaven to gain, no Hell to avoid;
if God had made them Beasts, as too many do make themselves, we should not be
displeased at this rambling talk; but it is an old trick, where men have an
aversion from a Duty, to represent it in a dismal dress, and to take off the
burden from their own Shoulders, and to bind it upon others. If they could
satisfy God with these shufflings, as easily as they do their own Consciences,
they were safe, but that, the great day must decide; and when the Archangel
shall sound his Trumpet, to gather the dead from all parts of the world, and
God, who prescribed to all Men, but one way to happiness, shall make a strict
examination, how every one has observed the Rules and Statutes of that way; it
will appear that this retirememt, in order to a serious pondering of our
actions, was a duty incumbent on some people else, besides Ministers. He that
retires upon this account, does indeed imprison himself, but it is, that he may
attain to true and perfect liberty, triumph over the slavery of sin, lead his
corruption captive, and free himself from the dreggs and dross, which corrupted
Nature has brought upon him. Little does the sensual man think what felicity
he robs himself of, by scorning this retirement. Here Heaven would look more
beautiful to him, than in a crowd; here he might in a manner with St. Stephen,
see the Heavens open, and his Savior standing at the right hand of God; here
he might truly enjoy himself, and look with pity on those men, who like Spirits
which are sometimes seen in Mines, with great labor, do nothing at all to any
purpose; and when they have tired, and wearied themselves in the world, like
Flies, burn themselves in that candle about which they have been hovering.

Come sinner, prepare thy Pencil, mingle the richest Colors thou can get,
Draw thy sinful careless life, give it a beautiful Virgins face; Draw all the
charms that thy fancy can find out; here, Draw the Adoration the world pays
unto her, there the bows and cringes, whereby both great and small insinuate
into her favor. On her Head Draw a Tree, whose Fruit is Gold, and the Dew
whereof* hardens into Pearls; let her right hand grasp a Crown, and her left
drop gifts on her Clients, and Votaries. But then, when this proud Peacock is
drawn thus, in all her dazzling circles, forget not to Draw her ugly feet, I
mean an unquiet, roaring, disturbed, distracted, trembling Conscience; for into
this dismal shape, does that lovely Mermaid end. On the other side, I Will paint
a Wilderness, a Grove, which wise Nature made, and in it I Will represent a
devout Soul kneeling, and with the Publican, smiting upon her Breast; then will
I draw Heaven, and out of that Heaven, Grace and Mercy in the shape of an
Angel, flying down with this message, Fear not, I have redeemed thee, thou art
mine; and holding a bottle under to catch her Tears: immediately upon this, the
Holy Ghost shall be seen descending, spreading his beams, and warming that
Soul, and invigorating it to resist the World, the Flesh, and the Devil: by and
by the Glory of God shall appear, and crown all with Peace and Joy, and
infinite content, and Eternal Hallelujahs.

And now Sinner, which of these Pictures would thou choose? do not the homely
feet of the former fright thee? can all the Beauty thou see in that painted
Harlot, countervail the misery it dies into? is an ever-gnawing Conscience,
matter of sport and laughter? when all these painted Gaudes must break into a
dismal Dungeon; will thou laugh awhile, that thou may mourn and lament for
ever? But if thou art so fond of this dangerous Garden, that nothing can
reclaim thee from being delighted with it; take thy choice, give me the other
Landscape. I know this world Men are so fond of, e're long will have an end, and
their pleasures will have an end, and their sins will have an end, and their
glory will have an end; but where these end, Gods Justice and Indignation
begins; Blessed is the man, that has then the God of Jacob for his refuge, the
Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble* what, if I enjoy none of the
worlds want on solaces? I know where better and stronger Consolations are to be
had; what if Thorns and Briars surround my Lillies, and Roses, I know they are
but to preserve them, and to hinder the Devil from tearing them to pieces:
these Thorns are my safeguard, which will e're long be done away, and when I am
out of the reach of all enemies, my Lillies will continue fresh, and
flourishing for ever: what need I covet the world, when I am made to live above
the world? what should I love this Earth for, when I have a God to love? why
should I dote on Nature, when I am in the state of Grace? God has made me many
glorious promises, how can I forbear rejoicing under the thoughts of them? By
Grace I am made partaker of the Divine Nature; wonderful Dignity! vid. Eusebius.
Nierem. de ador. lib. 1. c. (...) and seq.
Being advanced so high, why should I be enamored with a little Dust? when God
has made me a King, why should I debase my self, or stoop to the mean
employment of a Peasant? I know God does not see, as man does see, a Soul that
loves him above all, is more esteemed in his sight, than the proudest Monarch;
nor do rags fright him from fixing his habitation there, where he meets with an
humble, broken heart: let others glory in their great Titles, in this I Will
glory, that I am a Child of God. Who can express the Honor God bestows on
those that give their hearts to him? To be a Child of God is infinitely greater
Honor, than to be of Kin to Princes, or to have the Blood of Nobles running in
my veins. A Father expresses greater endearments to him, that participates of
his nature, and draws his substance from him, than to him, that is only like him
in the face; how far greater love then may I conceive in God to a Child, which
by grace is a partaker of the Divine Nature, than to the blessed Angels
themselves? The whole Creation in a manner participates of the Divine Nature;
but all other Creatures are but Pictures, painted Images of that Glorious
Nature; he that is a Child of God, is a lively Image of his Father, which is in
Heaven, and he has Fellowship, and communion with the Father, and his Son
Jesus Christ. What mysteries are these things to a poor Worldling? but Oh how
comfortable to him, that feels the good Spirit bearing witness with his Spirit,
that he is a Child of God! If God be my Father, then all the Riches he has are
mine; if he be my Father, he cannot but take special care of me; for, Can a
Mother forget her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on the
Fruit of her womb; yea, she may forget, yet will I not forget thee, behold, I
have engraven thee on the palms of my hand, Esaias 49.15, 16. Fathers sometimes,
expose their own lives to save their Sons; God has done infinitely more for
me; for he assumed humane Nature, and exposed his life for me, who was his
Enemy, and a Traitor to him, that I might become his Son.

By Grace I am the friend of God, if God had not taken me for his Child, yet
how excellent, how incomprehensible would the favor be, that he vouchsafes to
take me into the number of his friends? what a stir do men keep, to purchase
the friendship of Great Men? how little do they esteem the friendship of the
Almighty? they have not Souls clear enough to admire the Mercy; their
understandings are too earthy to adore so great a bounty; it requires too much
Spirit and Mind, to be ravished with such compassion. A Friend is often loved
better than near Relations; What may not I promise my self from this Love and
Friendship of God? What calamity or misery is there in which this love cannot
hold my Head, and keep it from aching? To be loved of God, is to be fed with the
richest stream, and to live upon Milk and Honey. If God laid down his life for
his enemies, what will not he do for his friends? when I was his enemy, God
seemed to love me more than he did himself, and now that I am his friend, shall
I think he will love me less, than an enemy? How should I rejoice to have such
a friend as Jonathan was? but alas! what is this friendship to Gods love? All
humane friendship is perfect perfidiousness, in comparison of Gods friendship.
God so loves his friends, that he knows not how to be separated from them; if
God had no other place to move in, but Heaven, he would leave that Heaven, and
come down and join himself to those, whom by his Spirit he has adopted into
the number of his friends; so great, so immense is his love to them. He that is
a friend of God, becomes Gods individual companion. What a favor would it have
been counted, if the Son of God, when he was on Earth, would have joined
himself to one particular man, and would have never departed from him? What a
privilege then must it be, for one who is Gods friend to have the Divinity
always present with him, not only as a companion, but as an inhabitant, for he
dwells in us by his spirit. Did ever any Father love his Son so, as never to
part company? did ever any Mother love her Child, as never to suffer it to go
from her Arms? But God is continually embracing his friends. Among Men, a
Father cannot be always there where his Son is, but God knows not how to be
from him, that is his friend; and though God be in all creatures by his
Essence, Presence, and Power, yet that is, because he is God; with a Gracious
Soul he is, because that Soul is his friend; and if God were not immense and
infinite, and could not be with his other creatures, yet he would be with such
a Soul with whom he is one Spirit; and if he could forget things, yet he could
not forget such a Soul, or lay aside the thoughts of his prosperity, and
welfare; and if he could forsake his other creatures, yet he could not forsake
such a Soul, but would work always some good or other in her: for Gods love
being strong, its always active, and where God bears a good Will to a Soul, he
cannot but communicate goodness to her.

And shall I after all this, repine, because I am not a Favorite of Kings and
Princes, when I have God for my constant guide, and associate? How should I
stand amazed at the strangeness of the favor? if God should charge all the
Angels of Heaven, all the ten thousand times ten thousand Spirits which wait
upon him, to go and attend such a man with all the Grandeur, and Majesty
imaginable; yet what is all this but a desert to Gods society? in having him
for my associate, I enjoy more Dignity, more Majesty, more Pomp and Glory, than
if I had all the Armies of Heaven waiting upon me; and can I think, God is
always with me, and will not provide for me? If I should neglect all things in
the world, and mind nothing but the things of God, and my Fathers business, I
might he confident that he would feed me, and support me, because so Great, so
Good, so Almighty, so kind a friend could not see me perish. The Son of God
has not honored any Angel with the name of Brother, and yet if I am united to
him by Grace, and by his Spirit, I enjoy this privilege, and as Mothers love
those Children most, for which they have suffered and endured most; so I may be
confident that God loves me most fervently, because he has suffered for me on
the Cross, and endured most bitter tortures and agonies for me. How may I
exult, how may I triumph in this love?

O my God! the Angels, for the least drop of that Grace, thou have bestowed on
them, are more beholding to thee, than all other creatures, for all their
natural gifts, and for the creation of the whole world: but for the least
degree of Grace thou have conferred on me, I am more beholding to thee than all
the Angels in Heaven; for that I might live by Grace, thou delivered thine own
Son, the Son of thy Bosom, the brightness of his Fathers Glory, to be
crucified, and to dye for me, which is more than thou have done for all the
Angels in Heaven; and thus thou have obliged me more than thou have done the
Heavenly Cherubins and Seraphins.

Farewell ungrateful treacherous World! I have seen enough of thy deceitful
Presents. I Will follow thy weak judgment no longer, I Will esteem no Riches, but
what my Savior has counted so: In following him I cannot err; self-denial,
and doing the Will of God, were the Treasures he studied to be master of; why
should not I judge that to be Riches, which God has judged so? why should not
my mind agree with the verdict of the Most High? Nay, when God does love me so
entirely, why should not I for love of him conform my understanding to his
judgment? I see, those that love the world, at the same time confess, that
they ought to love the everlasting Riches more; for if the fading things
deserve their love, things permanent and solid, and eternal, ought to be loved
much more. I will not think much of afflictions now, for I find that God by
them, would make me weary of my fondness to perishable trash, and elevate and
raise my Soul, to embrace those Treasures, which neither Men nor Devils can
steal away. Physicians I see, when they would cure a sick man, make him sicker
than he is, by enjoining him abstinence, by adustions, by vomitives, by putting
him to greater torments. I know my Soul is sick, God would make it perfectly
well; but such is my sickness, that God must put me to pain, and anguish, and
great trouble, before I can be well; my Heart is all Flint, but when this stone
is struck sufficiently, it will then send forth Holy Fire; when my Flesh is
weak, my Strength will retire more to my Mind, and Understanding, and I shall
be fitter for Heaven. The glorified Bodies of Saints, in the last day, will be
the more splendid and illustrious, the more they have been afflicted, and
tortured here, and shine the more, the more dismal the Dungeon was, they were
kept in, during their abode in this valley of Tears. Why should I weep, when
God takes away from me the cause of weeping? How many thousands are now weeping
in Hell, because they enjoy^d so much of the worlds comforts, and made them
occasions of affronting their Creator? Shall I count that loss, which is my
gain, and call my want of Riches, a misfortune, when it is the greatest remedy
to fit my Soul for Heaven? what is impudence is it in me, to desire that of
God, which I ought to hate; at the most, love but with fear and trembling? What
inhumanity to my self is it, to beg poison of the Father of Lights, and to
murmr that he gives me not that Viper, which will sting me into endless
tortures? My love of the world is Adultery, and shall I desire that, wherewith
I have committed Adultery? Is it not all one, as if a woman should entreat her
Husband, to let her enjoy the pleasure of an unlawful Bed? the Husband does
show great mercy to her, in that, when he might punish her more severely, he
only removes the Adulterer; and shall I count that mercy an injury? In wishing
for the Riches, and Greatnesses of this world, I do as much desire God to give
me that, whereby I may offend him. Shall I be angry with a Surgeon, who to
prevent the spreading of my Cancer, cuts off a Member, to preserve my life? and
shall I take it ill of God, for wounding my Flesh, to draw out the Arrows that
stick in my heart, and would fester, and kill me, if not pulled out betimes?

How shall I be crowned if I strive not? How shall I strive, if I have no
temptation? I cannot strive without an enemy, and without striving there can be
no victory; the Workman does not pull the Gold out of the fire, till
sufficiently refined, and shall I murmur, that God lets the Fiery Trials
continue upon me, when it is certain, that my Gold is not yet fit to be
received into the Sanctuary? I am full of dangers, but my greatest danger is
security. Men fear, and quake, and tremble, if they are in the midst of an
hundred enemies. I have all the Devils in Hell against me, and a whole Army of
Lusts bent to ruin me, and am not afraid. And when there is nothing can rouse
me from my security, but affliction, ought not I to kiss the rod? In the
greatest troubles I may be assured, that God loves me, and that it is not his
Anger, but his Love, that follows me with chastisements, and why should I fret
under the yoke? especially, when fretting and struggling to shake it off before
Gods time, does but make my neck more sore, and the yoke far more uneasy? I
brought the cause of suffering, with me into the world, which is sin, and how
can I expect I shall be freed from suffering, till I am freed from sin? God
might have placed me in Heaven; immediately upon my coming into the world,
without any of these outward troubles: he could as easily produce Bread out of
the Earth, as he does the Ears of Corn; but that man may sweat and labor, and
relish his bread the better, he causes only the Ears of Corn to spring, and of
them Bread must be made; so by labor and suffering, God leads me unto Glory;
that I may the better relish his bounty, and liberality, and my rest may be the
sweeter after my toil and tempests here. Affliction, I know cannot hurt me, for
my Savior has been my taster; there can be no bitterness in these herbs, when
my God has seasoned them. Why should I love God less than dogs do their
Masters? These poor brutes are beaten, and struck, and chid, and pelted with
stones, and yet the more they are beaten, the more they love their owners, and
cringe, and bow, and humble themselves before them; shall I be worse than a
beast, and shall I carry a rational Soul in my Breast, and kick against those
pricks which God has set to guard me from Eternal Flames? All my sorrows and
bitterness will shortly be poured out into an ocean of sweetness, and how
little of it shall I perceive then? it will then be all lost in a Sea of Glory,
and I shall forget that I was poor, and wretched, and naked, and miserable,
when I shall be Eternally enriched with God bounty, enamoured with his
perfection, decked with his Majestic Robes, comforted with his Consolation,
delighted with his love, enriched by his wisdom, and satisfied with his beauty,
in whose Presence there is fullness of joy, and pleasure at his right hand, for
evermore.

These are some descants upon that Picture of Retirement, with such
consolations can he that retires, refresh himself, while the man that wearies
himself with the vanities of this world, finds no solid peace, and when he
comes to dye, must look back upon his former life with horror and anxiety, But

II. Another great help to Consideration, is Prayer, this is the Ambassador
that must go to Heaven, and fetch the assistance of Gods Spirit from thence.
Consideration shows me my danger, and my happiness, but it is the Spirit of God
must blow upon my affections, that they may actually shun the one, and reach
after the other, and this Spirit must be had by Prayer, not by Lip-labor, not
by Prayer unto which the heart is a stranger, and knows not what the tongue
means in making such a noise, but by Prayer, which expresses the real desires
of the heart, by Prayer, that flows from a deep sense of the absolute necessity
of the grace of God, and has Fire and Flames enough to bear it up into Heaven,
For if you which are evil, can give good gifts unto your children, how much
more shall your Heavenly Father give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him,
says Christ, Luc. 11.13. and what kind of asking this is, appears from the
parable immediately preceding, for which of you, says Christ, v. 5. shall have
a friend, and shall go to him at midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend me
three loaves, for a friend of mine in his journey is come unto me, and I have
nothing to set before him; and he from within, shall answer and say, Trouble me
not, for the door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed, I cannot
rise and give thee; I say unto you, though he will not rise, and give him,
because he is his friend, yet because of his importunity, he will rise and give
him as many as he needs. And then it follows immediately, Ask, and it shall be
given you, i. e. Ask for Gods Holy Spirit, with the same importunity, with the
same fervency and earnestness, that this man did the Loaves; follow God with
incessant cries, resolve not to be denied, and it shall most certainly be given
you.

The truth is, importunate and fervent Prayer shows, a man is in good earnest,
and that he does not come to God out of formality, or merely to satisfy the
motions of a fearful Conscience, but that a great sense of the goodness and
mercy of God, and of his Spiritual wants, and necessities, puts him upon
Prayer, and such Prayers God cannot despise, because he has promised to hear
them, and of this the Evangelist gives us a very illustrious example in the
woman of Canaan, crying unto Christ, Lord help me. the answer is rough, It is
not meet to take the Childrens bread, and give it unto dogs; yet this does not
terrify her, she doubles her cries, and seems to catch our Savior in his own
words; Truth Lord, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs, which fall from their
Masters Table: and now God can hold no longer, but from his mouth drops the
joyful word, O Woman, great is thy Faith, be it unto thee even as thou will,
Matthew. 15.25, 26, 27.

Prayer sanctifies Consideration, and where the Soul begs hard of God, that God
would set home the reflections she has had, and work her into a willingness, to
close with his Will, that he would increase that light which Consideration has
given her; give that light, fire too, to warm as well as clear her, and drive
and force those Convictions, Consideration has afforded her, into a serious
conversion; terrify her so with that sight of sin, which Consideration has
darted into her, that she may remain no longer in the suburbs of Hell, but come
out of Sodom, and so allure her with that beauty of Holiness, which
Consideration has let her have a view of, that she may not be able to resist
the splendour, but submit to the power, and send his Spirit so to move upon her
affections, so to actuate her endeavors, so to encourage her with promises,
that it may not lie in the power of the Devil, nor in the power of her Lusts,
to gainsay or contradict, or dash the resolutions she has taken; where the
Soul does with strong desires, pour out these her requests before God, the good
Father opens the Gates of Heaven, lets in the Messenger, makes him welcome,
smiles upon him, and sends him back, laden with Mercy, and puts words into his
mouth, and bids him tell the Soul boldly from that God who hears Prayer, I
have heard thee in an acceptable time, in the day of Salvation have I succored
thee, I Will pour out my Spirit upon thee, I will open a river in high places,
and fountains in the midst of valleys; I will make thy wilderness a pool of
water, and thy dry land, springs of water; I will plant in the wilderness, the
Cedar and the Myrtle, and the Oil-tree I will set in the Desert, that thou
may see, and know, and consider, and understand together, that the hand of
the Lord has done this, and the Holy one of Israel has created it, 2 Cor.
6.2. Es. 41.18, 19, 20.

Up then Christian, who art resolved not to let the concerns of thy Soul, lie
at six and sevens, who art afraid to hazard Eternity with the careless besotted
world; like another Lazarus, beg Alms of the King of Heaven, Cry aloud, and
spare not: show him thy wounds, thy ulcers, thy poverty thy want, thy
necessity, let a greater fervency attend thy Prayer for Spiritual blessings,
than others use in begging for Temporal Mercies. Prayer is the way to be
enriched with all the Treasures of Heaven; seek Gods assistance with tears in
thine eyes; remember thy Soul is infinitely more precious than thy Body: and if
a Beggar in the street is so earnest with those that pass by to give him
something for the relief of his corporal wants, oughtst not thou to be all
fire, to procure those blessings which will enrich thy Soul for ever? Joseph's
Brethren were pinched with Famine, because they knew not, that their Brother
reigned in Egypt; why should thou starve Christian, when thy elder Brother
reigns in Heaven; who knows what thou want, and is a faithful High Priest,
and is touched with the feeling of thy infirmities, and was in all points
tempted, even as thou art. Come boldly to the throne of Grace, that thou may
obtain mercy, and find help in the time of need. If God has done good to
others for his servants sake, who have pleased him, what will not God do for
thee, for his Sons sake, in whom alone he is well pleased? if God does so
highly esteem the Piety of Men, that he professes, for my servant Jacob's sake,
for my servant David's sake I will be kind to such a one; will he derogate,
do thou think, from the merits and love of his own Son? will he harden his
heart, or stop his ears, or turn away his eyes, when thou call upon him for
Christ's sake, to send down upon thee the dayspring from on high? Christ is the
very object of Gods delight, nothing is sweet, nothing is pleasing to him, but
through, and in Christ: what ever is amiable and acceptable in us, it is for
Christ his sake, that God does think it so. Without light, all colors are
invisible, there is no beauty in them, the light shining upon them makes them
look lovely and amiable; without Christ nothing would appear pure or lovely, or
great, or delightful. He that looks on a green Glass, fancies all things he
looks upon to be green. God looking upon our Holy endeavors in Christ Jesus,
they all appear to him lovely and good, because all that Christ did, was good,
and infinitely pleasing to him. The world had perished ten thousand times, if
God had not looked upon it through his Son, and so supported it; he that looks
through a Glass upon a stinking carcass afar off, does not smell the ill scent
of it; so God through Christ, looks upon our imperfections, and he smells not
the ill savor of our performances. Take courage then, and lay hold on the
horns of this Altar, and if thou know not what to say, when thou have taken
a serious view of thy ways, make use of this, or some other Form.

Oh thou who art the Father of the Spirits of all flesh, the Father of lights,
with whom there is no variableness, nor shadow of turning; here lies a poor
miserable sinful wretch before thee, not worthy to lift up his eyes and hands
to Heaven; I know not where to look for shame and confusion of face, so long
have I gone astray from thee, so often have I provoked thee, so often have I
slighted thee, so often have I turned thy grace into wantonness, so long have I
hunted after broken Cisterns, which can hold no water, forsaking the Fountain
of living water, that thou may justly absent thy self from me for ever; so
disingenuously have I dealt with thee, so often have I endeavored to blind thy
all-seeing Eye, and to cheat my self, that thou might justly cause me to fall
a prey to Satan, look stern upon me, and charge me, never any more to see thy
face. O wretched creature that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? Oh my Lord, how often have thou darted Rays of Light into my Soul, and
the impure fire of my Lusts has prevailed against them? how often have thou
suggested to my Soul, the danger it has been in, and yet I have not trembled?
how often have thou stung my heart, pricked it, and goaded it into serious
reflections? and how soon has this vain world taken me off again, and dulled,
and dashed those considerations? how often have thou sent sparks of Grace into
my Soul, while I have done what I could, to smother that Holy fire? how justly
might thou say, My Spirit shall no longer strive with thee. O my God, there
is no plague, no punishment that is threatened in thy Law, but I have deserved
it, I only stand amazed at thy patience that I have escaped so long, without
being consumed, and ruined. Will thou receive such a Prodigal into thy favor?
will thou be reconciled to so great a rebel? will thou pass by unkindesses of
so deep a Dye? are the gates of Mercy open yet for so vile a wretch? Do not I
come too late, O my Lord, to the throne of Grace? will God be yet entreated for
such a poor forlorn creature? Is there yet compassion left for such a poor
sinner? O my God, I question not thy Power, but thy Will to pity such a Traitor
as I have been: I know thy Mercy is infinite, it would be a disparagement to
thy Glory and Perfection, to deny the exceeding riches of thy Grace; thou
could not be God, if my sins exceeded thy power to forgive; but when I
reflect on thy threatenings, how justly thou denouncest wrath and indignation
against all those, that obstinately prefer their foolish desires, before all
the Dictates and Oracles of thy Holy Spirit; O have not I reason to fear, that
thou will say of me, Cut down this barren Tree, why does it cumber the ground?
and yet how free, how full are thy promises to the truly penitent? how full of
Sweetness and Love are all thy Gracious Engagements to those that will have no
more to do with Idols, that will cleave to thee alone, that will renounce
themselves, and follow thee? O my Lord, these thy promises are my refuge, were
it not for these, desperation would be my portion. I do in some measure see my
folly; I see what a gracious, tender, patient, long suffering God, I have
offended; I see how my Soul has leaned on broken reeds, what a sandy
foundation I have trusted to, how the world has beguiled me, how I have
shunned thy company, been glad when God has been farthest from my thoughts,
rejoiced when I have been least of all reflecting on thy goodness. I have
nothing to plead for my self, I have no apology to make, the greatest charity
cannot excuse my misdemeanors; I have had light and darkened it, convictions,
and smothered them, knowledge, and abused it, reason, and perverted it, heard
thy word, and scorned it, enjoyed the means of Grace, and continued blind, and
hard under them. Thy Mercy is my Sanctuary, I am weary of my burden, I loath
my transgressions, I am willing to be rid of them, I desire to abhor them; but
though I am thus willing my flesh is weak, my understanding dark, my will dull,
my affections to goodness faint, my resolutions in constant. Come, O my Lord,
come down into my Soul, come quickly, O thou great preserver of Men, teach me
to answer all the reasons of Flesh and Blood, against a serious conversion; arm
me with arguments to beat down my carnal interest; furnish me with motives to a
truly Heavenly life; motives, which may break through all the devils
suggestions; motives which may invalidate and weaken the profane motions of my
Lusts. Come down thou Sun of Righteousness, thou mighty Star of Jacob, dispel
the Clouds and Mists which are upon my Reason; clear the eyes of my
understanding, and enable me to see the arts of Sin, the wiles of the Devil,
the snares of the World, the stratagems of the Flesh, and all the mischief
that is plotted against my Soul, by my Spiritual enemies. Convince me thoroughly,
that to follow thee is my greatest interest, that to resist these enemies, is
my greatest safety, that to watch against their charms, is my greatest
felicity. O let me apprehend sin, as it is the greatest evil, let it appear
very terrible to my mind, represent unto me Heaven, and thy Love, and all that
thou have done for me, in such lively colors, that neither death nor life,
neither good report, nor evil report, may separate me from thy love. O let thy
kindness, and the benefits of thy Sons death and passion, and resurrection
appear to me, in such characters, that I may long to be filled with all the
fullness of God. Thy Spirit is perfect Light, and there is no darkness with him.
O let that glorious Light, dissipate that gloominess, those foggs, that
confusedness, that is in my intellectual part; make me conceive clearly, and
distinctly what I must do to inherit Eternal life, and how I must carry myself
to God and Man. Give me such a sight of thy Glory, as may lift me up above the
world, and engage me to have my Conversation in Heaven. Bow my Will, to conform
entirely to thy Will; I would not be mine so much as thine. Come Lord, and take
the government of my Soul into thy hand; I have too long suffered my self to be
guided by merciless Tyrants: art thou not my Master, my Prince, my Father? thou
have the greatest right to rule me. Incline my Will unto thy Testimonies, and
not to Covetousness; when my Will would wander from thy Precepts, cross it, and
put a stop to it, that it may not go beyond the limits of thy Law. O heal my
affections, they hanker too much after this Earth, O make them in love with
Heaven, chide them for deserting their highest, and their chiefest good; let my
hatred pitch upon no other object but sin; let my Love be carried out after
nothing so much as thee; and if I love any thing besides, let me love it only
for thy sake; let my hopes be fixed upon immortality, engrosse thou my desires,
let me fear none but thee, let my chief delight be in thy ways and ordinances;
strengthen my resolutions; O deliver me from that fickleness, I have so long
been guilty of; make my purposes firm, let them be as the Mountains of God,
which can never be moved; let nothing be able to weaken my good intentions;
give me courage to fight the good fight; O Lord in thy strength I Will resist, by
thy Power I will conquer; my heart has locked the out; O knock again, and if
it will not yield, break open the door, and let all my corruptions vanish at
thy Presence, O Lord, I beg no Riches, no Honors, no Preferments, if I have
but Food and Raiment, I will learn therewith to be contented: its thy Grace I
want, establish me with thy free Spirit; give me spiritual Wisdom, even that
wisdom, which makes me wise unto Salvation: thou art nigh unto them that call
upon thee, yea unto all such as call upon thee faithfully. O cast me not away
from thy Presence, I am thine, O save me, order my steps according to thy word;
when I read it, let me read it with that attention, as to observe and take
notice of what thou do command; when I hear it, let me hear it, as if it were
the last time that ever I should hear it: let thy Oracles make deeper
impressions on me than ever; dash all those evasions, and excuses I used to
allege, when I have had no mind to obey thee; let the good motions of thy
Spirit prevail: O that there should be such difficulty in conquering a poor
sinner! O that God should be forced to carress me to my happiness! O that
Heaven should attract me no more! O that God should need to send out messengers
to entreat me to come to the Supper of the Lamb! Lord, take away this dullness,
make me mount up with wings, as Eagles; Let me not be able to go out of thy
Presence, till I have fully, and unfeignedly resolved, to give my self up to
thy service.

O Jesu, the light of the world who enlightenst every man that comes into the
world, where thou dwell, there Mercy dwells; O dwell in my Soul, and Mercy,
and Truth will kiss each other there: teach me to hate my self, not only for
the hurt I have done to my self, but for the injuries and indignities I have
offered thee; I was a horrid monster, thou by thy death made me a pleasing
spectacle in the sight of Heaven; I lay in the mire and pit, thou did advance
me into thy Fathers bosom; I lay trembling under the jaws of the hellish
Dragon, thou gave me a place in the heart of God; I was unworthy of thy
gracious Aspect, and thou have made me capable of being embraced by the Great
and Terrible God; I lay in a Dungeon, thou did promote me to a Throne; thou
have done that for me, which I durst not have hoped, or wished for: it had been
enough, to have delivered me from Hell, but that would not content thee, except
I were raised above the Heavens, and above Angels too: it had been favor
enough, when my condition was so desperate, if thou had parchas'd for me a
suspension, or forbearance of thy Fathers Anger, but thou did go further, and
did purchase me a Pardon too, and not satisfied with that, thou did incline
thy Fathers love to me, and as if that had not been enough, thou did procure
me Gifts and Blessings too, and not only Blessings in general, but the greatest
Blessing imaginable, even thine own Kingdom, and thine own Heritage. How
unworthy have I lived of this incomprehensible Love? O that I might not be able
to reflect upon my life without indignation! Thou art the way, the truth, and
the life; direct me, and I Will strive to enter in at the strait Gate, purify my
Spirit, wash my Soul with thy Blood, that is the Eye Salve which will make me
see, that is the Medicine which will cure my blindness: O cleanse me, and I
shall be whiter than Snow: O thou inexhausted Fountain of Goodness, let me not
go away dry from thee, let the light of thy countenance always shine about me,
and by that light let me discover, not only my grosser sins, but my more secret
corruptions. Draw me after thee, and I shall run, hide me in thy wounds; be my
Advocate, and plead my Cause; thou spreadest open thy Arms to all that desire
Rest; behold I come, receive me Graciously, love me Freely, teach me to rely
on thee; My Joy, my Treasure, my Sovereign Comfort, cause all the fruits of the
Spirit to grow in my Soul. O help me, or else I perish; O assist me, or else I
faint; my Conscience terrifies me, O do thou speak peace unto it, the roaring
Lion threatens to devour me, O show thy gliterring Sword, and drive him away.
Gods anger burns against me, O throw some drops of thy Blood into that fire,
and it will go out. Let me be content to sell all for thee, let me not scruple
to part, even with the best things I have, for thy service; set me as a seal
upon thy Heart, stream down the waters of Life upon me, I Will open my mouth
wide, O do thou fill it; I will live to my self no more, possess all my
faculties, and unite them to thee: make me truly acquainted with my self; let
those joys thou have promised to thy Saints, support me in all my tribulations.
Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.

O Thou Blessed and Eternal Spirit, vouchsafe to breath upon me; blow upon my
Garden, that the Spices may flow, move powerfully upon my Soul, that it may
bring forth fruits meet for Repentance. Let me be truly afraid to resist thy
suggestions. Sanctify, and give success to all my attempts to make my Calling
and Election sure; when my stubborn heart would baffile thy designs to save me,
let thy Grace overcome, and conquer me, represent the love of God to me in that
Glory, that I may instantly throw down all I have, at the feet of Christ; O let
my Soul be so dazzled with its beams, that I may desire, and breathe after
nothing so much, as after a Glorious enjoyment of God. Break the chains of my
sins, command the Fetters I have been bound in, to fly asunder; whatever good
thoughts I have of God, increase them; enlarge my Soul, that I may truly
delight in thinking of thee; let me feel the sweetness of Holiness; let me
taste those joys which thou do vouchsafe to those, that improve thy motions;
tempt me by a foretaste of Heavens Glory, to lay force upon it. Give me a
glimpse of yonder Paradise, that I may not faint in my journey; give me
arguments against my self, that I may be delivered from my self. Fill all the
channels of my Soul with thy gifts, while I sojourn here on Earth, let my heart
be in Heaven; let not self-love in me, hinder me from loving thee; Take my
heart away, and give me thy self, be thou my heart, and all my delight,
wherever I am, be thou my Director, let thy word be my rule, and enable me to
live according to that rule. O Holy, Blessed and Glorious Trinity, one God,
thou immense Sea of happiness, make me to know what it is to be one with thee.
O thou everlasting Goodness, O thou everlasting Wisdom, O thou everlasting
Sweetness, grant I may see thee, seeing, may love thee, loving, may admire
thee, admiring, may imitate thee, and imitating thee, may enjoy thee, enjoying
thee, may never be separated from thee, but live in thy Light, and Love, and
Glory, to all Eternity.

FINIS.

