A PROPOSAL humbly offered to this Honorable House of Commons,
by JOHN HORN Vpholsterer, London,
to Change both the Good and Bad Moneys of this Kingdom, and to make out the
want of Weight in the right Coin, and in so doing to Raise the King, near Two
Millions of Money; And also to cause a Free and open Trade amongst our selves,
and that every Person shall make Use as well of his bad Moneys as his Good,
until his bad Money has wasted it self quite away, as we humbly conceive may
be in a ten Years and much Easier for the People to lose 20 S. in 40 Weeks,
than to lose it in one Day, etc. humbly Referred to the Wisdom of this Honorable
House.

To Demonstrate the Methods how to Change the Moneys, is thus;

Imprimis, A. Brings 10 l. in Moneys to be Changed, the good being picked out,
amounts to but 7 l. in Tale, which 7 l. being weighed, amounts to but 5 l.
which 5 l. be given to A. in Milled Moneys; and for his 2 l. that his 7 l.
wanted in Weight, and his 3 l. of False Moneys, which makes 5 l. be given to A.
upon a Tally, which Tally of 5 l. and 5 l. A. before Received in Ready Moneys,
makes A. up his 10 l. again, and to be supposed to be much better satisfied
with a Tally for his Moneys, which he may then go to Market with again, then
totally to Lose his 3 l. of bad Moneys, which he took in Trade as so much Good;
and no doubt but A. had rather Lose this 3 l by little and little, than
altogether, and less hurt it will do him; And that every such Tally pass even
as for so much Ready Moneys, and in so doing we have a free Trade; for we are
sure we shall not Lose the bad Moneys, if we take it for our Goods, though we
will be as Cautious as may be how we take it, by reason we will have as small a
Tally as we can; This, I humbly conceive shows, That the bad Moneys may be
Changed as well as the Good, and at the same Charge.

II. As to Raising the King Two Millions of Moneys in so doing, and to show
that there will be a speedy consumption of these Tallies, is thus; Every time a
Tally is Paid, Received, Bought, or Sold, it must Lose Four Pence in every
Pound; that is, Two Pence to the King, which must be Indorsed on the Tally,
every time it is so Paid, Received, Bought, or Sold; and the other 2 sunk, that
is thus, viz. A. comes with his Tally of 5 l. and pays it to B. he being so
much Indebted to him and gives B. 1 s. 8 d. more than his Debt, which is all
the Loss A. does receive by putting off his Tally of 5 l. which is 1 s 8 d.
that A. gave to B. Half of it was sunk, and Half was for the King; which Half
for the King, A. takes Care to Indorse upon the Tally, then B. pays the said
Tally to C. which then wants 10 d. of 5 l. which 10 d. A. gave B before, to
make good his Payment, when he should come to pay it, which 10 d. B. gives also
to C. to make up his Five Pounds, and gives C. also 1 s. 8 d. more; as A. did
to him, which is all that B. Loses also by Passing the said Tally; and B. also
takes Care to Indorse 10 d. upon the Tally, which 10 d. still given, C. that
takes the Tally with the 10 d. that A. also gave to B. which makes then in the
Hands of C. 1 s. 8 d. for the King, and 1 s. 8 d. sunk off of the said Tally;
which 1 s. and 8 d. is still handed along with the Tally, and also the rest of
the Indorsements; and all the Indorsements are always left in his Hand that
has the Tally, until they amount to Twenty Shillings; which Tally when its
Indorsements has once amounted to Twenty Shillings shall no more pass in
Payment until Renewed, which will then have just gone through the Alphabet, and
have come into A's Hand again; then A. must carry this Tally of 5 l. to the
Office, and give them the 20 s. of Indorsments which are for the Use of the
King, and take a new Tally of 4 l. and set that to work again. Now I said it
would Raise Two Millions to the King; but I hope by this time this Honorable
House does plainly see, that it will make all the bad Moneys, and the want of
Weight in the good Money, become all Good to the King, which is supposed to be
nearer Four Millions than Two. Now, if this Honorable House shall not think fit
to Raise any thing upon the bad Moneys to the King, then it will be wasted away
the sooner; but since there must be Moneys Raised, I humbly conceive the People
would rather Pay it thus, and make use of their bad Moneys to the very last,
than to Lose their bad Moneys All at once, and Raise so much Moneys for the
King besides.

III. How this may be done, and we continue Trading one with another all the
time our Moneys is a Changing. First, That there be a Grand Office in this City
of London, called, The Tally-Office; and that at the Place where the Moneys is
Changed, no Tallies be given, but an Order to the Tally-Office, to give A. a
Tally for 5 l. more or less, Marked or Stamped, for such a County, as A. shall
desire it; and that no Tally pass out of the County it is Marked for; and that
no Tally pass in any County, till there be an Office fixed in the said County.

For the Convenience of Trade, how to make a Tally Payable in any County in
England, or Wales; thus A. has Tallies by him of a Hundred Pounds, A. wants to
pay a Hundred in B's County; A. must go to the Office of his own County, and
give up his Tallies of Hundred Pounds, and see them Struck out, and take an
Order from the Master of the Office in his own County, to the Master of the
Office of B's County, to give to A. Tallies for a Hundred Pounds, and Number
them with the same Number that A's Tallies was Numbered with before; and for so
doing A. shall Allow 2 d. or 3 d. in the Pound to the King, according to the
Distance of the Place.

IV. That every County Change their Moneys distinctly one after another; and
that so soon as every County shall begin to Change their Moneys, there be an
Office Erected in the same, as well for Suppressing the Falsifying such
Tallies, as for the Return of Moneys, though we humbly conceive a Tally cannot
well be Falsified; however it is but the Receiver's Trouble going with, or
sending the Tally offered him in Payment to the Office to Prove it; which, if
False, then he that offered such Tally, to be Punished according to the Great
Wisdom of this House.

V. That every Parish Change their Moneys distinctly, to avoid Confusions, and
that they have timely Notice to bring in the same; and that every Constable,
and Beadle of such Parish Attend their Parishioners at the Place of Change
during such Time, the better to find out such as have so metamorphis'd the Coin
of this Kingdom, and for the Ptomoting of Trade, that the Old Moneys go still
in every such County after they have so Changed, provided it be Good until they
are called upon a second Time, for it is supposed that one County Trades with
another; And after A's County has Changed their Moneys, in the mean time

C's County must Trade with A. and C's County having not yet Change, by
consequence can neither have Tally nor New Moneys; so that A's County must
still take C's Moneys, till the whole Alphabet has Changed; and then when A.
is Called a second Time, it is to be supposed that every County is furnished
either with new Money or Tallies, and then A's County so called a second time,
refuse any Old Moneys, if C's County comes to Trade with A's let them then
either bring forth their New Moneys, or Return their Tallies. Now hoping that I
have made it very Plain and Easy to Change the Moneys of this Kingdom, and so
continue a Free Trade Now it is convenient to take some Care, that the King be
not cheated of his Due, which I humbly conceive must be thus;

First, That there be a Penalty Laid upon all Persons paying such Tally or
Tallies; That they take Care to Indorse Sum or Sums, as does amount to the
King thereby.

Secondly, That there be a Penalty Laid upon all such Person or Persons, in
whose hands those Tallies shall be, when their Indorsements are amounted to
Twenty Shillings, That they forthwith bring in the same to the Office to be
Renewed, and pay in their Indorsements to the Office for the Use of the King.

Thirdly, That when any such Tally shall have wasted it self away to Twenty
Shillings, that is 4 l. out of the Five, that the Master of the Office, where
such Tally shall come, do give to the Owner thereof 19 s. for 20 in Ready
Moneys, and be Empowered to add the 20 s. he has so Bought, to the next Tally
that comes to be Renewed; and that the Owner of that Tally to whom the 20 s. is
added, do give the Master of the Office 20 s. in Ready Moneys for the 20 s. he
has so added to his Tally; also that no Tally pass in Payment under 20 s. by
reason the Poor shall not be Burdened with them.

Lastly, That when the Tallies of A's County are all wasted away to 20 s. that
the Office give A. 20 s. for his Tally, and that it be the King's Loss; and
then that the Office break up, and no more Tallies pass in that County.

How to find out that they are also wasted, and that none come after the Office
is broke up, is thus; That the Sherriff of the County at the Request of the
Master of the Office, do send to every Parish to give them Notice, if they have
any Tallies left, to bring them to the Office of the County, and by such a Day,
or else stand to their own Loss, that when such Parish has Notice from the
Sheriff, that they receive it publicly In the Church.


