THE VNRIGHTEOVS MAMMON EXCHANGED FOR THE TRUE RICHES OR A SERMON, Preached at
the Funeral of William Adams Esquire; In the Parish Church of St. Lawrence Jury on
Tuesday. September. 3. 1661.

BY THOMAS HORTON. D. D.

Psalm. 112.5.9. A Good Man shows mercy, and lends: He will guide his
affairs with Discretion.

He has dispersed abroad, He has given to the poor, his righteousness
remains for ever.

LONDON Printed by I. R. for John Clark, and are to be sold at the Entrance
into Mercers Chapel. 1661.

To the Right Worshipful, The Master, Wardens, and Assistants Of the Company
of HABERDASHERS IN LONDON.
Right Worshipful, and much Honored in Christ,
BEing requested by the Friends of this worthy Citizen, and Brother of your
Company now lately deceased, to put this Sermon in to print, which was preached
at his interrment, I knew not to whom more properly to dedicate and entitle it,
then to your selves; who being made the Trustees for that Bounty which he has
left behind him, might be also the Witnesses of those Truths which are asserted
of Him, and applied unto Him.

The Scripture which is here handled, I conceived to be every way suitable and
agreeable to the present Occasion: which first being a Funeral, has therefore
in it the seasonable remembrances of Death and final dissolution, and
preparations for another World. And then being the Funeral of a person whom God
had blessed with a very fair and plentiful Estate, has likewise in it the
pertinent mention of this worldly and earthly Mammon, and the Riches of this
present life. And lastly, being the Funeral of a Bountiful and Liberal Person,
and of one that had disposed of his Estate in a Charitable Improvement, has
accordingly in it Directions to make Friends of this Mammon of unrighteousness
to the best and most desirable Advantage.

Now the main scope and end of such Discourses as these are, is that those who
are acquainted with them might in some sort be Conformable to them, and have
them wrought as it were into themselves. This I look upon as that which is more
particularly Your Opportunity, from that Work wherein you are engaged for the
managing of this Persons Liberality. I know not how it comes to pass, but men's
spirits do usually, and for the most part partake of their Employment. Those,
who are taken up in low and meaner services, they have commonly a lowness of
Spirit engendered and contracted by them. Whereas Noble and Generous
Performances beget noble and Generous Affections, and transform the Persons
which are interested and concerned in them into the very nature of the things
themselves. Upon which account it is much to be hoped, that as many of you as
God has furnished with abilities answerable thereunto, in this discharge of a
Trust for another, you will your selves be unawares drawn into a compliance
with so good an example, as is here set before you. At least, that you will so
order and dispose of this Charity of His, as in a manner to make it your own,
and thereby to make to your selves so many Friends of this Mammon of
Righteousness, which you may do at the second hand.

The Heart of man by nature is so desperately treacherous and deceitful, where
it is not rectified by the Grace of God, and a special watchfulness over it
self, as that from hence there are great mistakes and miscarriages oftentimes
in the world in such matters as these are; both for the performing of the works
of Charity in men's own particular Persons, as also for the Executing of the
charity of other men; which yet is no disparagement at all to the works
themselves simply considered being still the same in their own nature, nor yet
any reflection upon such persons as are really conscionable in them who shall
notwithstanding reap the fruit of their own Integrity. But it is that which may
awaken all men very narrowly to look into themselves, and to examine their own
souls in this particular. Because otherwise they may give not only half but
all their Goods to the feeding of the poor, and yet be void of charity: and may
likewise be thought in some sort to discharge their Trust, and yet not to
discharge their Consciences. Our Savior in this very chaprer, and upon this
very occasion it self tells the Pharisees whom he converst withal, that They
were such as justified themselves before men, but that God knew their Hearts;
for THAT WHICH IS HIGHLY ESTEEMED AMONGST MEN, IS ABOMINATION IN THE SIGHT OF
GOD. The better that any thing is of it is own nature wherein we are employed,
the more need have we to look to our Minds and Affections in the managing of
it, that so we may not miscarry in that, wherein we seem to triumph, and most
to glory and pride our selves. Which that it may be the better avoided in this
present business in hand (as in all others besides) it is worth the while for
men to enquire into their state and Condition in Grace; and the constant and
general frame and temper of their own Hearts, there being nothing done as it
should be, which does not flow from such a Principle as this. Our Savior again
in the following words makes this sober and serious Expostulation, If ye be not
faithful in that which is ANOTHER man's, who shall give you that which is your
OWN? we may a little invert it, and turn it thus; If ye be not faithful in
that which is your Own, who shall trust you with that which is another man's?
There is no man can ever be a Good Husband for Others that is a Bad Husband for
Himself; and he that neglects the Care of his own Soul, can never be a good
Trustee for another's Estate. Religion is an Uniform business, and consistent
to it self: Men may carry it perhaps plausibly and gloriously in the Eyes of
the World, and make a fair show in the flesh for a little time; but every man
will have so much Comfort at last, as he has sincerity in him, and a spirit
in which is no guile. When God shall come to Judgment, and Christ shall sit
upon his last Tribunal, (as he one day will) He will then call men to Account
for Affections, as well as for Actions, and for the Principles of doing, as
well as for the Things themselves, which have bin done by them; and then shall
every one have Praise, or Blame from Him.

These things I do not suggest, as any way suspecting your Selves, who have
given sufficient Testimony of your Fidelity in things of this nature by former
experiences: Nor yet as in the least reflecting upon the Example here presented
unto you, whom I have looked upon as a Person of as great Integrity in this
Business as any man else. But only as taking occasion from the Opportunity
which is here afforded to discourse of the Point at large, and to express my
thoughts about it in a General and Theological Discussion. I have nothing
further but my Prayers that God would set home the Truths here mentioned upon
the Hearts of all those that are partakers of them, and that he would send
forth many such Persons out of your renowned and flourishing Society, as may
be enriched with the like Estates, and the like Hearts; which is the earnest
and unfeigned Desire of

Your SERVANT for the True Riches, And, Your FRIEND for the Everlasting
Habitations. Thomas Horton.

Luke XVI. 9. And I say unto you; Make unto your selves friends of the Mammon
of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
Habitations.


THat which has bin wont sometimes to be said of a good wit, it is more
especially and properly true of a good heart: that it is able to make use of
any thing, and to improve it to its own advantage; not only in the examples of
virtue, by conforming to that whch is absolutely and substantially good in
them; but likewise in the examples of Iniquity by picking out that which is
occasionally and circumstantially good in them also. An instance whereof we
have here in this Scripture, which we have now before us in the Parable of the
unjust Steward mentioned in the beginning of this chapter; whose providence and
forecast for Himself against the time of his expected ejection out of his
Stewardship (though by sinful and unlawful means) is improved by our blessed
Savior as a pattern to all rich Persons to provide for their souls against
the time of their expected dissolution and departure out of this world: but in
a way far more warrantable, though in some respects suitable thereunto; and that
is, by making to themselves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that so
when they fail, they may receive them into everlasting habitations.

In the words themselves there are three general Parts considerable: first the
quickening Preface or authoritative Introduction, I say unto you. Secondly, The
sober advice or serious counsel following upon it, Make unto your selves
friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness. Thirdly, The persuasive Argument or
Ground for the practice of it, That when ye fail they may receive you into
everlasting habitations.

We begin with the former, viz. The quickening Preface or Introduction, I say
unto you, This is a form of speech which our Savior Christ does often use in
his discourses, especially in such businesses as are of more weighty and
serious consideration, or where the minds of his hearers are not altogether so
quick and attentive; Here he does usually excite, and stir them up from the
thoughts and apprehensions of the Person, whom they have to deal withal, that
so they may take heed least they refuse him that speaks, who should most
effectually prevail with them. And there is a twofold intimation in it to make
it so much the more efficacious; First of Skill and understanding, I that Know
what I say. Secondly, of Love and affection, I that speak it out of my good
will unto you. Where there is a concurrence of these two; an Intelligent
speaker and an Affectionate, there is very great cause for listening and
attending to him: and so it is here.

I. There Is his skill and understanding; He is not one that speaks at random
he knows not what; but with a great deal of wisdom, and discretion, so great
as that none the like, Never any man spoke as he spoke. And that as to
knowledge and judgment. He knows all kind of Natures and Persons and Actions
and Events. His Name is Counselor, And so he is fittest to advise his people
for his wisdom.

II. For his Love and affection, there is much considerable in that also; there
are many, who can speak admirablely and give very good Counsel in regard of
that which comes from them; but it may be they have some sinister End, or
unworthy design in it: but for Christ what he speaks, it is in sincerity and
out of good will to the persons to whom he speaks, But this I do not insist
upon, as hastening to that which is mainly and principally intended, that's the
First General, viz. The quickening Preface, or Introduction, I say unto you.

The second is the sober Advice or Council which follows upon it in these
words; Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, wherein
again we have two branches more. First, the thing advised to, and that is the
making of friends. Secondly, The means advised to for the effecting and
accomplishing of this thing, and that is to do it by the Mammon of
unrightuousness.

For the First, the thing it self advised to, it is here expressed to be the
making of friends; This will be the more observeable; if we shall consider the
quality of the Persons, to whom these words are directed: and that is (as
appears by the scope of them) to rich men, such persons as have an abundance of
these worldly goods by them, these are they who are here called upon to the
making of friends to themselves.

But stay, what need have these of friends? those that have wealth and riches
and a fullness of these outward possessions, they can shift well enough of
themselves and be their own friends, though they had none else to regard them
or look after them; yea indeed sometimes they think so and are lifted up with
such thoughts as these are: well, but for all that, says our Savior do you
make your friends; you which are rich and wealthy persons, such as these have
need of friends, as well as any man else, yea and they have need to make
friends too; there is that also in the text, make to your selves friends. As for
poor men indeed, we are apt to think with our selves that such as they have
need to make friends, because they have so many Enemies. All the Brethren of
the poor hate him, how much more do his friends go far off from him^ he
pursues them with words, yet they are wanting to him. Pro. 19.7. And again
Pro. 14.20. The poor is hated even of his own neighbor,: but the rich has
many friends. Or many are the Lovers of the rich, as it is in the Hebrew text,
Rich men (as one would think) they have friends enough made to their hands from
the Nature of their condition: well, but yet still for all this, have these (I
say) need to make friends: and Christ himself says it also, yea they have need
to make friends of the poorest and meanest people that are, as having great use
of them. God has in his infinite wisdom and providence, so ordered and
disposed it, that no sorts of men should be absolute or independent one upon
another but that they should be mutually helpful and beneficial. The rich do as
much need the poor, as the poor the rich: and they cannot say unto them we
have no need of you, no more then the members of the body one to another 1 Cor.
12.21. Dives and pauper duo sibi sunt Contraria: sed and iterum duo sibi sunt
necessaria says St. Austin, the rich and the poor they are two contraries to
one another, but yet they are two Necessaries to one another likewise.

Especially, as any of these poor do any thing more abound in grace and virtue
and religion, so their friendship is more desirable then otherwise, such as
these our Savior here aims at, the poor Saints as the Scripture terms them,
Romans 15.26. The godly and the faithful poor, which are the friends and
favorites of Heaven, these he would have rich men to be sure to make their
friends above any other besides, as being such who will be friendly to them in
the best things that are, and which make most for their advantage, as is also
signified in the text, that they may receive ye into everlasting habitations.
From the Connection of which words together Friends, and which will so receive
you, the spirit of God does hint unto us who are indeed our truest friends and
so to be accounted, namely such as do further our Salvation are instruments of
our Conversion, and are means and helps and occasions of our coming to Heaven,
these are the truest and best friends of all; when ever we would make frinds
indeed it will be our concernment to make such. It is true, the world for the
most part has another estimate, and opinion of friendship, counting them the
best friends, which are most opposite in these respects which flatter them, and
sooth them, and harden them and confirm them in wickedness, and those the
greatest Enemies, which deal most Freely and plainly with them. Ionadab was
Amnon's friend, because he promoted his Lust: and St. Paul was the Galatians
Enemy because he told them the truth but with God whose judgment is
infallible, they of all others do best deserve the name of Friends, who most
concur to the saving of the Soul. And that is the first branch observable in
this second General, viz The thing advised to, the making of Friends.

The second is the means advised to whereby to effect it: And that is, By the
Mammon of unrighteousness, as it is here expressed, by Mammon we are to
understand Riches; concerning the Notation of which word there is some
difference amongst Interpreters, some would have it a Greek word, and so
derived from (...) which signifies to desire earnestly, as (...) which
signifies Silver from (...) for the same reason. But it seems rather to be
Syriach, and either fetched from (...) which signifies a Multitude or from (...)
which signifies to trust, because men's riches are commonly their confidence,
and that thing wherein they place their chiefest relyance, The rich man's wealth
is his strong City, and as an high wall in his own conceit, Pro. 18.12. That
for the notation of the word.

Now this Mammon or Riches, it is here called the Mammon of iniquity, or of
unrighteousness (...) whereby Christ would have those who enjoy it, to make
themselves friends, and here there are two things to be opened and explained by
us. First, the reason of the Denomination: why riches are here styled the
Mammon of unrighteousness. Secondly, the force of the Improvement: how this
Mammon of unrighteousness is so available as to the making of friends.

For the first, It is not so to be taken as a general and universal blot which
is cast upon all kind of riches without exception: for riches are simply
considered and in themselves the good blessings of God, and so to be accounted;
but they are called so from what they do prove most commonly and usually in the
event, through man's corruption, from whence it comes to pass, that that which
of its own Nature, and according to Gods institution is the fruit and reward of
industry, it becomes now by a contrary abuse, and misimprovement, the very
badge of Iniquity, and accordingly has the Name of Iniquity put upon it as it
is here in the text, which agrees with another Notation which some give of the
word, besides that which we formerly mentioned, and that is from the Hebrew
(...) which signifies a blot or fault which is usually adherent thereunto, we
may give an account of it in three particulars.

1. In reference to the getting of it, it is the Mammon of unrightuousnesse so
as it is unrighteously purchased, for so it oftentimes is, Ier. 17.11. By
fraud, and lying, and bribery, and extortion, and oppression and the like,
there are great estates in the world, which are got by such means as these;
yea indeed they are very few, which are got without them, or at least without
some kind of touch and tincture of them, hence is that saying of old which is
Fathered upon St. Hierom* Omnis Dives est, aut Iniquus, aut Iniqui Haeres, That
every rich man is either unrighteous himself or else is heir to somebody that
was so before him. I will not take upon me to justify either the truth or the
charity of that speech, which seems to be very harsh and somewhat unreasonable;
but this I will be bold to say, that it is difficult (though not altogether
impossible) very difficult it is out of question, for a man to get a very great
estate with a very clear and upright Conscience, in regard of the manifold
snares and temptations which attend thereupon.

Especially, if we shall take it in its full latitude and extent; as it
concerns us to do; in reference not only to the means, but also to the time,
which though it be seldom thought of, is very considerable in this particular;
when men shall spend that time in the getting of wealth. Which they should
spend in the getting of grace. When they shall be following their trades in the
world, when they should be driving a trade for Heaven, when they shall be so
sunk, and immerst, and swallowed up, in their secular employments, as to have
little or no leisure for the duties and exercises of Piety, and religion, and
the service of God, entrench upon the Lords day, and that which is allotted to
his worship. Amos. 8.5. So busy at their Mammon, as they have no leisure to
look after their souls, or the souls of others that belong unto them: surely
such as these, though they may be free from couzenage otherwise, yet in a sense
they are guilty of it, and of that which is the worst of all, which is the
couzenage of themselves. That wealth which is gotten unseasonably is gotten
unjustly, and the Mammon of Profaneness is no other then the Mammon of
unrighteousness.

II. In reference to the keeping of it, the Mammon of unrighteousness also
from that as there are riches unjustly held and unjustly possessed: woe unto him
that increseth that which is not his: how long? and that ladeth himself with
thick clay. Habb. 2.6. And the hire of the laborers, which is kept back by
fraud cries, and the cry of them is entered into the ears of the Lord of
Sabbath. Iam. 5.4. Withold not good from them, who are the owners of it, when
it is in the power of thine hand to give it. Pro. 3.27. An unrighteous
injoymemt makes it to be the Mammon of unrighteousness, that is the second.

III. In reference to the use of it; hence it is also called unrighteous
Mammon, because it is so often improved unrighteously, even to sin and
iniquity. Effodiuntur opes irritamenta malorum, those who have great estates*
they have from them great opportunites for the following and persuing of their
Lusts in all kinds; and they are not for the most part d^fective or wanting
hereunto: but do improve them abundantly, to oppression and luxury, and excess,
and revenge, and uncleanness, and all kind of wickedness. It was that which
the holy man Agur, was so jealous and suspicious of himself for in reference to
riches, least he should be full and deny God, and say who is the Lord? because
he knew that such corruptions did very frequently attend such conditions. Thus
we see how in all these respects this denomination is very suitable; the Mammon
of iniquity.

Now this expression it is not lightly to be passed over by us, but is
improveable to very good purpose. First, to humble us, in the consideration of
our sinful nature which does thus taint and pollute such things as these are to
us. Riches, (as I said before) they are of themselves the gifts of God, and
they are blessings rather than any thing else: they are such as God does bestow
upon men, as rewards of virtue and goodness in them; therefore we may not
absolutely and indefinitely speak against them, or against those which enjoy
them: it is an envious humor in many people, that because they want riches
themselves, to reproach them in others, as they do also now and then some other
qualifications besides: we know that diverse, Godly persons have bin
possessours of great estates; as Job, and Abraham, and David, and Boaz and the
rest. Wealth has no intrensecal evil or vitiousnesse in it. But that evil
which it has, it has from the sin of man, which intermingling it self with
it, does denominate it the Mammon of iniquity.

Indeed there is nothing at all which we have to do with, but according as we
may use it, it may prove to be iniquity to us, and may very well have the title
of iniquity fastened upon it: It is the Honor of iniquity when it is used to
Pride, and insultation: it is the power of iniquity when it is used to violence
and oppression; It is the beauty of iniquity, when it is used to wantonness
and lascivious allurements: nay further, it is the wit and learning of
iniquity, when it is used to the promoting of Heresy, and the conveying of
erroneus opinions. And so here now the Mammon of iniquity, when it is
unrighteously purchased, possessed and improved and yet this no way reflecting
upon the things themselves which are enjoyed, but upon the Persons of those
that enjoy them. To the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are
defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience
is defiled. Tit. 1.15.

Secondly, It should very much divert us from an inordinate love of these
things, and turn as it were our stomachs against them, which have such
disparagements put upon them, which the spirit of God does on purpose choose to
do, thereby to alienate our affections from them: As nurses do commonly with
their children, when they would keep them from any thing which may be hurtful,
they put dreadful names upon it: so does the Holy Ghost with us, both here and
in other places. The better any creature is in its own Nature, which is of
worldly and earthly consideration, the more does the Scripture usually
disparage it, that so it may teach us not to trust, or to rely upon it, but it
does it in nothing more then in riches, and worldly wealth, for this very
reason whereof we now speak, which should therefore prevail with us.

Thirdly, It should stir us up to the greater care and caution and
circumspection, seeing it is the Mammon of Iniquity most frequently and
usually, and for the greatest part. Oh what need have we then to be very wary
and heedfull about it! what need have those which are rich to be very watchful
over their own hearts in all particulars, that so they may not be defiled with
the iniquity of them? what though it be not so always, (as I have shown that
indeed it is not) yet if it be often, that is enough and such as may very much
awaken men to look to themselves, because as the Philosopher tells us. (...).
That which is often is next to that which is always. We know how in other
matters we are shie, not only of certainties, but also of probabilities of
danger: not only of these evils which will be, and which we are sure cannot be
avoided: but also of those evils which may be, and which are possible at least
to come to pass, and how much more does it concern us then to be so in the
case of our souls, which are usually in so much hazard and danger from these
occasions, though sometimes through Gods goodness they escape it. The Apostle
has sufficiently declared it and given testimony of it. 1 Timothy 6.9. But they
that will be rich, fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. How fearful are
men of such passages, where they are in danger of drowning! such is this which
we have here in this text of a great estate, and yet not so much from the
Estate neither as from the mind. It is not they that are rich, but they that
will be so: (...) who are set and resolved to be so per fas aut nefas, either
by hook or crook. These are the Men which are indeed in such danger: and what
cause is there then (I say) for great watchfulness and vigilancie in such
conditions! That which is one man's ruin, it should be another man's caution.
Certainly those men which have great estates in their hands, they had need to
have great grace in their hearts, to prevent them and to preserve them from the
temptations of those estates. They had need to keep in good terms with God,
and to be much in communion with him, that so pleasing him, they may not be
taken in such snares. Eccles. 7, 26. Magnaefelicitatis est a felicitate non
vinci, says, Aug. It is a great happiness not to be overcome by happiness.
And when riches increase not to set our hearts upon them as David advises Psalm.
62, 10. The Rabbis have a saying amongst them, That a man that has riches,
had need to season and powder his riches, and accordingly they add this (...)
that is, the salt of riches is righteousness, or the salt of riches is
kindness and liberality, and bounty to the poor, which will preserve it and
keep it it from noisomeness and putrefaction, and so much of the first inquiry,
viz. the reason of the denomination, why riches are here styled by our blessed
Savior the riches of iniquity or the Mammon of unrighteousness.

The second is the force of the improvement, how this Mammon of
unrighteousness proves so availeable and efficacious to the making of friends,
or is required so to do as is here employed? where, before we go any further,
we must remove a difficulty and objection which lies in our way, it may seem by
what is here expressed, as if our Savior in some sort did approve of riches
unlawfully got, or unlawfully possessed: because without any further taxation, or
censure upon them, but only naming them, he does advise the persons he speaks
to, that they would make themselves friends of them, and so thereby as it were
make some recompense for the iniquity of them, which is indeed the best use and
improvement which too many make of this counsel: but this was far enough from
the mind of our blessed Savior, who whiles he called it the Mammon of
iniquity, does not thereby so much signify what it may be, as what it usually
is through men's abuse, and his meaning is no more but this, that wealth which
others for the most part do improve as an occasion of iniquity, do ye improve
to the good of your souls, as the furtherance of your eternal salvation; by
making to your selves such friends as may be useful, and helpful to you in that
particular.

Now this (that we may know how it is done) is briefly by expending and laying
out of those riches upon them, whiles rich men do contribute of their estates,
to the relief and supply of poor Chistians, they do thereby get so many
friends, which may further them in their way to Heaven, where there are two
things intimated to us. First, here is the duty and disposition of those which
are poor: secondly here is the privilege and concernment of those which are
rich.

First, here is the poor man's duty and (if he be right) his disposition, which
is, being relieved by the rich, to become a friend unto him. This our Savior
here plainly supposes and takes for granted, whiles he speaks to rich men to
make the poor to be their friends by the relieving of them, he supposed that
being so relieved they will be indeed friends unto them: and so they will: and
so they ought: It is that which is expected from them. Indeed oftentimes
through men's corruption, it proves otherwise in the event, it is the base
ingratitude and unworthiness of some kind of people to be least of all friends
there, where they have received the greatest friendship: those who have done
them the greatest kindnesses, bestowed the most cost upon them, bin most
charitable and bountiful toward them, those are the persons oftentimes who are
most hated and maligned by them, and they are the deadliest Enemies against
them, so fearful a Creature is a man when he once degenerates. But this is
Monst^uous and unnatural, and contrary to all rational expectation; it is that
which one would not look for, and therefore does our Savior in this place
suppose the contrary, he makes account that these rich men, whiles they are
free of their Riches to the poor they will thereby make them their friends.

And indeed so they will: where ever they are that which they should be, where
they are godly, and Christian poor, they will be ready to make conscience of
such grateful returns as these are. Piety its full of its Ingenuity, and
there is a great deal of Goodnature in grace, from whence it thinks it can never
do enough for those persons by whom it is befriended, but is therefore careful
and studious to make all acknowledgement that possibly may be. A godly man that
has received a kindness from any one, he labors to requite that kindness in
the best way that he may, and where he cannot do it in kind, yet at least to
do it in aequivolence: or rather in transcendence, he thinks it a very equal
thing, that those who have sown Carnals should reap spirituals, which
therefore he endeavors as he is able to repay them withal, this is the poor
Christians both Duty and likewise Disposition.

But secondly, Here is also the rich man's Privilege and concernment, that he
may have friends by such means as these. This is (...) as Gregory Nazianzene
calls it: The most compendious way to Salvation, and the easiest ascent to
Heaven, not that this does exclude their own endeavor as to the ways of
piety; which are to be taken in with the other, as we shall hear more anon.
Indeed there are some now and then who are ready to exclude it, and to rest
only upon the interest which they have either in the opinion or affection of
those which are better then themselves: think if they be acquainted with such
and such holy Christians or godly Ministers, and be a little encouraged by them
in that which is good, that this is enough for them, and that they need not to
look any further, but this is an uncertain prop, and so will prove at another
day. No rather as the Apostle advises, let every man prove his own work that so
he may have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another Gal. 6.4. The best
men may be mistaken in their apprehensions of such and such persons, and
oftentimes are; but yet it is an advantage to have their affections to this end
which we now speak of, and so to be improved: and it is the substance of our
Saviors council and advice here in the text, he would have them to make use of
their wealth to such a purpose as this is, as which would be most profitable to
them; we see how it is with men in other matters as to the things of the world,
they would make friends of their riches here all they can; for the purchasing
of their liberty; for the recovery of their health, for the assuring of their
Estates, for the promoting of their requests: their riches make room for them,
as Solomon tell's us, brings them before great men. Prove. 18.16. Men make
themselves friends of their wealth in the Courts of Earth, and how much more
does it concern them to do so in the Court of Heaven: especially considering
that there is no other way to do it so expedient as this. They that know not
how to fasten any thing upon the Master, they deal with his servants, and this
is the case here. As for God himself our riches are no way profitable to him,
nor cannot advantage him: now therefore bestow them upon those which are his,
as David resolves it. Psalm. 16.2. My goodness extends not unto thee O God,
but unto the Saints which are on earth, and unto the excellent, in whom is my
delight. Men love in a way of the world to make as many friends as they can of
that which they have: let them learn to do so in these spiritual Improvements.

Whiles it is said here in the text, Make to your selves friends, there seems
to be a special emphasis in every word, which accordingly is considerable of us.

I. In the word friends, there is a special importance in that, namely; to guide
and direct them in the manageing and ordering of their liberality, that they
do it with the best prudence and discretion that may be, as to the quality and
disposition of the Persons, upon whom they bestow it: not only that they be
such as are simply and absolutely p^or in regard of their necessities: but also
that they be such as are likely conscionably to improve it in regard of their
deserts, otherwise it is not bestowed but cast away. To make friends of an
estate is so to dispose it, as that those who do partake of it, may indeed
become friends from it: they are not likely to receive others into everlasting
Habitations, which have no interest in them themselves.

II. For the word make, there is some force also (as I conceive) in that, to
teach men not only to show mercy to their nearest relations and such as are
friends already from the bonds of Nature or otherwise: but likewise sometimes to
those which are strangers, and at the greatest distance and remoteness: it is
not take friends only but make them, and begin as it were with them. That Is a
good beginning of friendship, which has its foundation laid in Beneficence and
the contributions of Charity.

III. In the word to your silves, there is somewhat likewise in that, which is to
show that by acts of bounty and liberality done to the poor, men, are not so
much friends to others, as rather in conclusion to themselves: and provide for
their own accommodation; and so I have done also with the second general part
of the text, which is the Council here of our Savior to rich men, make to your
selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness.

The third and last is the argument or ground for the practice of it. That when
ye fail they may receive you into everlasting Habitations. In which last
passage of the text, there are two branches further considerable, First the
designation of the time, Secondly, the specification of the benefit: the
designation of the time, that we have in those words, that when ye fail. The
specification of the benefit that we have in these they may receive you into
everlasting habitations.

First, of the designation of the time, when ye fail, that is in one word when
ye dye, where again are two things which we shall take notice off, 1. Of the
Phrase or expression. 2. Of the thing it self, or notion.

For the Phrase or expression, first, we see here how Death is exhibited, and
represented unto us, and that is as a Failing, and defection: and so indeed it
is as to the matters of this present world; a failing of strength, of parts, of
Senses, of understanding etc. All fails in death, yea that which rich men have
in their lives most made of, it must then fail unto them, this mammon of
unrighteousness, which is here mentioned in the text, that must fail too
amongst the rest: and accordingly some Interpreters as namely the Syriac and
Ethiopick do translate the words when IT fails, meaning the Mammon, and so in
like manner our old English translators, that when ye shall want, namely that
wealth, and substance and riches which now ye enjoy, for there is a time for
the deficiency of it, when it will cease unto you. As for rich men to fail,
this seems to be very inconsonant and in consistent, it is almost contradictio
in adjecto. There Is none, who are less in danger of failing in the sense of the
world than those that are rich, yea but yet even these may also fail in the
sense of the text, they may fail to the world when they do not fail in it,
and that is when they fail from it, and leave and forsake it, when their life
once fails them, every thing else also fails which is pertinent to it, and so
their riches amongst the rest.

For the better understanding of this passage, it may not be amiss for us to
reflect upon the word in the Original. The greek word is (...) which signifies
Eclipsin pati, to be under an Eclipse: and indeed Death is such a thing as that
is in either respects, whether we take it in the sense of Aggravation as an
evil enlarged, or whether we take it in the sense of extenuation, as an evil
diminished, in either of these senses it is an Eclipse.

First, take it in the sense of disparagement and aggravation and it is an
Eclipse, so as it is a failing of Light to those who are under the power of
it, therefore we do so often read of the darkness of death, because the eyes
are therein deprived of that light which now they enjoy, It is a deprivation of
Natural light, as it is an eclipse of those Natural comforts, which are
pertinent to the life of Man. And it is a deprivation of wordly light, as it is
an Eclipse of those secular comforts; whereby our natural life is made more
sweet and comfortable unto us, yea it is also sometimes according to the
circumstances of it a deprivation of spiritual light, likewise in the Eclipse
of the light of Gods countenance shining upon the soul; which now and then at
such times especially is obscured and darkened through the black interpositions
of Satan, who is the spiritual enemy, in these and the like considerations,
may it justly have the name of an Eclipse put upon it, in its sense of
aggravation, as being so much.

But then secondly, it is an eclipse also in its sense of extenuation as being
no more. We know that in an Eclipse though the Sunn and Moon be darkened for a
time, yet they are not darkened perpetually, but do recover their light again
to themselves, and with the greater advantage; even so it is also in death:
though there be a failing of light and life for a time, yet there is a
recovery, and return again of them, there is a failing of them in Death, but
there is a recovery of them again in Resurrestion, when Death shall be
swallowed up into victory and perfect abolition, as the Church expresses it
concerning her own condition. Mic. 7.8. Though I fall, yet I shall rise again,
though I sit in darkness yet the Lord shall be a light unto me. And thus much
may be spoken of the Phrase or expression, which is here used of dying, when as
it is called a Failing.

Now further for the thing it self and notion, we may here take notice how
seasonably our blessed Savior does put rich men in mind of Death, and suggest
to them thoughts and meditations of their latter end: when ye fail, that is
(as we have explained it) when ye dye, as considering that that was a time
which they must one day come to: and therefore was fitting for them to think
of, and so to hear of. The thoughts and meditations of Death as they become all
men besides, so are they especially proper and pertinent to men of great and
large Estates, and they had need to be put in mind of them, whiles our Savior
mentions the one, he mentions the other with it, whiles he speaks of Mammon, he
speaks also of failing. This is especially requisite upon this account;

I. To moderate their affections in the pursuit and increase of them that they
may not be too earnest and violent in following after them: but there may be an
end of their desires in this particular, and they may say, there is enough
whiles the Journey is but short, why should the provision be long?

II. To abate their pride and to prevent them from too much confidence and
relyance on such things as these are, Charge them that are rich in this world,
that they be not high minded says the Apostle. 1 Timothy 6, 17. Nor trust in
uncertain riches, whereby he would signify both that rich men are apt to be
high minded; as also that a good means to keep them and prevent them from it,
is by persuading them of the uncertainty of their riches, and the uncerntainty
of them does much lie in the uncertainty of life, seeing that within a while
shall fail, and so their wealth with it, what cause have they then to be
swollen and lifted up in themselves for it, as sometimes they prove to be?
there is no such check upon pride as death, which levels all men both poor and
rich, and makes them indeed to meet together. Dust thou art (O proud man) and
to dust thou shall return, ye shall dye like men and fall like one of the
Princes.

III. To provoke them to a wise ordering and disposeing of their estates, they
must one day dye: therefore let them do good whiles they live, their estates
must in time be left, because their lives must be taken away from them,
therefore let them dispose their estates whiles they live to the best
advantage: what is the reason that many persons have had their estates squandered
and imbezzel'd and come to nothing after their deaths? It has bin because that
whiles they lived they did not so seriously think they should dye as that which
might have excited them to have taken better care about them, that they might
be improved, when as themselves should be gone.

Therefore such persons as those should suffer the words of exhortation, It is
that which becomes those which are Ministers to use unto them as our Savior
does here in the text, and it is such as becomes those which are rich to
receive from them with all patience and meekness of Spirit, and not to put away
far off from them the evil day; as Lewis the eleventh of France who lying
sick, upon great penalty forbade the mentioning of death within his Court. And
so much of the first branch observable in this third general, viz. The
designation of the time; when ye fail, that is when ye dye.

The second is the specification of the benefit, in these words that they may
receive you into everlasting Habitations, where the argument is taken from the
End or Consequent of the forementioned practice, it is both ut
Intentionaliter, and also ut Consecutive, and it implies three things in it.

First, the design on the part of those that are rich, which they are to aim
at, and that is to go into everlasting Habitations.

Secondly; the practice on the part of those which are poor which they will
perform, and that is to bring or receive those rich persons thereinto.

Thirdly, the issue or effect in regard of the thing it self, and that is that
they shall indeed be received and brought into them.

First here is employed the design on the part of those that are rich, which
they are to aim at, and to propound to themselves: and that is that when they
go hence, they may go into everlasting habitations, that when they dye they may
go to Heaven, this is that which they are to have in their eye: and this is
the meaning of this expression wherein again there are three things yet further
implied.

First, that there are everlasting Habitations which are reserved for the
people of God in another world.

Secondly, that these everlasting Habitations they are entered upon immediately
upon Death and dissolution.

Thirdly, that it is all men's concernment, and of rich men more especially to
take care that when they fail, that is dye, they may have entrance and
admission hereinto, that they may be received into these everlasting
Habitations.

First, there are everlasting Habitations, which are reserved for the people of
God in another world. 2 Cor. 5.1. We know (says the Apostle) that if our
earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an
house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. The word tabernacle, it is
of it self a word of short cotinuance but if you add everlasting to it (as it
is here in the text) then it becomes a word of perpetuity, and so indeed it is:
It is (...) as we find that expression used concerning Jerusalem Esaias. 33.20.
A tabernacle that shall not be taken down, nor one of the stakes thereof
removed, neither any of the Cords thereof ever be broken. In my Fathers house
(says Christ) are many mansions, (...) Continued Habitations John. 14.2,

Alas, for these Cottages and Habitations here below, which we many times make
so much off, and keep such a stir to hold, and enjoy and to possess our selves
of them, though men's inward thoughts is that these houses shall continue for
ever, and their dwelling places to all generations. Psalm. 49.11. Yet what
fading things are they in comparison, Houses of Clay, Tabernacles of the Dust,
Habitations which will quickly moulder and vanish away; wear here (...) having
no certain dwelling place, as the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 4.11. Oh but those
dwellings which God has provided for his people in another world, they are such
as are dwellings indeed, where the Inhabitant is sure of the dwelling: and the
dwelling is sure to the Inhabitant, they are everlasting habitations as it is
here expressed unto us, that is the first.

Secondly, these everlasting Habitations they are entered upon immediately upon
Death, this we gather from the close conjunction of these two both together in
the text, that when ye fail they may receive you, that is, that they may
receive you upon your failing. The souls of the faithful go to Heaven
presently upon their departure out of this world, as soon as ever they are set
loose they are with Christ, as soon as they are absent from the body they are
present with the Lord, when this earthly Tabernacle is taken down, they have a
building of God not made with hands, when they fail, they do out of hand pass
to these everlasting Habitations, that so there may be no room left for
Purgatory, or Limbus, and such fopperies as these are.

And then again, when ye fail, that is, as we may take it exclusively not till
then, there is no passage (ordinarily) to Heaven but by Death, that is the Iron
gate that leads to the City of Gold.

Thirdly, which is the main thing here considerable, it is the great
concernment of all men, and especially of those that are rich to take care,
that when they dye they may be received into those everlasting Habitations:
this is that which our Savior does cheiflly offer and propound here unto them:
and accordingly we should be sensible of it, and affected with it, and
endeavor after it, that when we must at last part with all these things here
below, yet we may have somewhat else to hold to, which shall not be parted
withal nor taken away from us, that when this earthly Tabernacle shall be
dissolved we may have (as the Apostle speaks of himself in the place before
cited) an House in the Heavens. We see how it is the Nature of every man, as to
the affairs of this present life when he thinks he shall be turned out of one
dwelling, to provide himself what he can of another: no man would willingly ly
in the streets, but have a place whereto he might retire for his habitation,
and why should we not then be as wise and provident, as to our spiritual and
eternal condition.

Beloved, the world will one day turn us all out of doors, and whither then?
and whither then? Quae tunc abibis in loca? Oh it will be a miserable thing
with that Emperor Adrian (...) know whether: to be destitute and to have no
where to go, at least where we may have any comfort or contentment for our
abode and continuance. Let us therefore be persuaded to lay hold on the present
opportunities which God in providence affords unto us, let us lay up in store
to ourselves a good foundation against the time to come, laying hold on eternal
life. As St. Paul does in particular advise rich men to do; in that excellent
scripture. 1 Timothy 6.18. Let us take time, whiles time serves: whiles the day of
life and grace is continued still unto us. The time for providing for Heaven is
whiles we remain here upon earth: we know how it is in other matters, men do,
not stay till they are out of their old house before they get them a new one,
but get a new one at least in some readinese and preparation before the old one
be gone, whiles they stay and continue still in it, and so let ourselves learn
to do, as to our fittings and preparations for Heaven and another world; let us
do it whiles we abode in this, for it will be too late to do it afterward,
when these dwellings shall be taken away from us. Therefore it is worth our
observation, that is in effect here said in the text, make your selves friends
now that when ye fail, they may not fail you then. In the Greek it is (...)
in the Imperative Aorist: have made your selves friends already. Be aforehand
in this particular, do good now, that ye may reap the fruit of it hereafter.
There are many who never think of doing good till just the time when they
should have the benefit of it: never think of sowing till then when it is time
to reap: therefore if they make themselves friends of their riches it is
perhaps only just when they dye and are going, or are rather already gone out
of the world, But alas I there is then no opportunity for those friends whom they
have made to do this office of friends unto them. If ever it be done at all,
it must be done before. Whiles God gives us time upon earth, we should be
plotting, and contriving for Heaven,

And as this is the concernment of all men, (so to speak more closely to the
text) it is of rich men more especially above the rest. There Is none have more
need to make sure of Heaven, then those who have most of earth. And that upon a
twofold consideration. The one is the difficulty of obtaining. And the other
is the sadness of miscarrying, which is a great deal more in them than in any
other.

First, from the difficulty of obtaining. Our Savior has given notice of it,
that it is hard for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God: and in deed
so it is in regard of those manifold blocks and inpediments, which ly in his
way: which we spoke of before. This if it does not take off our minds from
looking after riches, as it seldom does; yet at least it should stir up our
minds to be more watchful over ourselves in them: and more active in the
pursuits of Heaven.

Secondly, from the sadness of the miscarriage, the better that men have lived
in this world the more tedious will it be to them to be disappointed of
happiness in another. Felix miser maxim miser. Those who are miserable in the
loss and deprivation of former happiness are the most miserable of all: and so
it is here, to go out of a Palace into a Prison, yea into a Dungeon, and pit
of destruction, what a lamentable case is this! when men shall have lived here
in the world in all kind of jollity and delight, and had what ever their hearts
could wish, and then at last be turned into Hell, into that lake which burns
with fire and brimstone for ever; where there is weeping and wayling, and
gnashing of teeth, where the worm never dies and the fire never goes out! To
have had no changes before in all their life: and now to meet with such a
change as this; Oh it will be a change indeed. What is the hope of the
Hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes away his soul, Job. 27.8.
Thou fool: this night thy soul shall be taken from thee; and then whose shall
those things be, which thou have provided. Luke 12.20. Thus it is when men are
rich to the world but are not rich to God. The case is strangely altered with
them, over what it was here. When the wicked spring as the grass and the
workers of Iniquity flourish it is that they may be destroyed for ever Psalm.
92.7.

Therefore let all rich persons especially be awakened in this particular, yea
let all of us together be persuaded to mind those things which concern our
peace, that when we leave these earthly tabernables, we may be received into
those everlasting Habitations. That when we go to our long home, we may go to
our eternal house, which we shall be possessed of for ever. We see in the world
when men remove and go to house, they love if they can to settle and not to
change, to have such habitations as they may desire never to leave: because
removeals are troublesome, and why should we not desire the same also as to our
settlements for Heaven? that when we fail we may not fail, when our flesh and
our heart fails us, yet God may be the strength of our hearts and our portion
for ever. Psalm. 73.26. That though we fail as to Nature; yet we may not fail
as to Grace, and so consequently not fail of Glory: Turpe est in extremo
deficere. It is counted a dishonorable business to fail at the last, let us as
much as we are able prevent this dishonor to our selves with the sad
consequents of it, and the miseries which are attendant upon it, for they that
go not into the everlasting habitations, they shall go into the everlasting
burnings. And that's the first particular observeable in this last passage,
namely, the design on the part of those who are rich, and which they are to
aim at; and that is that when they dye they may go into everlasting
Habitations,

The second is the practice on the part of those that are poor, which they will
perform, and that is to bring, or receive those rich persons, who have bin
friendly to them into these places, that they may receive you etc. It is one
property, and piece of friendship (amongst others) to give some reception to
friends where they are destitute of Habitation, (...), Now this is that which
is here done by those Christians which are relieved, to those that relieved
them. Who having engaged them by their liberality do receive this benefit from
them of admittance into Heaven. This will require a little explication in
regard of some difficulty which is in it. Some there are, who have a conceit
with themselves as if Christ by desiring them to make friends of the mammon of
unrighteousness, did tacitly allow of wealth, which is gotten by unrighteous
Courses; or at least that he did so far extinuate it as that they might
satisfy for the unrighteousness of it by those alms which they bestowed upon
the poor: so that when a man has scraped a great deal of wealth together in
his life time, by couzenage, and injustice, and oppression, and such ways
before named* and also spent (it may be) a great part of it among harlots and
with riotous living, as it is noted of the Prodigal, that in the mean time it
serve the turn to save him, and to make amends etc. It might in the mean time
serve the turn to save him, and to make amends for all his former iniquity, if
when he dyed he gave so much away to such and such persons, which were in want:
But this was far enough from the mind of our blessed Savior; who speaks not
here of Mammon what it ought to be, or may be in the thing it self, but what it
is as to men's usual improvements, as I hinted in part before, and when these
friends are said to receive or bring men into everlasting Habitations, we are
to take it as an improper expression by a Metonymy of the effect, when that is
done whereby the other is consequent, and following thereunto. It is Christ
alone who does properly receive us into those places whereinto he is gone
himself, who having the key of David does open the kingdom of heaven for us
and take us to himself. But even others also who are Christian friends, are in
a sense said here to do it likewise, they do also receive those who have done
good unto them into these everlasting Habitations. And that (as we may take it)
according to this following explication.

I. By their Prayers, and Remembrances of them at the Throne of Grace, whiles
Rich men do bestow their Charity upon the poor Members of Christ, they do
very much engage them, and provoke them to pray for them: And to pray for them
as to those Concernments, which are best and most expedient for them, which is
the furtherance of their salvation. This shall turn to my salvation through
the help of your prayers, Philip. 1.19. The prayers of Christians for one
another, do very much conduce to their salvation and eternal advantage, and
this is that which is done and which is to be done by them. Pauperis est or
are; Divitis erogare, Augustine. The rich are to lay out their moneys and the
poor their Prayers thus. 2 Timothy 1.16. Onesiphorus he was kind to St. Paul and
often refreshed him, and what followed thereupon? we may see in the last verse
of that Chapter, The Lord grant unto him, that he may find mercy of the Lord
in that day: he promoted his Salvation by his prayers.

This must be taken in its full latitude and extent as praying for their
Salvation not only in the end but in the means: for the changing of their
hearts; for the sanctifying of their Natures: for the subduing of their
Corruptions; for the bestowing of the Grace of God upon them in all the kinds
of it, this is indeed to pray for their Salvation, when together with their
prayer, there is a supply of the Spirit of Christ, as in the place before cited
Philipians 1.19.

There are many who when they hear of going to Heaven they think to do it per
saltum; to go thither at one jump, to leap presently from Dives table into
Abraham's bosom: that is from the enjoyment of their lusts to the enjoyment of
Happiness; and they think there is no more belongs to it but only for so many
good men to pray for their salvation at large and there is an end of it. But alas
there is a great deal more then so in it, and so to be expected. When we speak of
the Salvation of any persons, we speak of it in all its intercurrencies, and
preparatories and intermediations of such graces and duties as are tending
thereunto: and so when we speak of praying for their salvation; we are to
understand it in this method, and order and connection, of the discovery of
their Natural condition, of their apprehension of the necessity of Christ, and
of their willingness to close with him upon his own terms Thus do the Saints
and servants of God, help their friends too heaven by their Prayers, not when
they are out of the world, (it is to late then to pray for them) but while they
abide still in it.

II. By their Council and advice, by their gracious and savory speeches: by
their pertinent and seasonable Admonitions, and provocations to that, which is
their Duty, they do hereby further them in this particular, it is not done as
by a charm or spel; but In these holy ways and means: which God has
graciously sanctified to this purpose in the communion of Saints which having a
mixture especially of the Heart and love and Affection of these good men with
it, is very availeable in this respect.

III. By their Testimony and Comprobation, when Christ shall hereafter sit upon
his judgment seat at the last day, then shall these his poor members be ready
to bear witness to the charity of such men as these who have bin liberal to
them: I (says one) was hungry and this man fed me, and I (says another) was
naked and this man clothed me, and I (says another) was a stranger and this
man lodged me, and I (says another) was sick and in prison, and this man came
unto me; and so of the rest. And what shall be the issue and consequent of all
this Testimony at last? why even that which is there signified to us. Matthew.
25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you,
from the foundation of the world.

IV. This holds good in a way of Gratulatory entertainment: those friends whom
you have made by your alms shall receive you into heaven; so far forth as any
of them (as it may happen) being there before you, shall rejoice to see you
come thither as indeed they shall. Look as there is joy in Heaven amongst the
Angels for any one sinner that is converted: so is there joy also in Heaven
amongst amongst the Saints for any one convert that is glorified, there is a
mutual Heavenly welcome which they do bid (as I may say) one to another into
those everlasting Habitations, and this is that which you, who have formerly
bin bountiful to them shall then partake of from them.

The consideration of this point thus opened and in larged may be thus far
useful to us, namely: from hence to teach us to set an high price and
estimation upon the poor servants of Christ, and to think highly and honorably
of them. We do usually so far reckon of any persons as they are able to do
the most for us, now see here by this rule how to account of such persons as
those who are enabled thus to help us to Heaven, which is the greatest good of
all, we should honor them and think highly of them in the midst of many
outward disparagements, they are men of great interest with God, and so they
should be of great esteem with us, and we should never think we can do enough
for them, nor never repent of any good that ever we did them as being sure it
shall not be lost but abundantly recompensed to us: take heed of despising one
of these little ones, who have such great things in their reach.

Yea and take heed of disingageing them also, and of doing any thing to them
whereby to loose or abate of their affection, which may be of more use unto us
perhaps then we are aware of, not only as to the keeping off of temporal evils
and calamityes, and the procuring of many temporal blessings; but also as to
the diverting of God's eternal wrath, and indignation; and admittance into the
everlasting Habitations. And that's the second thing here intimated, xiz, The
practice of the poor releived Christans which they will be ready to comply with
in reference to those persons that relieve them.

The third and last is the Issue, or effect in regard of the thing it self, and
that is that these liberal persons, who do lay out of their essates to good
uses: they shall indeed at the last have admittance and entrance into those
everlasting habitations, They shall receive you: that is no more, but you shall
be received: by taking the words not relatively so much as absolutely, nor
personally but impersonally rather. And this is very suitable and agreeable to
other places of Scripture, where the like Form and manner of expression has
the like sense, and meaning with it; as Luke 6, 38. Good measure shall they
give into your bosom, that is good measure shall be given. Luke 12.20. This
night shall they take away thy Soul: that is, thy Soul shall be taken away. And
Revel. 12.6. Speaking of the woman fled into the wilderness; where she has a
place prepared of God, that they should feed her: that is, that she might be
fed, as will appear if we shall compare it with the 14 verse of that chapter.
And so now answerable here in the text, that they may recieve you, that is (I
say) that you may be recieved. And so now it does not so much point out the
Persons; as rather the state and condition it self, not the Persons conferring
but rather the state and condition it self, which is conferred. This is the
sum of all, that those who faithfully expend of their ^states to the relief of
the poor servants of Christ, when they dye they shall have Heaven it self
bestowed upon them. This is the doctrine of this present text and of the whole
scripture likewise beside: which yet, that it may be duly and rightly
understood by us, must be taken with this explication.

I. That this is not meant of any meritorius virtue in the act of Beneficence
it self: so that whosoever shall give an Alms more or less to any one poor man
or more, he shall thereby ipso facto, and as it were ex opere operato promeriti
a place in Heaven: for that he shall not nor cannot do. There is no proportion
or commensuration betwixt our bounty and the bounty of God in eternal life.

II. It is not so meant neither; as if this liberality were enough of it self
for any man that should go to Heaven, with out other graces besides, for so
neither it is not. It is not liberality considered solitarily or abstractly,
but in its full concomitancy: in the association of other good works going
along with it. It is not when ye fail of your duty, but when ye fail of your
Life.

III. It is not meant neither Independently upon the general principle of
saving Grace wrought in the Heart, we are said to be created in Christ Jesus
unto good works that we should walk in them. Ephesians. 2.10. And it holds good of
these works of Beneficence among the rest: which are no further properly good
neither have Salvation attending upon them, then as they flow and proceed in us
from such a root and spring as this: not from a common principle only of
morality, but from a special principle of regeneration and the new Creature.
The end of the commandment is charity: out of a pure heart, and a good
conscience, and of Faith unfeigned 1. Tim. 1.5.

So then the plain and direct meaning is briefly this: That as God will reward
all other good services besides with Eternal life in a subject duly fitted and
qualified thereunto; so amongst the rest in a special manner will he take
notice of the kindness which is done to any of his poor servants, and will at
last reward that also with eternal happiness and salvation.

This is matter of great encouragement to any to be faithful in such
performances as these, always to abound in this work of the Lord; for as much
as they hear and may know that their labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.
That which makes men commonly so strait-handed and close-fisted toward the
poor, is because they have this conceit with themselves that they shall
otherwise be loosers by the bargains. But here now for their comfort it is the
contrary, if it be gain to be partakers of Heaven, they shall not loose that
are bountiful toward the poor.

And therefore let this argument have its full force and efficacy upon us.
Those whom God has blessed with these estates, they should be prevailed upon by
it, yea, and it is lawful for them to be so, as is here implied. We may do good
out of the hopes of Heaven, and out of respect to the recompense of the reward
as is here signified to us in the text. That which God propounds as an argument
we may make to ourselves as an inducement, and that which he alleges as a
reason to provoke us to charity, we may be wrought upon to charity from the
consideration of that reason in our selves. It is true, we are to do it out of
other considerations besides; out of Love to the performance it self, wherein
we are employed: out of respect to our poor Brethren whom we relieve, out of
obedience to God, who commands it and requires it at our hands, out of regard
to Christ who counsels us, and advises us to it: but over and above we may
take in this likewise out of respect to ourselves, who shall be eternally
rewarded for it.

Beloved, we never know the worth of goodness, till we come to dye and leave
the world, then grace; will be grace, and religion, religion, and goodness
goodness indeed. When ye fail, then ye shall see what it was in the belief of
Gods gracious promises to obey his most holy commands, when ye fail of your
lives, ye shall not then fail of your expectations, God will be as good as his
word and a great deal better and will do for his servants abundantly above all
that they can ask or think. Eye has not seen nor ear heard, neither has it
entered in to the heart of man to conceive the things which God has prepared
for them that love him. 1 Cor. 2.9.

Therefore though our reward may be deferred for the present yet it will come
at last; though we see it not whiles we live, yet we shall partake of it at our
lives end; and though we have it not in this world, yet we shall not miss of it
in the world to come. As our Savior speaks in another place upon the like
occasion. Luke. 14.13, 14. Where he persuades them to invite the poor, the
maimed, and the blind etc. For this (says he) Thou shall be blessed, and though
they cannot recompense thee here yet they shall be an occasion of thy
recompense hereafter, For thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the
just.

And so I have done with the TEXT.

NOw as for the present Occasion, it is (as most here understand) for the
interring of the Corpse of a Gentleman well known amongst you, by name WILLIAM
ADAMS Esquire sometime called to the place and dignity of Alderman in this
Honorable City; a worthy Member of the Right Worshipful Company of
Haberdashers, and an ancient Inhabitant of this Parish in which we now are. Of
whom there are many Good things, which I am able upon mine own knowledge and
many years acquaintance with him to relate in his just commendation. But I
shall endeavor to contract them all into as close a room as may be, that I may
not seem tedious to You, yet somewhat I must needs say, for Imitation, and the
encouragement of others, that they may not loose the Benefit of so noble and
rare an Example: For Examples being such as we are accountable for to God as
well as Rules; I conceive it not altogether improper or impertinent to the work
of our Ministry to unfold them, and lay them open before you with the best
advantage. I could tell you of his great Integrity and plaine-heartednesse and
freedom from guile; of his Humility, and Modesty, and Meekness, and Lowliness
of Mind; neither highly conceited of Himself, nor yet affecting the Applause
of others, of his diligent attendance upon the Ordinances, and his Love to good
Men, of his pitiful and compassionate Affection upon occasion of other's
Calamities: But that which I shall chiefly insist on, as which is most proper
and pertinent, is to show you how good a Parallel and Correspondency he held
with the Text, which we have now discust, and how well he put in practice this
counsel of our Blessed Savior which He gives to Rich Men.

God had blessed him with a very fair Estate here in the world, which was not in
regard of Him the Mammon of Iniquity; but indeed the fruit of Industry, not
purchased by fraud, or injury, or oppression (as sometimes it is) but by a
diligent and laborious hand, which has in Scripture the promise of Riches made
unto it.

He was not suddenly rich, as one that made haste thereunto, (as Solomon
complains of some) which is oftentimes very suspicious, and seldom prosperous;
but he came up to his Estate by degrees, and leisurable proceedings, wherein He
might discern the hand of God going along with him, and assistant to him. And
when he came to have an Estate considerable, his Charity and desire of doing
good grew up with it, and as our Savior here advises, he began to think with
himself of making him Friends therewith, which he did in great Abundance.

His First Care was that which the Apostle Paul seems to require, 1 Timoth.
5.4, 8. (...). To show piety at home, and to take care of his own Relations. He
was mindful and careful of that. And forasmuch as being a Batchelour, he was
destitute of those more direct and nearer Relations of Wife and Children, his
Bounty spread it self forth to his Collateral Branches, for whose sake it is to
be thought he was the willinger to deny himself the Comfort of those other
Dependances. And he was exceeding large and ample in his provisions for them in
every respect, both in educating them suitably to their proper dispositions and
inclinations; and afterward being grown up and fitted for further
Improvements, in perfecting these Beginnings to them. In that he very prudently
and bountifully stocked some, matched others, and follovved them with his
continual advice, and other assistance. One of them amongst the rest I cannot
but take notice of especially, whom he brought up in Learning, Mr. Walter Adams
B. D sometime Fellow of Emmanuel-Colledge in Camb. and now Minister of Hampsted
near London.
first at the Grammar School here in London, and afterward at the University
of Cambridge; and since that being settled in the Ministry, has followed him
with further encouragements, wherein his Cost was not Ill bestowed; God
blessing him with the Comfortable Success of all his Love in that particular.

Having thus comfortably and plentifully provided for his own Relations, and
shown piety at home, his next care was of the public and doing good abroad:
for which purpose after good and serious and very private advice taken with
such friends as were fit to be consulted in such a business, he pitched upon a
design of founding a free grammar School at Newport in the County of Salop, the
place of his Nativity, where he erected a large fabric, for the teaching of
fourscore Scholars (gratis) born in the said Town, or living within three
miles compass thereabout. A large library over the said School: and also two
fair houses thereunto adjoining for the two Schoolemasters therein to inhabit;
together with Gardens and Ground appertaining. He likewise settled lands of
about ten pounds per annum for the teaching of children in the English school
to fit them for the Latin Grammer-schoole.

He built four commodious Almes-houses fronting the Courtyard of the said
school toward the street, and likewise settled a yearly: maintenance upon
the Minister of the said town for the yearly Catechizing of the said scholars
and other youths.

He settled exhibitions for the maintenance of four poor scholars of his
Foundation at the University: and also yearly to clothe and put forth to be
apprentices four poor youths to convenient Trades.

He made provision for the constant repaires of the said school, and
Almes-Houses, and for other conveniences belonging thereunto, all which in his
life time he saw fully effected, and did himself amply endow with good lands
there adjacent. He obtained a Confirmation of the settlement thereof, and of
the prudent Statutes for the Government of the said School by Acts of
Parliament according to law.

He has moreover taken order that after his Decease there should be built a
fair Market-house with a Town Hall over it in the said Town of Newport: for the
effecting whereof he has made ample provision.

Furthermore, he has by his last will and testament given unto Christ's
Hospital (where he was a governor) an hundred and fifty pounds. To the Poor
and Parish of St. Lawrence-Jury (where he had lived for many years) an hundred
and twenty pounds. To ten poor Ministers widows five pounds a piece. To
twenty poor men of the Haberdashers Company twenty shillings a piece yearly
for ever. And to the same worthy Company (whereof himself had bin an Ancient
member) he left friendly memorials of his respect. In whom likewise he reposed
the TRUST of all his former settlements, and made them the visitors and
overseers thereof with due allowance for defraying the charges concerning the
same.

When the aforesaid Schools were finished, and endowed, and two able and
eminent Schoolemasters settled therein, and the Scholars grown numerous, which
was in a very short time; An account coming to his hands of those great hopes
which the visitors and Schoolmasters conceived of much happiness that the
Foundation promised both to present and future Ages, He with Tears uttered
these words, or to the like effect.

That he had great cause to bless God who had entrusted him with such an
estate, but much greater cause to bless him for giveing him an heart to dispose
it in a way that might conduce to Gods glory, and the good of his country.

After all this his cost labor and travail, which was great and of long
continuance, he has by his last will and testament with so much wisdom,
love, and impartiallity, bequeathed a very fair estate among all his relations
and other friends, as that it is believed there is not one of them, but rests
abundantly and thankfully satisfied. There Is many a man that in dividing his
estate divides also his friends, whom he divides that estate unto, and does not
make friends but Enemies of the Mammon of unrighteousness. But it was his
happiness to do the quite contrary, he did not hereby divide his friends but
rather unite them: and not only make them friends to himself, but also one to
another.

God blessed him with a long life, which in it self is a great blessing, and
accordingly both to be accounted and improved, he was an old man, and full of
days, about fourscore years of Age and (which made it so much the longer)
free from those Infirmities which old Age is subject unto and oftentimes
encumbered withal; God making good that promise to him, which is conditionally
made to a good and righteous person. Job. 5.26. Thou shall come to thy grave in
a full age, like as a shock of corn comes in it is season.

Let those whom God has blessed with such opportunities as he had be careful all
they can to improve them as he did, that so making to themselves friends of
this Mammon of unrighteousness they may at last be received into those
everlasting Habitations, which God has prepared for all that love his
appearing.

ERRATA.
Page 25. lin. 2. read not to know whither. page 28. dele lin. penult. in some
Copies.


