Rich Treasure in Earthen Vessels.

A SERMON Preached ( Jan. 1. 1662/3.) at the FUNERAL OF That Reverend and
faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, Mr. JAMES NALTON, Late Minister of God's Word
at St. LEONARDS Foster-Lane.

By T. HORTON, D.D.

Your Fathers, where are they? and the Prophets, do they live for ever?

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1663.

To the READER,
Courteous Reader,
I Do here present unto thee a Sermon preached by a Reverend and Learned
Minister in this City, at the Funeral of that faithful, godly, and truly
conscientious Minister of Jesus Christ, Mr. James Nalton, whose Name is as a
precious Ointment poured forth unto all the godly in this Nation: He was one of
those precious sons of Zion (of whom the world is not worthy) ejected by men,
but now taken into a better Living by the great Bishop of souls. Surely
Englands sins are very great and heinous, that have turned God and Man against
us. Our Teachers are thrown into corners by men, and called away from us by
God. Oh that our eyes could run down with Rivers of tears! but who lays this
to heart? the righteous are despised, rejected, and taken away, but no man
regards it; if our wrestling Jacobs, our Moses's in the gap, our praying
Elijahs, our weeping Jeremiahs, be called home, Lord, what will become of
England! whose prayers will be instrumental to remove those judgments
incumbent, and prevent those which are imminent: if the mourners in Zion cease
from among us, surely then it is not only our duty, but our safety to pray for
(and consequently bewail the loss of) their lives, who are our Fathers, the
chariots and horsemen of England, for whose sake this Nation is kept from the
judgments of Sodom and Gomorrah, yet guilty of greater abominations, I shall
say no more, but commend this Sermon to thy reading, and entreat that candor
from thee, that if thou find any errata in words or phrases, or any thing
that seems imperfect, not to impute it to the reverend and learned Dispenser,
but to the Transcriber hereof So I commend thee to God, Far well.

Rich treasure in Earthen Vessels, etc.
2 Cor. 4.7. But we have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, that the excellency
of the Power may be of God, and not of us.


THere is nothing so excellent or complete in this World, but has its
diminishment and qualifications; and something that does disparage it, and
abates of the excellency thereof; not the things of this World only, but
spiritual things in some sort, as to enjoy them, and partake of them in this
life, have their inconveniences and disparagements annexed, and are mingled with
something that abates of their worth; an instance of which we have here in this
present Scripture which the Apostle Paul signifies to us concerning the
enjoyment of the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ. He had in the verse before
the Text, told us the great privilege that both Ministers and others had in
having the glorious Gospel, viz. The light of the knowledge of the glory of God
in the face of Jesus Christ, shining into our hearts; the consideration of
which is of great encouragement to us; yet adds this as a qualification of it,
viz. But we have this treasure in earthen Vessels, etc: That which does
qualify it, is, That this excellent treasure has its conveyances through weak
and mean persons, men of frailty and mortality. In the words there are two main
parts: I. The Dispensation it self. II. The Account of it.


I. The Dispensation it self, This Treasure we have in earthen Vessels, etc.

II. The account of it, That the excellency of the power may be of God, and not
of us.

I shall begin with the first, the Dispensation it self, which has two
blanches.

1, The Depositum, the thing laid up.

2. The Repository in which this Treasure is laid up.

First, The Depositum, or thing laid up, which is a Treasure, and what is this
Treasure, but the Gospel of Jesus Christ? The Gospel is a Treasure according to
a twofold consideration: In respect of the 1. Matter of it. In respect of the
2. Ministry of it.


Both make up a treasure. The Matter of it, the things of the Gospel are rich
things, and the conveyances of it; the Ministerial gifts and ability, by which
the Gospel is administered, do make up the Treasure: It Is a Treasure in both
respects.

1. In respect of the matter of it; therefore it is we read of the Riches of
Christ, of the Riches of the Gospel. The Scripture makes mention of three
things wherein the Gospel is agreeable to a treasure.

1. A Treasure is a thing of dignity and worth; it is not a company of pebbles
(though many) that will make up a Treasure; a Treasure consists of things of
worth and dignity; and thus is the Gospel; in it are contained excellent and
admirable truths, the Mysteries of salvation by Christ; the doctrine of the
Gospel brings glad tidings of peace and reconciliation with God in Christ;
there we have the gifts and graces of God; there we have glory and immortality,
etc. and those things in the Gospel are administered to us: there is no science
in the world brings such treasure as this.

2. The Gospel is a treasure for variety, abundance, and plurality. It Is not
one thing of worth, but many that makes up a treasure; if few, yet much worth
must be comprehended in them; so in the Gospel we have the manifold wisdom of
God, the rich treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge The Gospel, though it be but
one for substance, yet it is many for improvements; it is a chain of many links;
one faith, but diverse articles of it; so it is a treasure in that respect.

3. It Is a treasure for its closeness; We do not open a treasure to every one,
but it is kept close. The Gospel is a secret mystery, hidden, not revealed to
every one; it is not discovered to carnal worldly men, though it may be
revealed to them in the outward proposition, yet not in the spirituality of it.
But where shall wisdom be found? and where is the place of understanding? says
Job, chapter 28. v. 12. The peace of the Gospel is a treasure hid in the field, not
found by every one.

2. The Gospel is a treasure in respect of the ministry of it; so the Apostle
hints, it is not only light, but a shining light, which has shined into our
hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, etc. It Is a
treasure in this respect, viz. in the discovery and shining of it, the
conveyances, the several gifts and graces of the ministry, by which the Gospel
is conveyed to us, makes up a treasure; and as the Ministry is a treasure, so
the opportunities and advantages thereof are. Thus the Gospel and the Ministry
thereof is precious, and ought to be esteemed and made use of by us. We should
highly account of the Gospel, and put a high value on it, for it is a treasure;
yea, it is a treasure in the want of other treasures, they are rich that are
made partakers of it; Silver and Gold have I none (says S. Peter to the
Cripple) but such as I have I give it thee: this is the privilege of
Ministers; though it may be, poor in respect of themselves, yet are rich to
others. These excellent riches are committed to us, and accordingly we must not
only make use of them our selves, but make them known to others; the Gospel is
a treasure not for us to keep up, but to discover, reveal and manifest to
others; to give the light of the glory of God, etc. This is the work of the
Ministry, We have indeed this treasure, but not for our selves only, but for
others; so we are to keep it, to preserve and maintain it, but so as to be
diligent to impart what is committed to us for the edification of others: Every
Scribe instructed in the Kingdom of Heaven as a good householder, brings forth
things new and old.

The Gospel is a treasure, therefore we ought to carry our selves answerable to
it: As

1. We must labor for it, be diligent in the search of it, dig for it as for
hidden treasures. Lift up thy voice for understanding, etc. Prove. 2.2,3,4. Dig
for it, you know there is a great deal of pains taken, and labor used to get
Worldly treasure, What would not men venture for it? they will go over Sea and
Land, go through sire and water, expose themselves to all dangers for earthly
treasure, make unto themselves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, pass
away a great deal of time, and take a great deal of care for it.

2. Esteem this treasure; this heavenly wisdom, this Evangelical knowledge,
even the Gospel of Christ; labor to understand it, and have the efficacy
wrough upon your hearts.

3. Rejoice in it; how do men rejoice in earthly treasure; so should we, as the
Merchant in the Gospel when he had found the Pearl of Prize, rejoiced
exceedingly; so we ought, as being made partakers thereof, I rejoiced at thy
word, even as one that had found great spoils, (says David) so should we
rejoice always in this treasure. It Is said of those that sat under John
Baptists Ministry, that they rejoiced but for a while, and that is the
condition and misery of many. The City of Samaria when they had received the
Gospel, it is said they had great joy, Act. 8.9.

4. Be careful to keep and preserve it, for it is a treasure, and therefore we
must treasure it up in our hearts; and the rather because it will keep us. It
keeps (as Chrysostom says) the house where it is; other treasures cannot
secure themselves, but if we keep this treasure it will secure us. Discretion
shall preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee Prove. 2.11. thus you see
the excellency of this spiritual wisdom. So much for the first thing
considerable in the first branch. viz. the Depositum, the treasure.

The second thing considerable is, the Repository, h.e. Earthen Vessels, or
vessels of Earth earthen Pitchers: these are the Repository, but we have this
treasure in earthen vessels, etc. Earth is a word of diminution, and
disparagement, and that in three regards; 1 In regard of its meaness and
baseness. 2 In regard of its foulness and pollution. 3 In regard of its frailty
and transitoriness.


It Is passing away in all these respects; these earthen vessels in the Text, is
to he understood, the Apostles and Ministers of Jesus Christ, in regard of
their outward man are so called, and are so according to this threefold notion.

I. In regard of their meanness; their outside is mean, either for person, or
sometimes for estate, body, and outward deportment. This was the condition (you
know) of the first Ministers of Christ, mean and ordinary persons outwardly God
made use of. Nay our Master, our blessed Lord and Savior was mean in regard of
his humane birth, and reckoned of by most men according to his birth and
parentage, So it is with the servants of Christ, they are in their persons
generally base, mean, low, and accordingly rendered despicable to the eyes of
the World.

II. In regard of foulness and pollution; Ministers are called earthen Vessels,
they have many weaknesses, they are men subject to the like passions as others.
It Is true the Ministers of Christ have greater advantages then others, in regard
of their education, knowledge, gifts, and employments, being more free from
those desilements and snares that others are entangled in: yet through the
remainders of the flesh in them, they have many infirmities: so Satan watches
them more then others, lays more snares for them in regard of their parts and
employments; so that they are more subject to his temptations then others.
Satan has a desire to sift them (as the Apostle Peter) as wheat, because he
knows they will draw many after them; so that they must needs be subject to
many weaknesses and infirmities. Sometimes God makes use of the worst sort of
men, even the most vicious and malicious; first he changes them, and then
makes use of them as instruments of glory. The Apostle Paul was a Vessel of
Election to carry the name of Christ unto the Gentiles; yet in times past a
great persecutor. So it pleases God to make use of such, that the excellency
of the power may be of God, etc.

III. Ministers are called Earthen Vessels in regard of the frailty and
mortality of their persons, and earthen Vessels are soon crakt and broken.
Ministers are subject to many infirmities of body: This Heavenly light of the
Gospel shines often through Lanthorns of glass, which are soon broken.
Ministers have weak and frail bodies: Timothy had his bodily infirmities, and
Trophimus was left sick at Miletum, 2 Timothy 4.20. and Epaphroditus was sick nigh
unto death, Phil. 2.27. And Paul had need of Luke the Phyician, probably in
regard of his weakness Thus the servants of God are subject to many
infirmities. Besides the reasons in the Text, there are other reasons why God
will have it so.

1 That they may be more compassionate, and more sensible of the weaknesses of
others, for likeness of condition breeds sympathy of affection.

Men are apt to pity those in the like condition with themselves; so our Lord
took our nature upon him, that he might pity us; he took flesh and blood upon
him, he was tempted in all things like unto us, but without sin, that so he
might succor those that are tempted: So his servants many of them are much
tempted, which may breed in them a sympathy of affection to others that are in
such a condition.

2. God will have it so, that Ministers may have the more experience of the
truths they preach to others concerning an afflicted condition; those that have
had no sickness or other affliction, cannot preach from experience of such
truths that concern such a condition; they cannot preach so feelingly and
savory as others; when they have been under affliction, they will know what
affliction is, both in the nature of it, and the comforts of it, and God's
gracious assistance therein; and so they may speak comfortably, and be enabled
to comfort others, as the Apostle Paul speaks.

3. God is pleased so to order it sometimes for their humiliation, to keep them
low, that so they may not be lifted up by reason of extraordinary
manifestations and impartments; thus St. Paul had given him a thorn in the
flesh, that Messenger of Satai to buffet him, lest he should be exalted above
measure, 2 Cor. 12.7. A thorn was given him, etc. ('it is twice repeated both in
the beginning and end of the verse) that so this thorn in the flesh might keep
out pride in the heart, that so they may have a more low, meek, and humble
frame of spirit, and thereby fitted and prepared for greater services. And

4. That they may be also more conformable to those they have to deal with.
Israel desires Moses to speak to them (and not God) why? because he was like
unto them, and would therefore compassionate them; from whom they therefore
desired to receive the commands of God. Thus it pleases God to deal with his
servants, that as they may pity those they have to deal with, so likewise to
draw the affections of their people unto them, to make them more loving, and
the more to attend on their Ministry, seeing they are so fleeting, and going
away; it pleased God that Epaphroditus should be sick even to death, to endear
the Philippians more to him, chap. 2.25.28. that their love and tenderness may
be drawn forth the more by the discovery of his frailty. Let us improve this.

Use 1. First, as to Ministers, see how the condition is with us in our
Calling; We are Earthen Vessels, taken out of dust; We should often consider
our frailty, to make us more humble, more meek, and more compassionate to
others, more diligent in doing good, that we may make amends for our frailty
and natural weakness that are upon us: We must not think much of it. it being
no more then in former times; it was the condition of the Apostles themselves.
they were Earthen Vessels, they had such weaknesses upon them, men subject to
the like passions as we.

Use 2. Secondly. As for the people, this they may improve in all the notions
and considerations of an Earthen Vessel.

First, In regard of the meanness; you must not esteem the gospel according to
the vessel, according to the disparagement of the Vessel; a Vessel of dishonor
in respect of its matter, may be a Vessel of honor in regard of the gold that
is in it; those Members of the body that are weak, and in themselves less
honorable, we afford a great deal of honor upon them, in decking and clothing
them: So the Ministers Work and Employment, and the Doctrines they bring, are
excellent and of great use; when all is done, we have that we serve for;
according to the employment we are put to, we are honorable, though outwardly
^^ean: Wicked and base men are called filij terrae, they are s^ of the earth,
Job 30.8. Children of fools, yea children of base men; they are viler then the
earth, i. e. Men of no account (as one says) the earth groans under such
ingracious persons; but gracious persons are Vessels of honor; as it was said
of the giants of old, so it may be said of these, They are men of Renown; and
so we should esteem of them. Worldly men look at the outside, and so esteem of
them; so was Christ dealt with, Is not this the Carpenters Son? So those
Teachers in Corinth, endeavored to render St. Paul his presence weak, and his
speech contemptible, 2 Cor. 10.11. that so they might make his Ministry
contemptible also. But this glorious Treasure is in Earthen Vessels; You know
(says St. Paul) Gal. 4.13. that through infirmity of the flesh I preached the
Gospel unto you at first. This was their commendation, v. 14. But my temptation
which was in my flesh, you despised not, nor rejected, but received me as an
Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus.

All his weaknesses, and what ever was matter of discouragement, they did not
despise, but honorably entertained him even as Christ himself. So it was the
commendation of the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. that they received not the
word as the word of man, but (as it is in truth) the word of God, looking to
the mighty God to make it effectual: so should all others do upon this
consideration.

2. Seeing Ministers are earthen Vessels in regard of moral infirmities which
adhere to them: in respect of their corruptions and weaknesses judge of them as
men: but esteem of what is righteous in them; though they have great advantages
against sin, and be very careful against sin, yet notwithstanding they are not
totally exempted and freed from sin; as they are Ministers, so they are men.

3. In regard that Ministers are earthen Vessels in respect of their frailty.
Seeing then they are so frail and transitory, therefore accordingly you should
make use of them, deal kindly and affectionately with them, in that they are
quickly broken. What is sooner broken then a Glass, or an earthen vessel?
Ministers are quickly taken away, and therefore you should be tender of them
while you have them. Where are all the Fathers, Do the Prophets live for ever?
the Word of the Lord indeed indureth for ever, but the Preacher of it does not;
the Gospel is eternal, but the Dispenser is mortal; the Calling is lasting, but
the Minister is transitory; and therefore you should carry your selves With all
tenderness and respect to them: take heed of grieving their spirits, seeing
they are so soon broken. Endeavor also to improve by them, and to get as much
good as you can by them. It is a great argument to work while it is day,
because the night comes when no man can work: whilst God affords means and
opportunities, make use of them: we are but passengers; therefore this is a
great ground for you to endeavor to get all the good you can by your Ministers,
seeing they are frail.

Lastly, By way of improvement: Take notice of the ways of God as different
from man's; God puts excellent treasure into Earthen Vessels; we keep treasures
in strong holds, in the strongest Repositories. God's ways are not as our
ways, he goes another way then we do; he makes use of the poorest, meanest,
and most frail creatures sometimes; he lays aside many times men of greater
abilities, parts and quality, and makes use of weaker to do this great Work.
Chrysostom makes an expostulation, If it be excellent treasure, why in earthen
vessels? Therefore it is a Vessel of Earth, because an excellent Treasure. Thus
Gods ways are unsearchable. This is the improvement.

Now besides this interpretation given of it, there is another that will not be
impertinent. Some understand by Earthen Vessels, the expressions, words and
phrases of the Ministry, through which the doctrines and truths of the Gospel
are conveyed; this is agreeable to what went before: Some false Teachers in
Corinth pleased themselves with eloquent and enticing words of worldly wisdom,
and so endeavored to render Paul's preaching despicable, in regard of the
plainness of it; therefore (says the Apostle) we have this treasure in earthen
vessels, h. e. familiar conveyances, that so we may easily understand it.

Thus I have explained this Earthen Vessel, and so have done with the first
considerable part, viz. the dispensation it self, This Treasure we have in
Earthen Vessels: I come now to the second, viz.

II. The account of this Dispensation, That the excellency of the power may be
of God, and not of us, Which words may be considered two ways.

1. Either absolutely, as lying in themselves. Or,

2. Connexively; to the words before going.

1. Take them absolutely as they lie in themselves, and two things are
exhibited.

1. The excellency of the Gospel and Ministry it self, called Power.

2. The Author and Original of it, laid down two ways, positively, of God; and
negatively, not of us.

1. The excellency of the Gospel and Ministry thereof, called Power: There is a
great deal of power and efficecy in the Gospel, it is in its nature powerful and
efficacious; so the Ministry of it, Romans 1.16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel
of Christ, for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that
believes. See 1 Cor. 2.4. Paul's preaching was in the demonstration of the
Spirit and of Power, etc. It Is called the Arm of God's Power, the sword of the
Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. It Is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two-edged
sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, etc. Heb.
4.12. and many other places. We may conceive it to be so according to the
various effects and consequences of it, viz. as to 1. Conviction. 2. Coversion.
3. Consolation.


1. It Is powerful in regard of conviction, it is a word of conviction; and one
part of the Work of the Ministry is (by the Spirits cooperation) to convince
the world of sin, to open men's eyes, to show them the vileness of their ways,
to discover such courses to be sinful; the Conscience is awakened by the Spirit
in the Ministry of the Word, herein it is powerful and efficacious: There are
diverse instances in Scripture, how powerful the Word has been in point of
conviction; in Foelix, the Apostle Paul preached to him of righteousness and
judgment to come, etc. He trembles: The Judge on the Bench trembles at the
Word delivered by the Prisoner at the Bar: Sa powerful is the Ministry of the
Word, as to discover our sinfulness. So the Disciples going to Emans, their
hearts burnt within them when our Savior opened to them the Prophets, etc. So
it was with St. Peter's Auditors, Acts 2. they were pricked in the heart when
they heard tha; he did preach to them in the power and demoustration of the
spirit, and plainly discovered that sin that they were more especially guilty
of, and when they heard that, they were pricked in the heart, etc.

2. It is a word of Conversion also; Conviction is one thing, and Conversion is
another. Sometimes men may be convinced, but yet have no change wrought in
them; therefore conversion is another work, it is a turning men from darkness
to light, from the power of Satan to God, etc. to receive an inheritance among
them that are sanctified. Herein is the Word powerful, viz. in regeneration, I
have begotten you (by the Word) to a lively hope, etc. of his own will has he
begotten you, etc.

3. It is a word of comfort and consolation, it is a powerful word, and able to
comfort the heart: and the Ministry is very effectual herein (when set on by
the Spirit) to quiet, satisfy, and pacific the consciences of men, which
declares the remission of sin, and whosoevers sins are forgiven, must needs be
comforted. Indeed it is not in the power of men to forgive sint, yet they can
speak a word of comfort in season, by the administration of the promises (the
Spirit of God going along with them) and then they are not only declarative,
but operative. Where (I say) it pleases God to bless and sanctify the Word,
it is effectual for the quieting of the mind, for pacifying of the conscience,
and settling of the troubled soul. Thus you see how powerful the Ministry is;
and seeing it is so, this should teach us how to behave our selves under it; it
is powerful in it self, and powerful in its dispensation, and has none of that
weakness (mentioned before) of the dispenser of it, I was with you (says S.
Paul) in much weakness, and in fear, and intrembling, 1 Cor. 2.3.4. and my
speech -- was in demonstration of the Spirit, and of power. These may seem to
be contradictory; but it is answered, the Word is powerful in the demonstration
of the Spirit, though delivered by one of humane weakness, as before is
declared. This spiritual power we should look at, and labor after; which power
does not consist in matter of elocution, the enticing words of man's wisdom, nor
in matter of voice, which indeed is a good thing, and suitable to the nature of
the matter! a quick and powerful delivery is of great efficacy, and power, for
the setting home of truths, Yet this does not make a powerful Ministry; for a
whisper in the ear may cause a thunderbolt in the conscience: the power lies
first in the nature of the matter; the matter consists in the nature and
condition of mankind, the certainty of judgment, the necessity of Christ, the
covenant of Grace, and the graces and privileges thereof, etc. These carry a
great deal of power and efficacy with them when they are carefully and
frequently dispensed, and Gods spirit going along with them, so they become
powerful; for the Ministry consists not in empty notions and speculations that
will only tickle the sancie, but never reach the conscience. Moral discourses,
though they be of great use, yet if we rest in them, they leave us as they
found us. Evangelical truths (which are manifold) are to be delivered in the
Ministry. Now as the matter of the Ministry must be powerful, so the
expressions must be powerful; there should be sutableness of expression to the
matter, h. e. with gravity, sobriety, affection, etc. Strong lines make but
weak preaching, and take away the efficacy; but delivering truths in the
demonstration of the spirit and in power, that is most effectual: when we speak
feelingly and from our hearts, it comes then (through the blessing of the Lord
with it) with power. This is then to learn us of the Ministry, viz. 1. Use.

Let us be careful that the matter of our Ministry be powerful, so that the
handling and dispensing thereof be powerful, that so it may come home to the
conscience; thus we should deal with all; the words of the wise are as goads,
and as nails fastened by the Masters of assemblies, etc. Eccl. 12.11. So our
words should have a force and power in them. This as the Apostle says, is
mighty and powerful to the beating down of strong holds, etc.

Use. 2. Secondly in reference to hearers; seeing the Ministry is powerful, you
must then submit your selves to the power of it. Many people are Sermon proof,
and think to stand it out against the power of the Word; but if it comes in
power to the conscience, they will not be able to resist it; as it is said of
them in the Gospel, they were not able to resist the spirit by which he spoke
(viz. Stephen.) And for those that desire the conversion of others, what course
should be taken by them for that end? but by good counsel, instruction, prayer,
and good example, to endeavor to convince them, and more especially to bring
them to the Word and administrations thereof, which God has sanctified for
this end.

So much for the excellency of the Gospel, viz. The excellency of the power,
etc. I come to the second:

2. The Author of it, 1. Positively, it is of God. And 2. Negatively, it is not
of us.

First, positively, it is of God, and that in all the considerations of it, in
the full extent of it, it is of God. So the Ministerial gifts, the performances
of it, and the success of it, are all from God.

First, Ministerial gifts are from God; it is he that makes us able Ministers
of the New Testament; there are (says the Apostle Paul) diversity of gifts: to
one is given the Word of wisdom, to another the Word of knowledge by the same
Spirit, etc. 1 Cor. 12.4,5,6. It is God that bestows every good gift.

Secondly, The performance also is from God; his grace concurs and assists
therein; the habit and the act are both from him; God gives gifts to men, and
he enables them to dispense them. Ministerial employments are not only for
general, but particular applications, and so need not only general, but
particular assistances; That I might be enabled (says St. Paul) to fulfill the
work, etc. the Lord stood by me and strengthened me, that my preaching might be
fully accomplished.

It is God that makes the work powerful, efficacious and successful: Alas! when
we have used our best endeavors, all the success is from him, he must make it
effectual; it is said, our Savior went about doing good, for God was with him,
enclining him to the work, and assisting him therein: So he is with all his
servants: their gifts, employments, and success thereof, are all of God, not of
us.

Obj. But it may be objected, Is all from God, and nothing from us? Are we not
said to concur with him? and is not then the power partly ours?

Ans, I answer, No: it is of God, and not of us; we are indeed subjects of the
Ministry, the Recipients thereof, persons employed in the Work, and therefore
are said to be workers together with God, 2 Cor. 6.1. but the power and
efficacy thereof is from God alone: Paul and Apollo are but Ministers, it is God
that gives the blessing; it is not of us in two respects, 1. It Is not merited
by us, it is not of our deserving, nor of our procuring; 1, It Is not of our
deserving; the best and most accomplished do not merit it: I received mercy
(says Paul) to be faithful; he accounted it a mercy to be employed, and to be
faithful therein 2. It Is not of our own procuring, we do not obtain it by our
own power, as Peter said in the recovery of the lame man, It is not by any
power and holiness of ours, that this man is restored, etc. and so it is not
our gifts and industry only, that will make our Ministry powerful; and
therefore in this Work let us be looking up to God, and desire him to assist
us, as Moses said, If thou go not, O Lord, up with us, wherefore should we
go hence? so say I, If the presence of God be not with us, what can we do?

And further, when we do partake of any measure of ability, see where we must
determinate it; Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be all the
glory: We must not sacrifice to our own net, nor give the honor to our own
industry, but wholly give the praise to God, because the excellency is of God.

2. But in the second place, if you look upon the words reflexively, or as
having their connection to the words going before, and so they will agree and
hold together; and thus you may read them: Therefore is this Treasure in
earthen vessels, that the excellency of the Power may be acknowledged to be of
God, and not of us: If it were in Angels, or had we never so strong bodies, yet
the excellency of the power of God would not be so clearly seen, as it is now,
being laid up in poor, frail Vessels: Here Is the power of God, here is the
luster and glory of God most manifested; for so much the more apparently it
will be seen to be from God, by so much the weaker the instrument is, that is
employed by God; therefore if any thing does act beyond its own power, it must
have some foreign powers for the producing such and such acts; therefore when
we see any great matte done by poor, frail and contemptible persons of earthen
vessels, this does plainly show the excellency of the power to be of God, and
not of men; therefore look from man to God, it is God that does these things;
we should overlook earthen Vessels; we should (I say) overlook men that are
these earthen vessels, and look to God that makes the Ministry powerful in such
conveyences as these are.

Furthermore, It may satisfy us of the Ministry, in that we are Vessels, viz.
men of frailty, etc. we are apt to be discouraged, and to think hardly that we
are followed with so many weaknesses, that we have a hard matter, that when we
have taken such pains in the work of the Ministry, we should be thus rewarded;
but this should satisfy us, the more weakness in us, the greater honor will
come to Christ: This Treasure we have in earthen Vessels, that the excellency
of the Power may be of God, and not of us. The weaker the Vessel, the more
honor will redound to Christ.

Furthermore, this may take off the servants of Christ from unwillingness unto
those works and performances which God calls them unto, by reason of their
weakness: Thus it is when God calls to any work or employment, the servants of
God are apt to plead their own inability; Moses says he is not eloquent;
Jeremiah says he is a child; Jonah says he is a man of unclean lips: Thus we
have their delays, their excuses, whereby they endeavor to discharge
themselves from that Work that God calls them to, by their own weakness; etc.
but God refuses such excuses; for who makes the blind to see, the dumb to
speak, but God? It is he that touched Isaiahs lips; it is he that said to
Jeremiah, Do not say thou art a child, for I have sent thee, etc. This I say
then is a consideration that may encourage Ministers in their Work, that the
weaker they are, the honor and glory will redound to Christ; for he said unto
me, (says the Apostle) My Grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is
made perfect in weakness: Not that this is an encouragement or argument for any
to take upon them the great work of the Ministry, without sufficient
qualifications and abilities: But where there is not that degree of ability as
is desired, where there is a true sensibleness of their weakness, this may be
an encouragement unto them, that God delights to show his power in them, that
by so much the more they are weak, so much honor he will gain. For a conclusion,
it comes to this, viz.

That we lay no stress upon any outward things.

There is no stress or happiness in these outward things; those that seem to be
of some concernment, as strength of body, and other outward qualifications that
are of remark; yet consider, they are fading and transitory; this should teach
us in the enjoyments of outward things, a great deal of humility: Though we are
Vessels of gold in regard of the treasure and improvement, yet in regard of our
selves we are Vessels of Earth, and so should be in respect of humility, Let us
look upon all these things as given to us of God even for this very end, That
we may be more serviceable to him and his people.

So I have done with the two general parts of the words, and so with the whole
verse viz. We have this Treasure in earthen Vessels, that the excellency of the
power may be of God, and not of us.

Do we begin again to commend our selves? (says the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 3.1.)
or need we Epistles of commendation to you, or Letters of commendation from
you? ye are our epistle in our hearts, etc. But this is applicable to the
present sad occasion now before us.

This reverend and blessed man of God, Mr. James Nalton, was a person of great
note and eminency among us, one well known in this City, and in this place,
where he spent his labor and pains many years. I could give large accounts and
testimonies of him (if need were) from my own knowledge of him, having been
acquainted with him many years. He was not only a Minister, but the son of a
Minister, his birth and education suting together. He looked upon it not only as
an honor, but as an engagement to be careful to walk in those steps set before
him, and to continue the work of the Ministry begun by his religious father.
Certainly the children of godly and holy parents cannot come off so cheap in
their carriages as others; they have greater accounts to make, as having
greater examples set before them, greater advantages of prayer, exhortation,
etc. and so greater engagements; this was thought on, and observed by him. And
as he was the son of a Minister, so when he came to years and was fitted, he
took upon him the Ministry: as he was one of great abilities, so accordingly he
discharged them faithfully and conscienciously. He was a spiritual, powerful,
conscientious Preacher, he preached by his Life; for (as Erasmus says) we
should not only love to speak truths, but we should digest truths on our own
hearts before we commend them to others, and so they will be the more
effectual. He was a man of a very meek, sweet, and humble spirit; a man of
great humility and of great meekness in the midst of great abilities, which was
a great ornament in him; a man full of tenderness and condescension to others;
a man of a very yiedling and melting frame of spirit, soon dissolved into
tears. It was the saying of one, that a good man is full of tears; so this good
man was full of tears, not affected, but very real, and hearty, drawn from the
fullness of his Spirit, as the Apostle Paul says, he served the Lord in much
humility and many tears. This was remarkable, that in these times our Reverend
Brother was full of tears in delivering his doctrine, which was suitable to the
age we live in, being full of sin and calamity; there is much need of a
bewailing spirit to bewail the iniquities and miseries of the times; they that
cannot bewail themselves, need the tears of others, He was a man of great
integrity, and single-heartedness; in his exhortations he had much of the
simplicity of Christ, as the Apostle Paul speaks. In reference to the Ministry,
he had no worldly and base affections, he had no carnal designs therein; but
his chief design was to bring souls home to Christ, that was his chief
business. As the Apostle says of himself, may also be said of him, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, be had his conversation in the world, not
walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by the
manifestation of the truth, commending himself to every man's conscience in the
sight of God, 2 Cor. 4.2. He was a man that had ability to speak a word in
season, he was very compassionate to wounded spirits, he himself having been
much afflicted, He was a man much in communion with God, and had much
acquaintance with God, and was careful in improvement therein: he was a Jacob
in wrestling with God, a Moses that stood in the gap, an Elijah that prayed
earnestly: the whole land was the better for such a person, being much with
God; he made many addresses to him, and had much holy familiarity with him. And
as in his public performances he was very faithful and beneficial, so in his
family and private he was very fruitful and serious. In a word (not to multiply
much in this kind, you need it less in this Auditory, but only by way of
grateful memorial) there was much of God and Christ in him, and he was a great
example to his fellow servants; there was much of his Treasure (spoken of in
the Text) in this earthen Vessel; as in the matter of it, he was one of a
Gospel spirit; and in the conveyances of it, he had great abilities for the
work of the Ministry, and discharged it with a great deal of success. As he had
this treasure in an earthen vessel, so his vessel, his frail body was no
disparagement to him, but the advancement of the treasure, in setting forth the
power to be of God; his outward man was much weak and worn away, but his inward
man was upheld by the grace of God. His first work in the Ministry was in that
place where my self have relation to; he was an assistant to my Predecessor
(being then past labor) Mr. Richard Couder, and performed the work so well,
that he was exceedingly beloved of Mr. Couder, and well beloved of the Parish,
and other places. He left a good impression behind, and I found good effects by
the foundation there laid. The Apostle Paul indeed desired not to work there
where another had laid the foundation, but I thought it a great advantage that
the foundation was laid by such a Masterbuilder. He was called into the Country
to Rugby in Warwickshire, there he continued very fruitful, and did much good.
For some occasion he removed, and returned into the City, and came into this
place, where he continued about 18 or 19 years, discharged the work of the Lord
carefully. I need not say much of his carriage in this place, I appeal to your
own consciences. I may say of this servant of Christ, as the Apostle Paul said
of himself, 1 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. Ye are his witnesses, and God also, how holily,
and justly, and unblameably he behaved himself among you, as you know how he
exhorted, and comforted, and charged every one of you (as a father does his
children) that ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you unto his
kingdom and glory. Therefore there lies an engagement upon you to walk
answerable to the truths he delivered, and to follow his steps, considering the
end of his conversation. I shut up all in the words of the Apostle Paul to the
Philippians, chapter 4.9. Those things which ye have both learned, and received,
and heard, and seen in him, Do: and the God of Peace shall be with you.

FINIS.

