A SERMON Preached in His Majesty's Chapel AT WHITEHALL, ON The Eighth of
February 1684/5.

Being the Sunday after the Death of His late Sacred Majesty King CHARLES the
Second of Blessed Memory.

By Thomas Horn, Fellow of Eaton College, And Chaplain to His Late Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Horn, at the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill.

MDCLXXXV.

1 Thessalonians. 5.19. Quench not the Spirit.


IT is well known with what vehemence this Text has been urged against the use
of Liturgies; and it has been made as manifest by Learned men, with how little
justice it has been objected. So that it would seem frivolous to meddle with it
any more; but that the Objections rise again, after one would think they were
defeated: And the Principles are as active, as if their Arguments were
invincible. Wherefore since there is no end of objecting, it is allowable (I
hope) for us at least to consider the Question over again, if it be but to show
that we are neither ashamed of Our Reasons, nor afraid of Theirs. And this I
intend to do fairly, without any heat of Controversy; endeavoring rather to
lay, than raise the dust that in the heat of Skirmishes blinds the eyes of men,
and following the native force and evidence of truth. Though it be hard to
forbear speaking warmly to a Cavil which reproaches all our Worship of God, and
blasts all those Intercessions you put up this last Week in behalf of our dying
Sovereign, the fervency of which I know not where to parallel. For if this
Objection be true; in all those strong Cries and Supplications, you took more
than ordinary pains to Quench the Spirit.

The Question I intend to examine is, Whether Forms of Prayer quench (or stint)
the Spirit, as they use to speak? Which Question, I will first state plainly,
and then propose the method of searching into it.

The Question will be clearly stated, by showing, first, what is meant by Forms
of Prayer; Secondly, What it is to stint the Spirit.

1. By Forms of Prayer, is meant either the determining before we pray, what
things shall be the matter of our Prayer, leaving the words to be molded ex
tempore; or else the determining beforehand both what things to pray for, and
also in what expressions. The former of these we may call a Form of Matter
only; the latter, a Form of Matter and Words too: and both these may be either
mutable, or fixed as a constant Rule of Worship.

2. By stinting the Spirit must be meant either the hindering or quenching of
the blessed Influence of the Holy Spirit of God upon our Souls in prayer; or
else the infeebling the vigor of Devotion in the spirit of man; the depressing
our affections in their flight to the throne of Grace; the smothering the pious
zeal of the Heart, the extinguishing that holy fire of the Altar in which the
Sacrifice of Prayer should ascend.

The state of the Question therefore is this; Whether a Form of Matter only,
or a Form of Matter and Words too, hinder either the Influence of the Spirit of
God, or the Soul of man in prayer.

Now because when we look upon things in gross, we see them confusedly, and are
apt to shuffle Truth and Falsehood together; therefore I will resolve Prayer
into its simplest Principles, that we may judge more distinctly of the Question
before us, according to this following method.

First, All public Prayer in the Church is made up of the Prayers of single
persons; therefore we may consider of Prayer in one man, and see what quenches
the Spirit in him.

Secondly, The Prayers of the Church are made up of variety of matter; as
Confessions of sins, Praises and Thanksgivings, and of many Spplications for
Spiritual and Temporal good things: wherefore we may select one out of one of
these sorts, and consider that distinctly. Suppose any man would request of our
heavenly Father some one signal blessing; as, that God would save the King,
(which was your mournful Request, and must still be your dutiful Prayer.) But
because that would provoke a passionate sorrow which bleeds yet, and I would
rather speak to your Judgment, I will suppose rather that a man intends to beg
of God that gift of the Holy Spirit, which is promised in the 11th of St. Luke,
v. 13. which we do pray for in the Lords Prayer, and frequently in the rest of
our Prayers.

Thirdly, as in other Prayer, so in this particular supplication for Gods
Spirit, we may consider the outward prayer of Words, and the inward prayer of
the Heart, from whence the outward ought to flow.

The business is now drawn into a narrow compass; and the careful considering
of it thus, will be (I hope) a clue to lead us into a true judgment of the
whole Question.

First then, this inward Prayer of the Heart is the Soul and Life of all
Prayer, which God especially requires, and therefore chiefly regards, and
favorably accepts: Without this, the outward pouring forth of words is a
noisome carcass, whether we use a form of words, or new conceived fluency.
Words were made for man; not to help God to understand our meaning, who looks
into a desire, and searches thought; who takes notice of the first springs of
the motion of our mind toward him. This inward desire must be in all, whether
public or private Prayer, or nothing is done. Prayer may be without words, and
words may be without prayer: for that is the very essence, these are not. And
from hence it follows, first, that words conceived extempore cannot be an
ingredient necessary to make our Prayers accepted of God. Secondly, that the
useful and necessary help or gift of the Spirit in Prayer, is to be placed in
the inward Prayer of the Heart, and not in expresons of words, where the life
of Prayer is not. And this one consideration might be enough to end all dispute
about extempore words of Prayer.

Secondly, If a man address himself to request of God this blessing of his
Spirit, though he supplicate without uttering one word, yet here is a form (a
form of matter) and that as narrow as can be: for his Spirit cannot be more
stinted, than when it petitions for one thing. If therefore this so narrow a
form does not quench the Spirit of God, nor hinder the flight of his Prayer to
the Throne of Grace, nor obstruct its entrance, nor make the mercy of God turn
away his ear from attending to his suit; what larger form can do it? And to
satisfy us that this does in no wise hinder his Prayer, we may consider
further,

That in the third place, every sober Christian, and man of sense, will readily
grant that he will pray more heartily and acceptably to God when he begs this
grace of the Holy Spirit, if he go beforehand into his Closet and meditate on
his own manifold frailties, and consequently his great need of this grace. No
man can deny that he should fix and prepare his heart, by the consideration of
Gods fatherly goodness and bounty, especially of his promise of giving the Holy
Spirit to them that ask it; and all in order to the strengthening his Faith, and
dependence on God, and for the increasing his humility, and the settling his
good purposes and attention. Certainly this should be the work of our
retirement before we pray, without which our thoughts will be apt to play and
wander at the time of Prayer, and the pantings of the heart will be more
languid.

But all this preparation bounds the Spirit of a man to that particular matter
which he is to sue for, and this binding is the very thing which makes it a
form; so that the more a man premeditates, the more is his Spirit bounded or
stinted to his particular form of matter which he prays for; and so the more he
is stinted, the better he prays.

For this meditation restrains the operations of his Understanding, and by that
means quickens his desire; that is, it puts a stop to wandering thought, and
fixes it upon that one blessing he would request, and gathers together the
scattered motions of the Affection, and determines all his earnest desire to
that one point; which restraint inflames Religious Zeal, and gives it a greater
force: As winds are strongest in their narrowest passages, as a vast Ocean when
it rolls all one way, and beats with its whole weight upon a straight Channel;
that very stinting of it makes the Waves rage, and multiplies the swiftness and
vehemence of their motion beyond imagination, that it forces its way with
irresistible violence; but when once it has passed from thence into a wide
space, and gained the room it struggled for, there where the way is open and
free, all its vigor is lost in it self, and becomes a pacifick Sea.

We may take notice by the way, that it is advantageous (which some complain
of) for the Liturgy to be divided into several distinct Prayers, that we may
request more earnestly while we determine our Souls to single petitions;
whereas if all the Prayers were made into one long Oration, we could not so
easily discern where one Request ends and another begins; so that the intention
of our minds would be lost, and the undetermined vigor of desire be becalmed
as in a wide Sea. The sum of this is, that Premeditation on one single form,
does not hinder but help the Spirit of man.

It is hard to conceive how that which is so useful, so necessary a preparative
to serious Devotion, should any wise hinder the Spirit of God on the heart of
man in supplication; yet lest I should seem to shift away from the business, I
will consider this particularly. If a man pray for the conduct of Gods gracious
Spirit, what operations of the Spirit are needful in this Supplication? what
are necessary to attain the end Prayer, i. e. acceptance with God? I conceive
that if he have a love of God and Goodness, a belief of that Promise made by
Christ, Luke 11.13. a fervent desire of the grace of God, humility, and a
serious purpose of obeying its direction, his Prayer will be accepted. Now
serious premeditation, such as I have described, is the very exercise of all
these. Consideration of the fatherly goodness and promise of God made by
Christ, is the very exercise of Faith in him, and a proper incitement to a
greater love of him. The weighing with himself the great and manifold
imperfections of his corrupt nature, and therefore his great want of the
continual aids of the Holy Spirit, kindles ardent desire, and increases
humility; which is also furthered by reflecting on his own unworthiness,
compared with the unlimited bounty, and unmerited goodness of God; and all
together are strong motives to better purposes and stronger resolutions. Is it
possible that the exercise of Faith, Love, Zeal, Humility, and Resolution,
should hinder the Spirits working these very things? when they are the
preparations of the heart, which, as Solomon says, Prove. 16.1. are from the
Lord. One might as well say, that Pride, neglect of God, or Infidelity, further
the operations of the Holy Spirit.

Again, if after this preparation of heart, a man address himself to the same
Prayer in that very devout posture of mind in which his meditation left him,
assuredly the Spirit of God will perfect what it self began, and assist him
more yet in that Prayer to which it prepared him. The Royal Prophet says, Psalm.
10.17. that the Lord hears the desire of the humble, he will prepare their
heart, and will cause his ear to hear.

Wherefore, since both the first thoughts in the preparing meditation, and the
following desires in act of Prayer, are from God, it follows, that he who
considers beforehand, has a portion of the Spirits help double to what the
extempore man has, who knows not beforehand what he shall pray, but invents his
petition in the moment when he presents it. So far is a prepared form of matter
from hindering the good effects of Gods Spirit on the mind of man, that it is a
great furtherance. And from hence we gain also a new Argument for the former
Conclusion, i. e. that it does not hinder the fervency of man's Spirit: For that
which furthers the effects of Gods Spirit, cannot hinder ours in the least.

4. Let us go on with our single Form, and suppose that this Man resolves with
himself never to cease from begging the promised Spirit of God, but to wrestle
daily for this great blessing; here it becomes a stated or praescribed Form to
him, as much as if it were appointed by Authority, and he were resolved to obey
it: and this is our case in praying by a Liturgy. And in this case neither is
the Spirit of God quenched, nor the man's own Spirit hindered: Not the Spirit of
God, because he obeys that command of our Savior, in the 18 St. Luke, v. 1. to
pray always and not to faint, i. e. not to give over the same request, as
Christ explains himself in the words immediately following, by that Parable of
the importunate Widow, who continued to solicit the unjust judge with the
same suit, till she had obtained her desire; and therefore if he should not
repeat that Prayer, it would be a neglect of a plain duty; which sinful neglect
must really hinder and quench the Spirit. Nor can the man's own Spirit be said
to be hindered, unless we will blasphemously affirm, that our Savior has given
such a command about our Prayer, as hinders our Soul from praying a^ we should.

Now if we apply what has been said hitherto of one man's single petition, to
all the Prayers of a Congregation, it is manifest, that since the most limited
Form does not any wise quench the Spirit of God, or the Soul of Man; since if
it does stint our mind, it does it to advantage, by stopping only the loose
roving of invention, whetting thereby the serious desire of the Soul; our large
and comprehensive Forms cannot be a hindrance to Prayer by any narrowness that
is in them.

The truth is, we continually offend our good God, frequently in the commission
of the same sins, and in the omission of the same duties; and they must be
confessed: most mercies we receive every day, and every moment, and they
deserve incessant thanks: the infinite and peerless perfections of God, are the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever, and therefore the same praise endures
for ever: our needs are for the most part the same, especially our Spiritual
wants, which require the most intensive fervency; therefore the chief matter of
Prayer is such as must not be changed. There is no such place in the substance
of Prayer for the new invention of men, as some are apt to conceive. Shall we
invent sins extempore to confess before God? we commit too many, and it will
take up time enough to consider well of them. Can we invent Attributes in God
to magnify? they are immutable. Can we invent mercies to thank him for besides
what we have received? that imagination is vain, and unworthy of God; let us
offer our thanks with gratitude for what we have received. Or should we invent
new Topics of Blessings to ask of him? let us first consider what we do need,
and request those things seriously.

There is one thing necessary, which we are every day to seek: we always want
the grace of God, and must always pray for it: we need the heavenly food, and
must daily pray that God would give us ever more this bread.

I acknowledge that if a man should pray daily for one particular matter only,
so as to exclude others that are necessary; or if our public Prayers omitted
some important request, and we were hindered from completing our necessary
Petitions; then the Spirit would be straightened. But what is wanting in the
Liturgy that it is fit to beg of God? what would any of us want if God should
grant us all that is contained in the Lords Prayer, in the full extent of it?
or what want is there which we cannot address our selves to God for in a short
Ejaculation, in the time of public Prayer, or else in private, and so complete
the supposed defect of the Liturgy? This we can do if we are in earnest, and
therefore nothing can hinder us, but only our selves. When there is a prepared
Heart, there is nothing without can put a stop to the inward operations of man's
Spirit; nothing can obstruct the course of the thoughts, or block up the Will
from desiring; no power on earth can stop the freedom of its course; no
obstacle in Nature can reach it.

I have spoken as fully as is fit to the form of Matter, not wholly omitting to
speak of Words; and much more need not be said of them, but that the people of
our Nation have an unaccountable fondness for the extempore effusion of the
words of Prayer; though they love not that phrase extempore Prayer, but choose
to call it conceived Prayer. Their opinion of it is strange, because all men
must acknowledge that the Life of Prayer is in the desire of the inward man,
and that words are but the outward dress of Prayer, and that the Spirit and
Life of Prayer cannot be in that which is but the outward part; yet when the
Ministers of the Church of England use the Forms prescribed (suppose in the
Visitation of the Sick) many of the common people think that they have little
or nothing of the Spirit of Prayer in them, because they do not invent a new
Prayer; and no good is done, unless some private person comes and prays for
some time with a multitude of ready utterance: then they think there is the
Spirit of Prayer; which shows that they are verily persuaded that that there is
more of the Spirit in Words than really there is.

And the name they give to this extempore utterance is as strange: for no
reason can be given why that which is not thought of before, but invented in
the moment of utterance, should be called conceived Prayer, to distinguish it
from other Prayer: for certainly that which is premeditated and thought of
frequently before, and also in the time of Prayer, is conceived too; and the
more it is thought of, the more conceived.

However, let us consider whether a Form of Words hinders either the Work of
the Spirit of God, or the Spirit of man in Prayer. That they do not hinder the
Spirit of God, I argue first from hence, That it cannot be proved that the
Spirit of God does always give new expressions of Prayer. Suppose in the first
place, that the Spirit did once give a man the very Words of Prayer, and he
should constantly use those Words, he would pray as the Spirit gave him
utterance; and yet this would be a Form of Words. And such a Spiritual Form of
Words is the Lord's Prayer. Now there is no just reason to think the Spirit
should continually change those first Words for new: for as the Apostle
reasons, Heb. 8.7. concerning the Covenants, If the first Covenant had been
faultless, there had been no need of the second; so there is no need of new
Words unless the first had been faulty. And besides this, the rules which are
given in Holy Writ, for the manner of framing our Words, argue that the Spirit
did not intend always to indite the Words, but leave them to man: as that Rule
which Solomon gave, Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine
heart be hasty to utter any thing before God: for God is in heaven, and thou
upon earth; therefore let thy words be few. And our Saviors rule, 6 Matthew. 7.
Not to use vain repetitions as the Heathen, or to think we shall be heard for
much speaking: and v. 8, 9. it is manifest that he purposely gave his prayer in
few words, to prevent the using many words in prayer: Be not ye therefore like
unto them, i. e. in multiplying words; for your Father knows what things ye
have need of, before ye ask him. After this manner therefore pray ye: Our
Father, etc. That is, in this short way, therefore that ye may avoid much
speaking. Another rule the example of Solomon affords, in 2 Chronicles. 6.
throughout, whose prayer is made up chiefly of the words of Gods promises to
his Father. What need of giving us rules for our Words, if the Spirit gives the
Words? or of what use are the Rules when given, if we are not to do it?

Secondly, I argue from the general opinion of those who love extempore prayer,
concerning the Spirit of God; for they generally say, that the work of the
Spirit is after an irresistible manner upon the Elect, and therefore it cannot
be hindered there; and as for the Reprobate, if any work of the Spirit be
hindered in them, it can do no hurt.

Let us see in the next place, whether Forms of Words hinder the Spirit of man.

There are but these three uses of Words that I can think of in Prayer; First,
to express the matter or thing which we beg of God. Secondly, to express our
desire of that which we pray for, i. e. the earnestness or height of our
desire. Thirdly, to kindle affection in them that hear us. I can name no more,
unless it be by Words to win upon God, and persuade him to hearken and grant;
which I hope no man dares to think.

1. As to the first, I cannot see how Forms of Words should hinder our Spirit,
but by stinting the mind to the things which they signify. Now if a man were
to pray that Prayer, which I have so often spoken of, for the promised Spirit
of God; let the Words be varied an hundred ways, whether extempore or by
meditation, yet still (if the expressions are not foolish, but fit to signify
the matter) they all mean the same thing; and so the mind is as much tied to
the same subject, as if there were but one sort of expression: and therefore if
a Form of Matter does not hinder us, neither does a Form of Words.

2. But I verily believe that it is not the Matter so much, as the intense
ardor of their desire, which the men that use extempore prayer would fain
express by Words; which fruitless endeavor I confess a Liturgy hinders
indeed. They would show either to God or the People how much they are in
earnest; how vehemently they pant after the living God; they would find words
to signify how much they hunger and thirst after righteousness. But there are
no living words that can fully express the degrees of affection, or the heights
of desire, any more than there are colors to paint the swiftness of an arrow:
therefore though they labor for Words, and stretch invention, yet the
unalterable groans cannot be uttered. But because they think they may come
something nearer, as the invention grows warm, they try it over again, and
strive to find new ways; and this delightful play of the invention, they think
to be like Job's pleading with the Almighty, and Jacobs wrestling for the
blessing; and that this can come from nothing but the Spirit, and that
therefore Forms quench the Spirit.

But this proceeds from an opinion, that there is more of the Spirit of Prayer
in Words, than there is really; and from a persuasion that there is more need
of expressing in Words the fervor of our Zeal, than in truth there is: for
besides that the thing cannot be done, yet if it could, there is no need of
wording our affection to God, who knows our needs, and the sincerity of our
desire: and to men we should not be over-desirous to express it, because it
lies open so much to ostentation; it proceeds also from a forgetfulness of
Solomon's advice, that God is in heaven, and we are upon earth, and therefore
our words should be few, Eccles. 5.2.

A third use of Words is to raise our Affections, which extempore Prayer
pretends much to; and therefore it is commonly objected, that the constant use
of a Liturgy makes the people pray lazily. It is true indeed, that extempore
Prayer has raised in the people an affection to the men of that way, and a
scorn of Forms. It is true, that variety of passionate words does please the
ears of men; But that it has made the people more Serious and truly Devout, is
not so true: there is nothing which unconsidered words can do, which serious
consideration beforehand of the Majesty of the Great God, and of the weighty
things we are to request, will not do a great deal better, and without the
danger of sudden invention; for in the multitude of words there is vanity, and
one mean expression or foolish word is apt to spoil more serious devotion in
the hearer, than can be mended again in a great while: and it is this vanity of
words which Forms are designed to hinder.

And whereas it is objected that a Liturgy makes men pray lazily, it ought to
be considered whether something else has not deadned the Devotion beforehand,
when the Liturgy is accused of it.

If I approach before God with a senseless mind, with desires after wickedness,
or bent wholly on this world, this does quench the Spirit of God, and take away
the life of Prayer. For how can we pray for the guidance of the Spirit of God,
while we have some sin reigning in us which will not let us yield to the
conduct of his Grace? if I come with an unprepared careless heart, not
considering either the great Majesty of God, or the Blessings I should pray
for, I have already murdered my own Devotion, and my Prayer will be formal
whether I pray extempore or by a Form. If we regard not the mercies of God, how
can we give thanks aright? if we account lightly of the Offenses we have
committed against the Lord of the whole Earth, or intend to commit them again,
or care not if we do, all our Confessions will be only in words. If a man come
with a prejudice against a Form, or a scorn of our Liturgy, the ardency of
Prayer is already extinguished. So that many times the Devotion is slain
beforehand, and the Liturgy is accused of it, because it does not raise the
dead.

Let men bring hither a prepared and unprejudiced heart, let them lay aside the
love of words, and scorn of our Prayers, let them come full of reverence to God
and trust in him, with serious thankfulness, fervency, contrition, and
Religious resolutions, and then see whether a Form can hinder them.

Another frequent Pretense or Objection there is, that the Forms prescribed,
tie us up so that we cannot enlarge our Spirit according to the extraordinary
cases that may happen. Suppose a man is under any Spiritual desertion, or heavy
affliction, or fallen into some heinous sin, or has received some fresh
comfort, or any great blessing; here are not Prayers enough for these emergent
occasions, and this seems to hinder our Spirit. This I call a pretense; for
commonly it is so: because extraordinary cases are not a reason against the
ordinary use of Liturgies. As to the Objection in those extraordinary cases, I
say, that besides the provision made in the Liturgy for many cases, besides
the extraordinary Forms put forth by Authority for public cases; this does not
hinder our Prayer, i. e. the earnest request of the Soul, but only the
expressing our case particularly. But neither Forms of Prayer, nor extempore
conceived Prayer, can particularly express every case that may happen to every
private man; neither is there so much need of reporting our cases particularly
before God, for he knows whereof we have need, and what we do but desire. When
Christ bids us pray thus for the Necessaries of this life, Give us this day our
daily bread; do you think our Father knows not that we want raiment and health
too? or that he will forget to give them, because they are not expressly
mentioned? this were to think the understanding or bounty of God are straight
and narrow like ours.

If it be meant that a Form of Words cannot comprehend our particular case, or
that our Spirit is so detained thereby, that we cannot enlarge our selves so as
to reach our case; this is a very gross mistake, for want of considering the
general and comprehensive words in which our Common Prayers are expressed.

I will explain my self by one instance for many, in those words of Confession,
We have done those things which we ought not to have done, etc. Suppose that
one man of the Congregation has fallen into some great sins, and another has
been guilty of others, and so on: After we have considered every one privately
those particular sins in which each one has offended God, we can all unburden
our Consciences before God, and acknowledge to him our several offenses, though
we use the same words; because they are large and general, and so comprehend
all our particular sins. Apply the same to Thanksgiving, to Praise, and
Supplication, and the case will be very clear; for these are the great parts of
our Prayer. But this previous consideration is the great labor of real Prayer,
which most men love to escape.

Whatever extraordinary case happens to any of us, still preparation is needful
before we approach unto God in Prayer. And for this reason the constant use of
extempore Prayer in public, does and must hinder the real Spirit of Prayer,
because it hinders the preparation of heart to all that shall be prayed for.
For if the Minister change every time his Words and Matter, or if he reserves
to himself whether he will change, or how much, it is utterly impossible for
the Auditors any more than to guess what he will say. And how then can they
prepare their hearts for the particular things which he shall chance to pray
for.

I wish those who scorn our Forms, would consider, where the life of Prayer is,
and contend earnestly for that. It cannot be in Words, and therefore they
should place no more in them than they are capable of. Prayer is not an
exercise for men's parts, not to show ready invention, or elocution, (much less
vainity) but humble desire, and Faith in God: God is not taken either with
sounds, or outward gestures, that please the eyes and ears of men; but with
sincerity and uprightness, which man cannot discern. These may be where there
are no variety of delightful Words, and passionate exclamations; and the
petitions are then accepted. On the other side, all the outward shows of zeal
may be without the life of Prayer; and then the Words beat the air, and return
empty; and God is offended too. The abundance of melting words may come from
the heart; but they may not come from thence; and what man knows the heart of
another? And if all do come from the real zeal of him who speaks; yet it is
your faith and fervency, not merely his, that will procure you a blessing from
God. Wherefore we should labor to wean our selves from this love of the new
words of Prayer, and strive more earnestly for the inward and Spiritual part of
Prayer, which none can deprieve us of; in words we may be deceived, and in all
that is outward; in this we cannot. The Publicans prayer had but few words, and
that was accepted; the Pharisee prayed thrice as long, and returned empty.

Why should any man presume to offer to God any thing unconsidered: the words
of rashness, and the froth of the lip! why of all persons should any man choose
to trifle with the Majesty of the Living God? But when through a have to utter
any thing before God, men have spoke unadvisedly with the Tongue, and have not
considered that they do evil, it is adding mad presumption to the say, the Lord
has done it; or that his wise Spirit has put it into their heart to utter
vanity.

And let us who are satisfied that Forms do not quench the Spirit, take care of
our Addresses to God, that we do not quench the Spirit of Prayer by negligent
approach to him. Since we who pray by a Liturgy, have this advantage of those
who do not, that we know beforehand what Petitions we are to put up, that we
can consider and weigh them all, which they cannot; let us not loose the
advantage, and offer extemporary desires before God. Let private meditation
prepare us for our public Prayer, that our thoughts being fixed beforehand,
and our fervent desire kindled, we may enter into the House of God so full of
awful reverence, that there may be no room for levity and rambling
imaginations: that irreverence and carelessness being banished away, we may have
nothing to do but to confess with good purposes, and pray earnestly, and give
thanks with joy and gratitude, and be more ready to hear than to offer the
Sacrifice of Fools; that we may say with the Royal Prophet, My heart is fixed O
God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise, and so of the other parts
of our Worship. And then I doubt not, but the experience of upright men would
decide this question in favor of Liturgies, as effectual as any thing, unless
the public extempore Prayers had been printed, as the Common Prayer is; which
would have extinguished all their glory, as the Sepulchral Lamps go out when
they are exposed to the Light.

They who never have been used to Forms, or come not with an unprejudiced
intent to pray heartily by them, can be no judges whether Forms hinder the
Spirit; whether are they judges who seem to like the Common Prayer, but bring
no Devotion to it. I appeal to the serious devout persons of this place, who
continually attend upon Prayer; whose zealous devotion is remarkable and
exemplary, who are therefore competent judges. Did you ever approach with a
Religious sense of the Majesty of God, with a real desire to request any
blessing of him, and were hindered by the Liturgy? have you not rather found
that every expression was weighty, and added to your considerate zeal?

I appeal to your Devotion this last week, so fervent and unwearied. Did not
your hearts burn within you at every intercession you so earnestly put up for
our late Dread Sovereign? you seemed to pray as if you were in all his
weakness, and felt all his pains, from the first astonishing stroke to his last
gasp. You were with him in all the comfortable, the fearful and despairing
changes: you seemed to groan with the Agonies of his Death: you carried your
Tears and Prayers, hour after hour, from the Closet to this place with some
impatience, waiting for the next opportunity of imploring God again for him,
and rejoicing when it was some; as if every one were mourning over their first
born. And when the last sad news came, you submitted to Gods providence, and
rejoiced in a peaceable Succession, as much as passionate grief could give
leave.

You have really set your selves a pattern of fervent Prayer for your whole
life. If ever you would request of God any great blessing, remember how you
prayed this week; and let your own example stir up your Devotion for the future.

And take care that you do not quench the Spirit, by a persuasion that God
hearkened not to you, because he granted not that desired life. For your dutiful
and Loyal Devotion is yet acceptable to God, which is a desirable end of
Prayer. We are taught to close our daily Prayers with this submission to his
wisdom and goodness, Fulfill now O Lord the desires and petitions of thy
servants as may be most expedient for them. And if we pray with Faith in him,
we ought to be persuaded that what he does is most expedient for us.

Wherefore turn now the force of your Loyal Devotion, to thanks for our
Gracious Sovereign, and Prayers for Gods blessing on him, for a Just and Wise,
a long and peaceable Reign.

FINIS.

