A SERMON Preached in the Parish Church of St. Mary Savior's IN SOUTHWARK At
the Lent-Assizes, Febr. 28. 1671.

BEFORE THE HONORABLE Sir Thomas Twisden AND Sir William Morton His MAJESTY'S
Judges of ASSIZE. AND At the Request of Ellis Crisp Esquire High Sheriff of the
County of SURREY.

By Thomas Horton D. D.

Prove. 21.3. To do Justice and Judgment is more acceptable to the Lord then
Sacrifice.

Joh. 7.24. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous Judgment.

London, Printed by W.R. for Ralph Smith, at the Bible, under the Piazzo of the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1672.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE JUDGES The Eight and Twentieth of February, 1671.
2 Chronicles. 19.6. And he said to the Judges, Take heed what ye do, for ye judge
not for Man, but for the LORD, who is with you in the Judgment.


THere is nothing more comely, or amiable, then when Worth goes together with
Honor, and when Places of Trust and Dignity meet with Persons of Faithfulness
and Integrity for the managing and discharge of them, from whence they prove to
be mutually acceptable, and advantageous one to the other. This is that which
is observable of us in the carriage and scope of this Scripture which we have
now before us, where Jehoshaphat the King of Judah finding it to be in some
Respects requisite and necessary for Him to set up certain Officers of State,
and to appoint Judges in the Land, for the better ruling and governing of his
Kingdom under himself: He does not content himself only to appoint them their
Places, but he is careful also to mind them of their Duties, and to provoke
them to care and diligence in these places which were imposed upon them, and
sustained by them: That they might be the better enabled to give their Charge
to others, he first of all gives his Charge to them, and lays a very strict and
solemn Injunction upon them. That so from the same Authority whence they
received their Office it self, they might likewise receive some kind of fitness
and preparation for it; And be said unto the Judges, Take heed what ye do, etc.

In which words there are two main parts considerable of us. First, A Charge
premised. Secondly, A Reason annexed for the enforcing of this Charge. The
Charge, that we have in these words, Take heed what ye do. The Reason annexed in
these, For ye judge not, etc. Or if ye will, we may invert the parts, and take
them thus; First, A Truth declared. Secondly, A Caution inferred upon the
supposition and declaration of this Truth. The Truth declared in these words,
Ye judge not, etc. The Caution inferred in these, Take heed what ye do. So as
the one is in the nature of the Doctrine, the other of the Use; And in this
method and order shall I now with Gods gracious assistance take notice of them;
I begin first of all with the former, which is the Doctrine or Truth declared,
and this consisting of two Branches more; First, The simple Preposition.
Secondly, The additional Amplification. The Preposition, that ye have in those
words, Ye judge not for Man, but for the Lord. The Amplification, that ye have
in these, Who is with you in the Judgment.

First, Here is considerable of us the simple or single Preposition, Ye judge
not for Man, but for the Lord: This is that which is here asserted and declared
concerning the Judges. But it s^ems to carry some kind of difficulty and
intricacy with it, and therefore will require a little opening and explication
of it to us, in what sense it is to be taken by us. The Preposition it self is
of that nature as wherein the Parts are segregated and separated one from the
other, and accordingly we shall speak separately and distinctly of them. First,
By showing how far the Judges do indeed judge or not judge for Man. Secondly,
Showing how far and in what respects they do judge for the Lord. For there is a
Truth contained in both, being rightly stated and understood by us.

First, To view it in the first reference, as it has respect unto Men: Judges
they do in a sense, and in some sort, judge even thus; They judge for Man, and
that according to a twofold explication: First, For Man, that is, by Man's
Appointment, Hominum Instituto. Secondly, For Man, that is, for Man's Advantage,
Hominum Commodo.

First, For Man, that is, by the Appointment of Man: They judge so, and so they
may judge: It is true, They are by Gods appointment chiefly, as we shall hear
afterward out of the Text, but they are by Man's also subordinately; and
therefore even here in this present Scripture are said so to be. In the verse
immediately preceding, namely, the fifth verse of this Chapter, it is said,
That Jehoshaphat set up Judges in the Land, throughout all the fenced Cities of
Judah, City by City. And so Moses by the advice of Jethro, chose able men out
of all Israel, and they judged the People at all Seasons, Exodus 18.25, 26. And
so Samuel, upon the same account also he judged Israel all his Days, and went
from year to year in Circuit, 2 Samuel 7.15, 16. Judges they are no new thing in
the World, but have been long appointed, and that by Men themselves: Therefore
expressly called in Scripture the Ordinance of Man, or Humane Creation, (...) 1
Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lords
sake, whether it be unto the King, as Supreme, or unto Governors that are sent
by him. These Governors, amongst the rest, are the Judges, who are there
described, from the main scope of their Office, in reference either to
Punishment or to Reward.

Secondly, For Man, that is, for Man's Advantage; They judge for man likewise
so: for man, that is, for the good of man, and as that which is beneficial to
him, for so it is. Judges, and the Dispencers of Justice; they are of very
great use and necessity in the life of Man, without which he could not well
subsist or hold out in the World, nor indeed the World subsist it self. Man by
nature is so wild a Creature, and has so much corruption and perverseness in
his heart, as that without Judgment and Justice, People would be ready to
destroy both themselves and one another. Therefore we have very great cause to
bless God for such as these, and to submit unto them, as being indeed our own
greatest Interest and Accommodation: For it is the happiness of every thing
which is inferior, to be in subordination to an higher than it self, for the
regulating and ordering of it: And the weaker that any thing is, by so much the
more does it need the power of another to support and assist it. Therefore the
Apostle speaking of the Magistrate, says, He is the Minister of God to thee
for good, Romans 13.4. that is, he is so by his Place and Office in the proper
nature and scope of it. And for good in the full latitude, and extent of
goodness: God in mercy and favor to Man, has appointed Magistrates and
Governors to Rule him, and Judges to pass Sentence upon him; and therefore
accordingly has commanded that they should be acknowledged and prayed for by
him, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. I exhort that Supplications and Prayers, and Intercessions
and giving of Thanks be made for all men, for Kings and for all that are in
Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. Which word that, is to be taken not only Intentionaliter, but
Consecutive; not only as showing the End or Reason why we should make such
Prayers, but also as showing the Effect or Consequent of such Prayers being
made, and the good which does follow from such Persons for whom they are made.
And thus have we seen in what sense it does indeed hold good, That Judges do
judge for Man; which is twofold, First, For Man, that is, by Man's Appointment,
Hominum Instituto. And secondly, For Man, that is, for Man's Advantage, Hominum
Commodo.

It remains now further in the next place, that we should look upon it in the
Negative, and see how far it does not hold as it is declared to us here
directly and expressly in the very words of the Text, They judge not for Man:
Now this, it may be thus far explicated and unfolded unto us; First, Not for
Man in an exclusive sense, not for Man only. Secondly, Not for Man in a
Superlative sense, not for Man chiefly. Thirdly, Not for Man in an Irregular or
Inordinate sense, not for Man corruptly; neither of these ways for Man.

First, Not for Man in an Exclusive sense, not for Man only: Judges they do in
some respects (as we have shown) judge for Man, but they do not judge for Man
alone. There is an higher who is to be looked at, and regarded in their
Judgment; and whom accordingly it concerns them to approve and to acquit
themselves to; They may not think that when they have satisfied Men, and done
that only which they required of them, that they have discharged their Duty,
but must consider moreover, that they are answerable and accountable to God,
who will also take an account of them.

Secondly, Not for Man in a Superlative sense, not for Man chiesty: Judges they
judge for Man, but in the second place, not in the first; they judge for Man as
the subject and object of their Judgment which it is exercised and conversant
about; judge betwixt man and man, as the Scripture expresses it: But man is not
the main End or Scope of their Judgment which it is carried and directed unto,
but a greater Person; they judge for Man in reference to God, upon his account,
and such considerations as these: And therefore we are required to submit unto
them for the Lords sake, in the place before alleged.

It is a rule in the exposition of Scripture, That Comparationes negativae non
excludunt sed praeponunt; That negative Comparisons they do not exclude one
part, but prefer another: As for example, where it is said, God will have Mercy
and not Sacrifice; the meaning is not, that he will not have Sacrifice, but
that (in such cases) he will rather have Mercy. So when St. Paul says of
himself, That Christ sent him him not to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel: It
was not as prohibiting Baptism, but as preferring Preaching: Again, when it is
said of Servants, As doing Service to the Lord and not unto Man; it is not as
excluding Man, but as extolling God: To the Lord, and not unto Man; that is, to
the Lord rather than unto Man; and so here now in the Text, Ye judge not for
man, but for the Lord; that is, not for man so much as for the Lord: Not for
man in a Superlative sense, for man principally or chiefly, ye judge not for
man so.

Thirdly, Not for man in an irregular or inordinate sense; not for man
corruptly, ye judge not for man; that is, not for the mere will and pleasure of
man, Non Hominibus, i. e. Non Hominum arbitrio. Judges in the administration of
Judgment are not to make it their business to please and gratify men, or to do
nothing but what may be acceptable and satisfactory to them. These that thus
seek to please such, they are not the Servants of Christ, Gal. 1.10. Therefore
what St. Peter speaks in general of all Christians, it holds more particularly
and especially of such kind of Persons, that they should not live to the lusts
of men, but to the will of God, 1 Pet. 4.3. It is a dangerous thing for any
Persons whatsoever to make men to be the absolute rule and bias of their
Actions, as being compast with very much infirmity: But it is to none more
dangerous then it is to those who are in Places of Judicature and Public
Government; to such as those it is more hazardous than to any other besides.
And therefore it is that the Scripture does lay so many strict Cautions and
Prohibitions to his purpose of having regard to man in such matters as these
are. Thus Levit. 19.25. Thou shall not respect the person of the Poor, nor
honor the person of the Mighty, but in Righteousness shall thou judge thy
Neighbor. So Deuteronomy. 1.17. Ye shall not respect persons in Judgment, but ye
shall hear the Small as well as the Great: Ye shall not be afraid of the face
of man, for the Judgment is Gods. Again, Deuteronomy. 16.19. Thou shall not wrest
Judgment, Thou shall not respect Persons. In all these places, and the like, is
man excluded from an absolute influence upon such a censure as this is, as
whereby it should be regulated or determined And so are we now to take it here
in the Text in this expression before us, Ye judge not for man, that is, not
for the fear of man, so as to be terrified by that. Ye judge not for man, that
is, not for the savor of man, so as to be tickled by that. Ye judge not for
man, that is, not for the fancy of man, so as to be led or guided by that: not
for man; that is, not for man's lust and humor, and extravagancy, and
inordinate affection: Not for man in any case, so by any means. The word Man in
Scripture Language is sometimes used as Terminus Diminuens, as carrying some
kind of disparagement and diminution with it. Thus 1 Cor. 3.3. Are ye not
carnal, and walk as man, (...). And accordingly in this Notion is it
considerable of us here in this place, as to the business in hand: And so ye
have seen this passage in the full sense and explication of it here, and in
what respects it is here said, That ye do not judge for man; that is, not for
man only but for the Lord also; not for man chiefly, but for the Lord rather;
not for man absolutely and indefinitely, and at large, howsoever considered or
qualified, but in submission and subordination to the Lord; for man in
compliance with God, but not in contradiction to him, or opposition against
him. And so much may suffice to have spoken of this Judgment in its first
reference, as it has respect unto man, which we have seen both in the
Affirmative and Negative.

The second reference of it is, as it has respect to God, in these words, But
for the LORD. And this as well as the former does admit of various
explications; we may take them briefly thus;

First, For the Lord Authoritatively, by Warrant and Commission from Him. They
are appointed by man (as I showed before) immediately, but by God originally.
They take their Office first of all from Him, who is the Author and Owner of
it: Therefore says Wisdom, that is Christ, who is the essential Wisdom of
the Father, Prove. 8.15, 16. By me Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice: By
me Princes Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth. It is said in
Judges 2.16. That the Lord raised up Judges, and 2 Samuel 7.11. That he commanded
Judges: And here in the Text, it was not Jehoshaphat only of himself, but
probably by direction from God: Therefore, together with other Magistrates,
they are called expressly, The Ministers of God, Romans 14.4. Are said to be
ordained of God, which is accordingly made to be a ground for obedience and
subjection to them.

Secondly, For the Lord representatively, in the Lord's stead: Judges and
Magistrates they are in the room and place of God, as Joseph sometime spoke of
himself to his Brethen, Genesis 50.19. And therefore sometimes also have they the
name of God fastened upon them, I have said ye are Gods, Psalm. 82.6. They are
Dii nuncupative, though not formaliter. And they are Dii participative, though
not essentialiter: God has stamped his own Power and Authority in part upon
them, which they do execute for his sake, and in reference to him: Therefore it
was the Speech of the Lord to Moses concerning Aaron his Brother, Exodus 4.16.
And he shall be thy Spokesman unto the People: And he shall be even to thee in
stead of a Mouth, and thou shall be to him in stead of God; that is, he shall
be thine Interpreter; and thou shall be his Governor, to reveal my will unto
him, and Power to Command him: This is ordered in great goodness and kindness
to the Sons of Men; Look as in the Work of the Ministry, it is a favor that
God speaks to us by man, and not by himself (Let Moses speak to us, and we will
hear him, but let not God speak to us, least we die, Exodus 20.19.) So here as
to the work of the Magistracy, it is a favor that God judges us by man, and
not by himself: For so he does now here in this present World; indeed in the
World to come, then he will judge men by himself more immediately, but for the
present he does it by his Officers. Man is now judged by his Peers, who judge
for the Lord, as representing him in this Judgment, Domino, i. e. Loco Domini.

Thirdly, For the Lord effectually or intentionally, for the Lord's Interest:
God has therefore appointed Judges and Magistrates, and such kind of Persons
in the world, that so from thence his own Honor might be preserved more
inviolably in it; That his Commands might be the more regarded, and his Laws
might take the greater place in the Hearts of his People, Ye judge for the
Lord; as by your places in the right discharge of them, ye bring more glory to
God then other men do. The higher that any are in Place, the greater in
Influence, and they have larger opportunities of doing good afforded unto them;
which is indeed, if it be duly considered, the greatest excellency and
advantage of them. Oh what a great deal of good has a good Magistrate occasion
to accomplish, for the restraining of Vice, for the promoting of Virtues, and
every way for the advancing of the Name of God in the World! There is no man
that does the least good, but he serves the Lord in it in some measure: But
those that do such good as this is, they do serve Him in it more especically.
Every Sin in the proper nature of it, but some more especially strikes at the
very Majesty of God, and opposes his Interest: Therefore Judges whiles they set
themselves against Sin, they do so far forth act for God; for the Lord
Emphatically. And so now I have done with the first Branch of this first
general, to wit, the simple or single Proposition in those words, Ye judge not
for man, but for the Lord.

The second is the additional amplification, in those, Who is with you in the
Judgment: This is added, to make the Declaration so much the more considerable,
and to quicken these Judges in this their Office, which was undertaken by them:
But how does this hold good, and in what sense is it spoken? Take it if you
please thus,

First, He is with you to behold you, to observe you, and to take notice of
you: He is with you, that is, he is present amongst you, and sees all that is
done by you; God stands in the Congregation of the mighty, he judges among
the gods, Psalm. 82.1. Amongst them, or in the midst of them, as the words run
in the Text, where any Persons are gathered together in his Name, there is He
in the midst amongst them. It holds good not only of Ecclesiastical
Assemblies, but also of Judicial. As for King Jehoshaphat, who appointed and
set up these Judges, He could not be always or every where with them himself,
nor have his Eye continually upon them: He could not perfectly take notice of
the things which were transacted by them; but he tells them, That the Lord was
with them, and so consequently that he saw and beheld them, which was more
consiedrable to them, then any thing else: As his Eyes are with Kings upon the
Throne, Job 36.7. So also with Judges upon the Bench, as being himself the
chiefest of all: He is with you in the Judgment to behold you, That Is the first.

Secondly, He is with you to assist you, and to enable you, and to be helpful
to you: He is with you, not only in your Persons, but also in your Employment,
and in your Work, to promote you in it, and carry you through it. This is that
which is requisite and necessary to every business that we take in hand, which
is of any consequence; but more especially in such a business as this is, which
we now mention. And it is that which is here graciously promised to such
Persons as these are, in the exercise of their Judiciary proceedings: This we
may conceive him to be two manner of ways, Either first of all, by way of
general and habitual Qualification: Or secondly, by way of actual and
particular Assistance. The former, by inabling them for their work: The latter,
by inabling them in it. And this latter as well as the former is that which is
much to be prized and regarded by them: It is that which is very needful and
desirable in all other professions and Employments besides. For God is not
only to be with them remotely by a common and general Preparation, but also to
be with them immediately by a particular concurrence. Thus (for instance) a
Preacher, he does not only need a qualification in general, for the work of
the Ministry, but also God's assistance in every particular Sermon; Nor a
Soldier does not need only to be trained up to the War in general, but to
have assistance in every Battle: Nor a Physician to have Skill at large, and
in the habit, but to have assistance as to such a particular Patient, and to
such a particular Disease; And as is said of our blessed Savior, To have Power
present with him to Heal. And so for Judges, and the Distributers of Justice,
not only to be able men in the Law and Affairs of Judicature, considered at
large, but also to be assisted by God in such particular Causes, and in such
particular Cases, and in such particular Difficulties which are at any time
brought before them. And this (as I conceive) is included also in his being
with them; and from God in the mouth of Jehoshaphat, intimated and declared
unto them. That which is here rendered, In the Judgment, is in the Text Bidvar
Mishphat, which according to a different signification of the Hebrew word (...)
has a double sense with it: This word it signifies both Res and Verbum: And
each of them very pertinent to the purpose in hand. God promising assistance to
these Judges in each particular; First, He is with you in re Judicii, that is,
in the matter of the Judgment, as the Margin expresses it: He is with you to
enable you to judge aright, and to discern of the Cause and business it self
which is offered and presented to you. Secondly, He is with you in verbo
judicii, that is, he is with you in the Sentence and Verdict which is given by
you, and which comes from you. As in each of these you do need his assistance,
so in each of these you have the promise of his assistance made over to you,
upon your dependence upon him for it: He is with you, so as to assist you, and
to enable you; That Is the Second.

Thirdly, He is with you, to defend you; not only to stand among you, but also
to stand by you, and to stand to you: This is that which is to be supposed and
taken for granted, that those who are in any kind hinderers and restrainers of
Sin, they shall be sure to have Enemies, Ministers that reprove and condemn it,
Magistrates that censure and punish it: And therefore accordingly will they
need such as may be Abettors to them. This is that which God himself does
undertake here for these Judges; That he will thus be with them, and that
according to a twofold injury, whereunto they are exposed from those who are
Enemies to them: The one is of Reproach and Ignominy, the strife of Tongues.
The other is of Assault and Mischief, the Hand of Violence: with respect had to
each of these will God be with them to defend them: He will defend their Names,
to justify them, and he will defend their Persons, to protect them, and to
keep them from evil.

First, Their Names to justice them, where they are careful to discharge their
Consciences, and to do that in good earnest which is their Duty; they shall be
sure to have Him with them thus, so as to clear them, and to take off those
Scandals which are past upon them: While men seek to please men, and to curry
favor with them, God does many times, in just Judgment, give them up to the
censures of men, and make them more odious and abominable; But while they are
careful to discharge their Duty, he does from thence clear their Innocence.

Secondly, Their Persons to protect them; there are sometimes desperate People
in the world, who by their insolency, and violent attempts, would fright those
who are the Dispensers of Justice, from that which is to be done by them; but
God himself takes care of them, and watches over them. Those who are public
Magistrates, they are under a more special Protection; and those Angels which
are charged with others, do take more special charge of them then of any others
besides: God is with them, to defend and preserve them on every side; to hide
them in the secret of his presence, from the pride of man, and to keep them
secretly in a Pavilion, from the strife of Tongues, Psalm. 31.20.

Thirdly and Lastly, He is with you to bless you, and to reward you for that
good which is at any time done by you: There Is no man that does any thing for
God, that shall be a looser by him, but shall have it abundantly recompensed to
him. Those that are with Him, he will be sure to be with them; and those that
Honor Him, He will Honor: Those that are for him, to Serve him, he will be
for them, to Crown them, and to bestow a full Reward upom them; Ye judge not
for Man, but for the Lord; and ye receive not from Man, but from the Lord, as
that which is chiefly considerable. What ever good any man does, the same shall
he receive from the Lord, whether he be Bond or Free, Ephesians. 6.8. To be sure he
shall not lose his Reward, nor his Labor be in vain. And therefore that which
is here expressed by Gods being with you, some Translations render it, Quod in
vos redundabit, that is, which shall at last turn to your own account. And thus
have we seen how many ways God is said to be with those who are his Servants,
in such businesses as these are, To observe them, to assist them, to defend
them, and to bestow a blessing upon them: And accordingly it shows how far it
is both to be pursued, and also acknowledged by such kind of persons, not only
to partake of Gods common and essential presence, in regard whereof he is said
to be with all his Creatures; but also to partake of Gods special and gracious
presence, in regard whereof he is said to be with those who are his Servants
and Children.

The ground and foundation of this, is Immanuel, who is, God with us: First,
With us, in our nature, which is reconciled to God in Christ, who has taken it
upon himself; and then with us in our Persons, who are in Covenant with God
through Christ, upon compliance with Evangelical Conditions: And then also last
of all with us, in our Services and Performances, as coming from such Persons.
And so now I have done with the first general part of the Text, which is the
Truth declared: And that consisting of two Branches, First, The Proposition, Ye
judge not for Man, but for the Lord. And secondly, The Amplification, who is
with you in the Judgment. And this in the nature of the Doctrine.

The Second is the Caution inferred upon the Supposition and Declaration of
this Truth, Take heed what ye do; and this in the nature of the Use. Now this
again it may be looked upon by us two manner of ways; First, In its simple
Injunction. And secondly, In its rational Inference. The simple Injunction,
that is considerable in the words themselves. The rational Inference, that is
considerable in the connection of these words with the other, knit together by
the Causal For.

First, To speak of them as they lie in themselves, and in the simple
Injunction; Here Is a Caution given to the Judges, To take heed what they do;
where, by the way, before we go any further, give me leave to put in this, that
when we say here to the Judges, we are not to take these Judges in the limited
sense only, but in the extended; nor in the Peculiar sense only, but in the
Comprehensive; not only for such Persons as are the prime and principal in
Judicature, and have the chief managing of it, whom we call by a special
Eminency, The Justices of the Assize, (though these especially) but also all
others, who by their Places are any way subservient or subordinate to them.
Even they do likewise come within this compass, and have this Charge given unto
them, Justices of Peace, Witnesses, Jurors, Pleaders, and all others, whosoever
they be, who do any thing contribute to the administration of Justice: It is
that which does indeed concern all men whosoever at large. There Is no man that
does any thing at all, but it be hoves him to take heed what be does, because
every man is accountable to God for whatsoever is done by him: But it concerns
those who are the Dispensers of Justice, to take this heed above all others;
for which cause they are called upon to do so: To take heed, and to see what
they do, as the Hebrew word (...) properly signifies, that is, to be well
informed, and to have good Evidence for what is done by them

The giving of Caution, it does always, or at least, for the most part,
suppose some kind of danger, which is incident to those persons to whom it is
given, otherwise there were no need at all for the giving of it; Now there is a
double danger which such are exposed to, who are employed in the affairs of
Judicature: The one is danger of miscarrying, and the other is danger from
miscarrying. There Is danger of miscarrying, lest they should do so; and there is
danger from miscarrying, if they should do so; where there is either or both of
these, we do usually give, and are willing to receive, Caution and Praemonition.

First, Danger of miscarrying, there is a great deal of this in this business:
The work of Judgment is such a nice and intricate business, and has so many
Difficulties and Perplexities oftentimes belonging unto it; that if there be
not a great deal of care taken about it, it is the easiest thing that can be to
miscarry in it. Besides that, those who are exercised in it, are for the most
part liable to great Temptations on every side; which do call for the greater
vigilance and circumspection in them, and give them occasion for looking about
them in those things which are undertaken by them.

Secondly, Danger from miscarrying, there is much of that likewise in it, being
a matter of very great consequence and concernment in it is own nature. And this
is a most sure rule and observation, That those things which are most excellent
in themselves, and right improvement, are commonly most dangerous in their
miscarrying and disappointment: Thus it is here in this business whereof we now
speak, as to the administration of Justice. Forasmuch as there is a great deal
of good which comes (as I have shown before) from it is proceeding regularly;
there is consequently a great deal of danger and mischief ensuing from its
prevarication; Danger to the Judges themselves, danger to the Persons who are
judged by them, danger to the whole State and Commonalty it self; not only
men's lives, but their Souls sometimes hazarded by it. All which laid together,
do give ground for this hint which is here exhibited to them, of taking heed
what they do, which indeed we may take in the notion either of a Caution, or of
a Commination; of a Caution or Admonition, that they might not do amiss: And of
a Commination or Threatening, if they did so.

Whiles it is said here, Take heed what ye do; we are moreover to take this
expression, as in the full latitude and extent of Persons (as I hinted before)
that is to say, both of the principal Judges, and the subordinate; of
themselves, and of any other that are subservient to them; so we are likewise
to take it in the full latitude and extent of things, and of the Office
belonging to such Persons to be discharged by them, where there are two things
especially as pertinent and belonging hereunto, and branches hereof: The one is
as to matter of Condemnation, and the other as to matter of Absolution; These
two especially do make up the work of Judges, who to speak in the words of the
Apostle Peter to this purpose, are for the Punishment of those that do Evil,
and for the Praise of them that do well, 2 Pet. 2.13. And so the Apostle Paul
speaking of the Magistrate, and his Power: If thou do well (says he) thou
shall have Praise of the same. But if thou do Evil, he is an Avenger to
execute Wrath, Romans 13.3, 4. So then in reference to each of these Parts and
Branches of Judicature, we see how this Caution lies, and how far forth it is
to be understood by us: As it referrs to matter of Condemnation; So take heed
what ye do there, that ye do not Condemn the Innocent: And as it refers to
matter of Absolution, so take heed also what ye do there, that ye do not aqcuit
the Guilty; for there is a miscarriage and danger in both: He that justifies
the Wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they both are an abomination
to the Lord, Prove. 17.15.

First, Then take heed what ye do, that is, that ye do not condemn the
innocent; Take heed of that, remember that of the Apostle Paul, which he has
to this purpose, That Rulers are not for a Terror to good Works, but only to
the Evil, Romans 13.3. that is, still they are not so ex Officio, and by their
Places, which inclines them otherwise: And therefore it is supposed, that those
who are good, should not be afraid of their Power, because in stead of being
checked and reproved, and condemned by them, they should rather (as it is there
expressed) have praise from them. Thus it ought to be in this particular, and for
this purpose a great deal of care and heed to be had about it, lest men should
fall under that censure which St. James fastens upon some persons, Ye have
condemned and killed the Just, and he does not resist you, James 5.6.

Secondly, Take heed what ye do, that is, that ye do not acquit the Guilty:
There Is a Care to be had of that likewise. As Innocence is to be cherished and
protected; so is Vice also to be discountenanced and punished, which is another
branch of the Office of such Persons as are in place of Judicature, For the
Punishment of those that do evil, as was expressed in the Scripture
abovementioned. This is that which lies upon them, to be careful of in
themselves, and to take heed that nothing may hinder them, or take them off
from it; whether fear of Displeasure, or hope of Reward, or remisness of
Spirit, or inordinate Affection, or what ever else we might name, as might be
obstructive hereunto: Although there is always a tenderness to be had as to
the managing of such Censures, and a sensibleness of humane infirmity and
common frailty; yet as for the thing it self, it cannot be safely neglected or
omitted by such kind of persons as are entrusted with it. There Is a great deal
of mischief which follows upon the intermission and restraint of Justice in
this particular, when as convicted Offenders are not brought to condign
Punishment: For from hence are men so much the more strengthened and confirmed
in Sin, and encouraged to the Commission of it, according to that of Solomon,
Eccles. 8.11. Because Sentence against an evil Work is not executed speedily,
therefore the Hearts of the Sons of Men are fully set in them to do Evil.
Wickedness it improves from Indulgence, and the more that men are favored in
it, the more earnestly are they set upon it, and addicted to it; which makes so
much the more for such a Course as this is to be taken with it.

This Caution was never more seasonable, then in these Times wherein we live,
in which Sin is come to that height and extremity as it is amongst us in all
particulars; In Filthiness, in Drunkenness, in Luxury, in Oppression, and in
all manner of Profaneness. And these also carried on with an high Hand, with a
brazen Face, with a bold Forehead: The Impudence of Sin in this Age, makes it
to be notorious and abominable; wherein People are so far from being ashamed of
it, as that they rather glory in it, and make their boasts of it, counting it
an advantage to them to make Others as bad as themselves; because they think
that whiles Sin is more common, it will be less scandalous, as having many to
plead for it. Give me leave to instance in one Sin amongst the rest, which
there are very good Laws against, and it is pity but they were put into
Execution, and that is your common and profane Swearing and Cursing, and
hideous Blasphemy, whereby the great and glorious Name of God is in a most
fearful and execrable manner rent and torn in pieces: We cannot pass the
Streets, but our Ears are ready to tingle at the hearing of such horrid Oaths
as are uttered in every corner. A Sin which is the more intolerable, as it is
less accountable, which men have nothing to say for themselves in the defense
of it, as having no provocation or temptation at all to it, but only the
naughtiness and perverseness of their own Hearts; who will be wicked because
they will be, and are resolved in themselves so to be, let there come on it
what there will.

Now this does very much call for the restraint of those that have Power to
restrain it; An bainous Crime, and an Iniquity to be punished by the Judges: To
use that expression, Job 31.11. and so for all other Sins besides, which do
come within their compass. This Caution here in the Text, it reaches them in
this particular, To take heed what they do, yea, and to take heed what they do
not do too, which is included also in it: For even simple omissions are very
dangerous in such cases as these are. In times of common and public
Corruption, and the spreading of wickedness in the World, there are two sorts
of Persons especially which are very highly concerned, and cannot easily
discharge themselves from Guilt, in the neglect of their Duties about it;
Magistrates and Ministers. Ministers whiles they neglect to reprove it, they
become guilty of it by their silence. And Magistrates while they neglect to
punish it, they become guilty of it by their Indulgence. And it is an heavy and
grievous thing to draw the burden of other men's Sins upon our selves, and to
partake with them in them, which we do by our connivance at them.

Let us therefore all both one and the other be awakened and exhorted in this
particular, To take heed what we do; that so our examples may have an influence
upon our Offices in the succesfulness of them, and both together upon the good
of the State and Kingdom wherein we live; which we are all of us concerned in
to preserve it what we can in innocence, that we may preserve it what we can
from ruin: For Righteousness exalts a Nation, but Sin is a reproach to any
People, as it is in Prove. 14.34.

And moreover, let us look to our Hearts and Affections in all these things;
which is especially to be regarded by us. Take heed not only what ye do, but
how ye do it; which we are also for the fullness of the sense to take in, as
included in this Caution. Man looks to the outward appearance, but the Lord
looks unto the Heart: It is possible to be very unjust even in the execution of
Justice it self, according to the spirit and principle which men are at any
time carried by in the discharge of it; for which reason it concerns them to be
the more wary and watchful over themselves. And so much may suffice to have
spoken of this passage in the first view and notion of it, as it is
considerable in the words themselves, or simple Injunction.

The second is, as it is considerable in the connection of these words with the
other, or in their rational inference expressed in the causal For; because, or
forasmuch, Ye judge not for Man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the
Judgment; therefore, and upon this account and consideration, Take heed what ye
do: where again, we are to take the branches distinctly and separately one from
the other, and so the inference in each reference both to the proposition and
to the amplification: In reference to the proposition thus, Because ye judge
not for Man, but for the Lord; For there is the force of an argument in both;
therefore take heed what ye do, for that reason. Again, in reference to the
amplification thus, because the Lord is with you in the Judgment: Therefore
take heed what ye do for that also.

First, Take it in the first reference, namely, as to the proposition, thus,
Take heed what ye do, because ye judge not for Man, but for the Lord: Where we
may first of all in general take notice of the Topic or Nature of the
Argument, which is here used; and that as taken not so much from Humane, as
from Divine considerations; from God himself rather than from Man. And it gives
us by the way an hint of the disposition of each party; both of the person that
used it, and of the persons to whom it was used. First, For the person that
used it, which was Jehoshaphat, we see what kind of arguments were most
effectual with him, by what was used by him: There are some that would have
dealt with these Judges upon civil and secular considerations, and in a way of
Policy; but he deals with them rather upon sacred and religious considerations,
and in a way of Piety. Those things which most prevail with men themselves,
they are apt commonly to urge upon others, from the sense and efficacy which
they have of them upon their own Hearts: And so here.

Again, For the Persons to whom this Argument was used: These Judges they were
probably pious and religious men, and such as truly feared God, or else
Jehoshaphat would never have used such an argument as this was to them: Reasons
taken from Piety are insignificant to an impious Heart, and carry no stroke at
all of prevalency with them. Carnal and Atheistical people, who have no sense
of Religion at all in them, nor no sear of God before their eyes; they will
sooner scoff and mock at such arguments and reasons as these, then be any thing
moved or wrought upon by them. But these persons here in the Text, as we may
conjecture were better affected. And so this argument which was used unto them,
it was proper for them: It was Argumentum ad Homines, though not Argumentum ab
Hominibus. And this we may observe from the Condition of the argument in
general.

Now to come more closely to it in particular, Ye judge not for Man, but for
the Lord; therefore take heed what ye do: The argument holds good in this
connection upon a various consideration, we may resolve it into these following
Improvements.

First, Ye judge for the Lord, and it is He that imployes you; Therefore take
heed what ye do, that so thereby ye may discharge your Trust, and approve your
selves to him chiefly who is your Master, and that sots you on Work.

Secondly, Ye judge for the Lord, and it is He that is represented by you, and
in whose place ye stand; Therefore take heed what ye do, that ye may do that
which is every way suitable and agreeable to such an excellent Person as He
indeed is: This Picture is to be like the Person; and the Image is as near as
may be, to be proportionable to the Samplar. Those who are Gods by Title and
Appellation, as Magistrates and Judges are, they should as much as possibly
might be, be Gods also in property and disposition: That so it may be said of
them as was it said of Paul and Barnabas at Lystra, The Gods are come down to
us in the likeness of Men, Acts 14.11. Seeing they bear the Name of God,
sustain the Place, represent the Person, they should therefore, as near as they
can, partake of the Nature, and so carry themselves in point of Judicature even
as God himself does. And thus we find it improved in the verse immediately
following the Text, the seventh verse of this Chapter, Wherefore now let the
fear of the LORD be upon you, take heed and do it; For there is no Iniquity
with the Lord our God, nor respect of Persons, nor taking of Gifts. The
Deputies and Vicegerents are to be true and faithful to the Persons whom they
represent.

Thirdly, Ye judge for the Lord, as the Person that is especially aimed at and
intended in your Judicature; and therefore be careful that ye fall not short of
that main End whereunto ye are designed; and especially that ye walk not
contrary to it. There is somewhat considerable in reference to Man, which in
some respects might prevail with you to circumspection and exactness in your
proceedings. But this consideration, which is taken from God, is the chiefest
of all, and so most of all to be minded by you. For as old Ely spoke sometime
to his Sons to this purpose in 2 Samuel 2.25. If one man sin against another, the
Judge shall judge him: But if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for
him. And thus does the Inference hold good in its first reference, as it is
carried in the simple Proposition, Ye judge not for Man, but for the Lord;
therefore take heed what ye do, for that reason.

Secondly, It holds also in reference to the additional amplification, Who is
with you in the Judgment, and that according to all those explications which we
have before given of it.

First, He is with you to behold you; therefore take heed what ye do, as those
who are accountable to him, for that which shall be done by you Those who are
now Judges of others, they must hereafter be judged themselves, and together
with those whom they judge, stand personally before Christ's Tribunal: Whereof
these inferior Judicatures are both a Representation, and also an Assurance.
Therefore there are some Translators who thus render those words of the
Psalmist, Psalm 82.1. where it is said, He judges among the Gods: They read it,
In the midst he will judge the Gods. Intimating thus much unto us, That the
great God of all, he will judge these little and petty gods, which now have his
Name upon them; And so he will.

Secondly, He is with you to assist you, Therefore take heed what ye do, as
careful to improve that help and assistance which he offers to you: Inablement
is an engagement to performance, and the more help at any time we have, the
less excusable are we in sailing of that Duty which is required of us.

Thirdly, He is with you to defend you; Therefore take heed what ye do, that so
ye may give him occasion to defend you still, and testify your thankfulness
for his former defending of you: His protection is not to make you the more
secure, but rather the more careful.

Lastly, He is with you to reward you; Therefore take heed what ye do, that so
he may bestow a full reward upon you: That when the chief Judge of all shall
appear, you also may appear with him, and receive a Crown of Glory that fades
not away: Even a Crown of Justice and Righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give you in that day; and not to you only, but also to
all them that love his appearing. And thus ye have the Caution inferred upon
the Truth declared, and the Use which follows upon the Doctrine.

Now there is but one thing more behind, which yet is very considerable, for
the better enforcing of all the rest; which though it be first in the order of
the Text, yet I have reserved it to the last, as carrying a very good close
with it. And that is the Preface or Introduction, in these words, And he said
unto the Judges, which has the greater Emphasis with it, as it does exhibit to
us the Person by whom this Charge is given; And that is Jehoshaphat, who must
not be omitted by us; we may look upon him as considerable of us, under a
various Reduplication, and that also very pertinent to the matter and business
in hand.

First, As he was a good Man, and one that did himself take heed what he did,
therefore he might the better call upon others to do so: Guilt is an
obstruction to Duty, and especially to good Counsel, both in the performance,
and also in the success. But those who are themselves careful and exact in
their own Conversation, they may with the greater freedom and confidence
advise others; and their advice will from thence prove to be the more effectual.

Secondly, As he was a great Man, and one that had the command of them: He was
a King, and where the word of a King is, there is power, Eccles. 8.4. Not only
these Judges Piety, but their Loyally was concerned in this business. Good
Counsel it would not be rejected from the meanest person; but when besides the
pressing matter and nature of the things required, there shall be an accession
of the Authority of the Magistrate also requiring them, there is a double
engagement. As one who may in Christ enjoin that which is convenient, Philemon
8.

Thirdly, As he was the Person that instituted, and set up these Judges: It was
he that gave them their task, that enjoined them, and put them upon this
Service. Therefore he thought himself so much the more concerned in their
ordering and managing of it. Those that at any time put others into Places of
Trust and Public Employment, whether of Magistracy or Ministry, are so much
the more engaged in their faithful discharge of them, as they are themselves
occasions of them to them, as undertaking them upon their account.

Fourthly and Lastly, As he was one that had lately received a check from God
himself, for his own sinful compliance, in the second verse of this Chapter: He
was from hence now so much the more careful to warn and admonish others. Those
who have at any time felt the smart of Sin in their own Consciences, will be
the more sollicitous to keep off their Brethren from falling into the like
miscarriages with them, and the ill consequents of them.

And thus now have ye this whole Text in the several parts and branches of it,
both the Preface and the Principal Matter. The Charge which is given, with the
Person giving this Charge, and from both together a special engagement upon the
Persons to whom it is given: Here Is no place for any excuse, or evasion of
Duty. They could not plead Ignorance, that they did not know it, for they are
here instructed. They could not plead Forgetfulness, that they did not mind it,
for they are here admonished: And not only these persons themselves, but all
others in the like places with them; they may take these words of the Text as
spoken to them, and make use of them. That as I began, so I may end, Take heed
what ye do, for ye judge not for Man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the
Judg-ment.

FINIS.

