Strange News from Staffordshire: Being a true RELATION OF TWO Bloody Murders
Committed by one Andrew Sympson, Upon the Bodies of a young Man and a young
Woman.
O What a world of Curses the eating of the forbidden fruit has brought upon
Mankind! and unavoidably entailed upon the Sons of Men great Misery; amongst
all which none appears more terrible and full of Sorrow, and bewraying greater
Wrath, than the Blood-crying Sin of Murder, especially when it is attended with
Crimes, whose Wickedness of themselves might purchase the reward of Death:
which in the Person, of whom this Relation is written, might have been fully
evidenced, before he committed this horrible Action, for which he received his
just Reward or Punishment.

The place of his usual abode was Leeke, a Town in the Moorlands in Stafford
shire; his Name Andrew Sympson, by Trade a Shoemaker, and some time an Ostler
in an Inn in the same Town, where he first begun to act his wicked Designs:
For, about two years ago, a Countryman coming to Market in Leeke, he set up his
Horse at the Red-Lion, where Andrew was Hostler; and from thence going into the
Town, he received, for Corn, some Three Pounds, which putting in a large
Leather-purse in his Pocket, he in the Evening comes to his Inn, and drinking
indifferent hard, stays till 10 of the Clock or thereabouts (it being in
September, the Nights dark;) he then calls for the Ostler, and giving him two
Pence for his horse, he rode homewards toward his own house, which was some
four Miles from Leek.

But Andrew seeing this Purse of Money, and judging it to be more than it was,
he takes a Horse of his Master's out of the Stable; he rides a nearer way
through a back-ground of his Master's, and meets the Countryman in an open
large Moor; where bidding him stand, he robs him of his Money, and then with a
Horse-collar, or Halter, binds his hands and feet, loosing his Horse to run
home; and so leaves the poor Countryman in great distress all Night on the
cold ground, Moneyless and comfortless.

Next Morning he was by Country People found, and came back to Leeke, where he
made known his bad Misfortune: But none could suspect Andrew to be the Actor in
this Fact.

After this prize, he continues a good time honest, till another opportunity
affords it self to his eye, which he would not let slip; which was as follows:

About six months after the former Robbery, there came a youngman to the house
on foot, traveling for Nantwich in Cheshier, who overnight inquiring in the
house of his way, next day none was so forward as Andr. to inform him, or to
get into the acquaintance of this Stranger, who, by his own lavish discourse,
discovers he had good store of Money, and that he had lately left his Friends
upon Discontent. Andrew informs him of the best way he could toward Congerton
seven miles on his way, and himself proffered next morning to put him in the
right way for a mile or two. The Stranger accepts his proffer; and so in the
morning out they go together, their way lying over a great and almost
unfrequented Moore, and so through a great dismal Wood; in the midst of which
he takes an opportunity, and with one blow of a heavy Stick he knocks the poor
Traveller down; but not so content, he redoubles his blows till he found him
breathless on the ground: which when he perceived, he took out of his Pocket
six pounds in Gold and Silver, with two Rings, and a silver Box, and then takes
the Body and drags it into an old useless Coal pit; which being left open and
deep, the Body was not found till his Confession before Justice Anderson in
June last, 79.

From acting this horrible Crime, he comes home again to Leeke, no body ever
suspecting him: for he easily told where he pretended he parted with the
Stranger, and they never thinking but he was gone his Journey.

Andrew upon this Theft was full of money, which he freely spent, the only way
to be poor again, and so to be tempted to another sin or Robbery. He was so
cunning an Artist, as he never exposed the Rings to sale in Leek, but once
going over to Stafford, he there to a Goldsmith sells them, with the Box
pretending he found them.

After this, he continues till May last, without acting any dishonesty to be
detected; but though he was asleep in security, he could not escape the Divine
Vengeance for his horrid Facts: for now the time of his apprehension drew on,
and that he must render an Account for all his sins before the Terrestrial and
Celestial Judges. He observes in May last, a woman, who coming to Leeke with
Cloth, Lace and Thread, and other Pedlers Commodities, she took some money in
the Town, and with what she had before, it was pretty considerable. She then
intends for the Town of Bakewel, North-west from thence, where she must pass by
a place called the black Mere of Morridge, which is a strange deep black
water-pond of a very prodigious depth and color, differing from most ordinary
waters. Andrew learns what way she must travel, but in his heart he intends to
prevent her Journey, and add one more great sin to his two former. This place
was some seven miles or thereabouts from Leeke; and it was almost three in the
afternoon ere she went out of Town, and consequently it must be near night ere
she past by this unfrequented place. Andrew follows her, pretending he was
going to a Town three miles off; but he dogs this woman, and follows her to the
very place he intended, where by force he first strangles her, and then taking
her Purse of money from her side, and her Boxes of Lace, and her Linen, he
ties a Rope to her middle, and a great Stone to the end of it, and throws her
into the Mere; and so packing up his Prize he hyes home, where he gets before
morning, and in a Hay-mow hides all his Purchase: which he had not long
possessed, but being over-kind with a Maidservant in the house, he tells her he
would give her some Lace and Linen; which she being glad to hear, often tells,
and urges him for his promise. At last she so much tires him, that he goes one
day to fetch her some of both; but she watching him privately, wonders to see
him from the Hay-mow draw forth such a quantity of Linen and Lace. She says
nothing to him, but at night, sick of a woman's distemper, she tells her other
fellow servants, who could scarce believe it; but the other affirming it, she
next day tells her Mistress, who also wondering, sends for Andrew, and taxes
him, but he denies it stoutly. She then calls her Husband, and he going to look
in the very place, they find all the Linen and Lace, and some Money.

Andrew was secured, and carried before a Justice; where, after a many strange
Excuses, he confesses the Fact: and for it being committed to the Goal, he was,
this last Assizes there held, Condemned: And then he confessed the other two
Facts, receiving the just Reward of his horrible Murders and Robberies.

This Relation is known to be true by most of the Inhabitants of Staffordshire,
and by the Authors here inserted. Mr. Tho. Horsley, and Mr. Samuel Stains.

FINIS.

