Imprimatur, Z. Isham, R.P.P. Henrico, Episc. Land. a sacris. Apr. 4. 1689.

A SERMON PREACHED AT FULHAM, IN THE Chapel of the Palace, Upon Easter Day,
MDCLXXXIX. AT THE CONSECRATION OF THE Right Reverend Father in God, GILBERT,
Lord Bishop of SARVM.

By ANTHONY HORNECK, D.D.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, GILBERT, Lord Bishop of SARVM.
My Lord,
AFter your Lordship had desired me to Print this Sermon, I met with a
Discourse upon the very same Subject, and upon an occasion of the same nature,
by an abler Hand, Mr. Y. in the year 1685.
which made me look upon the printing of mine as needless, and had almost
prevailed with me to lay aside all thoughts of Publishing what I delivered in
your Lordship's presence; but considering, that Obedience would be better
resented than Excuses, and a man had better see himself out-shined by persons
of greater parts and abilities, which is a comfort to an humble mind, than be
guilty of disrespect to those whom we look upon both as our Friends and
Superiors (Not to mention that our matter and method are different) I was
resolved to venture; And tho these courser Meditations may not give that
satisfaction that more elaborate Orations do, yet since there must be
Vnder-workmen, as well as Master Builders, and both may be useful in their
several stations, I was willing to appear before your Lordship with this
Present, in which I must beseech you to regard the heart with which it is
offered, more than the gift it self; which if you do, you will not only let the
World see, how great your Charity is in over-looking Defects and Blemishes, but
increase the Obligations you have already laid on,

My Lord, Your Lordships most affectionate and most humble Servant, A. HORNECK.

2 TIMOTHY i.6. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, That thou stir up the gift of
God, which is in thee, by the putting on of my hands.
THEY that think, that every Christian may be a Preacher; and that the
Ministry, considered as a distinct Calling or Employ, is nothing but
usurpation, and some ambitious men's affecting a Superiority over their
Brethren, like the Cynick of old, trampling upon Plato's Cloak, make themselves
guilty of greater Pride than that which they pretend to condemn. They not only
contradict the universal Sense of Mankind, which from immemorial times have had
their distinct Officers of Religion, but set up their Conceits against the
Wisdom of God himself, who did no sooner plant a Church in the World, but took
care the Priesthood should be in a certain Order of Men; and as before the Law,
the Firstborn was to have that Privilege, as all the ancient Jewish Records
do witness, so under the Law, the Family of Aaron was p^ched upon to attend the
Altar. And tho the whole Jewish Nation was a Royal Priesthood, or a Kingdom of
Priests, Exodus 20.6.
in a metaphorical sense; yet properly speaking, none could officiate in
public, either in the Tabernacle or Temple, but the Levites, and the Sons of
Aaron. And under the New Testament, tho the Spirit was poured out upon all
flesh, yet even then men were separated, and set apart for preaching the Word,
administering the Holy Sacraments, and exercising Church Censures: and to invade
the Office, was counted Presumption and Sacrilege, and no less than resisting
the Holy Ghost. The Church is called a Building, and we know, that every Flint
or Pebble is not fit to be a Foundation, or Cornerstone; much less to be set
into the Ephod, and there to shine in Oracles and Responses. It Is called a Body
too, and this has various Members, and these, various Offices, which cannot be
all Eyes, and Overseers; if they were, where would be the hearing? It was
therefore that the Apostles, in the places where they preached the Gospel,
before they left them, or took their final leave of the People, ordained them
Bishops and Elders, to succeed them in the Ministerial Function; such a Bishop
was Timothy, the (...), the President, and Overseer of the Church of Ephesus;
and not only of the Church in the City, but (...) of the Diocese; of Ephesus,
says Eusebius: L. 3. c. 4.
and if we may believe St. Chrysostom, of all Asia, Hom. 15. in 1. Tim*
whose Office was, besides his other Ministerial Labors, to inspect the Clergy
under his charge, and other Officers belonging to the House of God, whereof the
Fifth Chapter of the First Epistle to Timothy, seems to me a very clear
Evidence; for it speaks of an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction lodged in Timothy, an
Overseer constituted and appointed by St. Paul, even by the laying on of his
hands, whereof he puts him in mind in the Text, and of the Gift, that was
bestowed upon him by that imposition of hands, and of his duty to exercise it.
Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the gift of God, which
is in thee, by the laying on of my hands.

And here, before I enter upon the Apostle's Exhortation, or the Duty contained
in it, I cannot but take notice of the softness and gentleness of his Address,
I put thee in remembrance.

Practical Discourses, and salutary Admonitions, to men of Learning and good
Education, are a refreshing of their Memories, rather than teaching or
illuminating their Understandings: Timothy could not be ignorant of the Duty
recommended to him here by his spiritual Father; for from a child he had known
the holy Scriptures, which made him wise unto salvation, through faith, which
is in Christ Jesus, perfect, and thoroughly furnished unto all good works: yet
the Apostle preaches to him a very familiar Duty; and this preaching he calls
putting him in remembrance.

The same may be said almost of all Sermons delivered in mixed Auditories, where
judicious and intelligent persons are mingled with vulgar capacities. The
Morals, and common Principles explained and taught, and inculcated there, may
be as useful to those of a higher, as well as to those of a lower Form; for tho
they came not attended with new Notions to instruct them, yet they may serve to
put them in mind of the solid Truths they know, and give them opportunity to
enlarge and ruminate upon them, to their spiritual profit and edification. The
things which tend to make us eternally happy, are the plainest, the most known,
and the most familiar Doctrines improved into practice of godliness; and he
that makes the Articles of the Catholic Faith, Motives and Engagements to
Self-denial, and strictness of life, is more likely to arrive in the Harbor of
a blessed Immortality, than the greatest Literati, who think it below them to
employ their Parts and Understandings about things which every Ploughman knows
as well as they: 3. v.
It was the custom of a very learned Prelate of our Church, when he had talked
with his friends of some nicer Points of Divinity, or History, or Chronology,
to close his Discourse with this friendly Exhortation, Come, let us now talk a
little of Jesus Christ, being sensible, that, however Learning may enlighten,
or refine the Understanding, the Doctrine of the Cross, and Christ crucified,
and such plain Notions of Christianity, are the things, which being
affectionately pondered, will conduct the Soul to eternal Life and Glory

And therefore, how impertinent soever it may be, to make an Oration of War
before Hannibal, it cannot be improper to discourse of (...), the Common things
which accompany Salvation, before the learnedest of you all; not to make you
more knowing and intelligent, that were to hold a Taper to the Sun, but to give
you opportunities to be better. Discourses of this nature may put you in
remembrance of a Duty, which multiplicity of business would not suffer you to
think of, or contemplations of other matters tempted you to overlook. The
learneder you are, the fitter you are to improve the meaner performances of the
Orator; and while you apply your larger Understandings to the Common Truths
delivered by the inconsiderab^ Speaker, and make Comments upon them in your
minds, by richer Meditations, your Edification is signal, being hereby put in a
capacity of saving both your selves and others.

And having premised this Observation, I may now with greater cheerfulness and
courage, exhort you who are here present, not only those of the Third, and
Second Degree, or Order of Priesthood, as Optatus Milevitanus, calls Deacons
and Priests, but even you the very Apices, the Principes, the Chiefs and Heads
of the Church of God, to stir up the Gift of God, which is in you, by the
imposition of hands: for this is no more than putting you in remembrance of the
things you have learned and known, and are eminently versed in; And that I may
proceed orderly, I shall enquire, I. What the Gift is which was in Timothy, and
may still be supposed to be in all those whom God calls to the same Office. II.
How that Gift was anciently, and is still bestowed and conveyed, or
communicated. III. How this Gift is to be stirred up, and what are the most
proper means and ways to do it.


I. What the Gift is which was in Timothy, and may still be supposed to be in
all those whom God calls to the same Office.

This Gift is the Holy Ghost, a Gift known already before, and under the Law;
but which, by the Confession of the Jews themselves, ceased in the Synagogue,
after the Death of Haggai, Zachary, and Malachy, as well as the fire from
Heaven, the Ark of God, the Urim and Thummim, and the Shekinah, or Divine
Presence; a Gift which revived, and rose again, and with greater luster and
splendour too, when Christ Jesus came into the World, himself being the Anointed
of the Lord, to whom God gave the Spirit without measure, that of his fullness
we should all receive grace for grace: a Gift poured out in those glorious
days, according to Joel's Prophecy, upon all flesh; i. e. on all sorts of men,
even some times by drops at least, upon Christ's Enemies; for it was by this
Spirit, Joh. xi 49.
that Caiaphas prophesied, that Christ should die for the People: a Gift most
visibly and most eminently conferred on the Apostles, Christ's Friends, and
Domestics, and who were to preach the Gospel to every Creature under Heaven,
and therefore consecrated by Miracles, and such a descent of the Holy Ghost
upon them, as put not only the Spectators, but the Apostles themselves, that
felt the Inspiration, into Ecstasy: a Gift which in the Primitive Times,
wonderfully illuminated those who were baptized, sometimes before their
baptism, as in the Case of Cornelius, that famous (...), or Proselyte of the
gate; a Gift bestowed more particularly on persons who were chosen out of the
People to exercise the Ministerial Function, whether as Apostles or Bishops,
who succeeded those Stewards of the House of God, or as Priests, or as Deacons:
In a word, men separated to holy Offices; and this is the Gift to which the
Text has relation.

When Christ ordained his Apostles, or rather confirmed their former
Ordination, John xx.22. he ordained them with this Motto, Receive ye the Holy
Ghost; with an intent, no doubt, that after his Decease, and before their
leaving the World, they should ordain Elders in every City, whether Bishops, or
inferior Ministers of the Word, and entitle them to the same Gift, so far, at
least, as it was conducive to the effectual exercise of their Ministry; for it
was not necessary that this Gift, as it brake out in Miracles and Prophecies,
and speaking in unknown Tongues, raising the dead, and opening the eyes of the
blind, and healing the sick, etc. should be propagated or continued in those
who were to succeed the Apostles in their Ministry, that demonstration of the
Spirit by Signs and Wonders, being proper only for those days, when the new Law
was to be established, and Jews were to be called away from Moses to Jesus,
from an External to a Spiritual Service, and the Heathens from their Gods and
Idolatries. It was enough that the substantial part of the Gift was to be
continued in the Church, and in its Officers, to bring People in the Unity of
the Faith, unto a perfect man in Christ Jesus; and this Gift is said here to be
in Timothy.

This Phrase, the Holy Ghost, being of a large Extent, standing sometime for
the Person, sometime for the miraculous Gifts, sometime for the saving Graces
of the Holy Ghost; and even these Gifts and Graces are different; for there are
diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. xii.4. I
shall therefore particularize the Gift communicated to Timothy; and if we take
St. Paul for our Guide, we shall find this Gift was a Divine Power vouchsafed
to this man of God, which enabled and disposed him to teach, and live, and act,
and do, answerably to the Duties incumbent upon him, as a Governor of the
House of God. The Apostle in the following Verse, calls it, (...), the Spirit
of Power, of Love, and of a sound Mind; the Spirit of Christian Fortitude, of
Charity, and of Sedateness and Tranquillity of Temper.

1. The Spirit of Fortitude, which consists in being undaunted at danger,
fearless of the Frowns of men, while we do no more than our Duty, and a steady
Freedom to vindicate the Truth of the Gospel, and the Honor of Christ Jesus,
whatever may be the Effect or Consequence of it: In a word, an humble boldness,
such as Hosius, St. Ambrose, St. Athanasius, St. Hilary, St. Chrysostom, St.
Basil, and others, were famous for, who talked to Kings and Emperors, when
God's Cause was concerned, like Persons who feared nothing but the Anger of the
King of Heaven; and tho Pride and Passion do sometimes shelter themselves under
the Name of Christian Fortitude, yet the counterfeit Ware may soon be
distinguished from the true and genuine, by examining the Cause and Principle,
from which the boldness rises; which if it be Contempt of the World, and a pure
Sense of God's Glory, it sanctifies the Temper, and speaks it to be derived
from the Holy Ghost.

2. The Spirit of Love. It was not without very great Reason, that our Savior
asked St. Peter thrice, Love thou me? and, Love thou me more than these? We
may very rationally infer, that in saying so, he showed what manner of Spirit
those should be of who were to be Pastors, and Teachers, and Overseers in the
House of God. Nothing renders them more amiable to God and Man, than this
Spirit of Love, Love to the Lord Jesus, Love to God's Glory, Love to the Souls
of Men, Love which makes them willing to spend, and to be spent, even to die
for the Name of the Lord Jesus. It is the mark of Christ's Disciples in
general, and therefore must be so more eminently of those who are to go before
the Sheep and lead them to green Pastures. From this Love have proceeded the
almost incredible Pains that holy Men of God have taken for the Conversion of
Souls, whereof Ecclesiastical History gives us very considerable Instances.

3. The Spirit of a sound Mind. This seems to be a Temper able to curb the
Passions, Inordinate Lusts, Desires and Perturbations of the Mind, an admirable
Spirit! To know when to be angry, and when to be calm; when to be severe, and
when to be moderate and gentle; when to use the Rod, and when to use the Staff;
to have the Brutish Part in subjection to the Rational, the Body to the Soul,
the Flesh to Spirit; this is Wisdom beyond all Worldly Policy whatsoever. Plato
makes this (...), or soundness of Mind, the opposite of Madness. Indeed
indulging our Passions, and letting loose the Reins of our carnal and sensual
Affections, is no better; for it is an Argument that Reason is dethroned, and
the ruling part of the Soul is become subject to the ignobler Principality; and
surely this is Madness. The Mind is then sound, when it keeps the lower
Faculties in good order, and it is an Argument of Wisdom to judge of things
without Heats, or Prejudice, or prospect of self-Interest, and to keep the wild
Desires of corrupted Nature in awe, and to do things with Prudence and
Moderation.

This is the Gift here aimed at, a Gift very necessary for the discharge of so
great, so weighty an Employ as is intimated in the Text; a Gift which not only
Timothy was partaker of, but which as I said may justly be supposed to be in
all, and to be given in some degree or other to those whom God calls to the
same Office. For, if this Spirit was bestowed on Timothy upon the account of
his Office, and God intends that Office should continue to the World's end, we
may justly conclude, that he will not deny the same Gift now to those whom he
calls to the same Office. He that conferred another Heart and another Spirit
upon Saul when he called him to be King over his People Israel; can we think
he will deny so useful, so necessary a Gift, to the Rulers of his Church, who
have his Call, his Summons, his Vocation? I say, his Call, for no Man takes
that Honor unto himself but he that is called, as also was Aaron.

Those who call themselves, whom either Ambition or Interest, or a worldly,
sensual Mind, or fondness of being great, and to be called of Men Rabbi, puts
upon thrusting themselves into this sacred Office, are called indeed, but it is
by that Spirit whose Name is Legion, not by him who gave some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and Teachers, for the perfecting
of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of
Christ; Ephesians. iv.11.

This Call of God which our Church accounts requisite and necessary upon such
occasions, is no (...) Bath Kol, no Daughter of the Voice, no audible Sound or
Language dropped from Heaven, as it was Act. xiii.2. Separate me Paul and
Barnabas; no sudden Passion, or warm Fancy, no violent Impulse, which
Melancholy causes, or a turbulent Temper does infuse, but it appears by proper
Parts and Abilities, by Learning suitable to the Office, by being skilful in
the Word of Truth, by a secret sense of the weight and importance of the
Calling, by Christian Wisdom and Prudence, by a vehement desire to do good, to
win Souls, to gain Proselytes to Righteousness, and to advance the Glory of
Christ's Kingdom, by unfeigned love to good Men, and being enamored with those
Christian Virtues and Perfections, without which that Name is only assumed and
usurped, and a Man is dead while he lives.

Those who are thus qualified, have not only one, but all, or most of these
Characters, and carry this whole Constellation in the Heaven of their Souls,
are, and may truly be said to be called to this Office by him, who tells the
number of the Stars; for these are such, even Stars in Christ's Righthand, and
calls them all by their Names. And on such Men we may expect the Spirit, and
the Gift of the Text will descend when an external Call invites them to put
their Shoulders under the Burden: and as the Spirit came on Elisha^ when the
Minstrel played; so such Men, having this Harmony in their Souls, may look for
the illapse of this Spirit, especially when seconded with the external Music
of Veni Creator Spiritus.

When St. Paul 1 Timothy iii.1. speaks of a Person who desires the Office of a
Bishop, and then subjoyns the Accomplishments of the Man who desires it, he
does in effect require this internal Call, and setting down the particular
marks of it, the design without all peradventure is, to show that he who thinks
to enter into that Station, must enquire of himself, whether those Ingredients
are found in him; He that finds them not, and yet boasts of a Divine Vocation,
may indeed deceive and blind the Eyes of Men who can see no farther than the
outside of the Cup and Platter, but surely cannot impose upon a (...) an
all-seeing Eye, which does not only see the Unsoundness of the Heart, and want
of the Wedding Garment, but will revenge it too in that day, when he shall judge
the Secrets of Men's Hearts by his Gospel.

The Holy Gho^ loves a cleanly Habitation, the Terms and Epithethes by which
that Gift is sometimes expressed in Scripture, Fire, and Water, import so much.
It is another Spirit that enters into the Swine. The Holy Spirit of Discipline,
as it is said Wisd. i.5. will flee deceit, and remove from Thoughts, that are
without Understanding, and will not abide when Unrighteousness comes in.

But though a Person thus qualified for Timothy's Office, and the sacred
Function, may be thereby disposed for the receiving of the Holy Ghost, the
Spirit of Power, of Love and of a sound Mind, or a greater portion of it, if he
had something of it before, yet it seems this Gift is not actually bestowed,
except Persons of the same Office and Station, Men that have been thus
initiated themselves, lay their Hands on him, which calls me to Examination of
the second Query.

II. How this Gift was anciently, and is still bestowed and communicated: By
the putting on of my Hands, says St. Paul; and 1 Timothy iv.14. he adds, by the
laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery, i. e. of the whole Apostolical
College, or the greater part of the Apostles, who it is like were present upon
the place: for the Apostles are called Presbyters sometimes, 'nay Deacons too,
Names in those days not of Office, at least not constantly, but of Age, and
Honor, and Service.

This Rite or Ceremony of Imposition of Hands on a Person designed for
Church-Offices, and the Service of the Tabernacle, Isidore and others derive
from Isaac's blessing his Son Jacob, which they suppose was one by the
Patriarch's laying his Hands upon Jacob's Head, from Jacob's laying his Hands
on his Grandchildren, and blessing them; from Moses's laying his Hand on
Joshua, and communicating part of his Spirit to him. And indeed there are very
few but will grant that it came from the Jews, who at the preferring or
promoting a Person to the degree of Rabbi, or Doctor of their Law, laid their
Hands upon him, a Ceremony performed by three, and called (...) Semicah, and
this was a Symbol that the Holy Ghost rested upon the Person thus ordained.

The Ancient Romans used to lay their Hands upon their Slaves when they made
them free; and Numa Pompilius had Hands laid on him, when he was made High
Pontiff; but it is probable that even these fetched it from the Jews.

The Christian Churches, who retained what was good and praise worthy among the
Jews, seeing nothing in this Rite but what was grave, and decent, and solemn,
and serious, adopted it into their Service. The three Orders, Bishops, Priests
and Deacons were in imitation of the Synagogue, which had her Highpriests, her
Priests, and her Levites, and so was this Imposition of Hands. In sacrificing
Beasts to the Honor of God, the Priest laid his Hands on the Victims Head, to
show he dedicated it to God, and from common, separated it to a holy use, and
dismissed it from the Service of Men into that of the most High God; all which
Significations did wonderfully well agree with the end of the Ministerial
Function under the Gospel, and therefore the Christians had no reason to reject
this useful and decent Custom.

Our Blessed Savior first practiced this Ceremony upon the Children that were
brought to him for his Blessing; and it is not unlikly he laid his Hands on the
Apostles before he left the World; for we read, that a little before his
Departure, he lifted up his Hands and blessed them; Luke xxiv.50. After our
Savior's Ascension into Heaven, the Apostles constantly used it after Baptism
in Confirmation, as an external Mark, to signify the Descent of the Spirit upon
the Persons washed with Water. But more especially, when they separated any
Persons to holy Offices, and they laid their Hands on such, as a sign or pledge
that the Holy Ghost, or a Spirit, and Temper suitable to their Calling, and
Employment, and Profession, was and would be conferred upon them, to guide, and
assist, and direct them.

This Imposition of Hands was no Physical Cause of conveying the Holy Ghost,
but an External Assurance, That as surely as the Hands were laid on the Head of
the Person ordained, so surely would the Spirit of Power, of Love, and of a
sound Mind, light upon his Soul, if he did not obstruct it by wilful departing
from the Living God. And yet all this does not make Order a Sacrament; for tho
we grant here is a Sign, and something Spiritual and Unseen, Represented by
that Sign, yet there is something more required to the making of a Sacrament,
and those must necessarily think so, who believe that the Apostles could
institute no Sacraments, by their Authority.

That this Rite has lasted in the Church from the Apostles Times unto this
day, is what the concurrent Testimonies of all Ages, witness. Those that would
confine it to the Apostles Times, are injurious to the Church of Christ, which
would be in an uncomfortable condition, if her Guides and Pastors came not in
the same way, their Predecessors did; and why should we think the Lord's Hand
shortened, or believe he will not let his Spirit accompany the Pious Ceremony,
when his Church now has as much need of it, as heretofore? and it is hard God
should vouchsafe his Spirit to Persons on whom Holy Hands were laid in the
Jewish, and refuse that Favor to the Guides and Pastors of the Christian
Church, those especially, who keep themselves unspotted from the World.

The Maronites in their Office of Ordination, Morin in Ordin. Maron.
make out the Original and Succession of this Rite, thus: The Most High God,
(say they) came down on Mount Sinai, and laid his Hands upon Moses, Moses laid
his upon Aaron, Aaron upon his Sons, his Sons successively on those that
followed them, until John the Baptist; John the Baptist laid his Hand upon our
Savior, our Savior upon his Apostles, his Apostles on the Bishops that
succeeded them, and they ever since on those who are admitted into Holy Orders.
How true, or how just this Calculation is, I shall not now enquire: But that
which I hinted before, I must touch here again, viz. That this Ceremony, as it
relates to Orders, and particularly to Timothy's Office, must be performed by
those, upon whom Holy Hands were laid before, in order to their Lawful
Ministering before the Lord. The Secular Magistrate, and Laity, may name and
propose Candidates, but cannot by their Imposition of Hands, ordain Bishops and
Elders, for no such Power was ever given them. In the purest, and best, none
would, nay in the most corrupt Ages, none durst presume to do it; The Power
Ecclesiastical as it was distinct from the Secular, before the Empire was
Christian, so they have continued distinct, since Crowns have stoopt to the
Cross; and though they live lovingly together, and are helpful one to another,
yet the one ought not to interfere with the other's essential rights, and
Constitutions.

The Apostle emphatically says, by the putting on of my hands; Himself had been
separated to the Office of Teacher and Apostle, by Imposition of Hands; and
what was conferred on him, he confers on Timothy the same way; And yet, though
he had assistants in the Ordination of his Beloved Son, and though others laid
their Hands on him, as well as St. Paul, that is no Argument, that therefore one
without the help of more, cannot convey the Power and Authority of Timothy's
Office to others. I know, the Church requires three at least to lay their hands
on the Man of God, who is to be consecrated to the Churches service; and most
of the Ancient Canons press it, nay some Churches have been so stiff in this
point, that they have pronounced that Ordination of a Bishop unlawful, which
has been performed by one only; and several Ancient Decrees and Constitutions
there are that require Ordination of a Bishop by all the Bishops of the
Province; yet all this can have relation only to the ordinary course of things,
and where such plenty may easily be had. Cases of necessity are not excluded
here; nor is that Ordination invalid, where there is but one to bless the
Party, who is admitted to the Office, in the Name of the Lord.

Nor need we wonder, that by the imposition of Hands, the Holy Ghost, even the
Spirit of Power, of Love, and of a sound Mind should be conferred; for as this
Imposition of Hands is always seconded by Prayer, which makes St. Austin look
upon Imposition of Hands and Prayer to be one and the same thing; Lib. 2.
contr. Donatist. c.16.
So we know what Promises are made to fervent and importunate Prayer. Luke.
XI.13. If ye being evil, can give good gifts unto your Children, how much more
shall your heavenly Father give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him? But,

It Is time I should in the last place show,

III. How this gift is to be stirred up, and what is the best and most proper
way to do it.

In the original it is (...) which is as much as stirring up the fire, or
blowing the coals, and making the fire burn that lies mingled with the ashes, a
word much used by Plato, which has made some fancy, that the Apostle was well
versed in Plato's Writings; but there is no necessity for that Conjecture, for
the LXX. make use of the expression, and with their Translation, it is likely,
the Apostle was better acquainted than the Ideas of that Philosopher. So that
the Spirit of God conferred upon Sacred Persons by the Imposition of Hands, is
lodged in the Soul, as the Treasure in the Gospel was hid in the Field, which
required digging and searching to make it useful. It Is like Gold in the Oar,
which requires Melting, and Cleansing, and Purifying; like a stock of money
which requires Improvement by Trading; like seed Sown in the Ground, which
requires Watering and other Labor and Industry to make it come forth, and
Grow, and Spread, and yield Fruit, and strengthen man's heart.

This stirring up the Gift of God, respects either the Means that are to be
used, or the Duty it self. The Means hinted in this and the preceding Epistle,
are chiefly three, Prayer, Reading, Meditating.

1. Prayer. Who can live without it? Who can act or do any thing of Moment
without the assistance of this Spiritual Engine? Nature teaches Mankind to
begin their Works of Concernment with God; Grace therefore must be supposed to
press this Duty infinitely more, on you particularly, the Heirs of Timothy's
Office, in order to this stirring up the Gift of God that is in you, by the
Imposition of Hands. God that gives you Talents, intends not that you should
bury them in the Earth, or lay them up in a Napkin, but Occupy, and Traffic
with them, and be gainers by them; and to do this, his help is necessary, who
gives strength to the Weak, and Power to the Feeble; and this help is not to be
had without Importunate Cries and Solicitations. These Prayers must have Fire;
it is their fervor, that unlocks the Secret Cabinet of the Almighty, as
Jamblicus Phrases it; They must be in the Nature of Gorgonia's Devotions, must
even Storm, and Threaten Heaven, as it were; so that God cannot withstand their
Force and Power; and such were the Prayers of Moses, and Aaron, and Samuel
among his Priests, that called upon his Name, they called upon the Lord, and he
answered them, Psalm. XCIX.6.

2. Reading. This the Apostle expressly recommends to Timothy, 1 Timothy IV.13. in
order to his stirring up the Gift of God. Reading What? No doubt, the Holy
Scripture, and therefore our Church prescribes, delivering a Bible into the
Hands of the Person, upon whom Episcopal Hands are laid; and the Maronites lay
the Book of the Gospel upon such a Person's Breast as the Nestorians in Syria
do upon his back or shoulders; not but that other Books are useful in their
Times and Seasons; but St. Paul knew what profit was to be got by Reading this
Library of the Holy Ghost, these Pandects of Christianity, and being greedy
after this Food of the Soul. The great examples you meet with here, the
Industry of Moses, the Zeal of Elijah, the Fervor of St. Paul, the Vigor of
St. Stephen, the Courage of St. Peter, the Assiduity of Apollo, the Sincerity
of Barnabas, what are these, but so many motives to stir up the Gift of God
that is in you. Add to all this the Glorious, the Precious, the Large, the
Sweet, the Wonderful Promises, Promises of Christ's Assistance, Promises of
Comfort, of Support, of Eternal Life and Glory, which will animate, and
enliven, and prompt you to blow up the fire of the Sanctuary, and the Coal of
the Altar, that it may consume the Dross, and Tin, not only that which cleaves
to your own Souls, but that also, which sticks to others, that see and hear
you, and converse with you.

3. Meditating. This is also urged among the Means, not to neglect the Gift of
God, 1 Timothy IV.15. Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them;
The bare Reading will make no great impression; Mediation digests, and Rouzes
the Soul from her Slumber. This quickens the faculties, sets all the wheels a
going, incites to Labor, Prompts to Industry, and moves and even compels us to
imitate the great examples set down in the Word of God, and to follow their
Faith, and Wisdom, and Hope, and Love, and Charity. Meditation is spiritual
Seeing. Seeing the Fight, made Homer's Hero join in Battle. Meditation surveys
the Combats of the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and Christ himself, and from
hence arise Incentives and Encouragements to stir up the Gift of God that is in
you, by the Imposition of Hands.

But in what does the stirring up of the gift of God consist? Chiefly in these
Three particulars.

1. Feeding the Flock of God, which is among you, taking the oversight thereof,
not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready mind,
neither as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being ensamples to the Flock;
This is St. Peter's charge, and we cannot well conceive, how this Spirit, or
gift can be stirred up more profitably, than this way; for this end the Holy
Spirit is bestowed upon you, that you should feed the Flock committed to your
charge, and cause it to be fed by persons not only Learned but Pious, and
Devout, and such as have a great sense of God, and of the worth of Men's Souls;
for this cause the Holy Ghost moves upon your inward Man, that you should feed
the Sheep by preaching the Word, by your sweet and gentle Government, and by
your exemplary lives. These will be Evidences, and Arguments, and
Demonstrations, that the Spirit of Glory, and of God rests upon you, that you
walk after the Spirit, and are filled with it, and that the weapons of your
warfare are not carnal, but spiritual, mighty through God to the pulling down
of the strong holds of iniquity. Feeding implies giving Food convenient to your
Masters Family, Ruling the House of God according to the dictates of Reason,
the Word of God, and the best examples, and making your selves paterns of
Meekness, Humility, Charity, Self-denial, and of all good Works. The external
Honors, Providence bestows upon you, and the respect Men pay you, are to
encourage you to a cheerful performance of your Work, and intended not to swell
you, not to puff you up, not to tempt you to please and tickle your selves with
your Grandeur, but to infuse greater alacrity into you to Fight the good Fight,
and to shed Blessed Influences on all, that are round about you.

Ye are the Captains, the Generals in Christ's Army, while you bear the Heat
and Burden of the day, detrect no Labor, spare no pains, live like Faithful
Stewards of the Mystery of God, Vindicate your Masters Honor, act like
persons, who have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, and by
manifestation of the Truth, commend your selves to every man's Conscience in the
sight of God; you make good the glorious Titles, and the lofty Names, which are
given you, such as Angels, and Stars, and Lights of the World, and the Salt of
the Earth, and a City set on a Hill, etc. Titles of a proud sound, but which
are intended to make you Humble, and to tell you* you are only exalted, that
you may with greater facility, take your people by the hand, and lift them up
to Heaven: This is the way to do good, and to make Religion glorious, and well
spoken of. This will even convince Infidels, that Religion is something more
than a Name, something more than Policy, and interest, that it is able to
transform Tempers, to change hearts, and to make Men act contrary to their
natural inclination, and that instead of debasing humane Nature, it exalts and
polishes, and refines it, and leads it to solid Bliss and Happiness; and this
as well as your Learning will make you, as it was once said of the English
Clergy, stupor Mundi, the Wonder of the World.

2. Laboring and making it your business to reform abuses. Thus did the
Primitive Prelates, the Men, whose Names we rise up to, and whose Memories we
admire, and in whom the Spirit of Power, of Love, and of a sound mind did
shine: Indeed we have some later Examples of magnanimous persons, within the
Kingdoms, to which we belong, who finding the Field, over which they were set,
over run with Briars, and Thorns, with abuses, which peace and plenty, and
connivance, and love to an easy quiet life, and the corruption of the Age, and
the covetousness, and partiality of worldly Men, and a slavish fear of
Superiors had brought in, have resolutely set themselves to weed the deformed,
and dismal Field, and to pull out the Tares, that incommoded, and annoyed the
Wheat. This is a Work, which requires more than ordinary Courage, and therefore
fit for you, whom Providence places at the Stern, and constitutes chief
Watchmen over the House of Israel, and who are in credit with God, and with
your Prince. Your Commission like Jeremy's reaches to destroying, and pulling
up, as well as to planting, and building, not such a destroying, as he, who
pretends to be the Vicar of Christ, has made in Kingdoms and Nations, but
tearing up those obstructions and impediments, which put a stop to the cheerful
progress of Religion amongst us: Here the Zeal of Phin^es will be necessary,
especially, when the Evil is grown so dangerous, that its come to an Ense
rescindendum. Fear of displeasing Men, or of being ill spoken of, or of being
contradicted by Equals, or Superiors must here be banished, as a thing that
renders you unfit for the Kingdom of God, and great Enterprises. Had Christ and
his Apostles insisted upon such excuses, Judaism had triumphed to this day, and
Idolatry maintained its post and station; I need not name here the particular
abuses, which require your Cognizance and Censures, they are too obvious, and a
holy mind, that judges by the Word of God, and the Rules of Primitive
Discipline will soon perceive, where the Sword of the Spirit, even this
Reformation is to be made use of. I know its easier to spy faults than to mend
them, and what seems intolerable to one man, appears harmless in another eye,
but such evasions will not do with a Person, whose Soul is touched with a sense
of God's Glory, whose delight is to do good, who examines impartially what is
required of him in the Station he is in, whom the love of God constrains to do
great things, for the honor of the Gospel, and I may add, who knows the
terrors of the Lord, and believes the threatening of Christ pronounced against
the unfaithful Steward. Matthew. XXIV.50 The Lord of that Servant shall come in a
day, when he looks not for him, and in an hour, that he is not aware of, and
shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the Hypocrites there
shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

3. Enduring hardness as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, a duty very warmly
recommended to our Bishop, 2 Timothy II.3. In discharging your duty faithfully,
you must expect obloquy, and slanders, and reproaches, and other
inconveniences, troubles and adversities; but to bear them patiently, to
maintain your integrity in the midst of all such Storms, your sweetness in the
midst of all the salt waters, not to flinch from your good Profession, not to
sink under your Burden, to hold out to the End, to continue with Christ in his
Temptations, and to be faithful unto death upon a prospect of the Crown of
Righteousness, this is Masculine and Heroic, and a certain Argument, that the
Spirit of God is sent into your hearts, which is the earnest of your future
inheritance.

Thus the Apostles baffled the Temptations of the World, and vanquished the
Stratagems of Hell and Devils, and thus the World must be taught, that neither
Death nor Life, neither Superiorities nor Powers, neither Things present nor
Things to come can separate you from the love of God, which is in Christ Christ
Jesus our Lord.

Were the future Glory (says One) believed as firmly as the things which are
seen, it would be a kind of Martyrdom to live here. To be sure the more lively
our Faith and our Apprehensions are of that future Bliss* the more cheerfully
we shall stir up the Gift of God, that is in us, to our great Redeemers Glory,
and the more patiently we shall bear the crosses that befall us in our good and
great attempts, Crosses, which must turn into Crowns at last, Crowns, that
wither not, that tarnish not, Crowns, which time does not change, and Ages do
not alter, for so we read, 1 Pet. V.4. When the Chief Shepherd shall appear, ye
shall receive a Crown of Glory, which fades not away.

And now, O Timothy, whom God has called, and the King has called, and the
Church does call; God by extraordinary parts and abilities, the King, who
understands the merit of those, who are near, and dear to him, the Church which
considers, who are like to be most useful to the edifying of the body of
Christ; O Timothy, I say, upon whom the sacred unction is to be poured forth,
and the hands of blessing to be laid; Remember, that Jesus Christ, of the seed
of David, was raised from the dead according to the Gospel; an argument, I make
use of not only because of its relation to the day, but because St. Paul makes
it an incentive to a Bishops duty, 2. Tim. II.8. Remember therefore, how our
Great Master labored for the good of Mankind, for the salvation of Souls, how
he suffered, and how he died, and then rose to an immortal glorious life, the
emblem of thy Office and reward; for when thou shall have gone about doing
good, and healing those, that are possessed of sin, and of the Devil, and have
born, and have had patience, thy mortal part, which has been tired, and worn
out with labor, must fall indeed, but then after the example of Christ's body,
a Creature must rise at last glorious, and Angelical, and triumphing over hell,
and Devils, seeing, We all look for a Savior, who shall change our vile body,
that it may be like unto his glorious body, according to the mighty Working,
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself.

FINIS

