Gods Providence In the midst of CONFUSIONS. Set out in a SERMON Preached at
the Savoy, January the 30. 1681. Being the Anniversary of the Martyrdom of King
Charles I.

By Anthony Horneck D. D.

In the SAVOY, Printed by T. N. for Samuel Lowndes, and are to Sold at his Shop
over against Exeter-Exchange in the Strand, 1682.

PSALM. XCIX. Verse. I. The Lord reigns, let the People tremble.
WHether this Psalm was written by Moses, as the Jewish Rabbis think, or by
some other Prophet, or why this Psalm with four and twenty more is destitute of
a Title, when all the rest have suitable Inscriptions, is not material to
enquire. The Psalm contains a rehearsal of Gods Wonderful Works in the Desert,
when he went before his People in the Wilderness, when God wrought Miracles
every hour, and the Cloudy Pillar by Day, and the other of Fire by Night, like
a Guardian Angel protected the Mighty Host, and rendered them formidable to all
Nations that heard of their Name, or had notice of their Approaches; or, we may
call it a Spur to fervent Devotion, and profound Veneration of the infinite
Majesty of Heaven, who never leaves such Devotional Prostrations unrewarded;
and if sincere, crowns them usually with loving Kindnesses and tender Mercies:
Instances whereof are given in Moses, Aaron, and Samuel, Men who by their
Prayers bowed the Heavens, and made God come down, and as it were forced the
Almighty into pity, and compassion by their Supplications.

To excite our Attention, the Psalmist begins his Hymn with an expression
great, and lofty, becoming the Supreme Being, and worthy of an Infinite
Majesty; In a few words he gives us the best Description of Gods Providence,
that reason can desire, and there could be nothing more magnificent, than to
say of him, The Lord reigns, let the People tremble.

That which will oblige me to deviate, or vary a little from the received
Translation, is the ambiguity of the word (...) in the Original, which we
render tremble. The word in other places of Scripture stands for being
tumultuous, or in a rage, inconfusion, or in great disorder, and this
signification seems to me to be most proper here, and to render the sense much
clearer, and if you ask me, what that sense is, I shall deliver it in this
Preposition.

Propos. In the midst of the greatest tumults and disorders, the Divine
Providence is awake; In the midst of the most lamentable confusions, Gods
management of things is orderly, and regular.

This must necessarily be the Result of the Text, if we Construe the words
according to the Interpretation I have given, and the words will naturally
bear, viz. The Lord reigns, let the People in a Commonwealth, or Kingdom be
never in so great disorder, or confusion; even then, when all things seem to be
turned upside down, the Lord reigns by his Providence.

Let Heathens and Epicureans fancy that God is asleep, when things go contrary
to our Carnal Wishes, and fond Expectations, we that enjoy Gods Revelations are
better taught; And though the vast Ship of this inconstant World were sinking,
we have reason to believe, that the great Pilot who sits at the Helm, is broad
awake, and has pregnant Reasons for the Dispensation. It Is a weak Argument,
that God is careless, because we cannot pry into the Reasons of his Actions;
nor can the inference be less than Childish; to conclude that the Almighty
enjoys his ease, regardless of things below, because our selves are not
Omniscient; We could not be Creatures if we were so, and should lose our
dependence upon the God above, if our Wisdom did equal his, or could know all
the depths of his Actions.

Yet so great is his goodness, that he has not left himself without Witness,
and as mysterious as his goings in the Sanctuary seem to be, he has let his
Servants know the Order of his Providence. So great an advantage are the
Scriptures, that while Pagans, like Moles, grovel in the Earth, unable to
apprehend what is done above; We like Children of Light, can unfold Gods darker
Proceedings, and inform the World of the equality of his Ways.

When the ten Tribes revolted, and shook off their obedience to their Liege
Lord Rehoboam, we may easily guess what disorders the Jewish Commonwealth then
labored under, and what confusions that juncture of Affairs produced. Judah
fought against Israel, and Israel against Judah, and in both Parties without
all peradventure were Discontented Men, who added Fuel to the Fire, and threw
Brimstone into the Flame to make it soar the higher; yet while the Republic
lies in that Convulsion-fit, God dispatches a Prophet to the Tribe of Judah,
Shemaiah by Name, with order to tell them, 1 Kings 12. 24. Thus says the Lord,
ye shall not go up, nor fight against your Brethren the Children of Israel,
return every man to his own house, for this thing is from me; i. e. Let no Man
wonder at these Disorders, for I have a Hand in them, and my Providence does
manage them; And to this purpose, Amos brings in God speaking, Am. 3. 6. Is
there any evil, i. e. any evil of confusion in the City, and the Lord has not
done it? This, even Jehoram, as wicked as he was, could not but be sensible of,
and therefore when in the great Famine of Samaria People were ready to devour
one another, and things were come to that extremity, that Women fell a dressing
their own Children for their Dinner, the King desperate and melancholic, cries
out, This evil is of the Lord, i. e. How dismal soever the state of things
appears, the Almighty has given order for it, and it is he, whose Power and
Wisdom manages this Calamity.

But this Subject will require some elucidation, and therefore I shall consider
here, 1. What those Disorders, and Confusions are, which seem to infer a
carelessness of Providence. 2. Why God suffers, and permits such Confusions and
Disorders. 3. How his Providence appears in them, and which way he manages
these seeming Contradictions.

1. What these Disorders and Confusions are, which seem to infer a carelessness
of Providence.

1. Oppression of the Innocent and Poor, such as we find among the Jews in the
time of Amos and Jeremy, Am. 6. 12. c. 8. 6. Jer. 7. 6. And no doubt a dismal
sight it is, to see the Rich invade the Poors little all without control, and
Great Men crush those of an Inferior Rank by their lawless Power; to see Ahab
take possession of Naboth's Vineyard; and Ziba because in favor with the King,
wrong the lame and harmless Mephibosheth; to see the Widow scorned, because
she has no Potent Friends; and the Orphan trampled on, because his injurious
Adversary can out-Bribe him; to see a Jeremy thrown into a Dungeon, because he
speaks the truth; and a Daniel hurled into a Lions Den, because he cannot
conform to the looser Customs of the Persian Court; to see an Aristides driven
into Exile, because of his Justice, and an Alcibiades deposed from his Office,
because the rash Lysander lost the Field. Oppression as it is enough to make
even a Wise Man mad, according to Solomon, Eccles. 7. 7. so it is an Argument,
that Justice has forsaken the Tribunal; and without Justice, Human Societies
become Cages of Ravenous Birds, and the Band, which is to hold Mankind
together, must necessarily be dissolved. It Is this maintains the health and
vigor of the Body Politic, and this once taken away, must on the other side
cast it into violent Distempers; Distempers which render it not only weak, but
deformed and odious, and must at last be the Death of it. It Is this whereby God
intended Kingdoms, and Cities should be governed, and Men no sooner receive
their being, but at the same time receive the Principles of this Virtue. Nature
obliges them to it, as much as it does to self preservation, and with their
Mothers Milk they imbibe these Inclinations; and on these Inclinations the
wholesome Laws of all Nations are grounded; and whatever Orders are contrived by
Wise men for the well governing of Societies, do all go upon this supposition.
Nay, God himself is concerned to see this Justice maintained in Commonwealths,
and it is part of his Prerogative to preserve its Laws inviolable, so that it is
being lost in a Corporation, seems to reflect upon him; and as it was he alone,
that first taught Men to gather into Societies, so to let Oppression come among
them, which is the Bane, that kills them, to a sensual Eye seems to be no small
disparagement to his Providence.

2. Such another Disorder is, when a Covetous, Ambitious Prince is suffered to
spoil and harrass the Country of his Neighbor Prince, who is at Peace with
him, and not so much as dreams of any Hostile Approaches, an instance whereof
we have in Benhaded, who without any other cause but that of Interest, and his
own glory, fell upon Baashah King of Israel, being in League with him, and
surprising his Territories, plundered, and made himself Master of Ijon, and
Dan, and Abelmaine, and all the Store-cities of Naphtali, 2 Chronicles. 16. 3, 4. A
strange way of War! to fall upon his Confederate for no other reason, but
because he is more Potent, and to deprive the other of his Right and
Inheritance, because he is too weak and feeble to oppose him: To fancy because
I have got a numerous Army, that therefore I may do what I list; and because I
can be more wicked than another, that therefore I may lawfully be so. To
imagine because I am a King, that therefore I am exempt from all Laws, and
because there is no Man above me, that therefore I may crush whomsoever I have
a mind to, to flatter my self, because God has advanced my Throne above other
Potentates, that therefore the rest must be my Vassals, and because they cannot
easily resist me, that therefore I may make them fall a Sacrifice to my Lust
and Glory. Conceits monstrous and odious, even to Pagans and Infidels! and
which deserve not only the sharpest Satyrs, but Gods severest Vengeance: We
look upon Joab as a Villain, because he killed Amasa Kissing, and David justly
called him the worst of Men, because he Murdered Abner under pretense of
Friendship, and shed the Blood of War in Peace.

Thus Ninus takes what he can get, because his Neighbors are unarmed: and
Sesostris of Egypt discontented that he has so little, makes even his
Familiars a prey to his Ambition: Actions which in Private Men would be
punished with the Hangmans Sword, and in Persons of a lower Condition, revenged
with the most exquisite Racks and Tortures; Yet it is not Power, can justify a
Sin, nor the greatness of a Man turn a Vice into Virtue. Robbery is a Crime in
a Prince as much as in a Subject, and stealing other Men's Goods the greater
injustice in a King, by how much he stands higher, than other Mortals. No
Prince has power to act against the Law of Nature, and what is intrinsically
Evil, can never be made Good by the most specious pretenses of Authority.

Princes that are given to such injustice are Enemies of Mankind, and no
marvel, if the Disorders they cause in the neighboring Dominions are
astonishing, for the Sin it self is prodigious. That which amazes the Spectator
more, is, that such Unrighteousness very often prospers, and the Disorders it
causes, tends to the Renown and splendor of the Perfidious Conqueror, for it
makes him not only more adored by Parasites, and Flatterers at home, who call
him, Great, Invincible, and a Demy-God, but formidable to Nations afar off,
which like innocent Animals, at the approach of the Ravenous Hawk, quake as the
Rumor spreads of his speedy, though treacherous Victory; A Scene of Affairs,
which Providence seems to suffer in, and while he, in whose Hands the Hearts of
Princes are said to be, lets loose the Reins, and suffers them to do what they
list, Men guided by sense can suspect no less, than that the Lord does not see,
neither does the God of Jacob regard it; as those; Psalm. 94. 7.

3. Civil Wars; when Men of the same Country and Nation breaking into
Factions, imbrue their hands in one another Blood, and thrust their Swords
into one another Bowels, as the Midianites, Jud. 7. 22. When Neighbor fights
with Neighbor, and those of a Man's own House prove his greatest Enemies; when
Members of the same Commonwealth first run into Discontents among themselves,
and thence into open Hostility one against the other; when different Parties
first give one another reproachful Names, from reproachful Names come to
Animosities, and feed their Envy and Malice so long till it break forth into a
consuming Fire. There is hardly any Nation but some time or other has felt the
smart of these Intestine Divisions; and if any have escaped the blow, it must
be, because there was nothing in the Country worth contending for. How many
Men's lives were lost at Rome in the Contentions betwixt Marius and Sylla,
betwixt Catilines Party, and the Senate, betwixt Pompey and Caesar, every
Schoolboy knows, that has read the History. This was the fate of the hot
Disputes at Thebes, betwixt Ismenias and Archias, at Jerusalem betwixt Jason
and Menelaus, in Greece betwixt the Dorians and Jonians, at Athens betwixt
Thucidides and Timon, in Italy betwixt the Guelphs and Gibellines, at
Constantinople betwixt Hypatius and the Court Party, at Carthage betwixt
Hannibal and Hanno, at Florence betwixt the People and the House of Medices, in
France betwixt the Hedui and Sequani, and he that shall peruse our own
Chronicles, take a view of the Quarrels betwixt the White and Red Rose, and all
the Seditions, Rebellions, and Divisions under the several Kings of this
Island, and add to all this what he remembers of the late Civil War, that set
Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, and they both against
Judah, cannot but behold a very sad Landscape of Horror and Confusion.

To see Men Drunk with their Prosperous Fortunes, and angry with their own
Happiness; To see them fall foul one upon another, and they that might live in
ease and safety, like Mad Dogs bite and devour one another; To see them enraged
one against another upon a punctilio of State, and as if their Lives were
nothing worth, throw them away because both Parties cannot be of the same
Judgment; To see them not only begin their Quarrels upon slight Occasions, but
pursue them unto Death and Ruin, as it is an Argument of intolerable Pride and
Self-conceitedness, so it is like, the careless Spectator, that sees the
Tremendous Effects of it, will wonder, what is become of Providence in such
Disorders.

4. Massacres: When the true Religion is persecuted, as a Pestilent Heresy, and
mighty Endeavors are used to Extirpate its Renown and Glory: when Fire and
Faggot become Arguments to confute it, and Swords and the Gallows are made use
of as the only Syllogisms to batter its Fortifications: when it is not only
contemned and derided, but the Professors of it severely handled, and those
that dare be so bold as to own it, put to most cruel Torments: when the Floods
of Ungodliness threaten to overwhelm it, and the Malice of Men rises to that
height, that nothing will serve their turn, but its Ruin and Destruction. Such
was the Massacre of the Jews under Antiochus, when to live up to the Law of
Moses, was present Death, and to observe Gods Statutes the readiest way to be
Tortured, when to believe in one God was to be broken on the Wheel; and to
abhor Idolatry involved the Votary in the danger of most barbarous Usage. Thus
was the true Religion treated in the first ten Persecutions by the Heathen
Emperors, when to have a Bible in the House, and to be thrown to the Lions was
all one, and not to offer Incense to the Heathen Gods, was cause enough to be
torn in pieces by Bears and Tigers; when Multitudes of Christians were driven
like so many Sheep to the Slaughter, and the Hangmen were sooner tired with
Executing, than the Professors of Christ's Doctrine with the variety of their
Tortures. Thus the Church of Rome dealt with the Waldenses and Albigenses, from
the Year of Our Lord 1334. to 1340. and upward, when those innocent Creatures
for contradicting the Corruptions of that Church, were hurled into the Fire;
and not to be subject to the Pope in his unlawful Decrees, was counted as bad
as Witchcraft; when Flames were the Portion of Men, that would not believe a
Purgatory, and a Dungeon the Reward of adhering close to the Oracles of the
Holy Ghost.

Such was the Massacre at Paris in the Year 1572. when in one Night many
thousands were Murdered for no other reason, but because they were
Protestants: and vast numbers of Men and Women Murdered like Beasts, because
they would make the Bible the only Rule of their Faith and Manners, when at
Rome they triumphed at the Inhumane Fact, and like the Jews, thought they had
done God Service by sacrificing the lives of his Servants to their Rage and
Malice. This was the lot of the Protestants in Ireland in the Year 1641. when
200000 of them were destroyed to make the Popish Clergy sport, and Men that
professed themselves to be of the Catholic Church out-did Indians and
Cannibals in their Cruelty; when the more Protestants a Papist killed, the more
he Merited, and might tell the Pearls of his Crown in Heaven, not by his Beads,
but by the number of Christ's Disciples, which as he thought, he had sent to
Hell, and offered to the Devil.

If God takes care of any thing, thinks the sensual Man, it must be of the true
Religion, this we must conceive to be his Darling, and if he has more tender
Affections for one thing than another, this we must suppose is the chief Object
of his solicitude: This makes most for his Honor, and his Glory is advanced
by nothing so much as by true, and genuine Worship; This therefore he must be
thought to mind and cherish most, and to look upon with the kindest Aspect: But
to see this Jewel scorned, derided, affronted, and its luster darkened by
Clouds of Ignorance and Malice: To see this Pearl broken, shattered, and the
dust of it dispersed into the various corners of the Earth: To see its Foes
live great, and those that touch this Apple of his Eye, brave it in their
pleasures: To see them erect their Throne on the Necks of Gods Servants, and
securely trample on these supposed Favorites of Heaven; what can we conclude,
but that either this is not the true Religion, or that Providence is careless,
and supine in its Protection?

5. Such another Disorder is, Base and contemptible men's climbing up to the
Thrones of Kings, and displacing the true Owners, and usurping their Authority;
When the vilest of Men are advanced to Royalty, and they that were but Subjects
a little before, come to sit in their Lords Tribunal: when Persons of the
Dregs of the People get up to the highest Power, and they that were but Scum
before, come to swim like Oil on the top, and throvv down Gods Anointed; when
a Jeroboam from Surveyor of the Kings Works, rises up to be King himself; and a
Zimri that dwelled in a Cottage before, comes to possess himself of the Royal
Palace.

Such was the sudden advance of the Famous or rather Infamous Massinello, who
from a Fisherman, in a day or two comes to be a Prince, and from mending of
Nets, in a Weeks time is advanced to be more than Viceroy of Naples, whose
contemptible Condition is on a sudden changed into Adorations, and his
Converse with the meanest of his fellow Subjects, turned into bows and cringes
from the greatest of the People: he that before had scarce a Dog to attend him,
in a few hours is followed by a Crowd, and receives the Courtships and Caresses
of an incredible Multitude: he that knew little but Obedience a little before,
now Commands Armies, and from a Slave, comes to give Law to the proudest of the
Spaniards. They that before would scarce vouchsafe to look upon him, now are
glad of his kinder Smiles: and his threats, that before were accounted little
more than the noise of a Hound, are now dreaded more than the Almighties
Thunder.

Such was the prodigious rise of the late Usurper, whose Crimes, and wonderful
Successes in his Bloody Attempts, have given occasion to the sad Solemnity, and
the Sackcloth, and Ashes of this Day. A Man, (if it be not a Crime to call him
so, for he outwent Devils in Hypocrisy) by whose contrivance the Royal Crown
fell down, and with the Crown the Church, and with the Church the Nations
happiness: a Man, whose Crimes must be detested while time is measured by the
intervals of Day and Night, and who by his Actions has fixed such a blot on
Christianity, as perhaps the Tears of many Ages cannot wipe away: a Man, who in
pursuance of his Dreams was restless, till he saw what the Evil Spirit had
revealed, accomplished; and first poisoned the Peoples Loyalty, and then made
advantage of their Perfidiousness.

Who made Religion a Stalking-horse to invade the Throne, and when he had
possessed himself of it, was more lawless than the Person, whom he pretended to
expel for being so; Who forced his way to Greatness through a thousand lives,
and knowing no means to arrive to it, but injustice in the highest degree, cut
down all the Trees that stopped his Prospect; who made the Bible subservient to
his Sword, and held it in one Hand, that he might only do greater Execution
with the other; who under a pretense of Liberty, made the Nation a greater
Slave to him than they are in Turkey, and while he gave out, that he would set
them free, bound them but the faster in their Shackles: who to reform the
Church, pulled it down to the Ground, and while he made Purity the Watchword,
brought in darkness greater than the Egyptian; for he taught Men a new
Religion, how they might be Devout and yet Rob and Steal, and commit Sacrilege
without fear, or Remorse of Conscience: who in the worst sense became all
things to all Men, to make them all his Prey, and complied with several
Parties, to make them all his Devoted Vassals; who could weep to deplore the
Misfortunes of the Time, while he was the chief Instrument to bring them in;
and cry out against Monarchy, while nothing less was the Object of his
Ambition; who waved the Title of a King merely because he saw it was not safe,
and seemed Humble, thereby the better to compass his dangerous Designs and
Purposes.

Who to stop the Clamours of the People, did them right, thereby to wrong his
Prince the better: and to make his Murder Legal, caused him to be condemned by
a Law of his own making: who first promoted the Parliaments Independency of the
King, and then made himself Independent of their Power: who first gulled the
simpler Party into an opinion of his sanctity, and when he had done so,
wallow'd securely in the shades of the greatest Villainy: who made himself
great, by daring to do that, which Heathens would have trembled at, and so his
Glory might be set on the Pillars of Fame, was content to make Lucifer both his
Instrument and General.

Thus lived the proud Usurper, but what is more, died in his Bed, lamented by
the Crew that had served him in his Sins, disposed of three Kingdoms to his
Son, who wanted besides Right, his Fathers Cunning, and Personal
Qualifications; yet he saw his Successor applauded, and fawned upon by Men that
were then in Power, and had the satisfaction to behold a Man of his own Line in
a probability to carry on his own Usurped Authority, which was all that a dying
Tyrant could desire, and greater felicity a Man could not possibly aim at, that
believed no other Life, or if he did, could not expect a share in its
Happiness: yet with his Death his Hellish Laurels did not wither, for his
Funeral was Royal, as if it had not been enough to have lived a King, except he
died so too, and the pomp of his Interrment such, as attracted the Eyes of the
most curious Spectators; Nay, as after the Storm is past, there remains some
agitation of the Waves, so the Agents of Foreign Princes, that had dreaded this
Neptunes Trident, while alive, retained some awe of his Power after Death,
which was the reason, that with their forced presence they graced his affected:
Funeral: An Accident uncommon, and exceeding rare; and if Asaph seeing the
Prosperity of private wicked Men, his Feet had almost slipped, and he very near
sunk into a slight Opinion, and low thoughts of Gods Providence, what would he
have said, had he seen Impiety thus publicly honored, not only in Life, but
in Death, as if Heaven had applauded the Heroic Sin, and loved to bestow
Rewards on Men, not only for their great Attempts in Virtue, but for daring to
be more than ordinarily Profane and Impious?

But as great as these Disorders are, or seem to be, they are no blemish of
Providence, nor does that Golden Chain look the less lovely, because all the
Links are not distinctly seen by Men, whose Eyes by staring upon Sensual
Objects, as People that look much on Snow, have contracted a vicious dimness.
And so much will appear from what we shall propose in the second General, viz.

2. Why God suffers such Disorders and Confusions to happen in Commonwealths or
Kingdoms.

1. God does it to punish a Nation or People for their Sin. When the Sins of a
People are come to a fatal pitch, and the measure grown full, it is time for
God, by sending such Disorders to lash the generality into better Manners; not
that God does instigate them to these Disorders, but it is just with him to
withdraw his restraining Grace, and not to hinder their wicked Inclinations:
And when the Prop that upholds the House is Charity, and that Charity is
abused, if the Prop be removed, and the House fall, it is to make the Inhabitant
sensible of his ingratitude. When Pride and Idleness; and fullness of Bread, and
its usual Concomitants, Wantonness and Luxury come once to Rage and Reign, God
justly takes away the Partition that kept the Fire and Tinder asunder, and then
no marvel, if being committed and let loose to fall one upon the other, they
cause a Combustion which is not easily quenched.

When the Body is grown Pletharick, and the Humors abound, the Wise Physician
breaths a Vein, and though the ignorant Spectator thinks he is going to let out
Life, yet it is only to preserve the whole from perishing. God sometimes
afflicts a good King for his wicked Peoples sake, so he permitted the Excellent
Josiah to be Slain, because though himself was one of the best of Men, yet his
Subjects were Hypocritical to a high degree; and while they seemed to comply
with the King in the true Worship of God, continued Idolaters in their Hearts:
So God suffered the Martyr of the day to fall, because the Nation that lived
under his Shadow, were grown extravagant in their Manners. And that you may not
wonder, how God comes to punish the Innocent, and let the Guilty go free, I
must answer, That the Innocent, though seemingly Afflicted, yet lose nothing by
the Adversity, but only Anticipate Heaven, and exchange their Temporal for an
Everlasting Bliss a few years sooner, while the Sinners, though seemingly
prosperous, suffer signally in the loss of their great Representative; for
hereupon they must necessarily fall into confusion, and while they send
sometime to the Vine, and sometime to the Fig Tree to Reign over them, and know
not where to fix, they at last inconsiderately, yet by Gods wise Permission,
fix upon the Bramble for their Prince, whence Fire comes forth, and either
Disperses or Consumes the giddy Multitude.

Sometimes God punishes the People, for their Irreligious Princes sake, as he
sent a Famine on the Land in the days of David, 2 Samuel 21. 1. because King Saul
had committed Perjury, and Slain the Gibeonites: And so he would not depart
from his anger against the Jews, because of the Sins of Manasseh, 2 Kings 23.
26. where with he had provoked him to anger: For Kingdoms are Bodies Politic,
whereof Princes are the Heads, and if either Head or Body be put to streights
and inconveniences, the design of Providence is fulfilled, which is resolved,
when heinous Offenses are committed in the whole, one principal part should
smart for the boldness, that the other may take warning: and though that which
suffers may not be so guilty as the other, yet as they sympathize together, so
its seldom seen but that they do contract something, or participate of one
another Corruptions, and consequently, justly share in one another
Sufferings: And where the Prince suffers for the People, though it is confessed,
the Providence is more astonishing and surprising, yet it is more Godlike and
Majestic, and an imitation of the Death of Jesus, who consented to die for the
People, that the whole Nation might not be undone.

God never punishes a Nation as a Nation, but only in this present Life; for
indeed that relation extends no farther: when People in the next, come to be
judged before the great Tribunal, they are not judged as a Nation, but as
single Persons; for every one shall give an account of himself to God; and
therefore if God Chastises a Nation as a Nation, it is only in this World, and
if in such Chastisements, either the generality or some Principal Members
suffer, its enough to answer the design of the Divine Equity, which is to let
the Nation see his displeasure against the cursed thing that is in the midst of
them; so that in this case, the Almighty uses a kind of Decimation, he being
too pitiful, and too great a lover of Humane Societies to destroy every
individual, especially in Ample Commonwealths, wherein are more than Sixscore
thousand Persons, that cannot discern between their right hand and their left,
Jon. 4. 11. But,

2. As in all these Disorders and Confusions, there are some, who though
notoriously guilty, yet escape, and are not so much as singed by that devouring
Fire, nay, prosper, and thrive best in such Combustions: so Providence lets
them go free, to convince Men of Reason, that there is another World, where
their insolence and unrighteousness shall be punished with a witness, Psalm. 50.
21, 22, 23. God gives Men a taste of his Justice here, that they may not think
in their hearts, there is no God; and yet but a taste, that they may not
imagine, that what he does here, is all he intends to do. Some Judgments he is
obliged to send down now, to let the World see, there is a God that judges in
the Earth; and yet he sends not all he means to send, to teach them, there are
far more dreadful ones to come. Some careless and debauched Men he lashes here,
to hint to us, that there is an Allseeing Eye; and yet others he lets alone, to
assure us, that there is a future and Everlasting Vengeance.

There is not a greater Argument of another Life, than Gods being silent now,
and not Executing Judgment against an Evil Work speedily; especially, where
the Crimes threaten Omnipotence, and Men attempt to mingle Heaven and Earth
together, dare be Giants in Transgression, and make Gods Patience an
encouragement to their Irreligion: for God, being a Righteous Governor, cannot
but be just; and since he awakes not to Vengeance here, he will certainly pay
the Sinner home with interest hereafter.

When Frederick the Emperor heard of a Nobleman in his Dominions, who had run
through all the Fallacious Labyrinths of Sin, tasted of all its Luxuries, lived
the life of a Beast, or of a Devil rather, had spared no Woman in his lust, and
no Man in his anger, had been Drunk and Intemperate to a prodigy, yet had never
had any Cross or Sickness, and at last Died softly and quietly without pain or
trouble, with Age more than with Sickness, being then above Fourscore; The
Intelligent Prince smote upon his Breast, and said, Either there is no God, or
after this comes a Life of Reward and Vengeance: concluding peremptorily, That
this Man having escaped Gods Rods and Axes here, must necessarily be Tormented
hereafter.

So that Prosperous Villains are Gods Witnesses, that Men do not cease to be
when they Die, and carry Marks about them of Gods future Vengeance. God in
suffering them to thrive, confirms what he has said in his Word, and their
Flourishing Condition here, is an item, that when this Life is ended, they
shall be destroyed forever; which is a Truth so important, and which the World
is so highly concerned to know, that it is in a manner necessary, Impiety
should be prosperous here, that their strength should be firm, and there should
be no Bands in their Death, that they should not be in trouble as other Men,
nor plagued like other Men, that their Eyes should stand out with fatness, and
that they should have more than their hearts can wish, since it is an
infallible Argument, that God has appointed a day, wherein he will render
Tribulation and Anguish to every Soul that does evil, to the Jew first, and
also to the Gentile, Romans 2. 9.

3. Such Disorders come to convince Men, that true Happiness is not to be had
in this Valley of Tears, but must be sought in Heaven. To this end the greatest
Glories in the World are subject to decay, and Scepters and Diademes are
suffered to tumble down, to show, there is a greater felicity to be gotten
elsewhere. To this end the greatest Calm is suffered to die into a Storm, and
Halcyon days into threatening Waves and Billows, to assure us the Prophet was
in the right, when he cried, Arise and depart, for here is not your rest, Mic.
2. 10.

To this end Gilimer the Vandal was overcome, and led in Triumph through the
Streets of Constantinople; To this end, Andronicus from an Emperor is made a
Slave, and infamously dragged through Common-shores and Kennels; To this end
the Great Vitellius has Dirt thrown in his Face, and is haled to the
Marketplace to be Executed; To this end the Mighty Croesus is like to fall a
Sacrifice to Flames, and the Sturdy Bajazet is imprisoned in a Cage: King
Boleslaus made a Skullion, and Dionysius forced to turn Schoolmaster; To this
end Valerianus is Flead by the Persian Soldiers, and Salted as if he had been
Bacon; To this end John the Twenty third, though a Pope, is at last constrained
to eat his own Clothes, and to feed upon the Flesh of his own Arms, for hunger;
To this end Adonibezeck after the Conquest of Seventy Kings, has the
extremities of his Hands and Feet cut off, and all to teach Men, that these
outward Gaudes are vanity of vanities, all is vanity.

And indeed the aforesaid Gilimer was so sensible of this, that being after
long, but fruitless Resistance necessitated to yield himself to the Enemy, sent
to his Conqueror for three things, for Bread, for a Sponge, and for a Cittern:
for Bread to support his fainting Body, for a Sponge to wipe away the Tears, he
had shed for the loss of his Royal Grandeur, and for a Cittern, to rejoice in
his Experience that all is vanity.

The fickleness of these outward Glories is an Argument of their emptiness, and
in that like Glasses, they are so easily broke and cracked, Wise Men see, that
they are but bubbles; were they lasting, Men would fancy them to be Heaven, and
their uninterruptedness would tempt poor Mortals to say of them, as the
surpised Disciple of Mount Tabor, It Is good for us to be here, let us make
Tabernacles. Indeed in the midst of their inconstancy, Men are apt to promise
themselves substantial satisfaction: and while they see them slip through their
Fingers, they are so unwise as to adore them; What would they do, were they
really what they seem to be, and had they beside their dazzling Dress, Eternal
duration to make them amiable?

God has laid up other Felicities for Rational Creatures, and they lie out of
the Common Road, that Men might take pains to get them. We must not think God
bestowed Immortal Souls upon us, that we might fix them on Sensual Objects, and
when we find, that they are capable of securing such Riches and Pleasures as
fade not away, we must suppose, that to do so, was the principal End of their
Creation. God has made these lower things changeable as the Moon, that like
the Woman in the Revelation, chap. 12. verse. 1. we may set our Feet upon them,
and aim at Delights which transport Souls, ravish Angels, and force Seraphim
into Ecstasies.

The deceitfulness of outward Glories appears no where so plain, as in public
Disorders and Confusions, and they are the best Glass to show us, what
unsatisfactory things they are; For though in private Families disappointments
and changes happen every day, yet they are too inconsiderable for a Multitude
to take notice of them; but Public Disorders convince a Kingdom of the
Imperfection of these External Comforts, and the more notorious they are, the
more all sorts of Men are perfwaded into a belief of that Imperfection; so that
Confusions of this nature are Sermons preached to a whole Nation, and Speeches
from Heaven, whereby God intends an Universal Reformation.

4. Sometimes it is to try the Good, and to brighten their Faith, and Hope, and
Constancy, which like Gold, is best Polished and Refined by Fire. And this
Reason God himself gives, Ps. 81. 7. It is in this case, as in matter of
Heresies, which must be, That those which are approved, may be made manifest, 1
Cor. 11. 19. To adhere to a good Cause, when it sleeps under the soft Wings of
Peace and order, may be Policy, but to espouse it when discouraged, is an
argument of true Honesty and Ingenuity. He that can defend it, when it meets
with Opposition, we may conclude, is guided more by its Equity, than his own
Interest: and he that sticks to it, when Tempests threaten to overwhelm it,
discovers, that it has not only his bare Approbation, but his Heart and
Affections too.

To Salute Christ when all Jerusalem cries Hosannah, may be a piece of
Civility; but to speak for him when he is Crucified, is a sign of true
Christian Simplicity. Till Persecution came, the Son of God had innumerable
Flatterers; but when that Fire began, the number soon dwindled away into a
small Company of Followers. It happens so sometimes, that the good cannot be
distinguished from the counterfeit Professors of Religion, and while all meet
in the Public Assemblies, the Wheat and Chaff seem to be one, but Troubles and
Disorders like the Wise Shepherd make a distinction between the Sheep and the
Goats, and discover the Integrity of the one, and the Deceit and Hypocrisy of
the other. To follow David, when all Israel runs after Absalom, is a Mark of
Loyalty, but with Achitophel to shrink, when Heaven seems to frown on the right
side, is base Treachery. Troubles, like Aqua Fortis, make a separation betwixt
Metals, and show which is the Silver, and which the contemptible Mineral. Those
that are good grow better by them: Those that seem only to be so, in the hour
of Temptation fall away.

That Sap certainly is strongest, which preserves the Leaves of a Tree green
and verdant all the Winter, and nothing is so great a sign of strength and
hardiness, as to be able to endure the rude assaults of Frost and Snow, and
unseasonable Weather. It Is a Character of Infamy, the Evangelist imprints on
the chief Rulers among the Jews, who indeed believed in Jesus, but for fear of
the Pharisees, durst not confess him, Joh. 12. 42. True Goodness like Lillies
thrives, though Thorns and Briars do surround it, and Salamander like can live
in Fire.

The late Kings Piety shines the brighter, because he durst maintain it under
Temptations to forsake it. The Troubles that came upon him, it is confessed added
little to his outward Pomp, but rendered his Goodness more charming and amiable
to the Prudent Spectator: It had never arrived to that Renown and Glory, if
those Confusions had not been the Touchstone: and when like Laurel it could
stand those Thunders, it was evident that an Almighty Power did uphold it: Had
he lived Prosperously all his days, his Virtue would have made him a Saint, but
the constancy of it in the severest Trials, gave him the Character of a Martyr:
Had he professed and expressed Meekness, while his Subjects were submissive and
respectful, the excellent Qualification might have challenged suitable
Commendations; but to practice it when his Servants became his Masters, and
instead of Honoring, loaded him with Indignities and Reproaches, this deserves
our wonder: To be true to the Church against his Temporal Interest, was that,
which gave him the greatest Credit, and to forgo a Crown rather than part with
his Religion, an act which force the World into admiration. The greater Man he
was, the greater was the Trial, and for such a Trial, perhaps, nothing was so
fit as Royal Virtue. The Disorders he lived to see, made him more sensible of
Gods assistance, than all his Sunshine did, and he had never tasted of that
degree of sweetness in Gods favor, if Persecution and a Prison had not
increased the relish. This gave him a clearer sight of Gods goodness, than the
high Specula of his Palace, and his Solitariness afforded him such
Contemplations, as he must never have hoped for in the Crowds of Courtiers.
This made him look into Paradise, and see the Suffering Jesus on his Throne,
and taught him, that a Man might be the Son of God in the very Garden of
Gethsemane. This furnished him with Lessons, which the greatest Kings are
Strangers to, and with Moses, directed him to behold him that was Invisible.
This made his Faith with Abraham, believe even Contradictions, and raised his
Confidence, that though he Died, he should live for ever. This made him stand
amazed at his own Virtue, and while he saw he was able to do, what he thought
had been impossible, admire the immense power and goodness of God, when grace
was thus sufficient for him, and made his strength proportionable to his
burden. This made him find by blessed experience, what the Saints of old felt
in their Chains and Tortures, and assured him, that to rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory in the midst of Flames, was no Fable. This made
him see, that the things Invisible are the most desirable Objects, and find
with the great Apostle, that there is a great difference between being
Persecuted and forsaken.

5. Such Disorders are sometimes permitted to discover the ill Principles of
some Men's Religion, who are like to seduce others by their specious Pretenses,
that Men who are in good earnest resolved to be saved, may be aware of them,
and not fall into the same condemnation, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 5, 9. Men who suppose
that gain is godliness, when troublesome and Perilous times do come, and
Disorders rise, serve themselves of these Tumults, and under a show of Piety,
grasp what they can, and betray their Carnal Ends, which in such times cannot
be hid, when there are opportunities and temptations to call them out into
Action; for as in such Disorders commonly the Right Cause, or the Party that
have most Justice on their side, are oppressed and come by the worst, so the
other make advantage of their Misery, and their Blood and Tears give the other
Growth and Stature. It Is possible, Beloved Hearers, you may remember times,
when Men walked in Sheeps Clothing, but within were Ravening Wolves, and while
their Voice was exactly like Jacobs, their Hands continued rough as Esau's;
when Men cried, The Temple of the Lord, and yet at the same time Murdered
those that opposed their Insolences, and talked of the good Cause, while they
meant nothing else by it, but enriching their own Purses; when Men pretended a
thorough Reformation, and made their own Souls as black as Hell, and gave out
that they fought for God, when it was only to maintain, what they had unjustly
purchased; when Men sighed and groaned to get the Prey into their Net, and
labored much for a Spiritual Kingdom, to make a surer settlement of their
Temporal Possessions.

When Men under a show of seeking a World to come, did what they could to enjoy
this present, and left no Stone unturned to Establish Religion, that thereby
they might Establish themselves the better in their Unrighteous Acquists; when
Men to pull down Idolatry, as they called it, set up Robbery and Sacrilege in
the room of it, and instead of doing things better than they had been,
exchanged only one Sin for another; when Men called that Zeal, which was in
good earnest nothing else, but inordinate Passion, and termed that Charity,
which was no more but Kindness to their Brethren in Iniquity; when Men called
others Dumb Dogs, that they might more securely Bark at them, and represented
them as lazy Droans, that they might carry the Honey, those Bees had made, to
their own Hives; when Men undertook to resolve Cases of Conscience, while
themselves had seared their own, and under a pretense of taking Scruples out of
other Men's Breasts, felt none for the monstrous Injuries they had been guilty
of to their Neighbors; when Men gave out, they pitied the Divisions of the
Church, while themselves were the Causes that began them, and talked of Works
of Mercy, while they showed none to those they had turned out of their Livings;
when they trampled on the Pride of Prelates with a greater of their own, and
ran like mad from Babylon to be consumed in the Fire of Sodom and Gomorrah.

So I have seen some gaudy Flowers arrayed more gloriously than Solomon, but
when dismantled, have been nothing but unsavory and unprofitable Stalks; so
the deadly Nightshade looks fresh and green, as other Plants, but carries
Poison in its Bowels; so the Prince of Precious Stones, the Diamond, by its
Rays, promises so many Springs of Light, but its Powder kills without Remedy;
so Gold and Silver dazzle the Eye, yet are no Steams more odious or loathsome,
than those which rise from the Mines, they are dug out of; so the Butterfly
is striped with several Paints, yet is no more but a squallid Animal; so the
Glowworm looks like a creeping Star, yet if you behold it by day light, it is
a very homely Creature.

These are the true Emblemes of some Men's Religion in the World, and their
partial Obedience in times of Disorder and Confusion, tells the Considerate
part of Mankind, that what they profess is Varnish not Substance, Glass not
Natural Crystal, Shadow not Reality; for how can that be true Religion, where
I give to God the things which are Gods, and deny to Caesar the things which
are Caesar's? where I am conscientious to the Creator, and unjust and perfidious
to the Creature? where I offer Sacrifice, and envy my Brother in my heart?
where I express love to my Maker, and yet do not give all their due, Custom to
whom Custom; Tribute to whom Tribute, Fear to whom Fear, and Honor to whom
Honor; or in St. Peter's Phrase, Fear God, and do not Honor the King?

And these Sophistications God commonly discovers in Confusions, intending them
as Sea-marks, to give warning to the Ships that see them afar off, not to come
near those Sands, lest they split their Vessel, and lose their Goods, which
with great cost and labor they have purchased. But it is time we proceed, and
enquire,

3. How Gods Providence appears in these Disorders and Confusions.

1. God puts bounds and limits to the rage of Men, that cause and encourage
those Disorders. The proud Senacharib, Es. 37. 24. talks big, he had already
put Jerusalem into Consternation, and boasted of greater mischiefs he intended;
By the multitude of my Chariots, says he, am I come up to the height of the
Mountains, to the sides of Lebanon, and I will cut down the tall Cedars
thereof, and the choice Fir-trees thereof, and I will enter into the height of
his Border, and the Forest of his Carmel. But he that sits in Heaven laughs at
him, and the great Jehovah derides the little talking Insect, assures the
Prophet, that beyond such a Field he shall not step, and as he says, he does;
Because thy rage against me, and thy tumult is come up into mine ears,
therefore will I put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I will
turn thee back by the way which thou came. When Maxentius had filled Rome
with Murders, and the People feared not only greater Injuries to their
Persons, but a total Desolation, (so great was the fury of the Monster) the
Almighty sets bounds to his brutish Courage, and sends the great Constantine to
remove him, and with him the Yoke, he had laid on the trembling People. And
thus has God dealt with most Tyrants, who have thought to crush the World by
their Power, when they have threatened Heaven it self, and gone on securely for
a considerable time, insomuch that they have flattered themselves, that all was
their own, an Invisible hand has stopped their Progress, and allotted them their
limits, Hitherto shall thou come and no farther.

And this has been Gods method with the most Pestilent Heretics, whose
business it has been to ruin the Church, and to render it, as the first Mass,
a (...) or a thing without shape or Figure; Not only Arrius himself was stopped
from belching out Blasphemies against the Son of God, by being struck with a
fatal Looseness before he could reach the Council, but his Heresy too, when the
World was afraid of its Inundation: for after such a term of years, the true
Religion flourished again maugre all the opposition, from Constantius, Valens,
and the Goths and Vandals.

2. Sometimes God disappoints such Men in their highest hopes and expectations.
Benhadad sends to King Ahab, to tell him, 1 Reg. 20. 3. Thy Silver and thy Gold
is mine, thy Wives also and thy Children, even the goodliest are mine, and
accordingly dispatches his Servants to take their choice of what they liked.
Ahab gives the Messengers a resolute denial, at which the Syrian storms and
swears, v. 10. The Gods do so unto me, and more also, if the dust of Samaria
shall suffice for handfuls, for all the People that follow me; Hereupon he
marches with two and thirty Kings, his Vassals at his Heels, and hearing that
some of the Israelites were come out against him, he scorns to fight with them,
but like a God, at whose nod People must either live or die, bids his men take
them alive: But behold how the Fantastic King is disappointed in his hopes,
while he thought all Samaria would come out to him with Ropes and Halters about
their Necks to acknowledge his Sovereign Power of Life and Death, he and his
vast Armies, which filled the Land, are not only chased and beaten, but himself
is taken Prisoner, and forced to come crouching and cringing to the King of
Israel.

Selimus the Turk in the year of our Lord 1569. sets out from Constantinople
with 25000 Horse, and 3000 Janissaries, and joins an Army of the Precopian
Tartars consisting of 80000 Horse more, besides a Navy at Sea of 150 Galleys
Manned, and provided of suitable Ammunition to Invade the Kingdom of Astracan;
he had already swallowed the Empire in his hopes, distributed the various
Provinces to his Basha's, and consulted how to govern the Kingdom, conquered
already in Imagination. It Is true, the Inhabitants of Astracan were in great
confusion, but the Mighty God, who sets up one, and pulls down another, comes
in, dashes all the swelling hopes of the haughty Sultan, and beyond
expectation, all that mighty Army pines and dwindles away in their march, some
of them come as far as Azeph, and of that vast Multitude 2000 only return to
Constantinople. Vitiges the Goth besieges Rome, makes use of all the
Stratagems, that his wisest and cunningest Men can think of, and doubts not of
success, but in despite of all these contrivances, he is forced to retire, and
acknowledge a Providence. The Spaniards in the famous year 1588. set out their
Invincible Armada against England, fright the Inhabitants of the Land with
their Titles and Numbers, and promise themselves a perfect Victory, but on a
sudden that vast Navy is scattered and torn, and only a few Ships return home
to bring King Philip the News, that the rest were lost, insomuch that the
Spaniards thought, that God was become a Lutheran.

So unexpectedly does God change the Scene of Affairs in such Disorders. The
Amalekites plunder Ziklag, 1 Samuel 30. and then sit down and play, and praise
their Gods for the Conquest, while David and his Men are almost distracted with
fear and grief. On a sudden, the Clouds clear up, God directs them to the
Camp, where the Enemy lay, secure of his Prey, The Foe is beaten, and David
recovers all, v. 17, 18, 19. Theodosius provoked by Eugenius the Tyrant,
Encamps against him; The Enemies numbers and valor fright the Emperors Men,
who looked upon themselves, as lost; But behold Theodosius prays, and on a
sudden a mighty Wind arises, insomuch that the Enemy is forced to turn his
back, and yield. So in Aurelius his Army, when those vast numbers of Men were
ready to die for thirst, the Christian Legion calls upon God, and on a sudden
the Heavens brake forth in Lightning and Rain, the Tumults among the Soldiers
are stilled, and all drink, and are refreshed by Gods kindly Showers.

3. Sometimes God works a mighty deliverance from such Disorders by very
inconsiderable means. What misery there was in Samaria in the time of that dire
Famine, we read of, 2 Reg. 6. 25, 28, 29. any one may guess that has felt the
straights of Hunger; that in one day there should be so great a change, that a
Measure of Fine Flower should be sold for a Shekle, one of the Kings Servants
thought to be a thing so impossible, that he ventured to say, if God should
rain down Corn from Heaven, it could not be, yet it happened so as the Prophet
had said, and the deliverance was effected by four inconsiderable Lepers, who
despairing of life, fled to the Syrian Camp, and found such affluence and
plenty, that all Samaria was immediately relieved and stored with Provision;
Thus was the Roman Capitol saved by Geese, and the Roman Army chased by
Poisoned Birds from the Parthian Walls; Thus the young Corvinus beat the Gauls
with the help of a Raven; And Immo Henry the Emperors General was delivered
from the danger threatened him by Gisilbert of Lorrain, by Swarms of Bees let
loose upon the Enemy, which Stung both Horse and Rider, and made them unfit for
Action; Thus Fridlevo the Dane's Army was saved by a Dog; And Hannibal got a
signal Victory over Eumenes by the help of Serpents.

The more inconsiderable the means are whereby deliverances are effected, the
more they proclaim the Divine Power and Providence; and when Gideon conquers a
numberless Host of the Midianites with three hundred Men, it is a sign, the Lord
of Hosts has a hand in it. That Sampson smites a thousand Philistines with the
Jawbone of an Ass, shows that God governed his Arm; and when Jonathan and his
Armor-bearer make the Philistines flee, it is an Argument, that the Lord
reigned in the midst of the frights and fears, which possessed the cowardly
Israelites. If Men believe it not, it is because they do not consider the
weakness of the Instruments upon such occasions, and the only thing that makes
them Infidels, is, because they conclude not from the contemptibleness of the
means, that there must be a higher Power, which gives them Strength and Virtue.

4. Sometimes God causes Divisions and Dissentions to arise among the
Prevailing Party, that were the cause of such Disorders, that they may fall
into great Disasters and Misfortunes. Abimelech, Judge. 9. sets upon his
Brethren, threescore and ten Persons, Murders them all, and fills the City of
Shechem with Confusion; Things go on merrily, and he fears no evil, but when he
had Reigned, says the Sacred Writer, v. 23. Three years over Israel, God sent
an Evil Spirit between Abimelech and the men of Shechem, and the Men of Shechem
dealt treacherously with Abimelech, which proved both his and their undoing, v.
40, 54. As great as their Friendship was before, God does but pull out a Pin,
that held them together, and the whole Frame breaks in pieces, and while they
see no Foreign Power to revenge their former wickedness, themselves are made
the Instruments to do it. God in this case made use of the Law of Retaliation,
and the Judgment that came upon them was suitable to their Sin. Ephraim's
Righteousness, Hos. 6. 4. is as the Morning Cloud, and as the early Dew it
passes away, Therefore themselves shall be as a Morning Cloud, and as the early
Dew they shall pass away, Hos. 13. 3. so these Men had sown Divisions, and
Dissentions among the People, at last their Sin becomes their Punishment, and
that which before had been their delight and pleasure, proves in the end their
Yoke and Burden; They divide themselves, and are lost.

This was the case of the Arcadians, Troezenians, and Thessalonians of old, and
has been re-acted in our days; for though such Jealousies and Dissentions seem
to come by chance, yet there is nothing more certain, than that God thereby
visits the Sins of those, that have been the causes of Public Disorders and
Confusions; and when those, who have assisted them in their attempts, begin to
suspect either their Fidelity or Honesty, and thereupon plot, how to remove the
Mushrooms, they have raised, its Providence disposes their hearts to it; not
that he, who is of Purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, prompts them to Sin, but
justly sends blindness on their Minds, whereby their Eyes become dim to their
Interest, and they tempted to undermine their own Foundations.

5. Sometimes God so orders it, that the Authors of such Confusions shall
hearken to ill Counsel, whereby they may be ruined. Ahab by the Prophets
Testimony, was a Person, that signally troubled Israel, 1 Kings 18. 18. But
behold how Providence deals with him. A fancy takes him, that he must needs go
up, and Retake Ramoth Gilead out of the hands of the Syrians; yet before he
adventures upon the Enterprise, he consults both with his Confederates and such
Prophets as he had, whether the Expedition were safe or no. All but Micah
advise him to it, and to this Advise he hearkens; but see, how Providence laid
the Scene. I saw the Lord, says Micah, 1 Kings 22. 19, 20, 21, 22. I saw the
Lord sitting on his Throne, and all the Host of Heaven standing by him, on his
right hand and on his left, and the Lord said, Who shall persuade Ahab, that he
may go up, and fall at Ramoth Gilead? and one said on this manner, and another
said on that manner, and there came forth a Spirit, and stood before the Lord,
and said, I will persuade him; And the Lord said unto him, Wherewith? And he
said, I will go forth, and I will be a lying Spirit in the mouth of all his
Prophets; and he said, thou shall persuade him, and prevail also, go forth and
do so; And so it came to pass, he was persuaded, went, and was Shot, and Died.

And though at this day, we see no such Visions as Micah did, yet we may justly
imagine, when we see the same events, that they are compassed and effected the
same way, i. e. by Gods permitting some Evil Spirit to put ill Counsel into the
Heads of those, with whom such Firebrands Advise, that acting according to
those Counsels, they may come to that woeful End, which their Crimes and Follies
do deserve. Were our Eyes quick enough to behold the Transactions and
Consultations in the Kingdom of Spirits above us; could we pry into their
Secrets, Order, Proceedings, and Management of this lower World, we should be
able to resolve a thousand Phenomenon, and mysteries of Events, which now seem
strange and uncouth to our darker understandings; for on the Molehills of this
World, where myriads of little Ants do run, those Spirits exercise their power,
and that which we call Accidental, has been, and is contrived by their
deliberate Resolutions.

Thus we may suppose they acted, when Rehoboam followed the Counsel of his
Young Men, and rejected the grave Advice of his Elder Senators; the very cause
of his succeeding danger. Thus they blinded the Carians of old, who rebelling
against Darius, set up for themselves, but by neglecting the excellent Counsel
of Pixodorus, were Conquered by the Persians; Thus they deceived the tumultuous
Athenians, who following the dangerous Advice of Aristagoras, drew the fury of
Darius upon them, and laid the Foundation of their Ruin. Thus they cozened
that unwary and Seditious People, in their Conflicts with the Lacedaemonians,
while they obliged them to hearken to Cleophon, who encouraged them to a
vigorous prosecution of the War, of which they repented, when it was too late;
for they lost not only all their power and greatness, but became subject to
domineering Tyrants, and lost all their ease, and conveniences too. Thus the
Seditious Zedekiah was served by them: Advised by Jeremiah the Prophet to yield
himself to the Chaldean Monarch, and expect his Mercy; he desperately hearkens
to the turbulent Counsels of Men as vicious as himself, to stand out against
the Babylonian Army, which proved his overthrow, and the utter destruction of
Jerusalem.

But still those Evil Spirits, as they are Gods Executioners, so they all must
attend his Command and Order, and they cannot thus impose on Sinners here on
Earth, till the Almighty gives them a Warrant for to do so: And he may do it,
as he is the Judge of Heaven and Earth, and it is just he should do so, to lash
the Insolences of Men, that would confound Kingdoms or Societies.

6. Sometimes he sends upon Men, who are the Causes of such Disorders, a Worm
to gnaw their Breasts, even a tormenting Conscience. Such a turbulent Spirit
was Pashur the Son of Immer the Priest, in the time of Zedekiah, a Man who set
both the King and Nobles against the Prophet Jeremiah, whereupon God threatens
him, to make him a terror to himself, which without all peradventure came to
pass, when Nebuchadnezzar took the City, Jer. 20. 4. So that when no visible
Judgment appears in such Men, there is an Enemy many times within them, which
frights them worse than all External Violence. Cain, who was the first that
brought Disorder into the World, behold, how after his Brothers Murder his
Conscience haunts him! Though there were no People in the World, but his
nearest Relations, yet he fancies every place he goes to, full of Men and
Enemies, and is afraid they will kill him. Tiberius, who scarce let a day pass
without some Villainy, and seemed to be born to the Confusion of the Roman
State, cries out, when no Man pursues him, trembles, when no Enemy is near him,
and feels terrors within, while without, all seems to be calm and quiet.

Nero kills his Mother Agrippina, sets Rome on Fire, Persecutes the Christians,
but what ails him? In the midst of his Guards he is frighted, fancies he sees
dreadful shapes before him, feels Arrows in his Breast, while his Flatterers
fawn upon him. Constans the Grecian Emperor, dispatches his Brother
Theodosius, soon after he cannot sleep; What Is the reason, was it Sickness? Was
it a fit of the Gout, or Stone, or Colic that troubled him? No, something
within opens his Eyes, and shows him his Brothers Ghost, coming toward him
with a Cup of Blood, and saying to him, Drink inhumane Brother; It was his
wicked Conscience. Theodorick King of the Goths uses Symmachus very
barbarously, and falls Sick upon it; Was it any disorder of the Blood? Was it a
Surfeit? Was it a Fever that discomposed him? No, he sees a Fish opened, and
sees Symmachus his Head in it, and having seen it, cannot put the strange sight
out of his mind; his Conscience rolled and worked within, and drew the dismal
Picture before his Eyes, and in such frightful colors, that in Torments of
Mind he dies. Thus it happened to Rudolphus, that engaged in Hildebrands
Faction against his Master Henry the 4th. Emperor; his Conscience tore him
within, and the remembrance, how he had sworn an Oath of Allegiance to his
Prince, and perfidiously broke it, lay upon his Spirits, and Rackt him, and in
that Rack his polluted Soul expires. Richard the Third, who for some years had
put England into Combustion, the Night before Bosworth-Field, in his Sleep fees
all the Devils in Hell about his ears, ready to tear his cursed Soul away.
Those Devils were the reflections of his Conscience, foreboding the Flames that
waited for him in the black Kingdom of Infernal Furies; And if History and Fame
does not belie the late Usurper, for all his borrowed Glories he slept but
uneasy, and as soft as his Pillows were, something harder than Lead or Iron
lay upon his Heart, which made him start in his Sleep, and betray an unruly
Guest within, upon other occasions.

This way God lets even the wickedest of Mankind know, not only that there is a
living Justice, but that they do but get little by all their desperate
Enterprises; This way he makes them see, that there is no place so private, but
he is present there, and that there is no design so intricate, but it is naked
and open before him; This way they must come to know, that the darkness does
not hide from him, and that though no Creatures can reach them with their Eyes,
they cannot abscond from the All-seeing one of the great Creator.

7. Such Disorders, God not only designs, but manages for his Peoples good; for
theirs is the promise, that all things shall work together for their advantage,
Romans 8. 28. So great a lover is God of Holy Men, that though I will not say
with the Jews, that for their sakes he Created the World, yet certainly for
their sakes he preserves it, as much as he would for their sakes have spared
Sodom and Gomorrah, had any tolerable number of them been found in those
corrupted places; Nay, more than that, for their sakes he not only suffers
Public Disorders to arise, but when they arise, so directs and overrules
them, that they shall receive no small advantage by them. Do Men gather Grapes
of Thorns, you will say, or Figs of Thistles? Can a Fountain at the same place
send forth both bitter and sweet Water? Yes, here this seeming contradiction is
true; and as great as the mischiefs are, that issue from such Confusions, the
good God's Servants reap by them, is as remarkable; In Prosperity their Prayers
are apt to slacken; In such Disorders, their Aspirations become loud and
vehement, and whereas before a cloud of dullness and laziness hung upon their
Spirits, now it is shaken off with scorn and indignation; Ease and Plenty made
their Piety lukewarm; Disorders give them Fire, and Tumults make them look more
carefully to their Souls. Their hatred of Sin before was sincere, may be, but
such Confusions make them Zealous; These make their Faith more lively, their
Hope more vigorous, and their Love more fervent; these whet their charity and
confidence, and when the Storms are gone, make them not only relish their
deliverance better, but engage them to greater gratitude.

But this is not all; As Godliness has the promise of this present Life, as
well as that of a future, so the good that arises to Gods People from such
Disorders, has respect to their Temporal felicity too; for this way a lasting
Foundation many times is laid for their future Tranquillity, and as Trees shaken
with the Wind, take the deeper Root, so these Disorders make way for a firmer
settlement of their outward Peace Plenty. By the troubles which happened to the
Israelites in Egypt, they are fitted for a quiet settlement in the Land of
Canaan, the Land that flowed with Milk and Honey; and whereas their Captivity
lasted but 400, their possession of that promised Land continued at least 800
years. Thus the first Persecutions of the Christian Church under Heathen
Emperors made way for their free enjoyment of the Comforts of this Life, after
the Empire began to be Christian, and though it was now and then interrupted
partly by the Arrians, and partly by Julian the Apostate, yet it settled again
after a little while, upon its former Basis, and has continued, at least in
the West, unto this day; And what we say of the Universal, is true also of
particular Churches, whose Tranquillity by such Disorders comes to be more
durable, as were an easy matter to instance in the Reformed European Churches,
when they had for some time struggled under the Seditions and Tumults raised by
the Roman Church; and though I do not take all those, who are Members of a
particular Reformed and visible Church to be Gods true Servants, yet even they
who are sincere, share in the Tranquillity, Peace and Plenty, and Temporal
Prosperity of the Church they are of, and consequently the Disorders which are
suffered to arise, may reasonably be said to promote the durableness, even of
their particular Prosperity.

Having thus asserted the Order, Regularity, and watchfulness of Gods
Providence in the midst of Disorders and Confusions, it will not be proper to
dismiss this Subject without some practical inferences;

1. The Lord reigns; Let all Sinners tremble; Be afraid ye workers of
Iniquity, there is a King above, who as patient as he is, will make you know
erelong he has a Trumpet of War, as well as a Scepter of Love. Good God! How
little do Men regard thy Power and Revenging Arm! If they can but save
themselves from the wrath of Men, and the lashes of the Law, how little are
they concerned at thy Indignation! Thou have Magazines of Vengeance,
Storehouses of Curses, and can undo a thousand ways; Thou have Waters to
drown, Fire and Brimston to consume, Arrows to wound, Pestilence and Famine
move by thy direction, nay, thou can destroy both Soul and Body into Hell;
Thou have threatened desolation, and howling and gnashing of Teeth, outward
darkness, and what is more, Fire, that is not quenched, to Men that choose
rather to gratify their sinful humors, than obey thy Laws; Yet they look not
pale upon it, their color changes not, they find no alteration in their
dispositions, thy terrors fright them not, thy anger moves them not; how
securely do they laugh and quaff, and sing fear and care away!

How Merry notwithstanding all this, is the Drunkard over his Cups! How
unconcerned does the Fornicator and Adulterer lie in the Embraces of his
Harlot! How cheerfully does the Covetous hug his Bags; and how boldly does the
Swearer send up his fearful Oaths to Heaven! How undisturbed does the
Oppressor, Extortioner, and Murderer sleep! and all because they think thou
art Patient and Merciful: Thy Mercy makes them wanton, and thy Patience causes
Sin to live in their Souls; Thy Goodness tempts them to be foolish, and thy
Compassion prompts them to affront thy Glory; Thy Kindness proves their Bane,
and the Meat thou give them, increases their Corruption; Thy Oil they turn
into Poison, and thy Corn and Wine feeds them into contempt of thy Majesty; The
ease thou give them, they make use of to fight against thy Laws, and the
plenty, they enjoy by thy Providence, gives them courage to make War with that
Heaven, from whence that plenty flows.

Monstrous Abuse! Strange Stupidity! When ever Gods Indignation breaks forth,
how violent will the Torrent be? Deluded Men! what pains do you take to
treasure up Wrath unto your selves! Were there but the least spark of ingenuity
in you, how durst you make Infinite goodness the Object of your scorn! How
could you find in your hearts, to declare your selves Rebels and Enemies to
your greatest Benefactor! Shall Goodness harden you, or Patience make your
Breasts impenetrable! Shall Bowels of Mercy make you hard as Rocks, and
Compassion be the Opiate to lull you asleep in your follies! If your Children
served you so, what plagues would you think too big for them! Or, if your
Servants should recompense your kindnesses thus, would not you hate the very
sight of their Persons! And must God put up affronts which you will not! Must
he be contented under scorns and abuses, which you will not bear! Can such
ingratitude be pleasing to him, which is so odious to you! What conceptions do
you entertain of God, that you deal with him thus! If you believe him to be
jealous of his Glory, Will not be vindicate these Injuries? See how loath he is
to punish you, and will you force him to it! See how slowly he proceeds to
Vengeance, and will you hasten him! See how he waits for your Repentance, and
will you make him despair of it! He is Patient, because he would have you
prevent the blow, and will you pull it down on your heads! He delays his anger,
because he would have you kiss the Son, and will you still fight against him,
that you may perish in good earnest! By your trespassing upon his Patience, you
aggravate your guilt, and must necessarily aggravate your Condemnation too; you
make Mercy a Witness against you, and Gods goodness your Accuser, and are these
Arguments to be Answered! I mean, the Arguments, that the Mercy and Patience of
God will allege against you in the last day; If you allow God but the ordinary
Wisdom of a great Man, you must needs think, that his Mercies abused thus, will
prove your Ruin. Does not every Wise Man, if he have entrusted his Steward
with an Estate, demand of him, how he has employed it, and will not you allow
God so much Wisdom, as to be concerned about the Talents, he has entrusted you
withal? His Mercy and Patience are those Talents, he gave you to improve into
seriousness, and hatred of Sin, and resistance of Temptations, will you bury
them under ground, or lay them up in a Napkin, or what is more, misuse them to
dishonor the Omnipotent God, and his Law, and expect an Euge? Will you turn
his Grace into wantonness, and believe, you shall be applauded at last, with a
well done good and faithful Servant? Have not you read of the unprofitable
Servant, that was delivered to the Tormentors, till he should pay what he owed;
and is not this your case, that make light of Gods anger, because he does not
power it out upon you, so soon, as your Sins deserve it? Therefore art thou
inexcusable, O Man, whosoever thou art, who despisest the riches of his
goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing, that the goodness
of God leads thee to Repentance, Romans 2. 1, 5.

2. The Lord reigns, Let Us admire the Wisdom of God, who can draw light out
of darkness, and wholesome Medicines from the rankest Poison; The brutish Man
knows it not, neither does a Fool understand this, and hence come the rash
censures of Gods actions; A Man who is no careless observer of things, will
find very strange and uncouth passages, and dispensations in this World, which
possibly he cannot reconcile to the principles of that Reason, God has given
him; yet may he be confident, that as absurd as some Dispensations seem to him,
they are carried on with singular Wisdom and Providence, by the Supreme mover
of all, it being impossible, but the All-Wise, God, who sees and knows, and
takes care of all, must act, and suffer things to be acted upon very weighty
and prudential Motives; and I question not, but should God be so kind, as to
give us a Key to open the Cabinet of some of his Mysterious Providence, I
mean, communicate his Reasons to us, why he disposes and martials things in
that order, method, and manner we see he does, we should be forced with the
Apostle to cry out, (...), O the depth of the Riches, both of the Mercy and
Wisdom of God!

That the Holy Ghost should be bestowed on the Uncircircumcised Gentiles, was a
thing which to the Jews seemed not only impossible, but in a manner Impious to
believe, it having been a Maxim with them from immemorial times, That the
Divine Presence rests on none, but an Israelite, yet when they saw the thing
effectually done, and understood the Reasons, they could not but break forth
into admiration of the infinite Wisdom of God, and praise and magnify him
whose Understanding is Infinite, and whose Wisdom cannot by searching be found
out.

It Is a very strange Dispensation, that the greatest part of the World should
continue Heathenish and Idolatrous, and the Mahometans exceed the Christians in
number by three parts at least, yet he that shall consider seriously, how
Christians are sunk, as to the holiness of their Lives, and how unfit by reason
of that decay they are for propagating that Holy Religion, they profess; how
careless and negligent Christian Princes are grown, as to the enlarging of
Christ's Kingdom, and those that have made some attempts that way, have gone
about it with sinister designs; how others had rather spend their time at home
in picking and feeding Quarrels in the Church, than advance the Unity of the
Faith abroad; and how the generality of Christians have learned to mind the
World more than Heaven, and are become lovers of Pleasures, more than lovers of
God: and the Religion that is left among them, is either mixed with Idolatry or
gross Superstitions, or some other notorious Abuses, and is become a Carnal,
rather than a Spiritual Worship, and a Formal rather than a Rational Service;
and how many of the Heathens and Mahometans exceed Christians in Virtue and
Morality, and how that Charity, Love, and Peace, which was once the great
Character of Christ's Disciples, is banished, and the Seamless Coat of Christ
torn in a thousand pieces, and those Dissentions cherished, maintained,
encouraged, and how Religion is become a mere Politic thing; I say, he that
shall consider all this, will not wonder so much, that there are no more
Christians in the World, as admire, there are so many, and that the greatest
part of them are not consumed or led into Captivity, when they abuse, and so
grossly abuse the best, the noblest, and the most excellent Religion, and
reproach and dishonor that God, who sent his Son into the World to Reveal it,
thinking, Surely, they will reverence my Son.

It was Self-denial, contempt of the World, and invincible Patience under
Injuries, Stupendous Charity, and very great strictness of Life, that first
spread the Christian Religion; and the Apostles having shown us the way, we
should have trod in their steps, and if we had, we should without all
peradventure have had the same success; for God works by Means, and those
having been the Means in the beginning of Christianity, they may justly be
supposed to be the genuine Means at this day, and where those are neglected,
it is part of Wisdom to punish Men for their wilful neglect of those Means, by
suffering Heathenism and Mahometanism, not only to continue unmolested, but to
grow and advance every day more and more, to the weakening of the Christian
Interest; for no wounds provoke so much as those which are given God in the
House of his Friends, as we see by Gods proceedings with the Jews, both in
their first and second Captivity.

So that notwithstanding this seeming inequality of Providence, Gods Wisdom
continues unspotted, and we have reason to give it the highest Encomiums and
Celebrations.

3. The Lord reigns; Let Us not despair, when either Public or Private
Calamities fall upon us. God is our Refuge, a present help in the time of
trouble, therefore will we not fear, though the Earth be moved, and though the
Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea, though the Waters thereof
roar, and be troubled, though the Mountains shake with the swelling thereof,
Ps. 46. 1. with this Psalm, Pachomius is said to have chased away a Legion of
Devils from his Cell, and I see no reason, but it may serve to support the Soul
in the greatest dangers. However things go, God is still good to Israel, to
them that are of a clean heart; what ever Tumults arise, Go tell the Righteous,
says God, it shall be well with him. What comfort must this be to a serious
Christian! though every thing goes contrary to his wishes and expectations, yet
he may be cofident, that from those contrarieties of Providence his Soul shall
be refreshed. The Prophet therefore had reason to cry, Es. 50. 10. Who is among
you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his Servant that walks in
darkness, and has no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay
upon his God.

From such a cheerful Confidence we may promise our selves great matters, for
God looks upon himself as concerned to reward our extraordinary Faith with an
extraordinary Providence, as we see in the poor VVidow of Sarepta; who had the
courage to give the remainder of the Meal and Oil she had, to the man of God,
and was therefore miraculously supplied in the time of Famine. Christ could do
no mighty works in his own Country, because of the Peoples unbelief, Mark 6.
5, 6. it is our diffidence in the time of danger, that makes God stay his hand,
and our unbelief keeps the former and latter rain of his favor from us. To
trust God, when the Fig Tree does not blossom, and to rely upon his goodness,
when the labor of the Olive does fail, is the way to see Miracles, and a
preparative for the richest Mercies.

Let come, what will come upon us, nothing can come, but by the order and
Providence of God, infinitely Good, and infinitely Wise; And what is there,
that can come amiss, if it come from these two Fountains? If Infinite Goodness
sends that, which the World calls Misery upon me, most certainly there can be
no hurt in it; and if Infinite Wisdom sends it, most certainly, it must be
best for me, for if Infinite Wisdom thinks it so, my shallow Understanding
has reason to submit to its most solid Judgment: God denies me what I would
have, because he would fain give me, what I should have. That which he takes
away, may be I do not want, and that Grace, I stand in need of, may be I cannot
have, without the other be taken away. A Temporal Blessing sometimes stands in
the way of a Spiritual one, and if the lesser be taken away to make room for
the greater, it is no more, but what mine own Wisdom would approve of in more
trivial concerns. God would have me follow him, not for the Loaves, but for the
Miracles of his Love, and if to make me enamoured with him, he sees it
necessary to take away the Loaves, it is no more than what a Wise Physician
does to a Patient, from whose Lips he takes away the pleasant Draught, to make
way for a more wholesome Potion.

The Lord reigns: Rejoice Christian; Let Israel rejoice in him that made him,
and let the Children of Zion be joyful in their King: Fear not thou Worm Jacob,
when affliction, when trouble, when anguish comes, when the Waves and Billows
of the Waters of Marah rise. Thy God reigns, thy King watches over thee, the
All-sufficient God is thy refuge, and thy hiding place. Surely he shall deliver
thee from the Snare of the Fowler, and from the noisome Pestilence: He shall
cover thee with his Feathers, and under his Wings shall thou trust, his Truth
shall be thy Shield and Buckler; Thou shall not be afraid for the Terror by
Night, nor for the Arrow that flies by Day, nor for the Pestilence that walks
in Darkness, nor for the Destruction that wastes at Noonday; a thousand shall
fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy Right hand, but it shall not come
nigh thee.

Nothing can hurt a good Christian, for whom is reserved the Crown
Righteousness in Heaven; Men may prejudice his Body, but they cannot hurt his
Soul; They may rob him of his Goods, but they cannot take away his Graces; They
may imprison him, but they cannot keep God out of his Heart; They may beat him,
but they cannot ruin him; They may make this World bitter to him, but they
cannot hinder him from feeding on the sweet Promises of the Gospel. God is thy
Shepherd, Christian, therefore thou shall not want. He will anoint thy Head
with Oil, and spread a Table for thee in the midst of thy Enemies, nay, thy Cup
shall run over Goodness and Mercy shall follow thee all the days of thy life,
and thou shall dwell at last in the House of God for ever, even in that House,
made without hands, Eternal in the Heavens.

4. The Lord reigns: Let Us cheerfully submit therefore to his Government;
Shall we pretend to be his ^ubjects, and not be Ruled by him? Shall we call him
our King, and follow our own Imaginations? Shall he only have the name of our
Ruler, while we are resolved to be guided by the Flesh, and by the World? This
were to call him King in jest, as the Jews did our Savior, and to bow the Knee
before him, while we buffet him, or run our Sword into his Bowels. Kings on
Earth, though they can give Protection to their Subjects, yet they cannot give
them being, nor keep their Souls in life, nor protect them from outward and
inward troubles. God who is your King, not only can do all this, but actually
does it, and consequently the Motives to be ruled and governed by him, are far
greater. I will not launch out here into the vast Sea of his Mercies, what he
has done for our Souls and Bodies, how he has been with us, when we have gone
through the Waters, and with us, when we have passed through the Fire, how he
has loved us in Christ Jesus, and what pains he takes with our Immortal Souls,
to make them happy; What a bountiful, what a charitable, what a condescending
Prince he has been to us upon all occasions; what benefits we reap by his
Government, and how every moment he gives us instances of his kindness. It Is
enough to put you in mind, that you acknowledge him to be your King, and that
word imports obedience to his Laws, else he is either no King to you, or you
are Rebels and Apostates.

But while I exhort you to be Ruled and Governed by him, I must not forget, to
tell you the measures, you are to observe in your Submission to his Government,
and they are these following;

1. Take heed of thinking, that you please the great King of Heaven, by
disobeying your King here on Earth in things lawful, and not contrary to the
Word of God. It Is impossible you can believe the truth of the Thirteenth
Chapter of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, and think so. Obeying God, and
being subject to the higher Powers, are not contrary, but subordinate Duties.
To think you are Saints, when you have courage to control the Orders of your
Superiors, is a sign of a graceless heart; and to fancy, it is Religion, to
laugh at what the Supreme Magistrate Commands, is to exclude your selves from
the Kingdom of Heaven. Such Divinity was never heard of in the World, till Vice
and Hypocrisy had debaucht it, and had such Doctrines been broacht in the
Primitive Church, they would have called them Rebellion and Heresy. The
Primitive Saints never contradicted the Laws of their Superiors, but where God
gave an express Command to the contrary, and they looked upon it as pride and
peevishness to show disrespect to that Order of Men, which God intended as his
Vicegerents. It was not the wickedness of their Prince, made them neglect
their Duty to his Person, nor could the Injuries he did them, tempt them to
forget their Obedience. They remembered, what Authority there was in the Country
they lived in, it was of God, and because it was so, thought themselves obliged
to be subject, not so much for Terror, as for Conscience sake. That Dominion
is founded in Grace, was a Principle, the Apostles had never taught them, and
they justly found fault with those that tore the Orders of the Magistrate,
which were given for their Persecution and Banishment; where they could not
comply, they suffered, and thought it a greater piece of Devotion, to be
Patient under Affronts and Oppositions, than to be their own Carvers, by
repelling Force by Violence. Christ had taught them not to resist Evil, and
they Rationally believed, they were no Christians, except they did whatsoever
he did Command them.

The Wisdom which is from above, is without Partiality, and he that assents to
what God says, in one thing, but not in another, shows, that the love of the
Father is not in him. Where the Conscience suspects the Magistrates Command, as
unlawful, it must suffer it self to be informed, not only by persons that serve
an Interest, but Impartial Men; and care must be taken, that what we call
Conscience, is not unwillingness to cross our Pride or Humor. Conscience is
too often pretended, when we have hardened our selves into Prejudice, and
therefore the best Rule to go by, in such cases, is to lay by Interest, and
hearken to the clear dictates of unbyassed Reason. When the Magistrate Commands
a thing that is doubtful, it is safer to keep our selves to a known Duty, which
is submission to their Orders, than to be obstinate in an uncertain conclusion;
and that Christian is likest to have the greatest peace, that walks on the
surest side of the Hedge.

2. Then you submit to him, when you reign over your inordinate desires and
passions; When you curb your anger, restrain your lusts, moderate your joys,
bid your grief and sorrow break forth into Tears for your Sins, watch over your
Sensual Delights, and keep them within bounds, mortify your hatred to your
fellow Christians, grow eminent in the Love of God, and advance in charity to
your Neighbors, kill your Covetousness, and give flame to your Desires after
Grace and Mercy. This government in your little World, is that, which pleases
the King of Heaven, and you then live like his Subjects, when you Reign and
Triumph thus over your Lusts, and force your Hearts into such religious and
reasonable Services. He serves not God, but himself, that lets his evil Desires
reign over him, and is so far from being submissive to the King of Heaven, that
he makes himself a Vassal of the Devil; This is the mighty privilege of all
the Loyal Subjects of the King of Heaven; Their being so, makes them Kings, and
their inordinate Passions, are the Slaves on which they exercise Dominion and
Authority; Over these God gives them power, and it has been acknowledged by
all Wise Men, that he that conquers these Rebels, is a greater Commander, than
he that lays whole Cities and Countries waste; for in wasting these, he acts
according to his Brutish Desires, but in conquering those Desires, he overcomes
himself, and in that consists the perfection of Virtue.

Without a serious attempt of this Self-conquest, your Prayers prevail not in
Heaven, and the little Devotions, you pay the Immortal King, are rejected, as
sapless Services. Without this, your New Moons, and solemn Assemblies are
Abominations, and your treading the Courts of the Lord is looked upon, as the
Sacrifice of Fools. The King above is not for outward shows, and he that does
not give him the inward Man, as well as the outward, instead of paying Homage
to him, turns his Grace into wantonness. The restraining of one inordinate
Desire, is more valued in Heaven, than twenty formal Prayers, and the curbing
of one Passion, receives greater applauses from the Holy Angels, than a hundred
Lord have Mercy upon me's. That one act of Joseph, in resisting the Temptations
of his Mistress, and his own Natural Desires, God approved of more, than of all
the Peace Offerings of the Harlot in the Proverbs, chap. 7. verse. 14. And Mary
Magdalen's Tears and Sorrow for Sins, melted Christ's heart more, than all the
pompous Devotions of the Pharisee, for in this Sorrow, she reigned gloriously
over her sinful Inclinations, while the other continued a Slave to his desire
of Vainglory.

3. Then you submit to him, and acknowledge him for your King, when you seek
first his Kingdom, and his Righteousness; When you offer unto God the best of
your Flock, and let the World have his refuse, and leavings. To give God the
sleepiest hours of the day, and to bestow the most lively upon the World, is
not to acknowledge him for your King, but to make him the Worlds Servant; and
to give him the Lame and Maimed, while your profit, and gain engrosses the
Sound, and the fat of your thoughts, is Preposterous Devotion. To Sin as long
as you can, and then to turn to him, is to play with Religion, and most
certainly, nothing looks so like Mockery, as to think of being serious, when
you can serve the World and the Flesh no longer. Either God is not the best of
Beings, if he must not have our Principal Adorations; or if he be, our warmest
Affections must of necessity be his due. First to secure our Temporal Interest,
and then to think of making sure of the Everlasting Riches, is to imagine, that
Death will stay for us; And to give our Youth and tender years to the Devil, is
to say our Lesson, as they say, Witches do the Lords Prayer, backward. To be
sure, this is not to be Subject to that King, who in his actions, is ever
Orderly and Regular, and therefore requires his Subject; should be so too.

No Man serves him, that does not serve him orderly, and to begin our Day, and
all our lawful Works, and Enterprises with him, to Consecrate to him the
Morning and Strength os our Age, and to make our Carnal and Temporal Interest,
truckle to his Will, is true Canonical Obedience. Those that do so, shall
reign with him in that Life, his Son has promised in the Gospel; who died for
this end, that such as yield to these Terms might wear Crowns in Heaven, Crowns
not like those of perishable Gold, which decay with Age and Time, but Crowns
immarcescible, Crowns which Angels wear, Crowns of Glory, Crowns which are made
splendid by the Light of Gods Countenance, Crowns made of Everlasting Light,
Crowns which will shine, when the Sun shall shine no more, Crowns which will
glitter, when the Stars shall have done twinkling; in a word, Crowns, the
thoughts of which, will transport the Souls that are incircled with them, into
Everlasting Comforts and Consolations.

FINIS.

