Son, go work to day in my Vineyard. Matthew. Ch: 21: v: 28.

THE HAPPY ASCETICK: OR, THE Best Exercise, To which is added, A LETTER TO A
Person of Quality, Concerning the Holy Lives of the Primitive Christians. By
ANTHONY HORNECK, Preacher at the Savoy.

Printed by T. N for Henry Mortlock at the Phaenix in St. Paul's Churchyard,
and Mark Pardoe at the Black Raven over against Bedford-House in the Strand,
1681.

To the Right Reverend FATHER in GOD, THOMAS, Lord Bishop of LINCOLN.
MY LORD,
THe Reason, why I dedicate this Treatise to your Lordship, is not any opinion
I have of the Merit of the Book; but my remembrance of your former Favors. I
am sensible, how much I am obliged to you, and though I have often professed so
much in private, yet I looked upon the Duty, as imperfect, without I made some
public Acknowledgement; and though the Book may not be worthy of your
Patronage, because it comes not attended with new Notions, yet I thought it
safer to run the hazard of being judged unlearned, than that of being counted
ungrateful.

My Lord, you were the Person, who first took notice of me in the University,
and by your Sunshine, warmed and cherished my Endeavors, and gave
Encouragement to those Studies, I am now engaged in, and as under your Shadow,
I then advanced, and prosper'd; So now, that the Fruit, though of a courser
sort, is come to some maturity, it was but reason, you should have a taste of
it. I know not, how pleasant it may be to your curious, and delicate Palate,
but your Piety is such, that you can disrelish nothing that tends to the
Exercise of Real Godliness.

A Subject indeed, on which Millions of Books are already written; yet such is
the Richness of it, that every day it affords new matter for Contemplation; and
though what we write is nothing, but a different Dress of the same Good Angel,
yet even those different Garbs, and Habits may help toward the Enlargement of
its Splendour and Glory. To Plant Goodness in Men is without doubt the indeleble
Character of our Office, and to make Souls fall in love with Heaven, the import
of that Duty, whereby we hold our Charter; and we have the greater reason to
attempt it in an Age, wherein Religion, like the Poets Echo, is become an
empty sound, and try how far we may bring that Faith into fashion again, which
formerly, when times were better, discovered it self in suitable Works and
Actions.

St. Paul's fight with Beasts, one would think, is still entailed upon our
Function, and the difference between his, and ours, seems only this, that his
was at Ephesus, and ours in the places where we do Officiate; for the Brutal
Lusts of Men are now as strong, as ever, and it is hard to say, whether our Task
be not the more difficult of the two, since, besides his Preaching, he had the
Mantle of Elijah, the Power of doing Miracles; and we only the ordinary
Assistances of Gods Spirit. It Is true, the World is Christian now, whereas it
was Heathen in his time; but I cannot tell whether Christianism, mingled with
Paganism in Carriage and Conversation, be not a fiercer Devil to drive out,
than mere Heathenism, and Black Infidelity without any White to checker it.

However we have reason to rely upon his Help, who has promised to be with us
to the Worlds end; and we find by happy Experience, that our Labors are not
altogether unsuccessful, where we aim at Gods Glory more than our own Interest.

We are happy in this Church, that we have so many Prelates who are bent upon
reviving the strictness of the Primitive Church, excellent Patterns for us the
inferior Clergy to imitate, and being thus encouraged by our Generals, we must
be inexcusable, if having such Monitors, we prove careless of our Duty. To
reduce Christianity in Men to its Primitive Rule, is the drift of this
discourse; and as your Lordships Zeal for such harmless Enterprises cannot be
unknown to any, that have had the Honor to converse with you; so whatever
defects may occur in the Book itself, the Scope and Intent being great, I
flatter my self, that though I fall short of the Mark I aim at, yet for the
Designs sake, your Lordship will generously pardon all the Faults, and Mistakes
of,

MY LORD, Your Lordships Much Obliged, and very Humble Servant, Anthony Horneck.

The Preface.
THe use of new Books, especially upon Subjects of this Nature, I apprehend to
be no other than this, that the newness of them is a temptation to Men to read
them, who many times will lay aside an Old one, though much better, to peruse a
New, and by the Novelty of the Dress, be brought into a good opinion of a
Doctrine, which before, while lying in Moth-eaten Leaves, was insipid and
nauseous to their Spiritual Appetite; so that we are forced to make advantage
of their Temper, and continue Writing, in hopes, that by a new Book we may
catch them into seriousness.

All I have to say concerning this Treatise, is, That it is intended to call
M^n away from the Shadow, to the Substance of Religion, from a Form, to the
Power of Godliness, and from a notional to a practical Belief of the Gospel;
and though Exercise in an Age so much given to Idleness may possibly sound ill,
and some Men, that never understood, that Religion required much Labor, will
be apt to cry, What will this Babbler say? yet we are not to be laughed out of
our Christianity by the talk of Men that have no mind to be saved, nor is
Religion therefore the less painful, because so many thousands turn it into
Formality.

The Judge of Quick and Dead will have another Rule to go by, and it is not the
Fancies of Men shall guide him in passing Sentence in the great Day of
Retribution. The World will find, that Heaven takes other Measures than they
flatter themselves withal, and it will not serve turn in that day to say, that
they thought, things would not have been so bad, when in this Life, they might
have believed the Gospel, and lived for ever. I know not how the Gospel can be
plainer than it is, and when it bids none expect Salvation, but those that do
the Will of their Father, which is in Heaven. It must not be Reason, but
Stupidity and Sottishness, that can pretend to ignorance, and as much as this
shakes the Foundation of some Men's Faith, it is notwithstanding an everlasting
Truth, and when Heaven and Earth shall wax old, as a Garment, this will be
found unalterable. The Cost God has been at to make us his, lays invincible
obligations upon us to work the Work of him that sent us hither, and when he
has Bought and Purchased us at so dear a Rate, as his own Blood, either that
Report is fabulous, or the Mercy challenges the strictest Obedience. As we are
not to appoint our selves our station and condition in the World, so neither
are we to do our own Will. We are Servants of God, not only naturally, and born
so, but bought with a Price, and therefore have nothing to do with disposing of
our selves, but are entirely at his Devotion, and Will, who bought us for that
purpose. Except we do so, we are Rebels, and slight the vast Love, that
condescended and stooped to make us happy, and we mistake the nature of our
Being, and the end of the Gospel, if we think we may do, what we have a mind to.

Nor does this make us Slaves, but perfect Freemen, and we are never so much at
liberty, than when we cheerfully go on from one Virtue to another. The Truth
certainly makes us Free, and the Soul does but lie shackled and a Prisoner till
its Wings serve her to mount up by Contemplation to the Regions of Glory. It is
then freest, when like the Be it can fly from one Flower of Grace unto
another, and when it can nimbly run in the way of Gods Commands, it may then be
truly said, to have thrown away its Chains and Manacles. This made Paul and
Silas Free, when Bound, and under Custody, and their joyful Hallelujahs in a
Dungeon, proclaimed their Liberty to be equal to that of Angels.

Till we learn to exercise our selves unto Godliness, we are Slaves, though
clad in Purple, and pitiful Vassals, though decked and adorned with the
richest Oriental Pearls. Godliness must make us Kings, and if ever we inherit
the Crown of Glory, this is it, must set it on our Heads. The Kings Daughter is
all Glorious within, and his Eyes behold the Upright. The Furniture God likes,
is good Works, and Devotion the Trappings, he delights to look upon. No Jewels
so amiable in his Eye as the Graces of a holy Soul, and her Virtues are the
only embroidery he is pleased with. Her breathings and Pantings after a
Crucified Redeemer, are the fine Linen, he loves to see her in, and her hunger
and thirst after Righteousness, the Silks and glorious Garb, which he opens the
Windows of Heaven to behold.

This Vesture, like the Israelites Garments in the Wilderness, never decays,
and no wonder, for it is so like the Garb Men wear in Heaven, that all the
difference is only this, that the Celestial exceeds this in Perfection; the
Ground is the same, but the Gloss of that above is more dazzling, and less
subject to spots and infirmities.

When will the dull World learn this Truth? When will poor unconverted Sinners
be convinced of their gross Mistakes? When will they see the Charms that are in
Godliness, and fall in love with it? When will they believe our report, and
think that we are the best Friends, they have? Can nothing open your Eyes, but
Hell? Can nothing move you, but Viols of Wrath? Can nothing prevail with you,
but a consuming Fire? Shall this World delude you? Shall your Flesh beguile
you? Shall a few Lusts blind you? Will nothing make you wise, but experience of
Gods Indignation? Will you count that Godliness your shame, which the Saints of
old did esteem their glory? Are you afraid of your own Bliss? Are you afraid of
the love of God? Does Gods willingness to receive you, fright you? Are his
embraces such dreadful things, that you shun them? Are his Smiles odious? Do
his Courtships strike terror? Are you loath to converse with infinite Beauty?
Can the Creature be more lovely than the Creator? Can the Stream be more
pleasant than the Fountain? Can sublunary Objects afford any comfort, and is it
possible, that he that made those comforts should not yield far greater
satisfaction? Have you drudged so long in the Devils Service, and are not you
weary yet? Have you minded your Bodies so long, and do not you think it time
yet to prevent the ruin of your Souls? O Jerusalem! wilt not thou be clean?
When shall it once be? When shall the Ark be set up? When shall Dagon fall?
When shall the Spices flow? When shall the Fig Tree blossom? When shall the
Vine put forth her tender Grapes? Wisdom has builded her House, she has hewn
out her seven Pillars, she has killed her Beasts, she has mingled her Wine,
she has also furnished her Table, she has sent forth her Maidens, she cries
upon the highest places of the City, whosoever is simple let him turn in hither; as
for him that wants understanding, she says to him, Come eat of my Bread, and
drink of the Wine, which I have mingled; Forsake the foolish and live, and go
in the way of Understanding, Prove. 9. 1 -- 7.

THE CONTENTS.
The Ordinary Exercises of Godliness.
I. TO Pray Always. II. Every Morning to resolve to tie our selves to certain
Rules of living that Day. III. Every Day to spend Half an hour, or some such
time in thinking of Good things. IV. To study deep Humility. V. To bridle our
Tongues. VI. To watch against little Sins. VII. To keep a strict Guard over our
Eyes. VIII. To make good use of the Virtues and Vices of our Neighbors. IX. To
put a charitable interpretation upon what we see or hear. X. Conscientiously to
discharge the Duties of our several Callings and Relations. XI. To resist all
sorts of Temptations. XII. To stand in awe of God, when we are alone and no
Creatture sees us. XIII. To do all things to Gods Glory. XIV. To stir up and
exercise the Graces God has given us. XV. Every night before we go to Bed to
call our selves to an Account for the Actions of the Day.
The Extraordinary Exercises of Godliness.
I TO enter into solemn Vows, and Promises. II. To subdue the Body by Fasting.
III. To use Watching, or Abstinence from Sleep. IV. To apply our Selves to
Self-revenge.
ERRATA.
Page 70. l. 10. r. is. p. 78 l. 8. r. wherever. p. 116. l. 20. r. In the Holy
Ghost. p. 329. l. 1. r. later. p. 329. in the Margent, r. (...). p. 336. in the
Margent. l. 3. r. Sixth. 4. p. 353. l. 5. r. Governors. p. 424. l. 2. r. Homer.
p. 461. l. 13. r. Discretion. p. 478. in the Margent. l. 3. r. Fronto's. p.
348. l. 27. r. Constantius. p. 344. l. 6. r. dispense with an Oath, and not
with a Vow. p. 394. in the Margent. l. 8. r. loc. cit. p. 415. l. 25. r. his
Devotions. In the Hebrew words now and then the Letter is mistaken for, and for
(...), and for, and (...) for (...). Other Literal Faults the Reader may
correct at his leisure.

The Best Exercise.
1 TIMOTHY 4. 7. Exercise thy self rather unto Godliness.
THis Chapter is partly Prophetical, partly Doctrinal; partly foretelling what
would come to pass in the last days, partly intimating, what work a Man, who
looks for another life, has to do, while he sojourns on this side Heaven. In
the Prophetic part, he acquaints his Trusty Disciple, the Bishop of Ephesus,
with the strange degeneracy, and corruption of Religion, that would ensue in
after-Ages, when he should be dead and gone; how Men under a show of Christian
strictness, would authoritatively prohibit what God had wisely, and like a good
and indulgent Father, permitted to his Creatures, Under a pretense of doing
more than God has commanded, set up the Kingdom of the Devil; and by crying
out against eating Flesh, and Marriage, discover to the World, that they are
more in love with their idle fancies, and inventions, than the Will of God,
blessed for evermore. Whether in this Prophecy he strikes at the Encratites,
and Pythagorean Christians of old, or at the Modern Church of Rome, I will not
now undertake to determine.

Whoever they be, he aims at, they are not Men, that by way of Mortification,
with a pious intent to subdue their Lusts, voluntarily abstain from either: for
such Spiritual Exercises many Good Men, and Excellent Servants of God, did
always use. That Daniel, and his Companions, St. Matthew, and St. James,
abstained altogether from Fish and Flesh, and all things that had life, is
asserted by Josephus, Clemens Alexandrinus, and St. Austin; and Ecclesiastical
History speaks of Alcibiades, Olympias, and diverse others, that lived
altogether upon Herbs, and Fruits of the Earth: Some, because they thought it
wholsomer; and others, because they looked upon it, as a means to promote
Religion, and Seriousness, and Heavenlymindedness; which makes St. Chrysostom
commend those, that could do so. But these Christians, that were thus
temperate, neither condemned those, that did eat Flesh, nor prescribed these
Rules, as necessary to others; much less had they any abhorrency from Flesh or
Marriage, as things unlawful. Those, the Apostle reproves here, were Men that
both commanded such abstinence, and declared eating Flesh, and Marrying,
sinful, and proceeding from the Devil; at least looked upon the abstinence as
great, and meritorious.

In the Doctrinal part, which begins at the sixth Verse, he considers Timothy
as a Christian, and a Bishop, and accordingly prescribes to him Canons, and
Rules to be observed by him in that double capacity. The Church in those days
was already infested by very Ravenous Wolves, Men, whom the Devil sent into the
World to oppose the design of Christianity, and to keep deluded Mortals in Sin,
and Error. These false Prophets, taught by a more Cunning Master, invented
various Stratagems, and Ways to pervert the new Proselytes of Christianity.
Sometimes they pretended readiness to teach gratis, without Wages, or Salary:
Sometimes they would seem to be stricter, than the True Apostles; Sometimes
they boasted of their Learning and Wisdom, and sought to render the Wisdom of
the Cross contemptible: Sometime they made the World believe, that they knew
great Mysteries, Secrets of Divinity, which the True Apostles were ignorant of;
and particularly Simon Magus his Disciples would tell very strange Stories of
the origin, and cause of Good and Evil, of the Fight or Battle of Angels, and
of the Creation of the World, which the Apostle, Verse 7. calls Profane, and
Old Wives Fables, and therefore does charge Timothy to slight, and despise
them, and mind nobler things, even such, as tend to the advancement of God's
Glory, and the Churches Good, and his own Joy and Satisfaction in the Day of
our Lord Jesus, whereof Spiritual Exercises, and considerable Progresses in the
ways Godliness, are chief, and most desirable, in the words of the Text,
Exercise thy self rather unto Godliness.

Before I enter upon any particulars of this Exercise, I must endeavor to
convince my Reader, that this Exhortation concerns all Christians, and not
Ministers only, all men that live under the sound of the Gospel, and not the
Preachers of it altogether: I'ts true, it is addressed to Timothy a Clergy man,
but not as a Bishop, but as a Christian; and the Apostle charges this Duty upon
him, not because he was an Evangelist, but because he had embraced the
Christian Faith, and been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, and this is
evident from hence, because what is here spoken to Timothy, is in other places
of Scripture, enjoined Believers and Christians in general, Phil. 4. 8. 2 Pet.
1. 5, 6. 2 Pet. 3. 11. Colos. 3. 12. 13, 14, 15, etc. Ephesians. 6. 14 15, 16, 17,
18, etc. And it would be as good a Plea, That contentedness, and striving
against Sin, and loving God, and reading the Holy Scriptures, Meekness,
Patience, and a lively Hope, are not Virtues belonging to Laymen, because they
are recommended to Timothy in these two Epistles, as to fancy, that this Text
imports no universal obligation.

And this I take notice of on purpose to prevent an objection, which lazy and
slothful Christians, are apt to make against such necessary lessons and
injunctions. It Is true, Ministers are obliged to excel in Goodness, and to be
patterns to the Flock, in Word, in Conversation, in Spirit, in Faith and
Purity, as St. Paul speaks, v. 12. of this Chapter; But that does not excuse
the Hearers, or private Christians, from pursuing the same end, or pressing
toward the same mark, but rather enforces the obligation, because they have
such lively motives before their Eyes, which makes the Apostle call to his
Disciples, Phil. 3. 17. Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them
which walk so, as you have us for an ensample: so that if this command had been
given to Timothy, as a Minister of the Gospel, yet the obligation that lies
upon all Christians to imitate their Pastors in their Holy lives, and acts of
Piety, makes this Exercise universally necessary.

Men are generally so enamoured with Sin, and the World, and the Devil does so
continually buzze the inconveniences of Religion, and the impossibilities of
living up to what God commands, into their Ears; That they care not, how absurd
the excuse is, they invent, to get their necks out of Christ's yoke; so
vigorously do they fight against their own Happiness, and so desperately do
they thrust away Salvation from them, and let the shift, or apology they have
for their neglect, be never so bad or silly, a mere Apron of Fig Leaves, yet
that shall serve, rather, than they will go without one. They are sensible that
the injunctions of the Gospel are given to rational creatures, not to Foxes of
the Field, not to Fishes of the Sea, nor to Fowls of the Air; and because they
would live undisturbed in their Lusts, unmolested in their Sensualities, and
easy in their Pleasures; they flatter themselves, that these stricter Laws,
concern only the Ministry, or Men in Black, that have little else to do, but to
mind their Books, and their Souls. Indeed if we were the only Men that had
Souls to be saved, the argument would hold good; if Heaven were designed for
none but Priests, much might be said for this pretense: but when in that point
you are as much concerned as we; and the Worm that dies not, is described by
the Holy Ghost, on purpose, to fright you as well as us; Look to it, for there
is but one Gospel, whereby both Priest and People shall be judged.

Oh Sirs, consider, whether these excuses will be accepted in the last day? If
Holiness of Life be a Ministers Duty only, what makes you repent on your
Deathbeds, that you have not minded it more? What makes you send for us to
cloth you with the Garments of Righteousness, when your Souls are going to
another World? What makes the Apostles write so many Epistles to their Hearers
and Disciples? And what makes them fill their Epistles, with so many pathetical
exhortations to this seriousness? Nay, What do you come to Church for? Is it
only to hear us talk? Is it only to divert your selves? Is it only to pass away
the time? Is it not to learn your Work? Is it not to know the Task, God
requires at your hands? Is it not to be acquainted with the Will of God, that
you may do it? and if so, you bear witness against yourselves, you condemn
yourselves, you acknowledge this Exercise is your Duty, as much as ours. There
is never a sinner of you all, that shall dare to plead in the great day of
account, that you were not persons concerned in this work; that it was out of
your Element, and beyond your Sphere; God will bear witness, and the Angels
will bear witness, and the Ministers of the Gospel will bear witness, and your
own Consciences will bear witness, nay, the Devils themselves will bear
witness, that you were told, assured, and convinced, that it was to you, that
the message of Grace and Pardon was sent, as well as to us; and that you lay
under the same obligation to fulfill the Conditions, upon which that Pardon is
offered, that we do.

Who of you desires not to be saved? Has any of you a mind to be damned? Dares
any of you refuse the everlasting Mercy of God? Do not you all declare, that
you would fain inherit the Kingdom, which fades not away? But show us one
Scripture, one place in the Bible, one tittle in the word of God, that favors
your Plea, or allows you a different way to Eternal Happiness, than is
appointed to the Preachers of the Gospel; and if God be resolved, that all that
enter into his joy, shall improve their Talents, work hard, and walk in the
same way; all these pretenses must needs vanish into smoke, and can be nothing
else but snares of the Devil, and Lime-twigs of the Prince of the Air, to catch
your Souls into ruin, and to deprive them of that Blessing, which must advance
them above the profaner Herd, make them equal to Angels; and what is more,
partakers of the Divine Nature.

So then, what the Apostle says here to Timothy, he says unto all, Exercise
thyself unto Godliness; and I must entreat you to look upon this exhortation,
as spoken to every one of you in particular, and to reflect on the importance
of it, with as much seriousness, as if St. Paul did at this time, from the
mansions of Glory, by a new Commission from Almighty God, call you every one by
your Names, Thou Thomas, John, Daniel, Peter, Ann, Elizabeth, Mary, etc.
Exercise thy self unto Godliness. Fancy you see the glorious Apostle standing
in the Clouds of Heaven, and bespeaking you from the mouth of him, who is
resolved, that not every one that says to him, Lord, Lord, but those that do
his Will, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Fancy you hear him cry in
your Ears, Oh mortal men, whom God so loved, that he gave his only begotten
Son, to the end, that all that believe in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life, whom the Son of God is willing to deliver from Sin, and
Slavery, and the bondage of the Devil, for whom he suffered Agonies, Wounds,
Torments, Shame, Reproaches, and an Ignominious Death, to purchase a Heaven,
and an endless Glory for you! every Wound of his calls for this Exercise; every
Tear he shed, is to melt you into a holy willingness to it; every Word he
spoke, is an Exhortation to it; His Love challenges it; His Labors and the
Pains he took for you require it; you cannot own him for your Redeemer without
it; he cannot save you from your sins without it: if his Love be not worth this
Exercise, it is worth nothing. O deluded Sinners! Will you slight this Mercy?
Will you trample on the Blood of Jesus? undervalue his Agonies, or fancy, they
deserve no such Exercise? O let not this Love be your ruin; let not this Mercy
be your Damnation; let not this Kindness be the Fuel, that must feed your
Fire; let not this Condescension be a Witness against you: you know not what
you refuse, when you refuse this Exercise. As you love your selves, as you
tender your eternal welfare, as you would not be counted haters of God,
despisers of his Love, Apostates from all sense of Gratitude; As you look for
favor in the last day, as you hope to see the Face of God in Glory, as you
desire to find Mercy of the Lamb, that takes away the Sins of the World: By all
that is holy and serious, by the Tears of God's Ministers, and what is dearer to
you, your own Interest; and by all the Promises and Threatenings of the Gospel,
I entreat you, Exercise your selves unto Godliness. Could you but look into
this Heaven, and behold the vast Armies of Blessed Souls in this Celestial
Quire, here you would find none, but such as did formerly, when on Earth, apply
themselves to this Spiritual Exercise; This is the place of Recompense: He that
was a stranger to these Exercises on Earth, can expect no Reward in these
Regions of Happiness: Here Godliness appears in it is greatest Beauty, and
Glory. As you expect the White Garment, the Royal Garb, the Saints of this
place do wear; as you hope for Abraham's Bosom, where now the once Godly Lazarus
lies, O delay not, neglect not to Exercise your selves unto Godliness: and what
these Exercises are, is the next thing I am to Treat of.

These Exercises are either Ordinary, or Extraordinary; either daily, or to be
used but now and then; either constant, or such, as may for some time be
intermitted, till necessity, and the exigency of our Spiritual Condition shall
command a Reiteration. I begin with the daily, constant, and ordinary; and they
are these following.

I. Exercise
Praying always. An Exercise enjoined by him, who came to call Sinners to
repentance, Luc. 18. 3. 1 These. 5. 17. Ephesians. 6. 18. By Praying always, I mean,
to bring our selves to that habit of Praying, to that disposition and temper,
and readiness to Pray, as shall put us upon Praying, wherever we are, whatever
company we are in, and whatever we are doing, though not with our Lips, yet in
our Minds and Understandings; An Exercise of that consequence, that this
Praying Frame is one of the chiefest Pillars, and Supporters of a Christian
Life: and this the Religious persons of Egypt in Cassian's Vid. Cassian, lib.
2. Instit, c. 10 and August, Epist. ad Probam.
time did understand so well, that they made exceeding short Prayers, but very
frequent; every quarter of an hour, and oftener sometime, they sent up some Holy
Ejaculations to Heaven: and this Art did Paphnutius teach Thais the Harlot
after her Conversion; and St. Bernard reports the same of St. Malachias. I have
read of others, that while they have been in company of their Neighbors, have
in their Minds, offered no less then One hundred and three Prayers to Allmighty
God; In Imitation possibly of St. Bartholomew the Apostle, of whom it is
reported that he Prayed a hundred times a day.
and accordingly Macarius advised the Man that asked him how he should Pray, to
repeat very frequently such words as these in his Mind, Have Mercy upon me O
Lord, as thou will, and think most convenient. In the Lives of the Fathers
there is mention made of one Moses, that Prayed Fifty times a day; of one
Paulus that Prayed Three hundred times, and of a Virgin that did so Seven
hundred times: others have gone farther, and lifted up their hearts to Heaven a
Thousand times a day, as St. Clara. These Prayers were only short Ejaculations,
used upon all occasions, effects of this Praying Frame; and whatever they
undertook, they began with a Prayer; and while they were busy in the Works of
their Calling, still some Holy Aspirations came from them; and if they were
reading the Bible, at the end of every Verse their Souls breathed after God,
and in few words, begged some Blessing at his hand; to which purpose, St. Ephrem
gives S. Ephrem. c. 1 Hom. de or and Deo.
this excellent Rule, Whether you work, or are going to lie down; whether you
stand still, or are in a Journey; whether you eat, or drink; whether you are
going to sleep, or are awaking, take heed you do not forget to Pray; whether
you are at Church, or at home, or in the field; whether you feed sheep, or
build houses; whether you are at a Feast, or otherwise engaged, still Pray, and
Converse with God.

These short Ejaculatory Prayers, are, by Vid. August. Ep. ad Probam.
St. Austin, justly called Arrows, whereby Gods heart is wounded, and our
hearts are raised into reciprocal love to God. These are the Prayers which
Tertul. de Orat, c. 1. Sine agmine verborum Oration.
Tertullian calls, Prayers without a Train, or retinue of Words, And Isack the
Anchorete, in Cassian collat. 9. c. ult. Sacrificia medullata.
Cassian, pure Offerings, Sacrifices with Marrow in them. These are the Works,
or Attempts of our Spiritual Bow, as Vid. Laurent. justinian. de inter.
conflict. c. 10.
Justinian phrases them, Darts, and Arrows, levelled against the Enemy; Fiery
Desires of the heart, and the Wishes of Importunate Supplications, which are
shot up to Heaven, wound a great way off, fly with great swiftness, keep the
Enemy from coming too near, and sometimes at one stroke enervate his
Temptations, when he approaches; for seeing the presence of God in these
Ejaculations, he is struck with horror, and departs.

And this Rule I earnestly entreat my Reader to think of, and put in practice.
Christian, What difficulty is there in it, before any honest attempt, or
enterprise, to say in thy Mind, Lord establish thou the work of our hands upon
us, yea the work of our hands establish thou it; or if it may not tend to thy
Glory, keep it from prospering, and let it not succeed according to my desires.
If thy design be honest, and lawful, Why should thou be loath to recommend thy
endeavors to the conduct of Providence? try it, and thou will find what comfort
it will yield in the end. When thou hear the Clock strike, let thy Mind
immediately mount up to Heaven, and say, Lord, so teach us to number our days,
that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom: When dressing thy self, Cloth my soul
with salvation, and deck me with white raiments, that the shame of my nakedness
may not appear: When washing thy hands and face, Bathe my soul in the Blood of
Jesus, and wash my heart from all Iniquity: When walking, O Lord, cause me to
walk in the way of thy Testimonies, and let me not wander from thy
Commandments: When in Company, O when will that Joyful Day come, that my soul
shall be gathered to the innumerable Company of Angels, to the general
Assembly, and Church of the firstborn, which are written in Heaven, and to the
Spirits of just Men made perfect. When Writing, Lord, put thy Laws in my heart,
and write them upon my mind. When Reading, O make me to understand the way of
thy Precepts, so shall I talk of thy wondrous Works. When Rising, O let me
awake unto Righteousness, and arise from the dead, that Christ may give me
light. When lying down, O cause me to lie down in the green pastures of thy
Mercy, lead me beside the still waters of thy Comforts, and restore my Soul.
When kindling a Fire, O shed abroad thy love in my heart, and raise such flames
within, as may burn up all my dross, and all my filth. When lighting a Candle,
O give me the spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, and enlighten mine Eyes, that
I may see what the hope of thy calling is, and what the riches of thy Grace are
When Eating, or Drinking, O let it be my Meat, and Drink to do thy Will; feed
me with the Bread which came down from Heaven, and give me to drink of that
Water, whereof whoever drinks, shall never thirst again. When Riding out, O
Thou that ridest upon the wings of the Wind, show thy self, conquer my
Corruptions, and trample all my Sins under thy feet. When taking the Air, Come,
Holy Spirit, blow upon my Garden, that the Spices may flow out; make my mind
calm, serene, and quiet; breathe upon me, and revive me with the light of thy
Countenance. When Visiting a sick Neighbor, O do thou make all his Bed in his
sickness, and give me Grace to speak a word in season to him, and cause all thy
Goodness to pass before him. When beholding Trees, and Plants, and Flowers,
Lord, how wonderful are all thy Works! in Wisdom have thou made them all, the
Earth is full of thy Riches. O make me as a Tree planted by the Rivers of
Water, which may bring forth its fruit in due season. When going to speak to a
Great Man, Overawe me with thy presence, Lord, that I may not comply with any
Evil, but may fear Thee more than Men. When going by Water, O satisfy my Soul
with the Fatness of thy House, and make me to drink of the River of thy
Pleasures. When Buying or Selling, Lord, prevail with me to keep a Conscience
void of offense toward Vid. Misna Beracoth. c. 4. Sect. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. (...)
God, and toward Man. When standing in thy Shop, How amiable are thy
Tabernacles, Lord God of Hosts! O let me ever love the Habitation of thy House,
and the place where thine Honor dwells. When hearing thy Neighbor Curse, or
Swear, Rabbi Nechuniah filius Kanae precatus est in ingressu suo in Synagogam,
itemque in egressu suo precatione^ breve^, etc.
O Lord, lay not this sin to his charge: Father, forgive him, for he knows not
what he does. When hearing any good of thy Friend, or Acquaintance, O let him
grow in Grace, and go on from Virtue to Virtue, and make him fruitful in every
good word, and work. When seeing any one, that is Blind, or Lame, or Dumb, O
Lord, make Rabban Gamaliel ait. Unoquoque die orabit homo octodecim
benedictiones, etc.
these distressed Creatures amends for these defects some other way; make the
Eye of their Faith the quicker, their inward Man stronger, and their Hope more
lively, and visit them more powerfully with thy Salvation. When looking upon a
Dunghill, Si quis insidet asino, descendat, si vero non potest descendere,
avertat faciam suam versus Jerusalem and precetur, etc.
O make me to know my self, and discover to me my false deceitful heart, and
the odiousness, and loathsomness of my sins, that I may hate them with a
perfect hatred. When beholding the Sun, O Thou Sun of Righteousness, rise upon
me with healing under thy wings, and warm my Soul with thy Radiant Beams, that
I may love thee better than Father and Mother, better Qui sedet in navi aut in
curru, aut in ratibxs, diriget cor suum versus Sanctum Sanctorum and precetur,
etc.
than all that is dear and pleasing to me here below. When looking upon a House,
O my God, make me in love with that City, which has Foundations, whose Builder
and Maker is God: O when shall this Earthly House of my Tabernacle be
dissolved, and I received into that Building of God, the House, not made with
hands, eternal in the Heavens! When seeing other Men laugh at any sin, Lord,
let Rivers of Tears run down mine eyes, because Men do not keep thy Law: O give
me tenderness of Soul, that I may be concerned at other Men's sins, as well as
mine own. When beholding any Children, or Infants, O Lord, out of the mouths of
Babes and Sucklings do thou prepare praises unto thy self; let these Children
grow up as the Lilies, and spread their Branches as the Cedars of Libanon. When
going to visit a Friend, Lord, make him thy Friend; and that he may be so,
encourage, and assist him to do whatsoever thou command. When reproved by
another, Lord, let this reproof be as an excellent Oil to me; give me Grace to
take it in good part; let my Soul thrive by it; let it heal my wounds, and make
me thankful for this opportunity. When receiving any injury, or ill language,
Sweet Jesu, give me Grace to follow thy example, and to tread in thy steps, who
being reviled, did not revile again; and when thou were threatened, sufferedst
it, committing thy self to him, that judges righteously. When seeing it Snow,
Purge me with Hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than
Snow. When seeing it Rain, O visit me with the former and latter Rain of thy
favor, and make my heart rich with thy Showers, that I may bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit. When despised for Righteousness sake, O let me esteem the
reproach of Christ greater Riches than all the Treasures of the World. When it
Thundreth, O Lord, the Power of thy Thunder who can understand! Let the World
take notice of the Voice of God, and the Inhabitants of the Earth learn
Righteousness.

I have been the more prolix in particularizing these Ejaculations of the Mind,
and these Aspirations of the Heart, in the various Contingencies, Accidents,
Providence, and Actions of our Lives, because I would help the Ignorant, and
take away all color of excuse, and destroy all pretenses of impossibility of
this Exercise. Use will make it easy: And, Sirs, if ever you would learn to
converse with God, or to have your Conversation in Heaven: If ever you would
get a Foretaste of the Joys to come: If ever you would make Religion your
Business: If ever you would conquer the Lusts of the Flesh: If ever you would
extinguish vain and evil Thoughts: If ever you would arrive to a sound Mind,
and that inward Spiritual Worship of God, without which Christ says, None can
please him: If ever you would learn to conquer Temptations: If ever you would
have your Souls become strong, lusty, and vigorous in the Ways of God; This is
the way, even this praying without ceasing. This is the best Antidote against
Sin, the best Medicine to cure all Spiritual Diseases: It does not hinder you
in the Works of your Calling, but rather furthers and sanctifies them; nor can
it be uneasy to the Mind, except it be to the unwilling Mind; and it keeps out
the Devil better than Vid. Teres. Vit. c. 31. and Athanas. Vit. S. Antonii.
St. Teresa's Holy Water, or St. Anthonies Sign of the Cross.

I know, what will be pleaded here, That this is to make Religion burdensome,
a Yoke indeed, and at this rate you shall never enjoy your selves. But give me
leave to ask you, What kind of Religion would you have? Would you be Religious,
and dissolute? Would you be good, and have Elbow-room in Sin? Would you be
pious, and be kept within no bounds? Cannot you enjoy your selves, without you
may be licentious? Would you be happy, and suffer no restraint to be laid upon
your Sensual Pleasures? If this be a yoke, there have been those before your
time, that have cheerfully drawn in it, and thought themselves most blessed for
having the honor of the Employment. It is a yoke, which the Son of God has
taken upon himself, and all the Apostles, whose Memories you celebrate, and
whose Actions you admire, have imitated their Great Master in. Would you be his
Disciples, and live as you please? Are you proud of being his Followers, and
scorn his Laws? Do you glory in his Salvation, and are you loath to follow his
Example? Would not you deny your selves in your ease for a Crown of Glory?
Would you have all that the World affords, and all that Heaven affords? Would
you live easy here, and easy hereafter too? Would you lie in the lap of
Sensual Delights here, and from thence drop into the Bosom of Everlasting
Mercy? Is it rational to believe, that the Spiritual delights above are
purchased by brutish, and beastly ones on Earth? He that will have his fill of
this World, must not expect to have his fill of the next. He that will welcome
the pleasures of Sin and Lust here, must not think to drink of the Rivers of
Gods pleasure hereafter; He that means to Rejoice hereafter, must mourn here;
He that means to Laugh in the next World, must weep in this; Son remember that
thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil
things, but now he is comforted, but thou art tormented, says Abraham to
Dives, Luc. 16. 25.

II. Exercise.
Every Morning, when we have paid our homage to God, by Prayer and
Thanksgiving, to resolve, and solemnly resolve to tie our selves to certain
Rules of living that day; An Exercise recommended to us, Psalm. 17. 3, 4. Psalm.
76. 11. Psalm. 57. 7, 8. Psalm. 119, 101, 106. To this purpose Pliny says of the
Christians in Trajan's time, That they used to oblige themselves, or bind
themselves by an Oath in the Morning, before they went about their Business,
not to Sin, not to Cheat, not to Lie, not to Steal, not to keep any thing
unjustly from their Neighbors: And this Exercise was observed many hundred
years before that time by David, Psalm. 5. 2. where our Translation renders it,
In the (...)
Morning will I direct my Prayer unto thee, and will look up: but the Original
runs thus, In the Morning I do order, or dispose my self to thee, or toward
thee, and watch, as a Man from a high Tower watches and observes the motion of
the Enemy. Not, but that our Translation reaches David's sense well enough, but
it does not so fully express it, as it might have done. He had, in the
foregoing words, spoken of his Prayer in the Morning; and behold, what he
presently subjoyns to that Duty! When I have done this, I then resolve how to
order my Conversation that day, and how I may please God; and consider, how I
may best watch against those Corruptions which do most easily beset me. The
truth is, Men running abroad abruptly, without any previous consideration of
what they mean to do for their Souls that day, must needs continue strangers to
that Spiritual Life, our Profession obliges us to; for this makes them rush
into Sin, as the Horse rushes into the Battle, having no Bridle to restrain, no
Curb to keep them in order, no Solemn Resolutions upon their Souls to check,
and govern themselves; whereas, if before I venture upon any worldly business,
or work of my Calling, I do solemnly resolve, in the presence of Allmighty God,
This day do I seriously intend thus and thus to behave my self, by the blessing
and assistance of Allmighty God; I resolve, if a Neighbor, or any other person,
should be very Angry, or Insolent with me, to answer him with meekness and
gentleness: If I meet with success in my Business, as soon as I come home, will
I enter into my Chamber, and praise the Great Giver of every good thing: If I
am tempted to go into Company, and have reason to suspect, they will draw me into
sin, I Will refuse to go, though they revile, and abuse me for it never so much:
or if I go into any Company, I Will speak but little, or will endeavor to divert
any vain Discourse to more savory Subjects. If a man speak ill of me, I Will be
sure not to speak ill of him again: If I meet with any ill Language, I Will keep
my mouth as it were with a bridle. Yesterday I committed such an error, against
this fault I Will watch to day, and strive to reform my Inclinations. If my
Servants, or my Children, do things undecent, or unlawful, I will certainly
reprove them with tenderness and compassion. If I meet with objects of Charity,
I Will relieve them according to ability; or if I meet with none, I Will seek out,
and enquire for some to whom I may express my Love, and Christian Compassion:
If I am Asked a Question, which I know not how to Answer readily, without
telling a Lie, I am resolved either to be silent, or to take time to consider
of an Answer, that I may not be surpised into an untruth.

If I resolve thus, before I set about any of my Secular Affairs, I set up a
kind of Remembrance Office in my Soul, and constitute a Monitor in my
Conscience, that will put me in mind of my Obligations, and pull me back, when
my Sensual Appetite would push me on to sin.

To make this Exercise more effectual, select two or three of Christ's Precepts
every Morning, and resolve to live up to them strictly, so long, till you have
conquered your selves, and made the Practice of them familiar to you; and when
you are arrived to a facility, and love of such Duties, set your selves another
task, and make choice of two or three other Lessons, especially of the Greater
and Weightier sort, and observe the same method. By Example, I seriously
resolve this day to observe three Rules; To speak evil of no Man; to Praise God
seven times with David; to shun the occasion of such a sin, suppose Anger, or
Hatred to my Neighbor. Thus I will resolve every morning, before I settle to
any Work, till these Duties become easy and pleasing to me; and when my Soul
begins to delight in them, I Will then appoint me another task in the Morning,
resolve to be cautious of promising, and if I promise, to keep strictly to my
promise; to deceive no Man, though it were never so much for my profit and
interest; or to have good discourses at my Table: And till I were Master of
these Virtues too, I would go on in my Resolutions every Morning; and if I
broke, or acted contrary to them at any time, I would renew them next day with
greater vigor and earnestness. This is it partly, which Solomon means, Eccles.
11. 6. In the morning sow thy seed: and from these pains in the morning, before
we go abroad, we may promise our selves an excellent harvest all the day. To
this end, it will be necessary to consider, what sins we are most prone, and
inclined to, that we may resolve particularly against such, and arm our selves
against them. And to this purpose I have read of one Sylvanus, that he always
began his Work in the morning, with these holy purposes, To Censure no body
that day, but to reflect always on his own sin, whenever he met with a
Temptation to judge his Brother; Not to hate any person for his sin, but to
pity him, and to pray for him: to think of the day of his death, and not to
rejoice at any thing that was evil; whence it came to pass, that he arrived to
that perfection of Grace, that like another Abraham, he became a Father of the
faithful, and able to comfort them, which were in any trouble, by the comfort
wherewith himself was comforted of God, to use St. Paul's expression, 2 Cor. 1.
4.

Where people venture out, without putting on this Armor of God, this Shield
of Faith, and this Breast Plate of Righteousness; no wonder if they expose
themselves to the Fiery Darts of the Devil, and the insolence of that roaring
Lion, which walks about, seeking whom he may devour; such a Soul lies open to
his incursions, and having no hedge to fence it, The Bore out of the Wood does
waste them, and the wild Beast of the Field devours them, as David speaks,
Psalm. 80. 13. Such resolutions in the morning, are a wall about the Soul, and
the Devil cannot easily climb it; the sight of it weakens his attempts, and he
is afraid of approaching it, as much, as once he was of coming near the Cell of
Holy Sophronius. These are the bulwarks, that fright the slaves of Hell, Vid.
Mosch Prat. Spir. c. 159.
and where they see such Citadels built against their fury, their courage fails
them; or where they assail the Fort, it is but with fear and trembling. Such
Resolutions show, that we do not take up Religion out of custom, but upon
serious deliberation, and persuasion, that this is the one thing necessary, and
that the fear of God has our chiefest care, and is the beginning of our
wisdom, a temper, without which, God rejects our service, and hides his face
from our customary Devotions, and gives them no other welcome, but this, Who
has required this at your hands?

Sirs, you purpose in a morning to dispatch such and such of your worldly
affairs that day; Why should you not purpose to do something more than ordinary
for God, or for your Souls every day? How came your Spiritual concerns to
deserve so little care? Why must ye needs be slovenly and careless in this
particular? Is not your Soul more than your Trade, and your Eternal welfare,
more than a livelihood on Earth? Why of all things must your Souls, and your
God be neglected? Laban was more concerned for his God, than for his Sheep and
Oxen; Shall an Idolater mind his Idol, more than you the great God of Heaven,
and Earth? You complain you cannot conquer your corruptions; How should you
conquer, when you do not strive? How should you strive, if you enter into no
Holy purposes, to arm your selves against the sins of the day? Are Corruptions
blown away with a breath? or Lusts that are deeply rooted, expelled with Sighs
and Wishes? Did you ever know Cedars fall with the touch of a hand? Or did ever
Children with a switch, strike a sturdy Oak out of its place? Will your sins
leave you when you do not think of them? Or will these foes ever yield, while
you make no war against them? Do you think the Devil values your Souls as
little as your selves; or do you fancy that strong man will leave his
Habitation, except you come against him with Swords and Axes? Can thou draw
Leviathan with a Hook, or his Tongue with a Cord, which thou let down?
Can thou put a hook into his Nose, or bore his Jaw through with a Thorn? Will thou play with him as with a Bird? or will thou bind him for thy Maidens?

With what faces can you confess your sins at night, when your Consciences tell
you, and cannot but fly into your faces, and convince you, that you did do
nothing to prevent them; that you left your selves naked, and exposed to the
assault of temptations, and would take nothing to preserve you from the
infection? What do you confess your sins for, but to be better? and if to be
better, how is it possible, you should be so, without you defend and guard your
Souls, by such Holy purposes the next day? Do you make confession of Sin a
business of custom only? Do you make no more than a formality of it? How shall
God forgive you? How shall he pardon you for your transgressions, while you do
not study and contrive next day, how you shall be rid of those sins, which the
night before, you professed your sorrow for? Do you think God will be put off
with shadows, and the Almighty gulled with counterfeit Devotion? Have you lived
so long under the Gospel, and have learned Christ no better? Have you conversed
with Ministers so long, and are no better Scholars? The Devil himself cannot
but smile, to see how ridiculously you go to work, to be good, and to subdue
your sins, to see you content your selves with the bare confession, and take no
care to tear them from your hearts; these Holy purposes in the morning, would
shake the evil tree, and by degrees so weaken it, that it would fall of it
self; If therefore you would not make a jest of Religion; if you would not play
with your Confessions; if you would not turn your Duties into ridicule; for
Gods sake, enter into protestations against your sins every morning, lest you
increase your guilt, and like the Ethiopian in the Fable, who thought he
should carry his burden better, Vid. Ruffin. vit. patr. l. 3. P. 38.
if he made it greater, you add sin unto sin.

III Exercise.
Every day to spend half an hour, or some such time, in thinking of some good
thing: an Exercise insisted on in this Chapter, v. 15. and Psalm. 1. 2. Phil. 4.
8. I mention half an hour, because it is not easily to be conceived, how any
meditation can be effectual, or do good upon the Soul, if men do not think it
worth bestowing so much time at least upon it. Meditation is that noble Power,
whereby we are distinguished from Brutes, and irrational Animals; and our being
able to think, and with our thoughts to dwell upon any Divine Object, shows,
that we participate of the nature of Angels. And there is such great variety of
Heavenly and Spiritual Objects, that every day we may pitch upon a new Theme,
every day smell to a new Flower, and with the day, change the subject of our
contemplation.

On Sunday, or the Lords day rather, we may let our hearts dwell on the
everlasting Kingdom of Heaven, and the vast Glory of the world to come; who
they are, that shall enjoy it, on what terms that Crown may be purchased; The
transcendency of that felicity, above all that the world can call Rich, and
Beautiful, and Glorious; How pleasant that life will be, how free from Hunger
and Thirst, and Cold and Nakedness, from all possibility of sin, and danger,
from death and sorrow, and sadness, from anxiety, corruption, perturbation;
from changes, and sickness, and weakness, and infirmities; from fear, and
storms, and tempests; from the assaults of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil;
How full of Love, and Delight, and Ravishment it will be; How sweetly the weary
Soul will rest in the bosom of everlasting Mercy; How Glorious a sight the new
Jerusalem will be; How reviving a spectacle, to behold the Guard-Royal of
Angels, shining in Robes of Light: The noble Army of Martyrs, the goodly
fellowship of Patriarchs, and Prophets, and what is more, Christ, as Man,
glorified with his Fathers Glory, shining like the Sun in his meridian Luster,
and calling to his Triumphant Church, Behold, thou art fair my love, thou have
ravished my heart! How fair is thy Love, my Sister, my Spouse! How much better
is thy love than wine? and the smell of thy ointment, than all spices? Who is
she that looks forth as the Morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and
terrible as an Army with Banners? Thy Lips, Oh my spouse, drop as the
Honeycomb, Honey and Milk are under thy Tongue; and the smell of thy Tongue is
like the smell of Lebanon.

On Monday we may reflect on the last judgment, how the Lord Jesus, for all
the seeming delay, shall be ere long revealed from Heaven, with his mighty
Angels, in flaming Fire, to take vengeance on them, that know not God, and that
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; How the King of Heaven will then
sit upon the throne of his Glory, and before him will be gathered all Nations,
and how he will separate them one from another, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep
from the Goats; how he will set the Sheep on his right hand, and the Goats on the
left, and say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world; for I was a
hungered, etc. but to them on his left hand, Depart from me ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels; How different men's
notions and apprehensions of God's Mercy and Justice will be then, from what
they are now; What amazement, the careless besotted world will be in then; how
those men that spend their days in jollity, and brutish pleasures now, will
then be forced into despair, and be ready to tear themselves, and call to Rocks
and Mountains, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of Him, that sits on
the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: How all things then will look with
another face; How the humble self-denying Christian, that is now the hissing,
and offscouring of the world, will then be exalted above all Heavens, and
seated in the same Throne with the Son of God; and how all those mighty
nothings, that scorn and laugh now at the Religious Soul, will tremble in that
day, like an Aspen leaf, and wish that they had considered the things which
belonged to their everlasting Peace, while the Candle of the Lord shined over
their heads, and God caressed them to their happiness.

On Tuesday, we may take God's various Mercies and Providence, into serious
consideration, What preservations, What deliverances we have met withal; What
care God has taken of us from time to time, how he has been with us, when we
have gone through the Water, and when we have passed through the Fire, has
commanded the Flames not to kindle upon us; How ready he has been to assist us
in the fiery Furnace; How miraculously he has appeared in our rescue, when the
Figtree has not blossomed, when there has been no Fruit in the Vine, and when
the labor of the Olive has failed, and when all Creature Comforts have
failed, how often he has been our strength, and our portion, our refuge, and
our hiding place; How kind he has been, in causing us to be born in a
Christian Country, and in a Religion free from those gross errors, and
superstitions, that other nominal Christians do sink into; What a mercy his
Word, his Gospel, and all his Laws, and Revelations are; What assistance, what
Comfort, what checks of Conscience, what motions of Gods Spirit we have found,
and how God has done more for us, than we have been able, to think, or to
express.

On Wednesday we may take a view of our Death, and the hour of our departure
out of this World; How certain Death is, how frail our Lives, how soon this
frame may be dissolved; how easy a thing dispatches us, how the approaches of
Death have made the stoutest sinner tremble, how dreadful and terrible it will
be to those, who have set their Heart upon the Riches and Pleasures of this
World, how wise a thing it is to prepare for it, before the evil days come, how
joyful it will be, if it find us prepared for the stroke, and prepared for that
life, we must enter into, when we quit this present, how welcome Death is to a
Holy Soul, how cheerfully a Pious man can say, Lord, now let thou thy
servant depart in peace, how upon our death there depends Eternity, how foolish
it is to slight Grace, and Mercy, till death forces us to embrace and wish for
it, how Death will mar our Beauty, deface our Glory, and lay all our grandeur
in the dust, how Death is the birthday of a sincere Believer, brings him into a
new world, a world of joys, and endless satisfactions, and is to him an
entrance into Paradise, a door into the Garden of Eden, where no good shall be
absent, and no evil present.

On Thursday we may Piously survey the Torments of Hell, how just they are, how
great they are, how terrible they are; how the unhappy Prisoners there roar for
a drop of Water to cool their burning Tongues; how they lie tormented in those
Flames, wishing in vain for some Glorified Spirit to relieve them; for some
comfort from the Mansions of Glory to drop down upon them: what howling, what
gnashing of Teeth there is in that outward Darkness; how Men there gnaw their
Tongues for pain, and Blaspheme the God of Heaven, because of their Sores and
Anguish; how endless those Calamities are; how glad those wretched Captives
would be, if there might be hope of their deliverance after some Millions of
Ages: how many, that have made a Jest of these Torments, have felt them in good
earnest; and those that have disputed the Justice of God, in inflicting them,
have, to their cost, found that there is no playing with a Consuming Fire: how
Men, in that Tophet, wish, when it is too late, that they had bethought
themselves, and submitted themselves betimes to Christ's Government, before
those evil days had come upon them; how easy every Precept of the Gospel will
then seem to them; how all Pretenses of Difficulty, and Impossibility will
vanish, when they shall lie upon the Wrack, and find by sad Experience, that it
was easier to deny themselves in their Sinful Pleasures, and easier to Watch
over their Hearts, then to endure such Agonies.

On Friday, we may cast our eyes upon the Passion and Death of Christ, how he
was Mocked, Derided, Crowned with Thorns, and Crucified, to purchase an Eternal
Redemption for us: What a wonderful Love it was to suffer all this for Enemies,
that they might be reconciled to God, and become his Friends. What a dreadful
spectacle it was, to see Infinite Majesty Annihilated, Infinite Beauty Defaced,
Infinite Happiness Tormented, and Eternity Dying, and droping into the Grave:
What Patience, what Meekness, what Submission, what Gentleness he expressed
under all those Injuries, to show us an Example, and to oblige us to follow his
steps. How heavy the burden of our Sins was, that could make the Son of God
cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? What a mighty Argument that
Love is, to Love him Fervently; How Inexcusable that Man makes himself that
believes this Love, and yet will not be persuaded by it to obey and conform
himself to his Will; How mysterious this Love is, that the Sinner should
Transgress, and the Righteous be Punished for him; That the Innocent should
suffer for the Nocent, the Judge for the Malefactor, the Master for the
Servant, God for Man. What Ingratitude it must be, to trample on the Blood of
Christ, or to put him to open shame again, or to make light of Salvation, when
God has Purchased it at so dear a rate; how by his Death we Live, by his
Stripes we are healed, by his Wounds we are cured, by his Reproaches we are
advanced to Glory, and by his being made a Curse for us, we escape the Curse of
the Law; How, after so much Charity, we have all the reason in the world to
prize him, and to count all things dross and dung in comparison of him; to
delight in him, to love him, to prefer him before the World, and to follow the
Lamb, whethersoever he goes.

On Saturday we may lay our sins before us, when, and where, and how often, and
how long, and how wilfully we have rebelled against our best and greatest
friend; What Light we have resisted, What motions of God's Spirit we have
slighted, What checks of Conscience, and convictions we have smothered, What
exhortations, and admonitions we have baffled; What we have done against the
First Table; What against the Second, What against God, and what against our
Neighbor; How we have misspent our time, and trifled away our precious hours;
How vile how wretched, how odious sin makes us in the sight of God; how we are
cheated by it, how it flatters us into destruction; How, like a cunning
Merchant, it sells us trash for Gold, pebles for Pearls, and drops of Gall for
Wine and Milk: How bitter it is in its farewell; How it hardens the heart,
sears the Conscience, beguiles us of our great Reward, represents things to us
under false colors; How it alienates the Mind from God, how averse it makes us
from the ways of God, What ingratitude it is, how destructive it is; what hurt
it has done to Sodom, to Jerusalem, to Cain, to Judas, to Dives, and to
innumerable Millions of Men, that would take no warning; How burdensome it
will be to the Soul at last, how contrary it is to the Divine Nature, how
loathsome to Angels, how odious to a holy Soul; what Tears it has cost David,
Peter, Paul, Mary Magdalene, the Publican, and others; what howling, what
terror, what anguish, what shrieks it will cause in the Burning Lake; how
easily these terrors may be prevented now by a serious repentance, and how
much better it is to abandon, and undervalue the pleasures, and profits of the
World now, than smart for these transitory delights to all Eternity.

Such Exercises as these keep the Soul awake, and thus roused, it cannot be
surpised with a Lethargy. The foolish Virgins, Matthew. 25. neglected these
Meditations, and that made them slumber and sleep: Such daily Meditations keep
the Soul in a readiness to obey her Great Master's Call, in case he should
summon her to Judgment: These feed and strengthen the Soul as much, as Meat,
and Drink does the Body; and thus supported, it grows strong, and vigorous, and
emulates the felicity of Angels.

Christians, Is your Reason a Talent, or no? If it be not, then it is no gift
of God; if no gift of God, why do you thank him, why do you praise him for it?
If it be, why should not you give God his own again with Usury? If it Matthew.
25. 27.
be a Talent, must not you give an account of it in the last day? Were you
capable of thinking of such things as these, and will not your Lord ask you,
whether you have made that use of your Reason which he intended it for? Shall
you give an account of your Riches, and Honor, and Time, and Opportunities,
and Liberty, and give no account of your Reason? Will it serve turn, do you
think, to say, That you have employed it about the World? Is the World a fit
Object to engross so Noble a Faculty? Shall the meanest thing, which is no more
but Dross and Dung in the sight of God, employ that Power which is capable of
fixing upon the Noblest Being? Would you have the Almighty so unwise, or weak,
or improvident, as not to demand of you an account of his Goods, what you have
done with them, whether you have traded with them, whether you have been active
in your Master's Business? Your Reason was given you to trade with it for
Heaven; it was given you to help you to steer your Vessel steddily through the
boisterous Sea of this World, till you come to the promised Canaan, and arrive
at the shore of Heaven; and will you make no other use of it, but think, how
your lusts may be gratified, how your carnal ease may be advanced, and how your
outward Man may live in mirth, and jollity?

You complain of Ignorance; How should you increase in Knowledge, if you will
not meditate? How should your Understanding be enlightened, if you will not make
use of this Candle? How can you but sit in darkness, if you refuse this Torch
of Heaven? By this God would teach you, by this he would instruct you, by this
he would communicate himself to you; but if you will not, whose fault is it?
whom can you blame? how inexcusable do you make your selves? This would
clarify your Souls, drive away the Mists and Clouds, that dwell upon your
Reason: but if you love Darkness better than Light, no marvel, if your Deeds be
evil. It is with your Souls in this case, as it is with your Bodies, shut your
Eyes, and you cannot see; so here, keep out such Meditations as these, and you
will not perceive the things of God, they will be foolishness unto you, and you
cannot perceive them, for they are spiritually discerned.

Never complain of want of fervency for the future, while you are loath to let
in such Meditations into your Minds. Fervency does not come from nothing, it
must have some root, some foundation, some fuel, some action to give it life
and being; and Meditation is this root, and this foundation: This is it, must
warm you; This is it, must fill your Souls with hallowed Flames: Keep out This,
and you keep out the Sun; shut the Window against these Beams, and you will
freeze, and shake with cold: It Is This, must make the ways of God easy to you;
it is This, must make them pleasant, sweet, and amiable: This gives them Charms,
This strows the way with Pearls, and shining Stones, which make the Soul
enamored with it, and thus it flies to Heaven.

IV. Exercise.
Every day to study Humility; an Exercise peremptorily commanded, Matthew. 18. 3,
4. Luke 14. 7, 8. Jam. 4. 6. Learn of me, says the Son of God, for I am meek,
and lowly in heart, Matthew. 11. 29. Learn of me! What? Not to raise the Dead,
not to cleanse the Lepers, not to cast out Devils, not to give sight to the
Blind, not to make the Deaf to hear, not to cure the Maimed, not to walk on the
Water, not to feed five thousand Men with a few Loaves; no, but learn of me
Humility, in this exercise your selves daily. And indeed greater Humility has
no Man shown, for being in the Form of God, and thinking it no robbery to be
equal with God, he humbled himself, and took upon him the form of a Servant,
and became obedient to the death of the Cross, says the Apostle, Phil. 2. 6,
7. This Exercise consists not only in forcing the Body into a submissive
posture, but working the Mind into very low, and humble thoughts of our selves,
and of our worth; and he is a truly humble Man, that does despise himself, and
is contented to be counted not only humble, but vile, and wretched too; that
refers all the honor done to himself, unto God, and rejoices in being
despised, (...) and is proud of nothing so much, as being ill spoken of, and
despising praise and glory; that compares his sins with the good works of
others, and upon that account looks upon himself, as the chief of sinners, and
worse than others; that affects no applause in what he does for Massech. Aboth.
c. 2. Sect. 8.
God, or for his Neighbor; is contented his defects and infirmities should be
R. Bechai. in Chobat. Lebaboth, c. 7.
known, bears Injuries patiently, is glad of mean employments to show his love
to God, does not care for being known, puts all things under his feet, and
looks (...)
upon himself as nothing; is circumspect, and modest, delights not in
superfluous talk, laughs but seldom, fixes his eyes to the ground, with the
Publican, is ashamed to lift them up to Heaven, smites upon his breast, and
cries from a mighty sense of his own vileness, Lord, be merciful to me a
Sinner: That mistrusts himself, Signa humilitatis quinque. Primum, Cum quis in
spiritum suum dominium exercet, quando quis ira excandescit in illum. Secundum,
Cum quis patienter onus suum fert, quando infortunium ipsi in opibus accidit.
Tertium, Cum quis spernit eum, qui ipsum laudat ob factum bonum, and confitetur
peccatum, quod refertur eum commisisse. Quartum, Cum quis ad honorem vel magras
divitias promovetur, and in praecedenti humilitate and mansuetudine perseverat.
Quintum, Cum quis seipsum corripit.
sets no high value on what he does, contemns the pomp and grandeur of the
World, admires nothing but God, and is well pleased with being made as the
filth of the World, and as the offscouring of all things: That does think
himself unworthy of the least crum he eats, of the least drop of drink, he
drinks; and though the circumstances he is under, and the place, office,
calling, and condition, he is in, bids him use discretion, in showing and
expressing his humility, yet in his mind throws himself at the feet, not only
of Equals and Superiors, but of Inferiors too, and could be contented to wash
the Feet of the meanest Servant of his Lord and Master Christ Jesus; That can
hear a Friendly Check with Meekness, can ask forgiveness, in case he does
unawares offend, before others, and is contented, men should misconstrue his
innocent Words, and Actions, and Gestures, and Behavior, so God does but know
the pious, and holy designs, he has in them; That is contented, that those
whom he loves, and in whom he trusted, and who have been kind to him, should
forsake him, abandon him, and persecute him, and can bear with the ingratitude
of Men, to whom he has done many good turns, and can find more comfort and
satisfaction in the light of Gods Countenance, then other Men do in the
Favors, and Presents of the greatest Monarchs; That can modestly decline great
Employments, and thinks himself unfit for weighty Provinces; That can be
contented to see his Neighbor honored, and himself slighted, and has courage
to refuse such Honors, as are not convenient for his place, and station; That
submits to the Will of God in all things, and both hopes, and quietly waits for
the Salvation of the Lord.

And this is that Humility, the Gospel presses, and whereof the Captain of our
Salvation has given us so illustrious an Example. This is that Virtue which
Cassian justly calls the Cornerstone of all Virtues, Vid. Cassian. Collat. 15.
c. 7.
the Foundation of Religion, the Ladder to intimate Converses with the
Almighty, and a gift beyond that of Miracles; and this is that Employment which
justly deserves our Care, and Labor, and exercise.

When Austin the Monk had summoned the British Bishops and Clergy to Conform
to the Church of Rome, and to Vid. Bed. lib. 2. c. 2.
yield obedience and submission to that See, the Brittans consulted with a
certain holy Man, to know whether he thought it expedient for them to submit to
Austin, or no. The good old man told them, That if they found him to be a man
of God, and a true follower of Jesus, they should not dispute their Submission,
and the only Character to know that, said he, was to see and take notice
whether he were a meek and humble Man: If he were, it was a certain sign that
he bore the Yoke of Christ, but if stout and proud, whatever his pretenses
might be, he could not be of God. And accordingly when they found the insolent
Monk carry it with a high hand, and scarce vouchsafe to Salute them; they
rejected his proud dictates, though it was with the loss of their lives.

And though I like not that piece of Humility, whereby men confess themselves
Guilty of the same sins, that others are, when they are not, on purpose to win
others to Repentance, or to preserve them from despair, as he in Vid. Ruffin.
vit; Pat. lib. 3. c. 12.
Ruffinus, who when his Neighbor had committed Fornication, and thereupon was
ready to cast away all hope, pretended to have committed the same Crime, that
he might thereby oblige him to apply himself together with him to the
severities of Repentance; yet as no man is to do evil, that good may come from
it, and as the Devil is not to be gratified, that God may be pleased, so where
a Christian, with Vid. Martyrol. Romans 28. December. and Menolog. Graecorum 24.
December.
Eugenia, when moving in the Sphere of Honor, and Dignity, can stoop to the
humblest, and lowest Offices to advance Gods Glory, and with King Vid. Vincent.
spec. Histor. lib. 15.
Abenner, think so meanly of himself, that he does not think himself worthy to
name the Name of God, and with the Emperor Theodosius, converse with the
meanest Men, that have the Image of God upon them; and with the noble Olympias
in Palladius, can lead a life without the least affectation of Vainglory,
carry a mind about him, free from Arrogance in the midst of a thousand
acclamations, and not be ashamed of the meanest habit, honor all Men, succor
the Weak, attend the Sick, help the Lame, protect the Aged, relieve the
Distressed, be serviceable and Charitable to the Poorest and meanest, shed
tears abundantly from the consideration of his own vileness, Martyrol. Rom 14.
Martii. Menolog. Graec. 25 Julii. Prater quidam interrogavit Senem, quid est
Humilitas? Et respondit ei Senex, ut been facias his qui tibi mal faciunt.
Pelag. in Vit. Pa. c. 63.
and can, with Euphrasia, stoop to him that hates him, and pray for the person
that has injured him, and move his fellow Christians to be kind to him, and
with the Prophet David takes it kindly when he is reproved, and instead of
being angry, thanks the faithful Monitor. Such a one may promise himself the
special presence of the High and Lofty one, who Inhabits Eternity, for with him
will I dwell, says the Lord, that is of a contrite and humble Spirit. Isay,
17. 15.

And though this be looked upon by the Frantic World, as baseness of Spirit,
Cowardice, and a low-bred mind, yet such is the nature of Religion, that Gods
thoughts are not, as our thoughts, nor are his ways, as our ways, and what is
highly esteemed among Men, is Abomination in the sight of God, Luc. 16. 15. And
whoever will be a Friend of God must be an Enemy to the World, Jam. 4. 4. and
be so far from conforming to the World, that he must become a Fool in the eyes
of the World, 1 Cor. 3. 18.

I have read of a Pious man (whether it be Parable or History, it matters not)
who having a Demoniack brought to him, to expel the Devil out of him, was after
great importunity persuaded to command the evil Spirit to depart from God's
Creature. The Fiend hearing the unwelcome voice, cried out, I go, but pray tell
me Father, who they are, that be the Sheep, and who the Goats, the Gospel
speaks of. The humble man replied, Who the Sheep are, God knows, but sure I am,
that I am one of the Goats. And when he had said so, the Fiend replied, this
Humility is the Charm that drives me out. No doubt this is a powerful Weapon to
keep off and resist the great Enemy, and he that exercises himself in this
Humility, imitates the best Pattern, even God himself, whose Humility is such,
that Men and Angels stand amazed at it; and it could not have entered into our
thoughts, that God could stoop so low, or condescend, as we find he does, if
himself had not been pleased to reveal this self-humiliation. He has revealed
it, and we have seen the Almighty enter into a Virgins womb to be born of her,
whom he had made before; We have seen how the Son of God has loved his
Enemies, even with that dearness and tenderness, that he has laid down his
life for them; We have seen how the omnipotent Creator Courts his Creatures,
his Rebellious Subjects, to Repentance; We have seen how notwithstanding the
frequent repulses they give him, notwithstanding their frequent refusals of his
stupendous offers, he renews his Entreaties, repeats his Expostulations, and
when the Prodigal Wretch is yet a far off, and approaching his Fathers house
with fear and trembling, runs and has compassion, and falls upon his neck, and
kisses him.

This Humility makes us like unto the Angels of God, for as bright and as
glorious Ministers as they are, as powerful Princes as they are, for the Kings
of the Earth are subject to their power, yet behold they fly down from above,
and Minister to those, that shall be Heirs of Salvation, even to the meanest
Saint, to the poorest Believer, to a Paul in Prison, to a Daniel in the Lions
Den. Hac Iter est Superis ad magni Tecta Tonantis. This is the way that leads
to Glory: so true is it, what the Religious Syncletica said of old, That as a
Ship cannot be held together without Nails, so a Christian, and Christ Jesus
cannot hold together without Humility. The Tree of Life, said the holy
Hyperichius, grows in Heaven, and Humility is the Grace, that climbs and
touches the Top of it.

This leads to the highest joys, to the richest content, to the greatest
satisfaction, and he is happier that sees his own sins, than he that sees an
Angel, for an Ass can see a Spirit, but none but a favorite Numb. 22, 23.
of heaven beholds his sins with humility, or Self-abhorrency. Antiquity speaks
of the Devil appearing to one in the shape of an Angel of Light, and saying to
the Devout Hermit, I am the Angel Gabriel, and am sent to thee: Oh, said the
Devout man, Take heed thou do not mistake thy Message, or the Man, to whom
thou art sent; I am sure, thou art not sent to me, for I am not worthy of the
sight, or company of Angels; and hereupon the fraudulent Spirit disappeared. In
the same manner he appeared to another, saying, I am Christ, come down from the
Regions of Glory to visit thee: The humble Man answered, I do not desire to see
Christ in this life; all my hope is, I shall see him in the next.

Humility eludes, and mocks the Stratagems of the Prince of Darkness, and how
God rewards, and crowns it, the Blessed Virgin has told us, Luc. 1. 51, 52. He
has showed strength with his Arm, he has scattered the proud in the
imagination of their heart; He has put down the Mighty from their seats, and
has exalted the humble and meek.

Indeed, we see how Meadows, and Valleys are laden with Fruit, and Corn, and
Enameled with Flowers, while the higher Mountains remain barren, and
unfruitful. O Christians, did you but know what Treasures lie hid in this
Exercise, you would be so far from counting it troublesome, that you would be
ambitious of it. In this Exercise consists the Mystery of Religion; the
richest Influences of Heaven come down upon the Soul, that looks upon her self,
as nothing. To her the Allmighty reveals himself, and here he is ready to
build Tabernacles; the sweetest communications of Grace are vouchsafed to him,
that is acquainted with this lowliness; into such a heart the Joys of the Holy
Ghost flow with a Springtide; and he that would understand the secrets of the
Lord, this is the School where he may learn them; and if he become a great
proficient here, he may promise himself a more then ordinary intercourse
between God and his Soul. The humble Shepherds are honored with the first news
of Christ's Nativity, while the lofty Pharisees at Jerusalem are kept ignorant
of these Glad Tidings; and that which moved God to send Nathan the Prophet to
David, to tell him of his singular love and compassion to him, was the voice of
that Great-humble Man, I will yet be more vile then thus, and will be base in
mine own eyes, 2 Samuel 6. 22.

I Will conclude this Exercise with a passage out of a Learned Jew. The
advantages R. Bechai Haddajan (...) ca. 7. fol. 64. Edit. Mant. 1589.
of Humility, says he, consist in Six Particulars, Three whereof do respect
this Present, and three the next Life. First, It makes a Man contented in all
Conditions; for he that is proud and arrogant, the whole (...)
World, and all that is in it, is not able to satisfy his lofty, and rising
thoughts, much less that, which God has appointed him for his Portion; but he
that is humble, lives contentedly, and is satisfied with what Providence has
allotted him. Secondly, The Humble Man bears adversity patiently, whereas the
Proud Man's fear is great, and his patience inconsiderable, when troubles come
upon him, Thirdly, The Humble Man is grateful and acceptable to Men, and Men
love him and esteem him: And to this purpose I must tell you a Story of a King,
that being asked, How he came to be so great? Answered, That he never saw any
Man, whom he did not esteem wiser, then himself; and those that he looked upon
to be wiser then himself, them he ever thought to fear God, more then himself:
and if he met with any, that was manifestly more foolish than himself, he
presently reflected, that this Man would have a less account to give unto God
in the last day, then himself: If he met with any that were older then himself,
he humbly thought, that their Merits must needs be greater then his own; and if
those, he met with, were younger then himself, he considered, that their sins
must needs be fewer, then his own; if he met with any of his equals, their
heart, thought he, in all likelihood, is better then mine; if they were richer
then himself, he considered, that they did more good in the World then himself;
if poorer, that then by reason of their poverty they must needs have more
humble and contrite hearts, and therefore be better, then himself. Fourthly,
the humble man arrives to true and solid wisdom before other men, not only
because he is desirous to learn, and loves to sit at the feet of his Teachers,
but God also helps him to attain unto more, then ordinary wisdom; whereas the
proud, and haughty, being loath to learn that wisdom, which crosses flesh and
blood, remains ignorant of the most solid wisdom. Fifthly. The humble Man runs
more cheerfully in the ways of Gods Testimonies, boggles at nothing that God
commands, and expresses alacrity, and readiness, at the voice of the greatest,
and weightiest, as well as at the least, and easiest Precepts. Sixthly, The
humble Man's devotion is the only acceptable devotion to God, his Sins are
pardoned, his Iniquities are easily forgiven, For an humble and a contrite
heart, O God, thou will not despise.

V. Exercise
Every day to bridle our Tongues, and to set a VVatch over the doors of our
Lips, and to take care that our Speech be always with Grace seasoned with Salt,
that we may know how to Answer every Man; An Exercise enjoined, Col. 4. 6.
Ephesians. 4. 25, 29. Ephesians. 5. 3, 4. Matthew. 12. 34, 35, 36. It was a good
Observation of one, who Traveled with some Men, that talked loosly and
inconsiderately, and whom St. Anthony the Hermit took for excellent Company;
Yes (says he) they are good Men, but the House they live in wants a Door with
a Lock and Key, for whoever pleases may go in, and take away what they possess:
His meaning was, That they took no care of their Words, that the Door of their
Lips was always open, and that they talked any thing that came into their
Minds. The Tongue, says St. James, is a little Member, but contains a world of
Iniquity, James 4. 5, 6. So that the greatness of the danger, enforces the
necessity of this Exercise.

This Exercise consists partly in watching against the sins, the Tongue is
subject to, partly in using the Tongue to such discourses, as are most proper
for a man, that pretends to be a follower of Jesus. The sins of the Tongue are
without number, yet the most remarkable are these following, 1. Blasphemy. 2.
Murmuring. 3. Defending our sins. 4. Perjury. 5. Lying. 6. Detraction. 7.
Accusing others falsely. 8. Much speaking. 9. Idle words. 10. Profane jesting,
or abusing of Scripture. 11. Indiscreet expressions. 12. Railing. 13.
Quarreling. 14. Laughing, and deriding those that are serious. 15. Evil
Counsel. 16. Sowing of Discord and Dissension among Neighbors. 17. Cursing,
and customary Swearing. 18. Flattery. 19. Double tongued dealings. 20. False
Reports. 21. Boasting, and speaking in ones own Praise. 22. Revelation of a
Secret. In vain does he pretend to exercise himself unto Godliness, that
watches not against these sins, or seeing himself in danger of running into
them, steps not back, or climbs up with his thoughts to Heaven, as he that sees
a Wild Beast coming toward him, climbs up into a Tree, to secure himself.

There is hardly any Precept either more spoken of, or recommended more, either
by the holy Ghost in Scripture, or by holy, wise, and sober men in their Books,
then this watching over our tongues and words and speeches, for indeed By thy
Words thou shall be Justified, and by thy Words thou shall be Condemned, says
Christ, Matthew. 12. 37. Before the power of Godliness was turned into a Form;
the Christians that lived then studied this point with that care and assiduity,
and became such Proficients in it, that men might Converse with them, and keep
them company a week together, and not hear one idle word drop from them, but
what was to the use of edifying and Ministered Grace unto the hearers; and till
men come to believe that their tongues are not their own, but Gods, who made
them and designed them for the Noblest uses, and must therefore be employed as
he shall think fit to direct, they are yet far from the Kingdom of God, and
Aliens from that Commonwealth of Saints, who are to be Heirs of Salvation; and
he knows not what Self-denial means, that does not deny himself in speaking
things which the Holy Ghost has forbid, and thought improper, undecent, or
extravagant, and he that cannot speak, but must offend in one or other of the
aforementioned particulars, had better hold his tongue and spend his time in
silence. It was therefore excellent advice which St. Ambrose Ambr. de Offic.
lib. 1 c. 2. 3.
gave to his people, Let Us learn to hold our tongues, that we may be able to
speak, why should thou run thy self into danger of Condemnation, when by
silence thou may be infinitely safer? I have seen thousands run into sin by
speaking, but few by holding their peace; most men love to talk, because they
know not how to be quiet. He is the wise man that knows when to speak, and when
to be silent; if of every idle word Men shall give an account in the day of
Judgment, how much more of filthy Communications? Thy mind is thy Lands and
Houses, thy heart is thy Gold, thy speech thy Silver. Therefore make a Hedge
about thy Lands, and cast up Trenches against thy Thoughts, Arm thy House with
diligent care, that thy unreasonable passions, like Thieves, do not break in
and Spoil it, that no disorderly motion make an irruption, and lay it waste,
that those that go by may not pluck off thy Grapes. Watch over thy inward man,
do not neglect him as contemptible; tie up thy Speech, cut off its luxuriant
Branches; let it not play the wanton, lest it drag thee into sin, restrain it,
keep it within its Banks, Water soon gathers Mud; Bind up thy Senses, let them
not be loose or Gadding, make a Door to thy Lips, to shut it when there is
occasion, and to open it, when there is necessity. Bring thy tongue under the
Yoke, and let it be subject to thy Reason. Keep the Bridle in thine own hands,
weigh thy words in a Balance, that thy sense may be ponderous, thy speech
solid, and thy words move within their bounds.

But watching against the sins of the Tongue is but one half of this Exercise,
speaking of God and heavenly and spiritual things is another, as we may see
Col. 3. 16. an Exercise commanded already in the days of Moses, Deuteronomy. 6. 5, 6,
7. and duly observed by men, who took care of their Salvation, long before the
Gospel was proclaimed in the World, which makes the Prophet take notice, Then
they who feared the Lord spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and
heard it, and a Book of Remembrance was written before him, for them that
feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name, and they shall be mine, says the
Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my Jewels, and I will spare them as a
man spares his own Son that serves him. Mal. 3. 16, 17.

Indeed Spiritual, and Heavenly things are the best things, and therefore
deserve our speaking of them. If meaner things, 1 Cor. 12. 31.
or Trifles are thought worth discoursing of, why should not the greatest, most
excellent, (a) Ubi sedent duo, qui Legem tractant, cum illis est shekinah
Rabini in Pirke Aboth.
and noblest, be worth talking of? especially when we converse with persons
that profess the same Faith with us. There is hardly any man, that makes a show
of Religion, or frequents the public Ordinances of God, but will grant Non
sunt in Conventu tres. nisi Deuteronomy sit quartus, sive multi sive pauct sint, ipse
cum eis est. Mahom. Alcor. Surat. 58.
and confess, That the concerns of God, and of our Souls, do infinitely exceed
all Earthly Objects in Worth, Value, and Dignity; but then, not to speak of
them is an omission, which contradicts that belief, and makes that faith all
shadow, and imagery. He that believes that these are the bestthings, and yet
cares not for discoursing of them to his Neighbor, gives himself the Cur Deus
vocatur (...) quia ubicunq: congregatisunt Justi, invenitur cun istis: Midrash.
Tillim. act Psalm.
lie, and silently confesses, that whatever his pretense may be, they are the
meanest, lowest, and most inconsiderable things, for he does not think them
worth opening his lips about them. And as these are the best, so they are the
most necessary things, Luc. 10. 42. Can there be any thing more needful, then
God's Favor? any thing more necessary, than the love of God? any thing of
greater necessity, than the true way to inherit eternal life? Without it we
deny our being, and dependence upon God, and disclaim our Relation to him, as
his Creatures, as his Servants, as his Children, put our selves into the number
of his Enemies, make our selves Objects of his Anger, renounce our Allegiance
to him, and deprive our selves of all those Comforts, which arise from a sense
of his Paternal Protection and Providence; and if they be the most necessary
things, certainly they deserve, certainly they challenge our frequent
discoursing of them, for we therefore talk of our Worldly Affairs, because we
look upon them as necessary, and by making this our Rule, we confess the
absolute necessity of speaking of things, that are infinitely more necessary.

We can be happy without Riches, happy without Honor, and Applause from men,
happy without a Palace, happy without a Vineyard, happy without a full Barn,
but we cannot be happy without Grace, without Godliness, or without a sense of
the Divine Goodness. So then, Spiritual things are most necessary, more
necessary than Meat, and Drink, and Clothing, or Provision, and because more
necessary than these, it must unavoidably follow, that it is more necessary to
talk together of the things that belong to our Peace, than of what we shall
eat, or of what we shall drink, or of wherewithal we shall be clothed, and so
much Christ intimates in that saying, Math. 6. 33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of
God, and its Righteousness.

And as these Heavenly Objects are the most necessary things, so they are
matters of the greatest consequence; an everlasting Estate depends upon them;
Where a man embraces them, as his greatest Treasure, an Eternity of Joy attends
him, where he slights, or despises them, an Eternity of Torments follows him at
his heels, and shall not things of that consequence merit our Conferences about
them? The man that fears his House may be on Fire, talks of nothing so much as
his fears, and the damage he shall suffer by the Conflagration. The man that
hopes to inherit such an Estate, or such a curious Seat, is wonderfully pleased
with Discourses of the Situation, of the largeness, fairness, fruitfulness, and
pleasantness of the place, and shall he that has either reason to fear, that
his Portion shall ere long be howling and gnashing of Teeth, in an eternal
Prison, or has reasonable hopes that an everlasting Kingdom of Joy, and Bliss,
and Glory, shall fall to his share, before a few days or years come to an end,
shall, or can he sit still under these hopes, or fears, and not express his
sense of it to his Neighbor when he meets him?

What are our Tongues given us for, but for Discourses and Conferences of this
Nature? If the righteous man is the only wise man, as Solomon assures us, and
prosecutes the true end of his Creation, and consequently is a Pattern, or
Original for others to write Copies by, then from the employment, he puts his
tongue to, we may conclude, what it is created for, and of this employment, the
inspired King gives us an account, Psalm. 37. 30. For the mouth of the
Righteous, says he, speaks Wisdom, and his Tongue talks of Judgment. To be
able to discourse of secular Affairs, and Businesses of our Callings, and
Professions in the World, is indeed one end, why that Member was added to the
rest, but it is one of the lower and subordinate ends: The chief and principal
end, is this we speak of, for whatever things God makes any Creature capable
of, the noblest Acts of that Creature are the chief end for which it was
vouchsafed a Being, and from hence the consequence is very easy, that
discoursing of Spiritual things must needs be the chief end, for which our
Tongues were given us, for these are the noblest Acts our Tongues are capable
of, such discourses being the Trumpets as it were, whereby we Praise and
Magnify our Maker, and show forth the Glory of our great Redeemer, and Proclaim
his Goodness to the Children of Men: We know that God made all things for his
Glory, indeed without it he could not have acted like himself, or like an
Infinite Spirit of Infinite Wisdom, and Goodness; and then certainly our
Tongues are chiefly designed for such Conferences, and he that neglects this
Exercise, frustrates Gods designs, and Reverses as much as in him lies, the
very end of his Creation, For ye are a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a
holy Nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the Praises of him,
who has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9.

How can we want matter of Discourse, when we hear so many Sermons, when we
have liberty to peruse the Holy Scriptures, and Read such variety of good
Books, which are so many Comments upon the Bible? Not a Precept in the Gospel,
that is given to Regulate our Thoughts, or Words, or Actions, or Passions; not
a Command, not a Direction left us by our Master, but it is a fit Subject for
such Holy Conferences. Our Experience will administer matter in these cases;
What experience we have had of Gods goodness; What experience of the fulfilling
of such a Promise; What experience in Prayer; What experience in Mortification;
What we have found in such a Duty; What effect our earnest striving, and
wrestling with Allmighty God, has had; What influence such a Fast, or
Abstistence has had upon us; What content we have found under such severities;
What Assistances of Gods Spirit we have found in our fighting against
Temptations; What comfort in such Afflictions; What has kept us from sinking;
How God has supported us in such a Calamity, and has been our refuge, and a
present help in the time of Trouble; when the Earth has been moved, and when
the Hills have been ready to be cast into the midst of the Sea.

Have not we Defects and Infirmities enough to Discourse of? Do we find no
Remora's, no Impediments, that let us in our course to Heaven? Do not we fall
short of that Christian Perfection, the Holy Ghost urges? And is not the zeal,
and fervency for Gods glory we find in our selves very inconsiderable? Are we
not very apt to sink into Hypocrisy, and to be backward to the greater and
weightier matters of the Law? Do not we embrace Excuses suggested by the Devil,
whereby we leave the most excellent Duties undone? Do not we find
Imperfections, and Infirmities in our holy performances? Do we find no
coldness, no deadness, no indisposedness in Gods Service? if we do, how can we
want matter of Discourse?

How many good thoughts come into our Minds, when we wake first in the Morning,
when we lie down at Night, when we are walking, when we are sitting down, when
we light upon ill Company, when we meet with good Society, when we meet with
Signal Providence, and Deliverances, when we receive unexpected Blessings from
Heaven, when Men wrong us, or do us an Injury? What edifying expressions and
discourses may we build upon these thoughts, and contemplations, when we visit
one another?

How many excellent Examples of holy Men and Women may we pitch upon in our
Discourses? Can there be more edifying Discourse, then to relate and represent
to one another the Holy Actions of Saints, either departed, or living yet? how
humble St. Paul was, how courageous St. Peter, how fervent David, how meek
Moses, how patient Job? How such a one scorned to be called the Son of Pharaohs
Daughter, and fixed his eyes upon the great Recompense of Reward? another took
pleasure in being reviled: another thanked God in the midst of Torments,
another Prayed for those that Stoned him, another chose Poverty and Contempt,
and the loss of all things, that he might win Christ. Excellent matter of holy
Discourse, and such as in all probability St. James did aim, and point at,
James 5. 10. Take, my Brethren, the Prophets, who have spoken in the Name of
the Lord, for an Example of suffering, affliction, and of patience.

And if this will not do, there are so many Motives, and encouraging Arguments
to Goodness, both we and others do make use of, that we may as soon want Light
at Noon, as matter of Pious and Religious Conference, When we converse with our
Fellow Christians: What moves us to be meek? What prevails with us to be
patient? What makes us contented in all conditions? What composes our spirits
in Fiery Trials? What puts us upon Self-denial? What Incentives do we make
choice of to the Love of God? How came we by that serious Frame of Spirit we
are in? How came we to conquer such a Lust? What did we to vanquish such a
Corruption? How did we compass that Facility, and Willingness, to conform to
God, which seems to be in us? How came Christ's Yoke to be easy to us, and his
Burden light? How came we to be rid of such a Sin? How came we to Extricate
our selves from such Snares, and Deceits of the Devil? The various ways and
methods, whereby we do arrive to such perfections as these, are so many Doors
of Utterance, and will serve to make us open our mouths boldly; and he that
does so, does, without all controversy, exercise himself unto Godliness: And
to illustrate this exercise by some examples, it will not be impertinent to set
down here the Discourse of the Twelve Hermits in Paschasius, that Paschas. c.
44.
meeting once a Week, gave one another an Account of their Spiritual Progress,
and Thriving in Grace, and one of their Conferences was this;

The First said, Every day I watch against evil Thoughts, and Lusts, as I do
against Serpents and Scorpions; and as soon as I find them rising in my heart, I
threaten them, and am heartily angry with them, and chide them for their
insolence and sauciness, and ask them, How they dare be so bold, as to profane
a Temple of the Holy Ghost?

The Second said, I look upon my self every day as a Stranger, and Pilgrim,
that must suffer many inconveniences, troubles and injuries, till I come to my
Journeys end; and I ever look upon the Morrow, as the day, wherein I shall be
delivered from the burden of the Flesh, and from all possibility of sinning,
and so bear up, under all the Crosses, that befall me.

The Third said, Every day very early in the Morning I get up, and go to my
God, and throwing my self down upon my Face, adore him, and intercede with him
for the whole World; and this done, I go and deny my Body that ease and
satisfaction, which flesh and blood does crave, on purpose to Crucify the
World to my self, and my self unto the World.

The Fourth said, Every day I take a Turn, and Walk upon the Mount of Olives,
and there behold my Dear Redeemer Bleeding, and do so Reflect on his Passion,
and the Agonies he endured for my Sin, till the Spectacle melts me into Tears,
and forces me into very strong Resolutions to imitate him, whom my Soul does
love.

The Fifth said, Every day with the Eyes of my Understanding, I behold the
Angels of God (as Jacob once did in a Dream) Ascending, and Descending for the
Salvation of Men's Souls; and this Love, and Care, and Tenderness so works upon
me, that I do both wish, that all man kind may be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the Truth, and do give more diligence to make my Calling and
Election sure.

The Sixth said, Every day, I make it my bsiuness to Meditate on that saying of
Christ, Come to me all that labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you,
take my Yoke upon you, and I fancy I hear this Voice be hind me, O Christians,
if you mean to be my Brethren, suffer with me, that ye may Reign with me; Die
with me, that ye may live with me; Conquer with me, that ye may sit with me in
my Throne, even as I overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne.

The seventh said, Every day I sit in Council with three grave Senators, Faith,
Hope, and Charity, and the effect of this Consultation is, my Faith becomes
more firm, my Hope more lively, my Charity more spreading, and more fervent,
and I dare not willingly offend any man, but think my self oblidged to suffer
long, and to be kind, not to behave my self unseemly, not to seek my own, not
to be easily provoked, and to think no evil.

The Eighth said, Every day I do expect the Devil, and look for his Assaults,
and Stratagems, and when I see him coming in my Mind, I run to God, and hide my
self under the shadow of his Wings, and beg hard, that his fiery Darts may not
hurt me.

The Ninth said, Every day with my thoughts I ascend into Heaven, and there
listen to the Halelujahs, and harmonious Voices, of the Blessed Angels, and
refresh my mind, and all that is within me, with those melodious Songs, and
when I do so, I die to the World, trample upon all these Sublunary objects, and
despise those things which sensual men admire, as dirt and Dung.

The Tenth said, Every day, I do set God before me, and look upon him as
present, and standing on my Right hand, and I strive to have this thought
continually in mind, whence it comes to pass, that I speak, and do nothing but
with great consideration and deliberation.

The Eleventh said, Every day I call the Graces and Gifts of Gods Spirit about
me, and when I am going out, I cry where are you all, come about me my faithful
Servants, and these are the Retinue, I go attended withal; in this State, and
Pomp, I set forth, with this Guard about me I walk, and no Devil dares approach
to hurt me.

The Twelfth said, Where ve I go, I see my Sins go before me, and whether I
look on my Right or Left hand, they still appear to me in very dreadful shapes
and that makes me every day take a view of Hell, and there I behold with
amazement the many Millions of poor tormented Creatures, that howl and shriek,
and lament, that they have neglected so great a Salvation, and this doleful cry
makes me watch against every weight, and every sin, which does so easily beset
me.

And now, Brethren, If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of
love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my
joy; and let not this Exercise seem grievous to you. Plead not, that it is out
of fashion; if it be so, do you make it modish. You know, who it is that
beseeches you by the Mercies of God, not to conform your selves to the World:
If it be out of fashion to be Rem. 12. 2.
saved, will you therefore resolve to be damned? Bear up against the stream; Be
not ashamed of Christ, and of his Gospel: You dare not plead this Excuse in the
last day, why should you allege it now? Here is no Rhetoric required, no
Eloquence, no Florid Learning; O that you were but more sensible of your
spiritual wants! O that your hearts were but more inflamed with the love of
God! O that you did but observe God's dealings with your Souls more, and would
take more notice of God's Providence, and the Operations of his Hands! You
would not then want language to express your selves in to your Children,
Servants, Friends, Neighbors and Acquaintance, but the sense within would force
you to say with David, Come, and I will tell you what the Lord has done for my
Soul, Psalm. 66. 19. Do not think Heaven so cheap a thing as your careless
Neighbors do; either Christ and Heaven, and our future Glory, are worth
talking of, or nothing can be worth it. Dare to prefer Heaven before the World;
and in your Words, as well as Actions, manifest the sincerity of your
resolution: You cannot pretend impossibility, you have a Tongue, you have
Reason, you hear the Ministers of the Gospel, you see God's Providence, you
know Heaven and Hell are before you, you read many excellent Lessons, what
should hinder you from speaking of these weighty things? It Is but bending and
moving your Tongues to such Subjects, and they will yield as easily, as they do
when you bend them to frivolous, vain, and idle talk; to gossipping, or
complementing, or prating of other Men's Matters. You will rest the sweeter at
night, when you have been talking of good things in the daytime: you will go
with greater comfort to Bed, your sleep and repose will be more pleasing, and
satisfactory, when you have exercised your Tongues in matters of this nature:
When you talk of such heavenly and spiritual things, you are not exposed to so
many Temptations, as otherwise you are; when in company with others, you may
sin in talking of your Neighbors, you may sin in speaking of the Actions of
Kings and Princes, you may sin in telling things and passages for true, which
have no other foundation, but an uncertain report, you may sin in foolish
jestings, and jeering one another; but in discoursing of heavenly things, you
are safe, you are in God's way, God walks with you, bears you company, and the
Enemy of your Souls will despair of prevailing with you, you shun the occasions
of evil, and you prepare your selves to quench the fiery darts of the Devil:
hereby you may do good to others, comfort your Neighbors, support your
Fellow Christians, and in such Conferences a word may drop from you, as may
keep those, you discourse with, from despair, and which may be an encouragement
to them, as long as they live.

It was bravely done of that Young Man Vid. Hicron. Vit. Pauli, c. 3.
under Decius his Persecution, who being by force tied upon a Down-Bed in a
Room made for Pride and Luxury, and solicited to Uncleanness by a Harlot, sent
to him by the Governor on purpose to provoke him to sin, bit his Tongue to
pieces, that the smart and pain might drown all sense of Voluptuousness, and so
spit it in the Harlots face: But here we require no such severity, but all that
is expected from you in this Exercise, is to keep your Tongues from evil, and
your Lips from speaking guile; to speak of the Glorious Honor of God's
Majesty, and of his Wondrous Works; to utter abundantly the memory of his great
Goodness, and to declare his Righteousness. The very Heathen have seen the
necessity of this Exercise, Vid. Stob. Sermon. 36. de Garrulitate.
therefore they shall be your Judges in the last day; and I know not how to
express their sense of this duty better, than by setting down the words of the
sober Epictetus: Prescribe thy self a Rule, says he, which thou may observe,
when thou art either by thy self, or in company Vid. Epictet. Enchirid. c. 40,
41, 42. (...), etc.
with others; Either be silent, or let the things thou speak of, be
necessary and profitable. When thou speak, talk not of light, and trivial
things, as Wrestling, and Horses, or Fencers, or Swords, or Meat, or Drink,
neither spend thy time in praising, or dispraising Men; but let thy discourse
be of something noble, decent, grave and serious: but if this cannot be, hold
thy peace. Thus did the Primitive Saints; and when they visited one another,
their care was, to put one another in mind of the words, and actions of their
Great Redeemer, what he did, and what he promised, and what he suffered; how
kind he was to this Blind Man, how favorable to that Leper; how loving to the
Lame, how compassionate to the Blind, how gracious to his Enemies, how free and
communicative to his Friends; what pity he expressed to sinful Men, how meek he
was before his Accusers, how patient before his Tormentors; how he ran to kiss
the Penitent, how he wept over the obstinate Jews, and how he longed for Men's
Salvation. These were their discourses, and they would hardly give themselves
liberty to talk of their Worldly Affairs, except necessity forced them; for
they believed, that by their Charter, they were to have their Conversation in
Heaven, and this they thought imported talking much of their Heavenly Country,
and of the Joys, and Hallelujahs of that Kingdom. It was the custom of some
Heathen Priests of old, in the service of Vid. Porphyr. de Antro. Nymph.
their Gods, to wash, or dip their Tongues in Honey; an excellent Emblem to
teach us, how our Tongues must be purified, and sanctified, and seasoned with
that Word, which is sweeter than the Honey, and the Honeycomb, Psalm. 19. 10.
And indeed then our words are sweet, and there is Milk and Honey under our
Tongues, when we exhort, and admonish one another daily, taking heed lest we be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 13.

VI Exercise.
Every day to watch against those sins, which in the eye of the World are
small, and inconsiderable, an Exercise commanded Matthew. 5. 19. 1 Cor. 5. 6.
Jud. Verse. 23. Indeed, Christ's whole Sermon upon the Mount is chiefly bent
against those sins, which purblind Mortals are apt to miscall little, and
trivial. The Pharisees were such ill Divines, that they not only believed, but
taught the people too, That in the Ten Commandments nothing was forbid, but
only the gross errors of Men's Lives, and Conversations: by example, in the
sixth Commandment they thought, God required nothing, but abstaining from
downright Murder, and accordingly they made nothing of envy, or malice, or
grudges, or secret heart-burnings; nothing of words spoke in anger, nothing of
contumelious speeches, nothing of giving Men ill names, or ill language,
nothing of expressions, whereby they derogated from their Neighbors credit,
and wounded his reputation; which wilful, and notorious mistakes, Christ
rectifies in that Sermon, and bids them look for God's eternal wrath for these
offenses, as well, as for the greater enormities. So in the seventh
Commandment, they flattered themselves, that they did rarely well obey the
great Lawgiver, when they kept themselves from being polluted with their
Neighbors Wives, and from the Act of Adultery; but the Son of God shows them
their monstrous errors, and proves to them, that not only that detestable Act
is prohibited in that Law, but all those Acts, and Occasions, that lead to it,
as wanton glances, lascivious thoughts, obscene expressions, running to places,
where temptations grow, bad intentions, lustful touches, evil desires, and
these he assures them lead to Hell, as well, as the grosser villainy. In the
same manner, they restrained the third Commandment to perjury only in a public
cause, and so thought light of customary Oaths; these were but matters of
laughter, and the people by their permission, and approbation, in their common
speeches, and communications, swore by Heaven, and by Earth, by their Heads,
and by Jerusalem, and he that did so, did not lose the reputation of a sober
Man: The Lord Jesus protests against this abuse too, and lets them see, that
He, who forbid Perjury, did forbid these common, and customary Oaths too, and
was resolved to revenge, and punish the Offenders for so doing, and did not so
much as permit strong Asseverations in common discourse, and ordinary matters,
but allowed only bare Affirmations, and Negations.

Loving those that loved them, and doing good to them, that did good to them,
they thought, was all that God required in that Royal Law, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. Hating their Enemies, or doing them all the mischief
they could, they looked upon only, as a venial extravagance of passion. So they
did but perform the task, and duty of Prayer, they did not think, any sin could
be committed in the manner of the performance, and therefore wandering thoughts,
and affectation of vain glory, or laying the stress upon the length of Prayer,
they thought were no sins at all; or if sins, not worth regarding, or
confessing. And by the same Rule they walked in their Alms, and Fasting,
thinking the letter of the Law required no more, than the outward observance of
the duty: as for a suitable frame of heart, they did not look upon the want of
it, as damnable, or worth their care to get it supplied from Heaven. Thus these
Men lessened and extenuated their Offenses, and having once brought them into
the number of little Sins, they excluded them from their care, and would not
suffer their Consciences to be troubled for them; and though they had very
severe Exercises, and disciplined their Bodies to a miracle, yet they made
watching against little Sins no part of their exercise; and this neglect draws
that dreadful protestation from the Son of God, Matthew. 5. 20. I say unto you,
That except your Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of God.

What these little Sins are, and how they may be known, is a Question that any
Man of common sense may soon satisfy, and resolve himself in, that will either
compare his actions with the precepts of the Gospel, or attend, and observe his
own neglects, or the practices of such of his Neighbors, that in the Eye of
the World pass for sober Men, and yet are no thorough-paced Christians. How few
are there, that make conscience of curbing their passions, of being concerned
for the sins of others, of giving Alms according to their ability, of speaking
truth, when they are in danger of losing something by the truth, of obeying God
more than Men, of being more careful to please the Creator than the Creature,
of attention in a Sermon, of fixing their thoughts and affections upon God in
Prayer, of ruminating upon what they hear, of doing good to them that hate
them? etc. Neglects of such Duties pass for Peccadillo's, and cunning frauds,
dissimulations, officious lies, false warrantings, secret over-reachings,
mincings of Oaths, telling of unchaste passages, churlish behavior, unkindness
to enemies, revenge of Injuries, hatred of a Brother, adulation, flattery,
laughing at good counsel, slighting of Fraternal correption, wanton Songs,
scoffings at Ministers, rash censuring and judging, and contempt of others, or
pride in Clothes, Patching and Painting, talking extravagantly over a Cup of
Wine, sleeping at Church, and carelessness in devotion, are Sins, which few
people take notice of, looking upon them as offenses of the smaller size, and
as things easily pardoned, as they think, by Him, who delights not in the death
of a Sinner.

But, Sirs, as little, as these and other Sins may seem in your eyes, we have a
Commission from the Allmighty, to tell you, that you cannot be Christians,
except you exercise your watchfulness against all those sins, which the World
is pleased to call by other names, then the Holy One of Israel is pleased to
put upon them. A Christian has Vowed to strive against all sin, whether great
or small. This Oath of God is upon you, and in your Baptism, so much you
promised, and so much you have since confirmed, by approving that your solemn
Initiation, or Introduction into the visible Church of Christ. Will ye be false
to your promise? Will ye break your Vow? Will ye Abjure, what then you gave
your consent to? Deceive not your selves, these sins are not little ones, you
only call them so, that you may more freely commit them, and that your hearts
may not smite you for them; You mistrust, they may provoke the Allmighty to
anger, and that you may not be discomposed with the thoughts of Gods
Indignation, you look upon them as trifles. Such sins formerly were no little
sins, when men were better Christians, then now they are; it is only the great
Debauchery, and Viciousness of the age, we live in, that makes them so; But
shall this Age prescribe Rules to God to govern himself by? Shall the
Wickedness of the Times oblige God to condescend to Men's Impiety, and in
Complaisance to their Folly, cause him to make no more of their sins, then they
are pleased to do? Shall Men, wilfully blind, tell the Allmighty, what color
their sins are of, or how he must interpret them, that searches the heart, and
the reins?

Can any sin be little that is committed against an Infinite Majesty? Can any
Affront be small that is levelled against him, whose Brightness dazles the eyes
of Angels? If it were not against a Law of God, it could not be sin; but is not
the same Authority to be seen in the least Precept,, as well as the greatest?
Does one God give the greater, and an other the lesser Injunctions? And if the
same God be slighted in the greater and lesser Laws, will not the same God find
a time to lash the boldness of the offender?

How is it possible you can love God, while you do not exercise your selves in
rooting out of these lesser sins? Can you love God and fight against him? Can
you be enamoured with him, and affront his Holiness? Can you tell us a way, how
to reconcile Gods purity with your uncleanness? You cannot but be sensible that
these (you call) lesser sins offend him, and is this your love to him, to
disobey him? Is this your affection to him, to do what you know will cross his
Will and Pleasure? Is this your respect to him, to disoblige him in things he
intends for your eternal Welfare? Let the sin be never so small, you do allow
your selves in, while you willingly indulge your selves in it, it looses the
name of an Infirmity, and passes for Enmity in the sight of Heaven, and it is
impossible that Love to God, and willful sins should ever consist together. Do
you believe, that Servant loves you, to whom you have spoken often to do some
small thing about you, and yet with all your Entreaties, and Caresses you
cannot oblige him to gratify you in that particular? Would you have God
believe you, that you love him, when you are loath to do whatsoever he commands
you? If love to God does not make you ready unto every good work, it is not
love but Hypocrisy; love will make things easy, and did you love God with
sincerity, you would not leave a Circumstance undone, if you knew that he had
enjoined it.

Why should you cheat your selves? Why should you delude your selves in a thing
so palpable? Whatever you may imagine, these lesser sins are but Baits to lead
you on to greater. The Persians at this day are great takers of Opium, Vid.
Tavern. Pers. Trav. l. 5. c. 17.
and first they take no more then the head of a Pin, increasing their Dose by
degrees, till they come to take the quantity of half a Nutmeg; when they are
come to that pitch, they dare not give over, for fear of endangering their
lives: a true Emblem of those sins, the World calls little and inconsiderable.
The lesser Doses, like small Wedges widen the Cleft, and are preparatives for
greater, and invite men to take a larger proportion, till at last it becomes
dangerous to cashier and part with them, and thus by little and little men sink
into the Gulf.

As much as Hazael abhorred the Villainies Elisha spoke of, the little sins he 2
Kings, 8. 13.
then lived in, brought him at last to that monstrous Iniquity he at first
trembled at. Judas looked upon Covetousness, as an inconsiderable sin, and made
no great matter of it, but it brought him at last to Treason. Strange that you
should not see the Danger! Nay you cannot promise your selves Gods preventing,
or restraining Grace to preserve you from falling into greater sins, while you
continue in the lesser; For by these lesser sins, you drive away Gods Spirit,
bring a Consumption on your Graces, and thrust the Almighty away from you. If
he do keep you from greater enormities, it is his superabundant Mercy, and
Goodness, but you cannot reckon upon it, you cannot be sure of it, you do enough
to make him take away his Spirit, the Prop that must support you, and if that
be gone, the House must fall, and great must be its ruin. If God depart from
you, you are left to the malice of the Devil, and he will be sure so to manage
those lesser sins in you, that they shall advance into hideous Offenses, and so
water the Tares, that are scattered up and down in your Souls, that the whole
Field in time shall be overrun with them, and the water that comes but to the
Ancles now, shall ere long come up to the Knees, to the Neck, and to the Head,
and drown you.

Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and evil speaking and Malice,
How little do men make of these sins? yet they grieve the holy Spirit of God,
by the Apostles Verdict, Ephesians. 4. 30 31. And do you thus reward this Spirit of
Love? Has he deserved no better dealings at your hands? It this the
recompense, you give him for all the kind motions, and whispers he has
followed you withal?

Does not reason tell you, that many little sins, amount to a great one?
suppose, you are not guilty of Adultery, yet if the many wanton thoughts, and
unclean desires of your minds, were laid in the Balance with it, Would they
not weigh as heavy, as the greater sin? Suppose, you are not guilty of Murder,
yet will not the many secret grudges, and clandestine contrivances against your
Neighbor, tantamount to that Crime? Is it not all one, whether one Goliath, or
a Thousand Philistines overcome you? Thou art no Thief, no Robber; but, Will
not thy many covetous wishes make up a Robbery? Were all thy idle words laid
together, How much would they want of Blasphemy? Thou art no Drunkard; but were
thy frequent abuses of Gods Creatures sum'd up, thou would go near to put
down Nabal for Drunkenness. The less any sins are, the more numerous are they
commonly; and small Birds, by their number, may do as much mischief, as one
Kite, or Eagle; and who knows not, that Egypt suffered more by the most
contemptible Creatures, then by the Greater Artillery of Heaven?

Tell me of any one sin, that Christ has not died for; If the very least sin
did help toward his death, and Crucifixion, Why should not Mortification of
little sins be one great part of your Exercise? Can you remember, that these
had a hand in that Murder, and can you hug these Enemies in your Bosoms? Can
you remember, that these, as well as the greater Crimes of Mankind, sharpened
the Nails, and Spear, and Thorns, that wounded him, and with a Kiss, more
Treacherous, then that of Judas, salute these Foes? Did Christ find, even your
unsavory Speeches, your looser Gestures, your obscene Expressions, your Carnal
Thoughts heavy? Did even these help to crush him under the burden of Gods
Anger, and do you make sport with them?

While you indulge your selves in these lesser sins, you run into greater
danger, then if you committed more fearful Iniquities; for there may be some
hopes, that a gross sin may startle a Man, and fright him into Repentance; but
while he makes light of little sins, he never repents of them, goes on in them,
and gathers a great many sticks together, that make up his burning pile. Little
sins become great ones, when they are justified as harmless; The defense
aggravates the error, and remorseless continuance in them, makes their dye all
Scarlet. What makes so many Hypocrites in the Christian Church, but this
insensibleness of lesser sins? These hinder men from going on from virtue to
virtue, and like a Moth eat away the beauty and splendor of their virtues.
Indeed, while you go on in these little sins, you cannot rationally suppose,
that your Names are written among the Candidates of Heaven; for Conversion
makes the Soul cautious, even of the appearance of sin: and he is yet a
stranger to the work of Grace, that has not learned to avoid the occasions of
evil; and he certainly begins at the wrong end, that begins to subdue his
obduracy, and hardness in sin, by suppressing the outward act; for it is the
evil thought, that causes delight, delight consent, consent action, action
habit, habit custom, custom perseverance, and perseverance hardness; therefore
he, that means to crush the corruption, must begin at the little sin, the evil
thought, or else he does but beat the air, and like the Boy in the story, that
thought to pour out the Sea into a Nut-shell, attempt impossibilities.

Christians, The Day will come, when every thing shall be called by its proper
name, and O how will you be surpised, when the sins, you looked upon as
inconsiderable, and unworthy of your deep repentance, and circumspection, shall
be represented in Magnifying Glasses, and appear as they are indeed, dreadful
and terrible! Woe to them that call evil good, and good evil, says God, Esaias 5.
20. a threatening pronounced not only against such as give Virtue the name of
Vice, and Vice the name of Virtue, but such also, as make of great sins, little
ones, and of little ones, none at all. This was the trade of the Pharisees, and
what serious Man can read the Judgments denounced against them by the Son of
God, and not be afraid of being guilty of their Error? Depart, I pray you,
from the Tents of these wicked Men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be
consumed in all their sins, cried Moses to the Children of Israel, in the case
of Korah, Numb. 16. 26. A Watchword I may give unto every one of you; Do you
know, what terror, what anguish, what plagues our Great Master has threatened
the Pharisees for their disregarding of little sins, and will you participate
of their ruin?

Come, Christians, believe the Word of God, before your deceitful hearts: That
will tell you, what is offensive to God, and show you, that even the least sin,
deserves tears more than laughter, and sorrow more than mirth, and
divertisement: That will tell you, that even these Children of Edom must be
dashed against the stones, if you would have peace within; and that as dead
Flies cause the Ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a stinking savor, so
does a little Folly him that is in reputation for Wisdom, and Honor, Eccles.
10. 1. That will tell you, that a little Leaven, leavens the whole lump, and
the only way not to be under a temptation of sitting down in the scorners
Chair, is, not to walk in the counsel of the ungodly. And to this purpose
Barlaam in Damascene advises his Convert Josaphat; Before all things, in Vid.
Vincent. Specul. Histor, l. 15.
this exercise thy self, even in the sedulous destruction of all thy evil
thoughts, that nobler conceptions may enter into thy mind, and thy Soul may
become a habitation of the Holy Ghost: for from thoughts, we come to actions;
and whatever work we undertake, it has its rise in our minds; and as small as
its beginning seems to be, by degrees it grows bigger, and by silent steps
swells to a vast magnitude: And for this Diabolus Serpens est lubricus, cujus
si capiti, id est, primae suggestioni non resistitur, totus in intima cordis,
dum non sentitur, illabitur, Isidor. lib. de Sum. Bono, c. 1.
cause, let no evil custom exercise dominion over thee, but while the shrub of
sin is young, and tender, pull up the little root, lest being grown strong, and
lusty, it be past thy skill to eradicate it: for from hence it is, that greater
sins get access to our hearts, because we apply no early remedy to the lesser
errors, such, as are roving thoughts, immodest speeches, and evil conferences;
and as it is in wounded Bodies, if the slighter hurts, and bruises be
neglected, the wound festers, and gathers corruption, and many times brings on
death, and excessive torments, so he that is careless of little sins, calls for
greater to attend him.

Christians, There is not one Soul in Heaven now, but what watched against such
little sins, when they sojourned here; and if they did not mind them for some
time, yet they were forced to repent of them, and to subdue, and leave them,
before ever they saw the face of God in Glory. If this Heaven be worth your
care, if this Glory be worth your pains, if this Everlasting Rest be worth your
endeavors, O say not of any sin, Genesis 19. 20.
as Lot of Zoar, Is it not a little one, and my Soul shall live? You may as
well say, I will break my Neck a little, and I will cut my Throat a little, and
I will burn my self in Hell a little, as harbor the smallest sin. O Tremble at
any thing that looks like it; Beware of these Foxes, Can. 2. 15.
these little Foxes that spoil the Vines; Trust not these Vermin, but destroy
them utterly; This is the way to keep your Garments white, and to fit your
selves for the Wedding of the Lamb, and for those Mansions, at which no unclear
thing must enter.

Learn to die to the World; for it is your fondness to that, which blinds you,
dulls you, darkens your Understanding, and perverts your Affections, raises
clouds and mists before your eyes, that you cannot see your duty, or your sins,
and eclipses the light of your minds, that you can see nothing, but grosser
offenses; if you would have that Sun shine out clearly, you must not suffer
this Moon to interpose between your sight, and it: This Moon is your love to
the World, which will put other constructions, other interpretations on your
sins, than your naked Reason would do. Set the Goodness of God before you,
Reflect much on his Favors, Ruminate upon his Mercies; The Divine Goodness is
of a melting, constraining nature, and the more lively you represent it to your
minds, the more it will compel you to part even with the least transgression.
Fancy you hear God pleading with you, Sinner, What Iniquity have thou found in
me? Thou owe thy Life and Being to me, and all the Blessings thou have, are
mine: Can thou be so unkind, so inhumane, so ungrateful, as not to crucify
so small a sin for my sake? If I should withdraw my presence from thee, take
away all, I have given thee, would not thou complain, and mourn? But what
mean these Provocations? Why do thou compel me to cast thee off? Look back,
and see whom thou do offend by these, thou call little sins. It is thy
greatest Benefactor, and is not he worth pleasing, that has greater things in
store to bestow upon thee, if the favors he has already showred down upon
thee, can make thee entirely his? Think you hear such a Voice behind you.
Compare your losses with your gains. Your little sins are commonly your gainful
sins: they are sins, wherein your carnal ease, and the satisfaction of your
sensual appetite is concerned: but grant, you get that sensual satisfaction you
wish for, by these sins, will it countervail the loss of God's Grace, the loss
of the light of his Countenance, the loss of spiritual comforts, the loss of
inward joy, the loss of Communion with your Maker? all which you do certainly
lose by your affection to these sins. Where is your Christian Perfection, if
you watch not against the least sin? How do you put on the whole Armor of God,
if you arm not your selves against these common Soldiers of the Devils Army?
It is not the Officers, the Captains of his Hellish Host, I mean the greater
sins alone, that endanger you; These Gibeonites, that seem inconsiderable, that
come with Clouts upon their feet, and look, as if they would do no great harm,
these lesser sins, are as big with mischief, as the other, for their design is
the same, viz. to engage you in a League with Hell, in a Covenant with Death,
and to lay you open to the fiercest assaults of the Devil. In a word, if you
would be rid of the least sin, learn to live by Rule, think by Rule, and speak
by Rule, and work by Rule, even by the Rule of the Word of the Living God; And
as many as walk according to this Rule, peace be on them, and on the whole
Israel of God.

VII Exercise.
Every day to keep a strict Guard over our Eyes; an Exercise recommended to us,
Job 31. 1. Psalm 119. 37. Matthew. 5. 28, 29. Matthew. 18. 9. By the Eye here, I do
not mean the Eye of Contemplation, whereby Men see, what is above them; nor the
Eye of Reason, whereby they see, what is within them; but the Eye of the Body,
which discovers to them the things, that are without them; and what necessity
there is for guarding the Eye, the unhappy examples of persons, who have been
lost for want of it, do sufficiently show. When our Grandmother Eve suffered
Genesis 3. 6.
her Eyes to wander on the Forbidden Tree, and pleased her sight with the
lovely, but dangerous Fruit, we know, and feel to this day, what was the effect
of it, even the undoing of all her Posterity. Had Dinah, the Daughter of Jacob,
Genesis 34. 1.
kept within the limits of her Fathers House, and not gadded abroad, to see
fashions, and the wanton behavior of the Daughters of the Land, she had not
lost her Virginity, nor been the occasion of so much Bloodshed. Had the Jews
Numb. 25. 1, 2.
forbore looking on the Daughters of Midian, they had prevented the plague,
which broke in upon them, and consumed the chosen Men of Israel. Had David
turned away his Eyes from Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 11. 2.
when he walked on the Platform of his House, neither Uriah had been killed,
nor himself fallen into that distress, and anguish, which afterward came upon
him. Achan loses his life by his Eyes, Josh. 7. 21.
and Amnon commits incest. Haman's Eyes 2 Samuel 13. 1, 2.
taking notice of Mordecai's irreverence, occasion his death: And had the
Elders Esth. 3. 5.
in the Story, when they admired the Beauty of Susanna, looked another way,
they had prevented their shameful, and ignominious execution. At these Windows
(...), Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 3. c. 11.
Covetousness, and Lasciviousness, and admiration of sensual Objects, and Envy,
enters; at these Avenues they come in, and from these Gates the poison is
conveyed to the Heart, and Entrails. At these Doors grief come in, which racks
the mind, and tears the bowels: for who knows not, that it is more tolerable to
hear, than to see a loss, or misfortune? Qui videt is peccat quite non viderit,
ergo non cupiet, facti crimina lumen habet. Propert. lib. 4. Eleg. vid. and
Casp. Barth. in notis ad Claudian.
Did not the Covetous feed his eyes with the sight of Gold; he would not
forsake Paradise for Sodom, Heaven for Earth, and God for Mammon. Did the
lustful person deny himself, in seeing the tempting object, he would not become
a slave to his passion, nor stoop to such a fatal servitude, as we see he does,
it is gazing on the (...), on the gaudes and glories of this World, makes the
sensual man admire nothing, but what savours of satisfaction of the Flesh. Did
not the envious cast his eyes on his neighbors welfare, it would not grieve
him to see his equal or inferior thrive and prosper. The Mother that looks upon
her dying Babe, by that look, increases her grief, and he that sees himself
despised and wronged, makes that spectacle an argument of his immoderate sorrow
and vexation, so that guarding the eyes is an Exercise, which Duty, Interest,
and Desire of our own quiet does command.

This Exercise consists, First, In admiring nothing in the Creature, but the
Creators Glory Secondly, In turning away our Eyes from any Object, which we
have reason to suspect, as dangerous. Thirdly, In checking the disorder which
our seeing may cause in our minds and passions. Fourthly, In making greater use
of the Eyes of our Minds, than of our Bodies.

1. In admiring nothing in the Creature, (...), M. Antonin. Lib. 3. Sect. 2.
but the Creators Glory; what Beauty, what Harmony, what Evenness, what
Exactness, what Perfection, we see in any object, that must immediately lead us
to admire the Supreme Cause, that gave it Being: His Finger must be taken
notice of, His Wisdom magnified, His Bounty adored, His Power praised, His
Munificence exalted, and the Creature only looked upon, as the work of his
hands, the effect of his Providence, and the product of his Goodness: he that
looks no farther, then the creature, runs himself into snares, and God justly
suffers him to fall, that would not look higher, and from Earth cast up his
Eyes to Heaven. Such a man looks no farther than a Beast, and forgets that God
gave him a faculty to see more than irrational Animals; such a man has nothing
to keep him in awe, and therefore is tempted to lay hold on the forbidden Tree,
which was only presented to his eyes by way of Trial: He that upon seeing the
Loveliness and Beauty of a sublunary Object, presently reflects on the God that
made it; at the same time, furnishes himself with Arguments to keep within the
bounds of Seeing, and within the borders of Virtue; for sure he cannot at the
same time admire the Creator, and sin against him; That reflection will put a
stop to his sensual desires, and as the Angel did Balaam, suffer him not to go
on to the King of Moab, I mean, to fulfill the suggestions of a brutish Appetite.

2. In turning away our Eyes from any Object, which we have reason to suspect,
as dangerous. There is no man, that observes himself, and knows, what sins and
errors, he is most prone and inclined to, but must needs, or at least may know,
what objects are most likely to raise disorders in his soul; Experience has
taught him, and his frequent falls have been his Schoolmasters. Such objects
must be shunned, as the pestilence, and if they come within sight, the Eyes
must be cast down on the ground, or shut; and as ridiculous, as this may seem
in the eyes of the world, a man in this case had better be laughed at by all his
acquaintance, than loose the Glory of his Self-denial. There is no dallying
with such objects. To see whether I am able to resist the Temptation, is to sin
for Trials sake, and he is certainly safer, that looks another way. Our
greatest wisdom, is to suspect our own frailty, and the best way to keep Sin
out of the Mind, is to keep it out of the Eyes (...), Porphyr. de abstin. I. 1.
Sect. 33.
What sin we have formerly fallen into, we may fall into again, and he that
knows not but he may, had best put himself out of all danger, and that is, by
not looking upon the enticing object, and though it is not necessary to run
away from it in great fury, as Paulus in Cassian Collat. 7. c. 27.
Cassian did from the sight of a Woman; yet it is expedient to get as fast as we
can, from the confines of that Fire, which is so apt to put our passions into a
Fever.

3. In checking the least disorder, which our Seeing may cause in our Minds and
Passions. It Is possible, we may be surpised, and the object, we behold
unawares, may dart a covetous, or envious, or lascivious thought into our
minds; and that spark may fall upon the passions; but here the poison must be
presently vomited up again, and the seed of evil dissipated, and our Souls
cleared of the dangerous guest; the sudden thought drowned in the waters of
Repentance; and greater cautiousness for the future must be used, and the Child
thus burnt must learn to dread the fire; where this is neglected, and men are
careless of this Exercise, their Souls are in danger of being consumed, for
those sparks, if let alone, will soon put all into a doleful conflagration, so
necessary is it to resist the beginnings of these impurer steams and
exhalations, and the Vipers bite can do no great harm, if something be applied
presently to stop the inflammation. The first disorder is soon checked, when
the greater tumult cannot be quelled or allayed, but with very great pains and
difficulty.

4. In making greater use of the eyes of our Minds, than those of our Bodies,
Matthew, 6. 22. When St. Anthony the Hermit had a mind to comfort the Excellent,
but blind Dydimus of Alexandria, he thus addressed himself to him. Let it not
trouble thee, that thou have lost thy outward or carnal eyes, for in being
deprived of them, thou want only such eyes, as Mice Ruffin. Hist. lib. 2. c.
7.
and Flies, and Lizzards have, but rejoice that thou have Eyes of Angels,
whereby God is seen, and a vast light of knowledge is kindled in thy Soul.
Indeed, were these Eyes but exercised more, those of the Body, would have no
such evil influence upon the Soul. The intellectual Eye looks beyond the
Clouds, transcends the Sky, and sees through all the Mists and Foggs of this
present World, into Eternity. This beholds the satisfactions of another World,
and surveys the Treasure, God has laid up for them, that fear him; This sees
the goodness of God, and causes otherguise Delights, than the Butterflies, and
Glowworms of earthly Glories do. This looks up to the everlasting Hills, and
as the Eyes of Servants look unto the hands of their Masters; and as the Eyes
of a Maiden, look unto the hand of her Mistress: so this waits upon the King
of Heaven, till he is pleased to answer in the still voice of Love and Mercy.
This scorns to stoop so low, as to see what Swine and Moles do here on earth,
and takes a view of Gods Paradise, and of the blessed Shades, under which, the
Heirs of Glory rest without Disturbance, or Molestation; and he that sees with
this eye, opens this often, and delights to behold objects, suitable and
agreeable to its sublime, and wonderful Fabric, does stupifie the pleasures,
his corporal eyes suggest, and so qualifies them, that they make no more
impression, than Arrows shot against a brazen Wall or Fortress made of Iron. In
these particulars, this Exercise consists, and this is it we press upon you,
this is it we exhort you to, and entreat you to employ your selves in, as you
would not bear the name of Christians in vain.

We do not bid you with Eusebius, in Theodoret, to shut your eyes against the
Flowers of the Field, or against the Stars of Heaven, and to put weights of
Iron about your Necks, to keep your Eyes fixed upon the ground; we do not
persuade you with Pachomius, so to tie your selves up from the sight of all
Mankind, as not to look upon so near a Relation, as a Sister: Simeon Stylita,
and Theodorus would not see their own Mothers; John the Hermit, for Fifty years
together saw none of the Female Sex; one Sarah lived Threescore years by a
River, and never looked upon it; one Marcus saluted his Mother, and one Pior,
his Sister, with their eyes shut; Sylvanus on Mount Sinai, was so afraid of
having his mind distracted with vain thoughts, that he would not so much as
look upon the Trees, that grew in a Garden before him; but such superstitious
doings we do not set before you, as patterns to imitate, but the thing, we
would have you learn to be masters of, is that modesty of the eyes, that
serious Look, that care of your Senses, that you may not look upon any thing,
that is like to breed vain thoughts (...), ajebat Diogenenes Didymoni moecho,
medico, cum curaret Virginis oculum, in Laert. lib. 6. de Diog.
in your understanding; your Eyes are Sacred things. The Egyptians represented
God by them, and the Type should ever answer to the Antitype; As God therefore
is Holy, so should the Eye be, that represents him. Would you know what makes
your Mind so frothy, and your Souls so weary of Gods Service; Why, your Eye is
never weary of seeing objects that feed your sensuality; What is it makes you
so averse from reading Books, that Treat of God and Happiness? Why? your eyes
delighting so much in reading Romances, and Play-Books. What damps or dulls
your admiration of Gods providence? Why? your eyes being so much taken with
vain shows and representations. What makes you that you are no more enamored
with him, that is altogether lovely? Why? your eyes are so entirely fixed on the
Flesh, and on the World; How should you love that, which you see but seldom?
How should you hunger and thirst after that, which you care not, how rarely you
cast your eyes upon? you fancy, Religion does not reach so far as the eyes, and
think that God has given you eyes on purpose, to look on all things that are
visible, you are not aware of the Serpent, that lies in the Grass you look
upon, and all is harmless to you, that comes within the verge of sight; but
these are not thoughts of Men, that have learned Christ; these are not
reasonings of Men, that have laid up their portion in another world; this is
the sense of Men, that grovel in the Dust, and know not, what it means to walk
after the Spirit: your God, that Ideo humani generis Creator and Conditor Deus
opificii sui naturam prae omnibus emendationemque cognoscens, illic curam
adhibuit medicinae, unde causas morbi principaliter nover at emanare. Cassian.
institut. lib. 6. c. 12.
knows your frame, would never have made a Law to regulate the Sight, but that
he knew, that was the hole, at which the Scorpions creep in, that prey upon the
Soul. Stop up this Fountain, and you need not fear its fatal Rivulets God knew
it was the quickest sense, and therefore wisely ordered us to make a hedge
about it, that Thieves might not break in; He that stands Centry here, keeps
his Castle safe, preserves the Purity of his Soul, keeps up his Virgin
innocence, and truly enjoys himself; from the guarding of this sense, the Soul
comes to taste, what inward pleasure means, and can silently rejoice in her
Watchfulness and Victory; This lifts her up above her self, and makes her
triumph in her Conquest, and watching thus she advances her Glory into a
Kingdom, Reigns within her self, and makes her Lusts come crouching to her
Throne, or overaw'd with her Majesty, creep away into Dens and Darkness.

This has been the care of Saints in all ages, and this has made their memory
famous. This Exercise the ancient Fathers pressed, and upon such Sermons, the
wanton world began to be reformed; This made the Virgins cover their Faces with
Vails, that they might neither tempt others with their Beauty, nor be tempted
with the comely Looks of their Spectators; This made the World take notice of
the Holy Looks of Christians, and observe, how with their Lives and
Conversations, the motions of their eyes, and all their gestures changed: The
man, whose eyes did rove before on every Female he met withal, upon his turning
to God, fixed them on the ground, or on Hell, which he thought he had deserved;
The quickness of their Eyes was lost with their Sins, and the wantonness of
their Looks, expired with their Viciousness and Debaucheries. They considered,
that their reason was given them to govern their Senses, and they justly
thought that in vain they pretendto a life of Reason and Religion, without Vid.
Athenagor. leg^^: pro Christ.
they subdued their Senses, and fenced all those passages, where Sin and Folly
used to enter. This gave Religion credit, and made Men come from the East, and
West to gaze upon it. This made the World wonder to see Humane Nature rise so
high, and come to that pitch of Sanctity, which even the Heathen Gods had been
strangers to.

He that thus guards his Eyes, is the man that sees, whereas the other, that
walks in the sight of his Eyes, is blind; and let him remember, that even for
his Looks, God shall one day call him to judgment, Eccles. 11. 9. They were
excellent Arguments, Seneca gave to him, that had Vid. Senec. in excerpt.
lost his Eyes; Thou complainest, says he, I have lost mine eyes; even this
darkness has its pleasure; Lost thine eyes? what great matter have thou lost?
How many base and filthy Lusts crowd the way thou walk in? Thou art happy,
for thou will want abundance of things, which were worth pulling out thine
eyes, that thou might not see them: Thou considerest not, that Blindess is a
spice of Innocence; Alas! What are the eyes? such a man they prompt to
adultery, another they entice to unnatural copulation; another they tempt to
covet his neighbors House; another they put upon laying Siege to a City;
another they seduce into all manner of misery; so that in loosing thine eyes,
thou have lost nothing else, but incentives to Vice, and ringleaders of
iniquity. Indeed, without a man learns to guard this sense, it had been better
for him, that he had never seen the Sun, or that he had lost his eyes, as soon
as he came into the world, for that misfortune would yet have quickened the
eyes of his understanding, and helped him with Moses, to look upon him that is
invisible, by the eye of Faith, and at last he might have obtained the end of
his Faith, even the salvation of his Soul; whereas, by his unhappy seeing, he
besots himself, falls in love with the World; hugs the pleasures of Sin for a
season, fancies no satisfaction like that, which gratifies his sense, and so
remains a stranger to peace of Conscience, and joy with the Holy Ghost; till
with Dives, he lifts up his eyes in Hell, and sees Abraham afar off, and
Lazarus in his bosom, and finds by sad experience, what he has lost and
slighted.

It was worthily said of Pericles, when Vid. Plutarch, Pericl. and Cicer,
Offic. l. 1,
Sophocles his companion, showed him an extraordinary Beauty, and seemed to be
taken with it, It is not enough to keep clean Hands, Oh Sophocles, but you must
keep your Eyes clean too. Though he was a Heathen, yet in this, he spoke like a
Christian, and conformably to our Religion, which bids us keep both the outside
and the inside clean; and indeed there can be no purity of heart, without
purity of the senses; and to this purpose there is an excellent Discourse in
St. Jerome, or whoever be the Author of the Comment upon the Lamentations, to
be found in St. Jerome's Works: Let Us not look upon that, which we are forbid
to lust after; That the Mind may be preserved pure, the Eyes must be pressed
down, as Slaves, that ravish Men to sin. If the Mother of the Living by her
Eyes procured her own death, we ought to consider, how necessary it is to take
our Eyes into custody: Mine Eye has robbed my Heart, says Lamentat. 3. 51.
the Prophet; for coveting after things visible, it lost its invisible Virtues:
He that loses his sense of God within, suffers the Eye of his Body to commit
Robbery in his Heart: Therefore, if we would be Masters of our Hearts, let us be
Masters of our Senses too; for though the Mind be never so grave, yet the
Childish Senses of the Body make so fearful a noise sometimes, that if they be
not overpowered by the weight of Reason, and with a juvenile kind of heat
restrained, they will render the Mind effeminate, and feeble.

VIII Exercise.
Every day as there shall be occasion, to make good use of the Virtues, and
Vices of our Neighbors, or those that have lived before us, and whose actions
we have either read, or heard of; an Exercise commanded, Luc. 13. 2, 3. 1 Cor.
10. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Romans 15. 4. The Caldew Paraphrast upon the 34th Chapter
of Deuteronomy, tells us, God taught us to cloth the Naked, when he made Adam,
and Eve Coats of Skin, and clothed them: And taught us to Marry in the Lord,
and in the fear of God, when he joined them two together: And taught us to
visit the Sick, when he revealed himself to Abraham, being sore with the
Circumcision of his Flesh: And taught us to comfort those that mourn, when he
manifested himself to Jacob, coming back from Padan, in the place, where his
Mother died: And taught us to feed the Poor, when he sent Bread to the Children
of Israel from Heaven: And taught us to bury the Dead, when himself was pleased
to bury Moses, the Man of God, and charge his holy Angels to attend his Corpse
to the place of his Interrment, over against Beth-Peor, to the Confusion of
that Idol. So far the Interpreter, though a Jew, is in the right: But this is
not all, not only God's actions, but the actions of our Neighbors must be
improved to our spiritual profit, and advantage. And this Exercise consists
partly in imitating the good actions, partly in shunning the bad, or such as we
have reason to suspect as evil, and contrary to the Will of God.

1. In imitating the good; Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of a good report, if there be any
virtue, if there be any Omnibus, ad quos studio discendi pergebat, obediens,
proprias singulorum gratias bauriebat, hujus continentiam, jcunditatem illius
sectabatur, istixs lenitatem, illius vigilantiam, alterius legendi aemulabatur
industriam, etc. St Athanas. Vit. Anton. c. 3.
praise, wherever you see it, in whomsoever you meet with it, whether in a
Jew, or Heathen, or Christian, think on these things, and imitate them, says
the Apostle of the Gentiles, Phil. 4. 8. Such a Christian is eminent for his
meekness, another eminent for patience, a third eminent for peaceableness, a
fourth eminent for modesty, a fifth eminent for charity, a sixth for humility,
a seventh for spiritual joy, another for self-denial, another for temperance,
another for pardoning of injuries, etc. To look upon these patterns is not
enough, but then we exercise our selves to Godliness, when we reason our selves
into imitation, some such way as this, How lovely is this Virtue! How amiable
this temper! How beautiful this gift! How great a commendation is it to this
Man, to be so qualified! What content must it cause in him to be so gracious,
so favored of God, and so well disposed! What should hinder me from following
him? Why should not I tread in his steps? Why should not his practice kindle in
me desires, to arrive to the same happiness? Could he be Master of this Grace,
and why cannot I? Is not the same God alive? the same Spirit ready to assist
me? Have not I the same means of Grace to help me? Suppose my condition is not
the same with his, yet is there any condition, which a Man may not, or is not
obliged to be good in?

If I go among the Turks, I shall see Vid. Tavern Descr. Seragl. c. 16.
the highest, as well as the lowest, the Emperor, as well as the meanest
Subject, rise by break of day to praise God. If I go among the Jews, I shall
find, that Vid. Leo de Moden. Cerem. Jud. p. 38.
they will begin no Work, do nothing about their Houses, nothing of business,
till they have been at their Prayers. If I go among the Heathen, I shall find,
that though their Goods, and Houses, and all they have, and their Lives to
boot, were in danger, they would not break off in the midst of the service of
their Gods, but stay till they have done. Can I imagine, that these examples
are represented to me, without a Providence? Can I imagine, that these are no
Invitations to convert those good customs into practice? Is not this Call
enough to baptize them, and to adopt them into Christianity? Shall a Heathen, a
Turk, a Jew, outdo me in Holiness? If they do, Shall not the Queen of the
South rise Matthew. 12. 42.
against me in the day of Judgment, and condemn me, who came from the farthest
parts of the Earth to hear the Wisdom of Solomon, but a greater than Solomon is
here?

In the same manner, if I read the Bible, Elige itaque Catonem, si hie videtur
tibi nimis rigidus, elige remissioris animi virum Laelium, elige eum, cujus
tibi placuit and vita and oration, and ipsius animum ante te ferens, and vultum
illum semper tibi ostende, vel custodem vel exemplum, opus est inquam aliquo ad
quem mores nostri seipsiexigant, nisi ad regulam, prava non corriges, Senec.
Epist. 11. Vid. and Ep. 6.
and meet with excellent Endowments of Men, I am idle, and lazy, and like that
slothful Servant in the Gospel, hide my Talent in a Napkin; if reading of the
Zeal of Moses, of the Contentedness of Job, of the Even Spirit of David, of the
Stedfastness of Daniel, of the Constancy of Shadrack, Meshech, and Abednego, of
the Faithfulness of Samuel, of the Circumspection of Enoch, of the Early Piety
of Josiah, of the Candor of St. Paul, of the Sincerity of Nathanael, of the
strong Faith of Abraham, of the Alms and Prayers of Cornelius, of the Fervency
of St. Peter, of the Readiness of the Berrheans to receive the Word, of the
Jailer at Philippi his Earnestness to be saved; I say, I wrong my Conscience if
I do not force my self to follow these Examples. Indeed this is the end of
God's setting these Examples before me, and except I make these Examples my
Pattern, I read the Scripture unprofitably.

It Is true, when the good actions I meet withal in Scripture, are peculiar to
the place and office of the Saint, that wrought them, as the Prophet saying to
the Man that met him, Smite me, I pray thee, 1 Reg. 20. 37. and the Apostles
taking neither Gold nor Silver in their Pockets, when they went to preach the
Gospel; and shaking of the dust of their feet against that House, that would
not receive them; and where the actions of holy Men recorded there, have only
respect to the time they lived in, as Circumcision, and offering Sacrifices,
and outward Purifications, things proper only for the Economy of the Ritual
Law, or where the actions of such pious Men are extraordinary and miraculous,
as cleansing the Lepers, raising the Dead, healing the Blind, where the good
actions are of this nature, I am not bound to exercise my self so, as to study
imitation; but all those actions, which they did in conformity to the Moral Law
of God, and the Dictates of Nature, and the Rules, the Gospel prescribes to all
Christians, there I am bound to look upon these Examples, as Voices from
Heaven, to summon me to make that use of them, I have been mentioning. St.
Austin is very confident August. in Psalm 119.
of this, and adds, that the Examples of Saints are those hot burning Coals,
the Psalmist speaks of, Psalm 120. 4. whereby a deceitful Tongue may be burnt
into a better temper. By these, says he, God calls to us. This Man could do
so, and cannot you? Art thou more delicate, than such a Senator? Art thou
weaker than such a Woman? Art thou more afraid, than such a Mighty, and Wealthy
Man? Could they do this, and cannot you? Could a Mary Magdalene weep, and
cannot you? Could a Wealthy Zachaeus confess his sin, and make restitution, and
turn, and cannot you? Could a Paulus Sergius, a great Commander, leave his
Place and Dignity, to keep a good Conscience, and cannot you? Could a
Centurion, a Captain, a Man of Arms, stoop to the humble Laws of the Gospel,
and cannot you? Could they, that had greater Impediments than you have, embrace
Christ's Yoke, and cannot you? Could they, that had more to plead for their
refusal of God's Offers, than you, slight, and leave all, and follow Christ,
and cannot you? Could they leave Lands, and Houses, and Father, and Mother, and
Life it self, for the Gospel, and cannot you part with a Trifle for Heavens
Glory? Did they think nothing too costly to part with for the Pearl of Price,
and will not you quit one Lust, one darling bosom Sin for it?

Nor is this only to be observed in Scripture-passages, but in Civil Histories
too. I may chance to read of the Admirable, and Heroic Acts of Pagans, and
Infidels; of the Continence of Scipio, who being but Four and twenty years of
Age, Young, Lively, and what is more, a Conqueror, and having taken a young
Lady Prisoner of noble Vid Valor. Max. Lib. 4. c. 3.
Blood and of wonderful Beauty, did not only dismiss her to her Friends
undefiled, but added the vast Sum of Money, brought for her Ransom, as an
Augmentation of her Portion. I may light upon such an Example as that of
Curious, who being presented with a great quantity of Gold by the Samnites, though
poor, refused it, saying he had rather Rule over a Wealthy People, then be
Wealthy and Rich himself; so I may read of the Moderation of Metellus, of the
Constancy of Phocion, of the Sobriety of Socrates, of the Meekness of Archytas,
of the Chastity of Spurina, of the Gratitude of Massanisa, of the Gravity of
Aristides, of the Temperance of Epicurus, of the Patience of Regulus, of the
Liberality of Hiero, etc. Even here I must not be a careless Reader of these
Virtues, but make this inference from them; If these men arrived to such
perfection by the light of Nature, what a shame and disgrace will it be to me,
if assisted by the light both of Grace and Nature, I fall short of it.

2. The same Method must be observed in the Sins and Vices of others, whose
Example must fright us from those sins, and stir up our hatred against them,
and draw the same Language from us, it did from David, Psalm. 139. 21. Do not I
hate them, O Lord, that hate thee, and am I not grieved with those that rise up
against thee? I must not see a Drunkard, either in the Streets, or in a private
Nequaquam avicula circuiverit granum, si aliam avem in laqueo pendentem
viderit; Tu ex aliorum damnis exemplum capito. Saad Gulist. p. m. 262.
house, without working my Soul into Detestation of his Bruitishness: The
Swearers Oath must fill me with Horror, and the Covetous man's wishes must have
this happy effect upon me, as to set me against that damnable Iniquity. Cains
Despair must make me shun the Sins that brought it, and Lot's Incest must fill
me with wonder, how a Preacher of Righteousness could sinck into such
abominations. The Sodomites stubbornness must melt me, and Esau's Profaneness
must make me serious and humble. Readiness Disobedience must produce
self-Resignation in me to the Will of God. And Doeg's Treachery must oblige me
to Faithfulness; David's Adultery must make me take heed, lest I fall, and
Solomon's Idolatry must make me suspect mine own Wisdom. Nebuchadnezar's Pride
must make me loath the Vice, and Belshezzar's Luxury make me tremble. Judas his
greediness after Money must oblige me to a Charitable Liberality, and I then
read of Demas's embracing this present World, with some advantage, if it causes
strong Resolutions in me to follow the Lamb, whether soever he goes. The
Pharisees unbelief must make my Faith stronger, and the Sadducees denying a
Resurrection must make me with care and earnestness prepare for it. The
uncleanness of the Nicolaitans must make me Proclaim War against all unlawful
Lusts, and the Angel of Laodicea's Lukewarmness must kindle such a Zeal in me,
as will carry me beyond all Oppositions. Sylla's Cruelty must teach me to apply
my self to Meekness, and Annibal's haughtiness teach me moderation in
Prosperity. Tatius his Perfidiousness must lead me to sincerity, and
Cleopatra's extravagance persuade me to Temperance. And this is to make
Medicines of Poisons, and he that excels in this Art is a greater Phisician
then Hippocrates, and out-does Galen at his Weapon. Acting thus, we imitate
Bees, which suck Honey even from stinking Flowers, and there is no Chemistry
like that, which extracts good out of Evil, and Transforms the Devil himself
into an Angel. Your Transmutations of Iron into Gold are nothing to this
Alchymie, and all that the World has talked of the Philosophers Stone, falls
short of this holy Metamorphosis. Let the sins of others attract sensual men
into Delight and Compliance, a Christian must live above that sordid
Condescension, and the Follies of his Neighbor, by a kind of Antiperistasis,
must make the Fire of his Zeal against those Offenses scorch the more, as their
Virtues must make him grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

This is your Work, my Friends, this is the Task the God of your Fathers has
set you, in this Race you are to run, the good Works of those you converse
withal, or that you hear mentioned by others, you are to transcribe upon your
lives. As Light does naturally issue out from Fire, and Flowers send forth a
delightful Fragrancy, so from the Light or Commemoration of holy men's Actions
proceeds very great advantage and emolument, says Homil. in Gord. mart.
St. Basil. This is to draw Pictures from Divine Images. Thus did the men,
Potitianus spoke of to Aug. Confess. Lib. 8. C. 6.
St. Austin; as they were walking forth to take the Air, they lighted upon a
Cottage, where some very Religious persons lived, and taking a view of their
Devotion, and manner of Conversation, and meeting with a History of a certain
Habet unumquodque propositum Principes suos; Romani Duces imitentur, Camillos,
Fabricios, Scipiones. Philosophi proponant Pythagoram, Socratem, Platonem,
Aristotelem, etc. Nos autem habeamus propositi nostri Principes, Paulos and
Antonios, Julianos, Hilariones, and Macarios, etc. Hieron, Epist ad Paulin. de
instit. mon.
Holy Man's life in one of the Rooms, they read it, and from these
considerations were so transported, that immediately they resolved to become
friends of God, and Holiness, and so Basil. Epist. ad Eustach. Epise. Seb.
St. Basil prosesses of himself, When I saw (says he) about Alexandria, and in
other parts of Egypt in Palaestina, Coelosyria, and Mesopotamia, diverse men
that had consecrated themselves to the service of God, I could not but stand
amazed at the strictness of their Diet, their patience in Holy Labors, their
vigor and constancy in Prayer; when I observed, how neither conquered with
sleep, nor overcome with the infirmities of their natures, they kept up, and
maintained a lively sense of God, mocking both Hunger and Thirst, both Cold,
and Nakedness, as if they lived in another world, and their Souls dwell'd in a
spiritual Body, and nothing would satisfy them, but bearing in their bodies the
marks of the Lord Jesus; I began to envy their happiness, and thought it long,
till I attained to their felicity.

It was the Jaylors taking notice of St. Paul and Silas, their praying and
praising God at midnight, and their wonderful Courage, and evenness of Mind in
the midst of their Chains, Acts 16. 29, 30. That caused an Earthquake in his
Soul, and made him restless, till they showed him a way to attain to those
Sweets and Delicacies of a conscientious life, which he saw they had experience
of. We read of Jacob, Genesis 30. 37, 38, 39. That he took him rods of Green
Poplar, and of the Hazel and Chestnut, and pilled white strakes in them, and
made the white appear, which was in the rods, and he set the rods, which he had
pilled before the Flocks in the Gutters, in the watering troughs, when the
Flocks came to drink, that they should conceive when they came to drink; and
the Flocks conceived before the Rods, and brought forth Cattle Ringstreaked,
speckled and spotted; What are these Rods, says St. Gregory? and what is it to
lay them before the Flock, but Gregor. Moral. lib. 21. c. 1.
to set before us the Sayings and Actions of our pious Ancestors, that we may
be Regenerated, that we may be Whitened, that we may bring forth such Fruits,
as they have born.

Thy two Breasts are like two young Roes that are Twins, which feed among the
Lillies, says Christ to the Church, Cant. 4. 5. By these two Breasts, some of
the Primitive Writers understand the Jewish and Gentile Christians, such as
love Christ cordially, and the Lillies among which they feed, are the innocent
and spotless lives of sincere Believers, which nourish, and cherish their
Souls, make them Lively and Vigorous, Fat and Flourishing; These purify their
Minds; These give them the whiteness of Milk, and nothing digests with them
better, than this Heavenly Food. I dislike not the practice of Papias (had it
Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. lib. 3. c. 39.
been but carried on with greater discretion) who was mighty inquisitive, what
Andrew, what Philip, what Peter, what James, what John, what Matthew, and what
the rest of the Apostles of our Lord had done, and what they used to say; how
they ordered their Lives, what their Conversation was, how they behaved
themselves abroad, and at home, for by such enquiries a man may learn much,
improve himself, advance in goodness, and encourage himself to the severest
acts of Religion, which by having such patterns before us, become easy, and
loose much of that dreadful aspect, in which they do appear to Flesh and Blood.

Behold Christians, here lies your Wisdom; this is to be wise unto Salvation;
This is the Learning, that must fit you for the University of the Third Heaven;
This is the Schollarship, without which you loose your places in that College
of Glory. Study this point, and you will be Wiser than Aristotle, Learneder than
all the Sages at Athens; all the Wisdom of Solomon, without this skill, would
have done him but little good. Behold the Fountain of your Comforts! would you
be supported in distress? would you be preserved from fainting under troubles?
would you bear up under the greatest storms? would you hold out in the greatest
persecutions? survey the Heroic actions of the Martyrs and Confessors of old,
and they will shed new Life into your Spirits, strengthen you beyond expectation,
keep you from despair, defend you against discouragements, and make you weather
out all the tempests, that come against you. Are you reproached? look upon
David, how patiently he endured the railings of Shimei; are you persecuted for
Righteousness sake? look upon the Apostles of our Lord, how they rejoiced that
they were counted worthy to suffer for the Name of the Lord Jesus; do you
suffer wrongfully? look unto Jesus, the Author, and Captain of your Salvation,
who for the Glory set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the shame.
Are you bound with Chains? Look upon St. Paul, how he glories in those
shackles, and is confident, that they will promote God's Glory. Do Friends
forsake you? Look upon Lazarus, whom God took care of, when none would regard,
or relieve him.

Nay, in Death it self, the sweet, and heavenly frame of spirit, that is to be
found in the Saints of God, will be of very great efficacy to arm your selves
against the assaults of that last Enemy: When Death approaches, look upon the
courage, the joy, the comfort, the resolution, and cheerfulness of Vid. Eusebius.
Hist. Eccl. lib. 4. c. 15. and l. 5. c. 1.
Polycarp, of Ignatius of Epagathus, of Sanctus, Maturus, Altalus, Blandina,
Biblis, Alexander, and others. Come forth, my Soul, said Hieron, in vita Hilar.
c. 38.
old Hilarion, Why art thou afraid? Venture into another World, Why do thou
doubt? Have thou served Christ so long, and do thou tremble? The Saint in
Ruffin. vit. Patr. lib. 3. Sect, 159.
Ruffinus smiled, and laughed three times, when he was a dying. Being asked by
his Friends, that stood about him mourning, and weeping, why at the point of
death he presumed to laugh: The first time, said he, I laughed, because I saw
you so strangely afraid of death. The second time, I did so, because the World
deludes you so, that you cannot find in your hearts to prepare for death: And I
smiled the third time, because just now I am going from my labor to rest, from
my pains, and toil here below, to everlasting quietness in Heaven. St. Jerome,
when he was departing, thus addressed himself to his Friends that stood about
him: Throw Vid. Epist, Eusebius. ad Damas. de Morte Hieron.
off your Mourning Weeds, and sing a Psalm of Praise to God; for hitherto I
have gone through Fire and Water, but now I am entering into my Cooling-place: O
what a mighty gainful thing is Death to me! for Christ with all his Merits, and
Benefits will be mine. Behold, my Friends, the Earthly Tabernacle of my House
is going to be dissolved, that I may enter into another made without hands,
eternal in the Heavens: I am going to put off Corruption, that I may put on
Incorruption: Hitherto I have been a Traveller, but now am going to my own
Country. I see the Prize before me, for which I have been running so long: I am
come to my desired Haven. I am passing from Darkness to Light, from Poverty to
great Riches, from Fighting to Victory, from Sorrow to Joy, from a Temporal to
an Everlasting Life, from an Offensive Dunghill to Odoriferous Fields. The Life
of this World, is no Life, but Death. The Merchandise of Death is more
precious, than that of Gold and Rubies. O sweet, O comfortable Death! Certainly
thou art no King of Terrors, for thou give true Life, thou chasest Fevers,
and Wounds, and drivest away Thirst, and Famine: Come then, my Beloved, my
Spouse, my Friend, my Sister, show me, where he feeds, whom my Soul does love.
Awake, my Glory. Lend me thy hand, draw me after thee. My Heart is ready, I Will
rise, and follow the perfume, I smell, till thou bring me into my Fathers
House. Thou art lovely, my Friend, come, do not tarry. By thee I must go into
the Garden of my Beloved, that I may eat of his Fruit. The time is come for
thee to have Mercy on me, make haste, fly to me, for I am sick of love. Thou
art black, but comely, thy Lips drop Honey. Thou art terrible to the Kings of
the Earth, and crushest the Spirits of Princes; but to the Humble, thou make
thy Power to be known. Thou breakest the Horns of the Wicked, and liftest up
the Horns of the Righteous: Open to me, my Sister, thou Gate of Life. Take away
my Coat, this Mortal Coat, which I wear, and deck me with the Garment of
Praise, and Gladness. Break the Bow, and Shield, the Sword, and the Battle.
Harden not thy Heart against me. Take pity of a hungry Son, that has lived
long in a strange Country, and deliver him back to his own Father again.

Thus departed that Holy Presbyter; thus he spoke, and thus he died: What
excellent Cordials are such Patterns to a dying Christian! He that takes a view
of them, learns what to say, and how to speak to God, and to his own Soul, when
he is going to leave this present World. Hypocrites commonly compare themselves
with Men, that are worse than themselves, and finding themselves better, than
the worst of Men, stroke themselves for excellent Saints: Because they are not
so bad, as others, therefore they must be very admirable Christians: Because
they do something more than those, that know not God, therefore they think,
they do enough, as much as is necessary to Salvation. But a Christian indeed, a
Christian, that is altogether so, looks forward upon those that are better than
himself, and by these he takes example, and to come up to their perfection, is
a a great part of his exercise. I heard the Ezech. 3. 13.
noise of the Wings of the Living Creatures, that touched one another, says
Ezechiel; an Emblem of the Saints edifying one another, and touching one
another by their Virtues, and exciting one another to proficiency in the ways
of seriousness. God has not given all Perfections to one Man, lest he should
be exalted above measure. But this Christian has what thou have not; and thou
have that, which is denied to him, that considering the good, he has not, and
which is to be seen in thee, he may prefer thee before himself in his own
thoughts: and again, that thou, who see that in him, which thou have not,
may give him the greater respect, and honor. Counterfeit Christians consider
not, wherein other Men excel them, but wherein they excel others: They take no
notice, what Gifts their Neighbors have received above their own, but what
evil others do commit, and wherein they fall short of them, and thus their
spiritual pride leads them on to carnal security, and that carnal security
entitles them to the portion, which is reserved for Hypocrites. I have not that
Virtue, another has, that I may labor to be Master of it; and another
possibly wants that Grace, I have, that he may be restless, till he has
attained to it; so true is that saying of the Apostle, The Eye cannot say unto
the Hand, I have no need of thee; nor again the Head to the Feet, I have no
need of you, 1 Cor. 12. 21.

IX Exercise.
To put a charitable Interpretation upon what we see, or hear, especially, when
the thing we see, or hear, does look ill; an Exercise commanded 1 Cor. 13. 4,
5, 6, 7. Romans 14. 13. Matthew. 7. 1, 2, 3. An Exercise very necessary in this
Age, we live in, where Men's preposterous Judgments, and Misconstructions of one
another Actions, have made them strangers to that Charity, which thinks no
evil, and the Duties of the second Table are as much neglected, as if Men had
never heard of them; wherein Men's Passions have shaken off the Empire of
Reason, and will be shackled by no Laws of God, or Religion; wherein Men will
be Judges of other Men's Hearts, and think God has given them free leave to
pass their Censures on all those, that come within the verge of their
Knowledge. This Exercise includes five Duties. 1. Unwillingness to believe any
thing, that is ill of our fellow Christians. 2. Believing, and hoping that it
was not done with any ill intention. 3. Ascribing the evil act, either to
Education, or Ignorance, or the Society they have been in, or to necessity, or
to some other circumstances, which may take off from the greatness of the
guilt. 4. Pitying of them. 5. Believing readily all the good, we hear of our
Neighbors.

1. Unwillingness to believe any thing, that is ill, of our fellow Christians. A
quick belief of things of this nature, argues either Malice, or great vanity of
Mind. The best Man that is, cannot escape the lashes of a slanderous Tongue,
and there are thousands, that will raise ill reports of their Neighbors,
without any other ground, but a humor. We see daily, how we are deceived, by
giving credit to uncertain Rumors; and shall I believe any thing that is ill of
my Neighbor, because two or three Men say so? Nay, though a Man of Credit and
Honesty accuses him, my belief at the best must be but slow and wavering. If
wavering and doubting be allowable in any sort of Faith, it is in this; and
sure it cannot be so bad, must be our language in these cases; There may be a
mistake in it; how is it possible he could be so forsaken of his Reason? It is
improbable, he would plunge himself into so dangerous a gulf. Let the thing be
better examined first, before we give the verdict; Let Us not be peremptory in
our Judgment, till we have heard him plead in his own defense; Till then, let
us suspend our thoughts, and think better of his actions. Thus we ought to
qualify the ill, we hear of our Neighbors, and he that thus exercises his
discretion, and his reason, acts like a rational Man, upon Principles of
Prudence, and Christian Circumspection.

It is well observed by St. Chrysostom Vid. Chrysostom. Homil. in c. 18. Genes.
upon the 18th Chapter of Genesis, That God's speech, Verse. 21. at first blush,
seems very strange; I will go down now, and see, whether they have done
altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me: But by this
saying the Almighty suggests to us an excellent Lesson, which is, not to
condemn Men upon hearsay, not to be facile, and easy in believing what is
said to our Neighbors dishonor and disparagement: And though I grant, that
sometimes by this unwillingness to believe, we may run into danger, as the
Noble Gedaliah, Jer. 40. 16. Jer. 41. 2. who would not give credit to the Man,
that told him of the barbarous design of Ishmael; yet he that values the favor
of God, more than the applause of Men, and had rather obey the Precepts of his
God, than be guided by the Rules, the World follows, and prefers a share in the
happiness of another World, before a portion in the pleasures, and
satisfactions of this present, will rather run these hazards, than be guilty of
uncharitableness; and he that cannot suffer for a Precept of Christ, is not fit
to be his Disciple, Marc. 8. 34, 35.

2. Believing, and Hoping, that the ill, our neighbor is found to have done,
was not done with an ill intention; This is another branch of that charitable
interpretation of our neighbors actions; without all peradventure, the
intention either aggravates, or qualifies a crime. He that hurts his neighbor
with an intent to be revenged upon him, certainly is a greater sinner, than he,
that hurts him only to save himself; He that tells a passage of me, which
renders me ridiculous to the company, that is present, may not do it with an
intent to traduce me, but it may drop from him, out of inconsiderateness.
Naaman the Syrian, did indeed bow 2 Reg. 5. Tollenda ex animo suspicio, and
conjectura. Ille me parum humane salutavit, ille osculo meo non adhaesit, ille
inchoatum Sermonem cito abrupit, ille ad coenam non vocavit, illius vultus
aversior visus est. Non deerit suspicioni argumentatio, simplicitate opus est,
and benigna Rerum astimatione. Nihil nisi, quod in oculos occurret,
manifestumque erit, credamus, etc. Senec. de ira lib. 2. c. 24.
himself, when his Master leaned on him in the House of Rimmon, but he, that
from thence should have concluded, that he did it with an intent to Adore, and
Honor the Syrian God, or Devil rather, would have done the Man wrong, his
intent being only to perform his Duty to his Prince, while he hated the Idol in
his heart. As it is in Religious Actions, a man may either pray as the
Pharisee, with a design of being applauded by the standers by, or with an
humble sense of his wants, as the Publican, and their different intentions, may
cause very great alteration in the acceptance of their Devotions; so in evil
actions, the Intent gives the Sin the Dye, and according to that, it is either
cole-black, or checkered with spots of White. This made God appoint different
proceedings for him, that had killed his neighbor premeditately, or wilfully,
and him, that without design, chanced to be the cause of his death, Numb. 35.
11, 30.

Indeed some actions are so foul, that the Offender cannot with any color of
Reason, be supposed to have had a good intention in it; but where there is one
that is so, there is ten others, which are capable of a double intention; and
since we cannot look into Men's Hearts, nor search into the recesses of their
Minds; it is our safest course to exercise our Charity, as to their intent,
that it might be more plausible than it seems, or is said to be; and this is
the import of Christ's Command, John 7. 24. Judge not according to outward
appearance, upon which words St. Austin comments thus; Open, and notorious
crimes may, and must Vid. Augustine. Sermon. de temp.
be judged, and severely censured; but those that come not within the sphere of
our certain knowledge, whether they be done with a bad or good intent, we may
not, and must not judge. Where the action is capable of a good intention, let us
ever give our Vote for that: for suppose we err, it is an error of the right
hand, and it is more prudent and Christianlike, to believe a bad man to be
good, than bring our selves to a habit of censuring, and consequently, to run
our selves into danger of mis-interpreting the harmless Acts even of the best
of Men.

3. Ascribing the evil Act, either to Education, or to Ignorance, or to the
Society, our neighbor converses with, or to necessity, or to some other
circumstances, which may take off from the greatness of the guilt. I have read
of a Persian King, who having condemned Vid. Musladin Saadi Shiras. Rosar. p.
m. 23.
a prisoner to death, and given the Executioner a Sign to do his Office; the
Prisoner despairing of all hopes of Mercy, in his own Language began to revile
the King, and curse him. The King demanding what it was the wretch did mutter,
a grave and charitable Man, that stood by, answered, This unhappy Creature was
saying, that Paradise awaits those that show Mercy, and none can so much reckon
upon the happiness of another world, as those that moderate their anger, and
give Laws to their Fury. The King hearing this, immediately revoked the
Sentence, and bid him live. Another Courtier that bore a spleen to this sober
man, presently steps forth, and assures the King, that the Prisoner had been so
far from answering modestly, that he had most basely reviled him for condemning
him, and that this man had misrepresented the Malefactors Answer. The King
hereupon fell into a passion, and protested, I like this man's Lie better than
thy Truth, for he has covered the Malefactors ill nature, with the mantle of
Charity, but thou speak nothing but Spleen and Malice!

Though I do not altogether like this way of doing good turns, yet as to the
main, the Action was Heroic, and Magnanimous; and would Men, as the
Philosopher advised them, put the Bag, wherein their own faults are, before,
and that wherein their neighbors offenses are, behind; there is no question,
but they would observe the Rules I have laid down. I am sure, he that means to
work in Gods Vineyard, like a Christian, must do so. Breeding, Education, and
Society, and other circumstances, do make great alterations upon Men's tempers,
and inclinations; and if these Causes be rightly considered and weighed, the
injuries we receive, or fancy, will not appear so big, as Flesh and Blood does
represent them.

This made Epicurus take no great notice Vid. Diog. Laer. lib. 10. and Gassend.
comment.
of affronts, and wrongs that were offered him, saying, that the Men that did
so, acted according to their Nature, as Winds, and Heat, and Ice, and Frost do,
and he could be angry with them no more than he would chide the Wind for
blowing off his Cap, or blame the Sun for making him Sweat, or Drink. It takes
off from the hainousness of the evil act, if we think it is not inclination,
but some adventitious heat, that has caused the injury. Such a man reproaches
me, it is possible he may not know me, if he did, he would not give himself that
freedom. Another takes me to be a Drunkard, it is possible, those that hate me,
told him so, and to confirm him in his belief, swore to it; such a Servant robs
me, may be the ill society he kept, has brought him to it; another is
unfaithful to me, may be Poverty prevailed with him to be so; such Cogita, eum
in se non esse, qui vituperat, and non moleste feres contumelias ejus, nam and
daemoniaci plerumque, nos verberant, nec solum non movemur, verum etiam eos de
flemus Chrysostom.
a one calls me Hypocrite for my Zeal, may be some ill principles have been
instilled into him. Another seeks to do me mischief, may be he is put on by
those, that have no other way to show their Spleen against me; may be, it was
misinformation, that made this man despise me; may be, it was his being in such
a Family, made him neglect my Counsel; may be, it was the powerful charm of
Self-Interest, that made this man hinder me of such a preferment; may be, he
had other apprehensions of this Act, than I, and that made him contradict me.
Whatever is possible in these cases, may justly be believed, and that is it,
what the Apostle means by saying, that Charity believes all things, 1 Cor. 13.
7.

Indeed, to shift off mine own sins in this manner, and to put such favorable
interpretations upon them, would be delusion, and self-flattery, a great sin,
and of very dangerous consequence, for that would be the way to poison the
wound, which I should cure, but in my neighbors concerns, to ascribe the
injury to any thing, rather than his temper, or inclination, and malicious
designs is a virtue, and duty, great, and excellent, and a gift, beyond that of
miracles, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3.

4. Pitying our fellow Christians upon the account of their faults, and errors.
Thus St. Paul pitied the Jews his Countrymen, who had studied to murder him,
Romans 9. 3. Thus St. Austin pitied Vid. August. contra Gaudent lib. 2.
the Donatists, who did, what they could to sully his Fame, and to wrong his
Reputation. We pity men, that are Sick, and such as have not the use of their
Reason; or that have lost their Estate, and Fortune, or are fallen into the
hands of a powerful Enemy; and shall not we pity the man, who by his error, and
offense, is fallen sick of a desperate disease, which if not speedily remedied,
will make him languish and die into Eternal Torments? Shall not we pity the
wretch who has acted below the dignity, and power of a rational Creature,
unmann'd himself, and lost his reason in his sinful enterprise? Shall not we
pity a Creature, that by his sin has lost the favor of God, and his sense of
Gods Omnipresence, and Omniscience, and weakened, if not lost his Title to the
Treasures, Christ has purchased by his death and passion? Shall not we pity
him that has lost his way, and is fallen among the Thieves of Hell, become a
Subject of the Prince of Darkness, and has brought himself into a worse
condition than ever the Israelites were brought to, under the Tyranny of
Pharaoh? Certainly, such a man deserves our pity more, than our anger, our
commiseration more than our passion, and our tears more than our stripes. The
injury he has done us, is not so great as that he has done to himself, and he
is to be pitied the more, because, may be, he does not pity himself; we are not
only to weep with them, that weep, but to weep over those too, that have cause
to mourn for themselves, and are blinded, and do not, for that is the greater
misery; He that is sensible of his misery, and weeps, may yet find out a way to
be freed from it; but he that is not, and consequently is not affected with it,
runs on, and locks up all the Gates of Mercy, and Recovery against himself;
whence must necessarily arise those everlasting Plagues, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels.

5. A ready belief of all the good, that is said of our neighbors. Indeed,
this is a sign of a generous mind, of a Soul enamoured with goodness, and so in
love with it, that it would have no man bad, but is desirous, that all mankind
should meet in this Center. A sanctified Soul does attentively listen to such
Reports, rejoices at the Blessing, God has conferred upon it is neighbor, and
if the good things said of him be not true, it however wishes, they were so.
Such a man hopes that the very shadows of his neighbors Graces, are
substantial things, and though he would not, if he could help it, suffer sin
upon him, or sooth him into counterfeit Piety; yet till he has certain
knowledge to the contrary, he believes, he is that man he seems, and is
reported to be. A true Christian has a Soul greedy after Goodness, and is glad
of an opportunity to think well of his neighbor. That which makes him loath to
believe any ill of him, makes him believe all that is said in his commendation,
for he abhors that which is evil; sin is odious to him, because God hates it,
and therefore he would have no man guilty of it; and because Goodness is
exceeding lovely, and amiable in his eyes, and God loves it, therefore he would
have all men love Goodness, that God may love them, and that draws this
charitable Belief from his mind; he believes what he would have to be true, and
so makes good that character St. Paul gives of Charity, that it thinks no evil,
but rejoices in the Truth, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5.

And this is that Exercise that is incumbent upon you, Men, Fathers, and
Brethren, an Exercise of that necessity, that you must declare Enmity and War
against that Law of nature, Whatsoever Matthew. 7. 12.
you would that men should do unto you, even so do ye to them, if you neglect,
or undervalue it. Is there any of you that would not be thus dealt withal?
would not you have others put such charitable interpretations on your Words and
Actions, and will not you express the same civility to others? would you have
others subject to this Rule, and would you except your selves? would you have
others live up to this Light, and would you love Darkness better? would you
have others discharge their Duty to you, and would you be excused from
discharging yours to them? what can be more unreasonable, where is your
Justice, your Equity, your Religion? would you have others wash your errors
white, and would you throw Ink on theirs? would you have others smooth the
rough outside of your Offenses, and put on them the skins of Lambs, and would
you put the Lions skin on theirs? It is ill manners, as well, as irreligion,
and do not your Hearts and Consciences smite you for it?

You are for Peace and Quietness, but are your sinister constructions of your
neighbors Actions, the way to it? Charitable interpretations will preserve you
from a storm, but where you abate nothing of the fault, your passions must
needs rise into a Tempest. Calmness of mind is so great a Blessing, that a wise
man would purchase it at any price, and when you may have it at so cheap a
rate, as the favorable interpretations of what your neighbors say, or do,
Will ye stand out and refuse the Treasure?

This Exercise will preserve you from a thousand sins, and as many
inconveniences too. We see, how Men, when once they give way to uncharitable
censures; how they run from one sin to another, and know not where to stop;
this uncharitableness leads them on to envy, envy to wrath, wrath to
backbiting, backbiting to revenge, revenge stops their progress in goodness,
and who can reckon up all the evils that flow from this polluted Spring? These
evils you Deus altissimus scelera aspicit, and tegit, vicinus vero nihil videt,
and tamen nil nisi alienos navos crepat. Saadi. Gulistan. p. 263.
avoid by your favorable interpretations, and consequently lessen your account
with God; so much you strike off from the sum of your sins, and consequently,
are more expedite in your way to Heaven. What should you do but imitate your
Father, which is above? How loath is he to believe our rebellion against him?
Truly they are my people, says he, children that will not lie, so he became
their Savior, Es. 63. 8. He knows our frame, and remembers that we are but
dust, says the Royal Prophet, Psalm 103. 14. And should not thou also have
compassion on thy fellow servants, even as I had pity on thee? says the Son of
God, Matthew. 18. 33. Shall God allow grains in offenses, and shall not we? Shall
he remember we are dust, and shall we forget, that our Neighbors are so, and
subject to mistakes and errors? How can we expect, God will deal favorably
with us, if we do not deal so with our fellow Christians? What do we call our
selves Christians for, if we will not learn to run in this race? This
charitable interpretation of what we see, or hear, is the very character which
is to distinguish us from Jews, Heathens, and Infidels; if we want this mark,
how shall Christ distinguish us from the Goats?

Who has made you Judges of your Neighbors? Who opened a Window to you into
their hearts? Why do you usurp God's Authority? Has he appointed a Day, to
judge the World in, and will you prevent that Judgment? Are you ever like to
love your Neighbors, as you selves, while you reject this Exercise? And if you
are resolved not to learn it, how will ye be able to appear at the great
Tribunal? Have you forgot that this Charity is the root of all Virtues? Have
not you heard, that this makes the Soul beautiful, and lovely in the eyes of
him, that gave it? Have you forgot, that this is the Bond, that unites the Soul
to its Creator? This is the Harp, which cheers the heart both of God and Man:
This opens the Gate of Heaven; This is the Gold of the Sanctuary, without
which, we are blind, naked, poor, and miserable. This enlarges the Soul,
whereas suspicion, and rash judgment does contract it. This is the most
excellent gift, and speaking in diverse Languages, and giving our Bodies to be
burnt, and the greatest Learning in the World, The Eloquence of Angels, the
Rhetoric of the greatest Orators, the greatest Accomplishments fall short of
its Glory; and he that has it, offers a more acceptable Sacrifice to God, than
he that kills the Cattle upon a Thousand Hills, and lays them upon his Altar:
This is the Livery of the Citizens of Heaven, and that which makes Saints, and
Angels so happy, is their perfect Charity. Our love to God, is nothing but
froth, and smoke without it, and he will never believe that we prize his favor,
while we are loath to venture on a duty he is so much in love with. This makes
a Man, a living Hieron. in Regul. Monach. ad Paul and Eustoch. c 9.
Man; without this, Religious Societies are no better than Hells, as St. Jerome
phrases it, and the Inhabitants of Convents, no better than Devils. Put on
Sackcloth, tear your Flesh, fast your selves to Death, lie on the hard Ground,
walk in black, pray whole days together, without Charity you are not yet
arrived to the Perfection of Apostolical Holiness.

X Exercise.
Conscientiously, and faithfully to discharge the Duties of our several
Relations, Callings, and Conditions; an Exercise enjoined Ephesians. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 9. Col. 3. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Col. 4. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 17, 18. Tit. 2. 2, 3, 4,
6, 9. Hebr. 13. 17. 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 9, 12. Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Let a
Christian work never so hard, if he make not this conscientious discharge part
of his work, he works as those, that built the Tower of Babel, to no purpose,
rolls Sisyphus's Stone, and like Subterraneous Vid. Agricol. de Metal.
Spirits, that are to be seen in Mines, with great labor, and industry, does
nothing. What I mean by several Relations, Callings, and Conditions, no Man can
be ignorant of, that has heard of such Names, as Father, and Mother, Parents,
and Children, Masters, and Servants, Husbands, and Wives, Tutors, and Scholars,
Magistrates, and Subjects, Ministers, and People, Rich and Poor, Old Men, and
Young Men, Bond, and Free, Noble, and Ignoble, Tradesmen, and Gentlemen. If the
Exercise commanded in the Text, be universal, then certainly all these have
their Task, all these are bound to exercise themselves in Duties, belonging to
the relation, or condition they are in. And,

1. How do I exercise myself unto Godliness as a Father, or Mother of Children,
except I show them a good example, except I behave my self decently, gravely,
Deuteronomy. 6. 7, 8.
soberly, and modestly before them, that they may learn nothing, that is ill, by
my carriage? Except I breed them up in the fear of God, talk to them of the
odiousness of Sin, and beauty of Holiness; instruct them in the ways of God,
and pray with them, and for them; except I provide for them, not only for their
Bodies, but their Souls too; except I admonish them in the Lord, check them for
their sins, reprove them for their faults, and correct them early for any
undecent Prove. 23. 13, 14.
action, or expression; except I oblige them to use reverence and respect to
their Father, that begot them, and their Mother, that bore them; except I
instill conscientious Principles into them, Prove. 22. 6
Principles of Justice, Honesty, Goodness, Meekness, Patience, and giving every
one their due; except I enquire into their Devotion, whether, and how they
read, and pray, and hear; except I watch their actions, their eating and
drinking, sleeping, working, writing, studying, playing, and see whether they
keep within bounds, or no; except I examine them, what progress they make in
Piety, whether they make conscience of secret duties, whether they are
respectful, and obedient to the Ministers of the Word of God, whether they be
attentive Ephesians. 6. 4.
in hearing Sermons, whether they delight in keeping the Lord's Day holy, and
what apprehensions they have of their spiritual, and eternal condition, how
they spend their time, and whether they apply themselves to those Virtues they
read, and hear of; whether they do not indulge themselves in pride, or lying,
or envy, or hatred, or revengeful desires, whether they are tractable, and live
up to the Rules, and Precepts, I give them.

2. Then I exercise my self unto Godliness, as a Child, as a Son, or Daughter,
when I follow the good Instructions of Ephesians. 6. 1, 2, 3.
my Parents, when I obey them in every lawful thing, when I have an honest
desire to please them, and a filial fear of their displeasure, when I do not
lose my respect to them, though I am got out of their jurisdiction, nor deride
them for their infirmities, but like the Sons of Noah, cover their nakedness
with the Genesis 9. 23.
Cloak of Charity; when I speak of them, and to them with reverence, when I
take their admonition, and correction kindly, when I seek to promote their
honor, credit, Deuteronomy. 21. 18.
and reputation, when I attend to their good counsels, and am guided by their
discretion, and wisdom, and good example; when I imitate them in their
seriousness, and when I hearken to their Prove. 23. 22.
Instructions, and do not forsake their Law; when I neither Marry, nor settle
my self in the World without their advice, and am governed by their direction
more, than by mine own determination; Genesis 24. 3.
when I express my grateful resentment of their kindnesses, and study how I may
requite their paternal care and love, when I interpret all they do or say
heartily, when I respect them, though they are poor, and bear the same love to
them if they be sunk into a low condition, that I would have done, if they had
been advanced to the highest pitch of prosperity; when I relieve them in their
distress, support them in their want, and like Aeneas, carry them out upon my
shoulders, to save them from fire, and danger; when like that happy Daughter in
Pliny, I feed them with mine own blood; and like the Children of Catania Plin.
Not. Hist. l. 7.
of old, rather endanger my self, than see them perish; when in their unlawful
commands I show passive obedience, and where I cannot obey them for Conscience
sake, suffer their anger, and the effects of it patiently, without traducing of
them, or exposing them to the scorn, and laughter of Men; when like the
Rechabites, Jerem. 35. 8, 9.
I obey them in things lawful, yet difficult, and suffer not the uneasiness, or
hardness of the task, to discourage me from acting according to their
Prescriptions.

3. How can that Man be said to exercise himself unto Godliness, as a Master of
a Family, that is himself a slave to sin, and to the Devil, that either drinks,
or Psalm. 101. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
swears, or cheats, or lies, and in stead of discouraging his Servants from any
of these sins, does rather tempt, and entice them to these transgressions? That
is regardless of his great Master in Heaven, to whom ere long he must give an
account of his Stewardship. That is indifferent, what becomes of his Servants
Souls, and is not much concerned, whether they are ever like to get to Heaven,
so they do but do their business well on Earth. That makes nothing of God's
Commands, and lives, as if the Precepts of the Lord Jesus did not belong to
him. Act. 16. 33.
That gives himself to laziness, and idleness, and thereby teaches his Servants
to do so too. That makes no Conscience of redeeming the time, and while he
should work, and be busy in his Calling, sits in an Alehouse, or Tavern, or
runs into ill Company. That cares not, what Qualifications his Servants have,
so they will but do his Work; and is not at all displeased, if they privily
slander their Neighbors, or turn aside from the holy Commandment delivered
unto them. That either oppresses his Servant with Josh. 24. 15.
Work, and Drudgery, or gives him leave to waste much time in doing nothing.
That allows his Servants no time, to perform their duty to their Maker, nor
incourages them to Prayer by his example, and command. That gives them liberty
to do what they please on the Lord's day, and is unconcerned, if they neglect
the public Worship of God, or their private Devotion. That takes no notice of
their thrivings in Grace, and cares not, what he does in their presence, so his
passion, and humor be but gratified: That gives them bitter language, and in
stead of reproving of them with meekness and gentleness for their sins, and
faults, reviles them with all possible wrath, and bitterness: That does not
give them Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15.
things necessary, and convenient for their sustenance, and denies them the
Wages for which they serve him: That does not faithfully instruct his
Covenant-Servant in the Art, or Trade, he has promised Col. 4, 1.
to instruct him in, and has no tenderness, no compassion to such persons in
their distress, and sickness: That thinks much of giving them Bread, when they
cannot work, and of maintaining them, when Providence has disabled them from
doing their Masters business.

4. If I will exercise my self unto Godliness, as a Servant, I must be diligent
and faithful, industrious and careful in the Work I am employed in; I must
advance my Master's Matthew. 8, 9
Interest, and manage his Concerns in his absence with the same honesty, that I
would do, if he were present: I must cheerfully run at his Command, if not
contrary to the Will of God, and be ready to do the Errand, he sends me upon. I
must not pick, and choose my Work, but do that, which he thinks most fit, and
convenient for me. I must not grumble at his order, nor be unwilling to go
where he sends me. I must love him, as well as serve him, and honor the
froward, 1 Timothy 6. 1.
as well as the gentle: I must suffer none of his Goods to be embezell'd, nor
waste the Treasure, he has committed to my charge: I must not steal from him,
what I think, he does not know of, nor enrich my self by what he has, farther,
than he gives me leave, and liberty. I must not mispend the hours, he gives me
for my Work, nor dissemble with him in things, that make for his just interest
and advantage. I must be tender of his honor, and the secrets of the House, I
am acquainted withal, I must not reveal to strangers. I must not discover his
faults, 1 Pet. 2. 18.
without a lawful call, nor tell Stories, to the Men that hate him, of his
actions. I must not consort with idle Companions, nor let persons come into his
House, that would either wrong him, or do him mischief. Tit. 2. 9, 10.
I must stand up in his Vindication, when he is abused, and take heed of
exaggerating his errors, if once they come to be public. I must not tell him
a lie, if I have committed a fault, and am asked about it, nor stand to
justify, or excuse my error, when it will not bear an Apology. I must not
answer again, when Jam. 5. 16.
I am chid by him, much less repay him with ill language, if his passion
prompts him to speak more, than otherwise he would have done. I must bear with
his 2 Samuel 19. 26, 27.
infirmities, and though he has his failings, yet do him service with fear and
trembling. I must not despise him, because I am better born, nor speak
therefore dishonourably of him, because I understand more than he. I must plead
Conscience, when he would have me do Genesis 39. 9.
a thing, that is displeasing to God, and humbly beg of him, not to put me upon
that, which in the end will be a torment to my Spirit. I must endeavor to gain
Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8.
his love, and do sometimes more than he commands me, to testify my zeal to do
my duty. I must listen to the good Lessons he gives me from the Word of God,
and exhort my fellow servants to do the like. I must be kind to his Children,
and take care, that by my familiar converses with them, I do not draw them into
any thing, that may be prejudicial either to their Souls, or Bodies.

5. That Man does not exercise himself unto Godliness, as a Husband, that loves
Col. 3 19, 20.
not his Wife without dissimulation; or does not, as much as in him lies, 1
Cor. 14. 34, 35.
promote her spiritual, and everlasting welfare; that does not care for
dwelling with her, nor thinks it his duty to entreat the Light of God's
Countenance for her, or join in prayer with her: That 1 Cor. 7. 11, 12.
is intemperate in his Wedlock, or thinks, that the strict alliance between him
and her warrants every immodest, extravagant, and inordinate pleasure, and
desire, or that no Decorum is to be observed 1 Cor. 7. 29.
in that estate: That has no care of her Health, Wealth, and Credit, or loves
her more for her Money, and Beauty, than her Virtue: That gives her reproachful
language, and reproves her not with tenderness and compassion, if her errors
deserve reprehension: That does not instruct her, so far as he is able, or does
not Ephesians. 5. 25.
help her to bear the burden of the Family: That is a stranger to all pity,
and cares not, what becomes of her, so himself can but enjoy health, and
prosperity; whose carriage to her is churlish, and his expressions to her dipped
in Gall, and Vinegar: That exposes her natural defects before company, and
aggravates her 1 Pet. 3. 7.
neglects, which should be qualified with softer constructions: That in stead
of comforting her, slights her, and is so far from healing her wounds, that he
does what he can, to make them wider; That does not allow her convenient Food,
and Raiment, and let us her want those necessary supplies, which the Law of
Nations binds him to: That does not protect her, when she is in danger, nor
redeem her from the malice and cruelty of 1 Samuel 30. 18, 19.
those, that use all means to disparage her: That does not trust her with the
affairs of the Family, if she be able to manage them, or conceals from her the
things which appertain to their common safety: That goes beyond the bounds of
the authority, God has given him over her, and in stead of being her Head,
makes himself a Tyrant, and her a Slave: That Matthew. 19. 8.
does not yield unto her reasonable requests, nor by his good example
encourages her to Piety, Gravity, Charity, and Discretion: That despises her
good counsel, and will be sooner persuaded by a stranger, or idle Companion,
than by her, that lies in his bosom: That laughs at her Devotion, and takes
pains to make her weary of her seriousness: That takes it ill, she should obey
God more, than him, and thinks nothing so tedious, as her frequent exhorting of
him to universal Conscientiousness. Such a Man for certain does not exercise
himself unto Godliness, but rather strives to work himself out of the
Obligations of it, and exercises himself into hardness of heart, and
impenitence.

6. And indeed the same may be said of the Woman that does not discharge the
duty of a Wife, if Married to a Husband. If her Religion shall deserve this
name of exercising her self unto Godliness, her great care must be, according
to the Apostle's Rule, to reverence her Ephesians. 5 33.
Husband. After him must be her desire, and it must be her glory, to submit to
Genesis 3. 16.
him in the fear of God. In her mind she must esteem him, and value him, as the
Image and Glory of the great Creator. To love him must become natural 1 Cor.
11. 7.
to her; and to tend him, though never 1 Samuel 18. 28.
so weak, or calamitous, must be one great Prove. 31. 11, 12.
part of her care. Her Conversation must be chaste, and the value she has for
him 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2.
must appear in her words and actions. She must fear him, as her Master, and
yet nothing must cause that fear, but affection. She must deny her self for
him, and in things indifferent, his Will must Col 3. 18.
be her Rule to go by. Her submission must be hearty, and it must not be any
sinister respect, but Conscience, that must produce it. She must wave her
Privileges, that Birth and Breeding have given 2 Samuel 6. 20, 21, 22.
her, and honor him according to the Law of him that joined them. Her study
must be to make his life comfortable, and she must contrive soft expressions to
engage his inclinations. Her language to him must be mild, and peaceable, and
her behavior such as becomes a Woman, that professes Godliness. Her
Conversation must be the same in his absence, that it is in his presence; and
she must give him such demonstration of her kindness, that his heart may
confide in her. To get a meek and quiet spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 4.
must be not the least part of her prayer, and insolence, and haughtiness of
spirit Prove. 21. 19.
she must shun, as the Pestilence. She must be a stranger to brawling, and
Prove. 21. 24.
her words must be weighed in a balance. She must flee idleness, as an Enemy,
and contrive how to advance her Husband's Interest with honesty. She must
encourage her Servants to their labor, and Prove. 31. 15, 16, 17, 19, 20.
guide them by her eye. Her feet must not be much in the Streets, and it is an
Prove. 7. 12. Genesis 18. 19.
answer fit to be given to an Angel, that Sarah is in her Tent. Her ears must
be open to her Husband's counsel, and she must not think much of his reproof,
and reprehension. Her entertainment of him must be with a cheerful countenance,
and crosness of humor must be banished from her temper. If ought have provoked
him, she must study arts to pacify him; and whatever revengeful heat she finds
him in, she must study, how to allay the inflammation. His anger she must
overcome by her meekness; and if he be inclined to passion, take the fittest
opportunities to hush those tempests. In Expenses she must move by his advice,
2 Reg. 4. 8, 9, 10.
and the Propriety being properly in him, consult him upon such occasions. His
kindness to her, must not make her usurp 1 Timothy 2. 12.
Authority over him; and the more he condescends to her, the more she must
oblige him by her manners.

7. If I mean to exercise my self unto Godliness as a Minister of the Gospel, I
must be more concerned for men's Souls, than for a maintenance, and I do
little, if I do not study to advance the peoples 2 Timothy 4. 5.
happiness; I must not sow pillows under their elbows, nor flatter them with
easy Injunctions into Ruin. I must not speak peace to them, when there is
none, Ezech. 34. ^, 3, 4.
nor tell them that they are in Gods favor, when their averseness from
Gospel-Duties shows them reprobates. I must become an intercessor for them at
the Throne of Grace, and be more than ordinarily importunate with God, to
Ezech. 13. 10. 18.
pour out upon them, the Spirit of Grace, and Supplication. My life must be
Holy, and I must not tell them of one way, and go another; I must let them
see, that I 1 Timothy 4. 12.
am in good earnest when I preach to them, and that I do not only give them a
cast of my office, when I fright them with Damnation. They must see, that my
self am afraid of Gods judgments, and that I have deliberately chosen that
seriousness, which I press upon them, by a thousand 2 Cor. 5. 9, 10, 11.
Arguments. I must enquire into their wants, and labor to suit my Plaster 1
Cor. 1. 11.
to their Wounds. I must give them warning, that they fall not into the snare 1
Cor. 5. 1, 2, 3.
of the Devil, and if they be caught in it, Ezech. 3. 17, 18.
see which way I may extricate, and free them from that danger. I must open my
Heart and Bosom to them, and convince them, that nothing is so pleasing to me,
as an opportunity to advance their spiritual Interest. I must be instant in
season, and out of season, and exhort, and 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2.
rebuke, with all long suffering, and Doctrine. The sins I do reprove in them,
I must hate like poison; and in vain do I bid them abstain from the forbidden
Tree, if I stretch forth my hand to eat of it. I must visit them when they are
James 5. 14.
sick, and must make my self acquainted with their necessities. I must relieve
the Phil. 4. 3.
poor, so far as I am able, and by my Zeal and Gentleness, win, even upon those
that hate me. I must comfort the weakhearted, and strengthen the feeble knees.
I must meditate in the Scriptures, and 1 Timothy 4. 15.
make it my business to know the Will of God. I must be able to resolve their 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25.
doubts, and to confute such as creep in unawares, to pervert their Souls. I
must learn to rule my own House well, that I may be able to prescribe good
Rules to others; and must not neglect the Gift 1 Timothy 3. 3, 4, 5.
that is in me, but study how I may lay 1 Timothy 4. 14.
out my self, for the promoting of Gods Glory.

8. On the other side, If I would have my Conscience bear me witness, that I
exercise my self unto Godliness, as a Hearer, or one that lives under the
guidance, and conduct of the Ministry; I must be sure to obey, them that have
the Rule over me, and count them worthy Heb. 13. 17.
of double Honor, that labor in the 1 Timothy 5. 17.
Word and Doctrine. I must look upon them as Ambassadors from God, and respect
2 Cor. 5. 20.
them as Messengers of the Lord of 2 Cor. 4. 5, 6, 7.
Hosts. I must learn to see God in them, and must look farther than their
outside, even to the Commission God has given them. I must not despise them,
because they carry this Treasure in earthen Acts 14. 15.
Vessels, nor think the worse of them, because they are men of the same
passions, that I am. I must not contemn the whole Function, because some
Wolves do get in among the Sheep; nor blaspheme the Order, because there is a
Judas in the College of Jesus. I must be kind to them for Gods sake, and
remember that the cup of cold Water I give to them, I Matthew. 10. 42
give to him that sent them. I must not deny them maintenance, nor let them
Matthew. 10. 10.
labor without encouragement. I must 1 Cor. 9. 9. 10, 11.
remember, that such Laborers are worthy of their hire, and deserve so much
Acts 2. 37.
1 Cor. 7. 1.
the more, by how much their pains are of a sublimer nature. I must consult
with 1 Cor. 8. 1.
them in my perplexities, and in my doubts be guided by their directions. I
must have recourse to them, when I lie under strong temptations, and reveal my
case to them, that they may know, how to apply a remedy. I must ask seriously
of them, what I must do to inherit Eternal life, and when I know it, must run,
and make haste to do it. I must consider, that they watch for my Soul, and make
that an argument to express my Love to them upon all occasions. I must not
think Phil. 4. 10. 14, 17, 19.
any thing that is bestowed on them, as thrown away, but believe it will some
Gal. 4. 15. 16.
way or other, descend upon me, in richer showers. I must not show my self
froward, when they do reprove me, nor fall out with them, because they preach
no Doctrine, that pleases my sensual Appetite. I must so love them, as to stand
up for them when they are traduced, and think it my Duty to speak and act for
them, to whom I am more beholding, than to the nearest Relations.

9. I cannot exercise my self unto Godliness, as a Magistrate, except I protect
the Innocent, and lash the guilty into better manners. I must be a terror to
evildoers, and an encourager of those that do well. I must reign in
Righteousness, 2 Samuel 24. 3.
and my Rule must be in the fear of Romans 13. 4.
God. I must not bear the Sword in Ps. 72. 47.
vain, nor must mine eye spare those, whom God would not have live. I must
secure those that are committed to my care against dangers, and must not suffer
cruel men to oppress them. I must seek their welfare, to the best of my skill
and power, and neglect no lawful means to advance their Good, and Prosperity. I
must prescribe them wholesome Laws, and see that they obey the Law of him, who is
above all Kings and Princes. I must not stop my ear against the cry of the
Poor, nor suffer the Widow and Fatherless to be trampled on by their more
powerful neighbors. I must not flay my Subjects, 1 Kings 12. 6, 7.
when they are willing to let me have their Fleeces, nor exercise Tyranny over
them, when they are willing to submit to the Scepter of my Mercy. I must
remember, I have an account to give to that God that is above me, and that I am
as liable to his Rods and Axes, as Dan. 4. 34, 35, 37.
my meanest Vassal is to mine. I must not do what I please, but what is
convenient, and my Will must not be my Law, but the Will of him, that has put
this Power into my hands: I must remember, that Magistrates are called Gods,
and Ps. 82. 6.
that I can imitate God in nothing so much as in doing good. I must be as Holy
as I am Great, and be as eminent in Goodness as I am in Power; I must keep up
that Religion, which is most agreeable to the word of God, and must not be
ashamed to know the Almighty's Precepts. I must proscribe Idolatry, as a Deuteronomy.
17. 18.
thing accursed, and take care, that the 2 Kings 18.
Doctrine, which is taught within my Dominions, be Sound, and Catholic. I must
2 Chronicles. 17. 3, 4.
follow the pious examples of my Religious Forefathers, and be a nursing Father
to the Church, that bred me. I must preserve the Right of all men, and must
especially take heed, that the Land be not defiled with Sacrilege, I must
promote 2 Chronicles. 19. 5, 6, 7, 8.
Men of Honesty, and Virtue to places of Trust, and must exhort my 2 Chronicles. 3,
4.
Subjects in times of calamity, to seek the God of their Fathers with Prayer,
and Fasting. I must not wallow in unlawful pleasures, but must be as much above
them, as I am above the common level of Mankind. I must fight more against my
intestine Enemies, than against foreign Foes, and look upon the lusts of Ps.
1. 9. 104.
my bosom, to be greater Traitors, than those that would deprive, and rob me of
Ps. 139. 21.
my Purple.

10. If I mean to exercise my self unto Romans 13. 1, 2, 3.
Godliness, as a Subject, I must look upon my Prince, as God's Vicegerent, and
stand in awe of that Authority, the Almighty has stamped upon him. I must not
speak evil of Dignities, nor report things abroad, which are false, to my
King's discredit. I must submit to his Orders, that contradict not the
Injunctions Josh. 1. 16, 17.
of the greater Lawgiver, and live peaceably under his Government. I must not
sow Sedition among my Neighbors, nor fill them with prejudice against their
lawful Governor: I must suffer rather, than resist, and be persuaded, that
those, who resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation. I must cheerfully
give him that 1 Samuel 26, 9, 10.
Tribute, I owe him, and pay him that Romans 13. 7.
Respect and Honor, which the Law of God and Nature does allow him. I must not
find fault with his Judicial Proceedings, because they cross my Interest; nor
therefore refuse Obedience, because he does not think fit to do, what I have a
mind to. I must not be subject only for wrath, but for Conscience sake; and it
must not be fear of punishment, but love to God, and Obedience to his Precepts,
must make me tractable. When he punishes me justly, I must not rail at him; and
when unjustly, I must patiently bear it. I must not fight against him, though
he oppress me; and let the Injury he does me, be never so great, I must use no
other Arms, but Tears, and Prayers, Though his Yoke be heavy, I must patiently
bear it, and leave all Vengeance Romans 12, 19.
to that God, that has said, I will repay. I must pray for him, though he
wrong me; and beg hard of God to give him Psalm 21. 1, 2, 3, 4.
the Spirit of Wisdom, and Government, though he trample upon me at his
pleasure. I must not rashly censure his Actions, because I do not apprehend the
reason of them; and forbear judging of them, till I know the cause that moved 1
King. 1. 23.
him. I must not only have a due Veneration for him in my heart, but must
express it in my gestures too; and my outward behavior to him must show, that
I look upon him, as a Mortal God. If 2 Samuel 14. 17
he falls into any scandalous sins, I must not attempt to reform him by
Insurrection, Psalm. 82. 6.
but must address my self to that God, 2 Samuel 12. 1, 2, 3.
in whose hands the hearts of Princes are, and leave it to his Power and
Goodness, to make him a Man after his own heart.

11. If I mean to exercise my self unto Codliness, as a Judge, my Tribunal must
be as sacred, as God's Temple, and afford refuge to the Oppressed, as much, as
the Horns of the Altar. I must be impartial in my Sentence, and dread
Injustice, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6.
as much, as I would do the Archangel's Esaias 1. 17.
Trumpet. I must be blind to Bribes, and hate Covetousness, as I do the
Scorpions sting. I must love truth, beyond all the Riches of the East, and
Falsehood must be a Name, as odious to Exodus 18. 21.
me, as that of Beelzebub. I must mingle pity with my Threatenings, and Mercy,
and Justice must ever kiss each other in my Breast. I must lay aside passion,
and prejudice, and hear Men with that calmness, that I would use to say my
Prayers. Perjury I must punish, as the bane of humane Society, and faithfulness
must receive my applause, and highest commendations. I must not be swayed by
Power in my Justice, nor must great Men by their Authority John 10, 12, 13.
command my Conscience. I must do right to the Poor, as well as to the Rich,
and be so much a Christian, as to be no respecter of persons. I must not
rejoice at the destruction of him that hates me, nor laugh at the punishment,
that falls on the man, that has done me evil. I must not judge in favor of my
relation, because he is so, nor must I acknowledge any other Kindred upon the
Bench, but such, as are allied to Righteousness. I must not delay a Cause,
Exodus 18. 13.
when I may dispatch it; nor make my neighbor spend Time in attendance, 1
Kings 3. 27.
when it lies in my power to tell him, Acts 25. 16.
what he is to trust to. I must attend to the Cause that comes before me, and
turn the other ear to the Party that is accused. I must not encourage
quarrelling, nor suggest Arguments, which may feed the fire of Contention. I
must not Lak. 18. 2.
be at once, an Accuser and a Judge, nor carry my self proudly, no, not against
an Enemy. I must study Piety, as well as Justice; and remember, that he cannot
be a good Judge, that is an ill man; and though Authority and Fear of being
Psalm. 72 2.
turned out, may keep him in awe for Act. 24. 26.
sometime, yet when ever he can promise Prev. 31. 4, 5.
himself impunity, or secure himself against the Eyes of Men, he will make bold
to pervert Judgment, and sacrifice all to his own Interest.

12. He that will exercise himself unto Godliness, as a Client, must bear no
Acts 24. 1, 2. 9, 10. 13.
Wrath, no Malice to the Man that goes to Law with him; must use no unlawful
means to compass his Design, nor think by Flattery, or Gifts, to incline the
Judges favor. He must commit himself to him that judges Righteously, and with
Patience, and Humility, receive the Sentence of him, to Acts 25. 11.
whom Authority has left the determination. He must not vaunt himself, if he
gets the better of him, that opposed him; nor therefore undervalue his
neighbor, Matthew. 5. 39, 40.
because the Lot is fallen to him in pleasant places. He must learn to behave
himself peaceably for the future, and so order his conversation, that he may
not give offense to any. He must avoid litigiousness, as the great enemy of
Christianity, and where differences may be 1 Cor. 6. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7.
composed at an easier rate, shun going to Law, as much as a Patient dreads
cutting off his Hand, or Arm, till mere necessity forces him.

13. The same may be said of Schoolmasters and Scholars; The Master does not
exercise himself unto Godliness, that does not train up the Child under his
Charge, in the way he is to go; That does not season his Mind with a Form of
sound words, and whilst he infuses 2 Timothy 1. 13.
Learning into him, neglects to teach him, how to behave himself to God, and 1 Timothy 6. 20.
to his Neighbor; That cockers the young man in his Folly, or lets him walk in
the way of his Heart; That does not break the stubborn Youth by Admonition, and
just Correction, and cares not what becomes of him, so himself does but get a
livelihood; That does not check the first beginnings of Sin in Acts 22. 3.
him, or lets the Tares run on, till they choke the good Seed, that is sown
there; That does not teach him to stand in awe of his Maker, or does not by his
serious Deportment show him, how he may render himself Beloved, and Beneficial
to Mankind.

And so the Scholar continues a stranger to this Exercise; That will be taught
nothing, but what is pleasing to his brutish appetite; That values himself upon
the Estate he is to inherit, and had rather be Ignorant and Rich, than Wise
Prove. 2. 1, 2, 3.
and Poor. That stop his Ears against Prove. 1. 7, 10.
the sound Instructions of his Tutor, and delights in nothing so much, as
Froth, and Vanity. That had rather handle a pack of Cards, than his Bible; and
is more taken with a fine Suit of Clothes, than with the Ornaments of Wisdom,
and Understanding; That thinks ill of his Master, because he seeks his Good, or
calls him Cruel, or Insolent, because he will not suffer him to follow his own
imaginations; That spends his time in Play, which should be employed in
Learning, Prove. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
and thinks no Argument solid, but what is pleaded in favor of his Laziness.

14. If I am rich, and mean to exercise 1 Timothy 6. 7. 18, 19.
my self unto Godliness, as such, I must remember that I am but Gods Steward,
and sent hither to disperse those Blessings, he has bestowed upon me, among
those, he has made objects of my Charity. I must not oppress the Poor, because
he cannot hurt me, nor deny another man what is due to him, because he has no
power to withstand me; I must make my self friends of the Mammon of
Unrighteousness, and so husband that Estate I have, as to provide for
everlasting Habitations. I must not think my self the better man for my Riches,
nor fancy God will be more kind to me in the last day, because my enjoyments
were greater here, than my neighbors. I must mistrust my own Prosperity, and
look upon it, as more dangerous, than the greatest misery. I must walk very
circumspectly in my affluence, and take heed my Heart be not set Ps. 62. 10.
on things, which, before I am aware, will make themselves wings, and fly away.
I must make the Poor my Pensioners, Matthew. 19 23.
and lay up a good foundation against the time to come. I must be Liberal Luc.
19. 8.
and Bountiful, as I expect God should be munificent to me, and believe, I am
unjust, if I do not according to my ability, provide for Christ's distressed
Members. I must learn to be humble in James 1. 10.
the midst of my plenty, and the more Blessings God heaps upon me, the more I
must grow in Grace and Holiness. I must study how I may do good, and James 2.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
make it the great Concern of my life, so to deport my self in this condition,
that I may inherit Eternal life.

As a poor man, I then exercise my self Prove. 10. 4.
unto Godliness, when I am contented with the condition, I am in, and labor
Prove. 24. 30.
in the sweat of my Brows, to get mine own Bread; When I do not indulge my
Prove. 26. 13.
self in idleness, and go upon this Principle, that he that will not work,
neither shall he eat. When I envy not the Rich their vast Possessions, and
rejoice in having but Food and Raiment, as 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
much as others do in a great Inheritance; When I labor to be poor in Spirit,
and keep my self from repining, and mistrusting Gods providence; When I am
ambitious of the Riches of Grace, and thirst Matthew. 5. 6.
after nothing so much, as the Treasure, which Thieves cannot steal away; When
the Kingdom I seek, is the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and nothing
ingrosses my desires so much, as to be always 1 Cor. 15. 58.
abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as I know, my Labor is not in
vain in the Lord.

15. Then I exercise my self unto Godliness, as a Great Man, or a Man of a
Gentile, and Noble Extract; when I mind things Great, and Generous, and 2 Chronicles. 34. 2.
slight those Lusts which other men admire, and make pleasing God, the chief
care of my Life, while others make it their principal care and business, to
please and gratify themselves; When I Acts 13. 7.
undervalue that world, others dote on, Acts 8 27, 28.
and love that God with Zeal, and Fervency, whom others love only in Words, and
vain pretenses; When I pray with Groans, which cannot be uttered, while others
draw nigh to God only with their lips, and their Hearts are far from him; and
dare loose something for Christ, while others follow him no farther, than is
consistent Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26.
with their Temporal Glory; when I mind that, which many Kings, and Prophets,
and Righteous Men have desired to see, even the Spiritual Riches of Grace, and
the everlasting Mercies of David; Ps. 84. 1, 2.
When I mind that, for which Abraham forsook his own Country, and Moses Ps.
16. 11.
left the dazzling Glories of Pharoh's Court, and for which, Saints and Martyrs
have spilt their Blood; even that everlasting Kingdom of Bliss, which Sense
cannot Fathom, and no Eye can perceive, but that of an illuminated
Understanding, and which the King Immortal, who cannot lie, has promised to
the Man, that shall be faithful unto death; When I am ambitious of the company
of that vast multitude we read of, Rev. 7. 9. which no man can number, out of
all Nations, Kindred, Tongues, and People, that stand before the Throne, and
before the Lamb, with Palms in their hands, and clothed in White Raiment, and
cry day and night, Salvation unto our God, and to the Lamb for ever and ever.
When I can offer free-will-offerings to God, and am so far from being frighted
at the Gift, God 2 Cor. 8. 1, 2, 3.
requires at my hands, that I am ready to do more, than I have an express
Command 2 Cor. 9. 2.
for, like the Pious Souls at the Acts 2. 44, 45.
erecting of the Tabernacle, who being bid to bring in their proportion, freely
offered more than their share, and were so free to give, that Moses was forced
to put a stop to their Generosity and Liberality, Exodus 36. 3, 5, 6.

And to add no more, then I exercise my self unto Godliness, as a common
ordinary man, as a man in a lower Sphere, Romans 12. 1. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
and private station; When I am just in all my dealings, and in Simplicity, and
Godly Sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace of God, have my
Conversation in the World. When I live in a sense of God's Mercy, and am 2 Cor.
1. 12.
ready to do good Offices to all my Neighbors: When I study Truth in my Trade
2 Thessalonians. 3. 7, 8.
and Calling, and as much as in me lies, Romans 12. 18.
provide things honest in the sight of all Men. When I am not slothful in
business, but fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord, rejoicing in hope, patient
in tribulation, continuing instant in prayer, etc.

You see, Christians, what it is to be universally conscientious. In vain does
the Pharisee boast, I thank thee, O God, Luc. 18. 11.
that I am not as other Men, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, nor even as this
Publican. As much as he valued himself uphis perfection, it was nothing but
Rags, and menstruous Clothes; for in this Catalogue no Duties of his several
Relations are mentioned, and he knew not what it was to live like a Divine, or
like a Loyal Subject. Let Alexander boast of his Conquering Persia, India, and
other Countries, and mourn, that there are no more Worlds to conquer; He that
faithfully discharges the duties of his several Relations, is a greater Man.
Such a Man is sensible, that God will not be put off with shows, and shadows,
nor with a righteousness, that is as a Morning Cloud, and as the early Dew,
which passes away. Such a Man receives the Kingdom of Heaven as a little
Child, and does not stand out for want of pains: Such a Man is resolved to know
God, and what the exceeding greatness of his power is to them who believe.

O Sirs, retire, and think of the reasonableness of this Exercise: O that we
could make you see the necessity of it! O that it lay in my power to persuade
you to it! O that I had Rhetoric enough to charm you! O that I had the Tongues
of Angels to catch your Inclinations by a holy guile! But it is not Eloquence
will do it; God's Spirit must breathe upon you, and O that this blessed Spirit
would blow upon you, and compel you to come in, and make you so sensible of the
love of God, that you might not be able to withstand its force, but become
greedy, and ambitious of this Employment! You would then see, how much these
Men are mistaken, how much they are out, what a wrong way they take, that place
all Religion in a few heartless Prayers, and careless Wishes, and will not be
persuaded to believe, that God ever commanded this faithful discharge of the
Duties of their several Relations and Callings; and that they may not be
obliged to it, are resolved to continue in that unbelief to their dying day:
You would be ready to call after them, Awake ye that sleep, and Christ shall
give you light: You would wonder that they take no greater care to dress up
their Souls for the Marriage of the Lamb; O how you would pity them, bemoan
them, and wish for a Fountain of Tears to bewail their stubbornness! O how you
would be frighted to see what burdens they lay upon their backs! Burdens
insupportable, burdens, which will crush them, burdens, which will make them
cry out, one day, O that there had been such a heart in me! O that I had kept
close to the Law, and to the Testimony! O that I had looked more to my ways! O
that I had remembered what a charge God gave me! O that I had given ease to my
Soul when Christ offered to refresh me! O that I had submitted to his Yoke in
all things, when he promised me rest for my Soul!

We have innumerable examples of Men, who even in this life have felt the
burden of God's anger for their unfaithful discharge of these Duties: How many
Fathers have groaned under a sense of neglect of their duty to their Children?
How many Children have smarted for the neglect of theirs to their Parents? How
has God punished Princes, how has he visited Subjects for their carelessness
of these mutual Offices? How many Servants have complained that they have been
undone, because their Masters admonished them not? How many Masters have been
ruined, because their Servants remembered not what faithfulness, and what
duties, God required at their hands? And if God's anger against these neglects
be so heavy in this life, what will it be in the day of Wrath, and in the day
of Indignation? The Judgments God sends upon Men here, are but shadows of the
future, emblems of greater plagues in another World, representations of more
violent storms that are to follow, and God punishes some only, that the rest
may take warning; and those he punishes, he punishes but gently, to show, that
if these Rods cannot melt Men's hearts, and invite them to humiliation, that
these are but forerunners of more dreadful scourges.

XI Exercise.
To resist all sorts of Temptations; an Exercise peremptorily commanded, Jam.
1. 12, 13. Jam. 4. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. Ephesians. 5. 15. Hebr. 12. 4. Temptations
must try our courage, and discover what mettle we are made of. Temptations are
as necessary, as difficulties in getting an Estate, and their greatness does
but whet our appetite to overcome them: Without Temptations, the way to Life
would be broad and easy; and were it not for these, every Fool could go to
Heaven. They that dream of Feather-Beds in the way to Happiness, know not what
Temptations are; and were Men but sensible, what resisting of Temptations
means, they would not play the fool, and fancy that a slovenly belief in Jesus
Christ will spread open to them the Gates of Everlasting Mercy. The Conquest of
Temptations makes the great difference between a true Believer, and a
Hypocrite; and there is not a surer sign, that a Man is perishing, than his
being loath to encounter with these Enemies.

Most Men complain of Temptations, and yet there are but few, that do oppose
them; and the generality are so besotted, as to imagine, that nothing is a
Temptation, but what prompts them to open profaneness, and some notorious
impiety. Temptations no doubt may come from Friends, as well as from Enemies;
and a Father, or a Mother, may be a Tempter, as well as our greatest Adversary.
Temptations may arise from our selves, as well, as from strangers, and our own
Bosoms may harbor Traitors, as much, as Extrinsick Objects. And indeed there
are no Temptations so dangerous, as those that come from within; and the Devil
himself could do us no hurt, but that our own Hearts do second his fatal
Enterprise. Outward Objects can only present themselves to our Minds, but it is
our Minds, make the first motion to Transgression. He that resists his evil
thoughts, resists the strongest Rebels; and what can all the other assaults
signify, while the Mind is guarded from Invasion?

It is not a faint-hearted resistance, that will disperse these Insects; and he
that is unresolved, and will, and will not, makes the Prince of the Air
believe, that he has no serious purposes. Here nothing but boldness will do
good, and he that by weak sallies means to repulse this Flying Army of the
Devil, does but make himself an object of their scorn. When young Hilarion
began to be troubled Vid. Hieron. Vit. Hilar. c. 3.
with unclean thoughts, and did not know yet, how to resist them, the innocent
Lad fell a beating his Breast, till he made it sore; and though that was not
the only remedy, yet it showed that he was in good earnest resolved to oppose
them. Of all the Temptations of the Devil, there is none that he values so
much, as those that are levelled either against our venturing on the power of
Godliness, or against continuance in Seriousness.

1. Such as are levelled against our venturing on the power of Godliness. The
Devil is content, we should play about the outsides of Religion, in the Suburbs
of Devotion, in the Antichamber to true Piety; as long as he can keep us from
the Banqueting House, the Banner whereof is love, he can bear with our little
acts of Worship, and dispense with our playing with Religion. The
inconsiderable services which proceed only from custom, he does not value much;
and he is content we should use a Form of Godliness, being sensible, that
Hypocrisy will damn as soon, as more open Debaucheries.

2. Such as are levelled against our holding out in Seriousness, or Continuance
in it. He knows to whom the Crown is promised, even to him that is faithful unto
death and has seen God set the Diadem of Righteousness on the heads of those,
that have continued with him in Temptations. He knows the Scripture, and is
sensible, that the Man that holds out to the last, will certainly enjoy the
delights of God's Bosom; and therefore to conquer such a Man, that labors hard
for Salvation, and to stop him in his progress, he looks upon as his proudest
Victory. Antiquity has expressed it by this Apologue. Lucifer having sent out
his Officers to fill the World with Death, and Ruin, they all went on their
several Errands. Upon their return, he demands an account of their proceedings,
What mischief they had done, What Plagues they had scattered, and What
Calamities they had sent among affrighted Mortals. One of them more forward,
than the rest, replied, He had been a fortnight wandering about, and at last had
overturned some Merchants Ships at Sea, insomuch that both Men, and Goods were
lost. The Prince of Darkness enraged at his laziness, in stead of a reward,
gave him a hundred Lashes, because he had done no more hurt all that time.
Another Spirit stands forth, and boasts, That he had been for a month together
contriving, how to set such a City on Fire, and had at last effected it; and he
also was severely punished for his idleness, and neglect of accomplishing his
design sooner. At last comes forth a third, that had been Forty years absent,
and being asked, How he had spent his time, and how he had promoted the
Interest of the black Empire, answered, These Forty years have I been tempting
such a Religious Man to Fornication, and have at last prevailed, and at this
time he wallows securely in his sin. Beelzebub immediately rises from his
Throne, hugs the Fiend, embraces the Child of Darkness, and with Rhetoric
fetched from Hell, commends him before all the howling Crew, as having done a
greater exploit after Forty years travel, than the other by afflicting and
consuming so many Men, and Ships, and Houses in a few days, or weeks. The Moral
of the Fable is no other, but this, That if he can make a sincere Believer
weary of his Heavenly-mindedness, and burning Zeal to God's Glory, he values
that Injury more, than if he tempted a thousand Reprobates to greater Impieties.

Alas! What great Conquest is it, to persuade the Proud to Covetousness, or the
Drunkard to Adultery? The Wretch was his before, and there is nothing in the
Temptation to gratify his envy, and haughtiness; but to stop the Man that runs
well, to make him end in the Flesh, that has begun in the Spirit, and to make
him turn Enemy, that before was a Disciple; This is great, and answers the
proud Designs of that Hellish Monarch. Pirates do not meddle with a poor, and
empty Fisherboat, but when Ships come richly laden, full of precious Wares,
then they bestir themselves, and take pains to Vid. Chrysostom. Epist. ad Demetr.
Verg.
master it: So the Devil, when he sees a Soul richly laden with Fruits, sees a
Man has got a vast Stock together, of Alms, and Prayers, and other Virtues,
upon him he sets, and nothing pleases him, like robbing such a person of his
Treasure. The empty Traveller fears no Robbers; The Beggar sleeps securely in
his Cottage; The Shepherd is not afraid of Highway-men; The Indigent
Day-Labourer needs not lock up his Doors at night; But the Man that is Rich,
Wealthy, and abounds in Gold, whose Purse is full, and whose Coffers are ready
to burst with the weight of Money, that is the Man, that has reason to be
afraid of Enemies. So it is with Grace, and Holiness. The Holier Men are, the
more they may expect the Devil's assaults; and the richer their Souls are in
Faith, and Good Works, the more they may look for the rage of this Roaring
Lion; for nothing is a greater eyesore to him, than Eve in Paradise, and a
Soul encircled with Celestial Glory; and nothing stings him more, than that a
Creature made a little lower than the Angels, should be in a probability of
being placed in the same Form with Angels.

To resist these two grand Temptations, is the intent of this Exercise; which
consists, 1. In arming our selves with the Word of God. 2. In praying for help
and assistance from above against such assaults. 3. In getting others to pray
for us, and to counsel us. 4. In being more cautious for the future, in case
the Temptation do prevail.

1. In arming our selves with the Word of God; With this Sword Christ cut the
Devil's Temptations asunder; with this Shield the Apostles weathered his
fiercest Tempests. With this Helmet the Saints of old blunted his sharpest
Arrows; and he that has no skill at this Weapon, may resist, but weakly,
fight, but with feeble hands, and at the best cannot hold out long. These holy
Oracles are the Arms, wherewith the Lord of Hosts will have us engage Legions
of Devils, whole Armies of Lusts, and all the Troops of the Worlds Enticements,
and Flatteries; and that you may know, how this is to be done, I cannot
satisfy you better, than by setting before you the noble example of Saint
Paula, whose resistance Saint Jerome, Vid. Hieron. Vit. St. Paul. c. 15. 16, 17.
who was intimately acquainted with her, describes in this manner. When she was
tempted, to give sparingly to the Poor, she presently replied, Blessed are
Matthew. 5. 7.
the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. When tempted to revile those that
reviled her, her thoughts were the same with the Psalmist's, I said, I will
take heed to Psalm. 39. 1.
my ways, that I sin not with my tongue; I will keep my mouth with a bridle,
while the wicked is before me. In crosses, and disappointments, when tempted to
repining, her voice was, Tribulation works Rom 5. 4, 5.
patience, and patience, hope and hope makes not ashamed. When tempted to
impatience, she cried, I have heard thee Esaias 49. 1.
in an acceptable time, in the day of Salvation have I succored thee. When
tempted in her frequent Sicknesses, to complain, she checked the motion with
this, When I am weak, then am I strong; and 2 Cor. 12, 10.
again, As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our Consolation also
abounds by 2 Cor. 1. 5.
Christ. When in grief, she was tempted to mourn, like one without hope, she
cried, Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, Psa. 42. 11.
and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope in God, for I shall yet praise
him, who is the health of my Countenance, and my God. When in danger, she was
tempted to mistrust God's Providence, this was her Language, Whoever will come
after Matthew. 16. 24.
me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me. When she had
lost all her outward Means, and was tempted to doubt of God's Goodness, and to
question his Justice, she said, What shall it profit a Man, if he gain the
Matthew. 16. 26.
whole World, and lose his own Soul? or what shall a Man give in exchange for
his Soul? And again, Naked came I Job 1. 21.
from my Mothers Womb, and naked shall I return thither; the Lord gave, and the
Lord has taken away: Blessed be the Name of the Lord. When the Beloved
Toxotius, her Husband, died, and she was tempted to despair, this came into her
mind, and with this she checked the ill suggestion; He that loves Father, and
Mother, and Matthew. 10. 37.
consequently Husband, or Children, more than me, is not worthy of me. When
some charged her with Madness, because of her excessive love to Christ, and she
was tempted to give them unhandsome Language, thus she stopped her self, We are 1
Cor. 4. 9. 10, 13.
made a spectacle to Angels and to Men, we are Fools for Christ his sake, being
defamed, we entreat. Thus this excellent Matron overcame Temptations, and the
Enemy could fix nothing that was ill, upon her, because she was provided with
Arrows from the Quiver of the Holy Ghost.

2. In Praying against Temptations. This has in all Ages been counted part of
this Exercise; and he that considers with what force Temptations come upon us
sometimes will believe it necessary to call in the Divine Arm for our
assistance. This was the command of him, who was tempted in all things as we
our selves, yet without sin, Matthew. 26. 41. and what is impossible with Men, is
easily effected by him, whose Power cannot by searching be found out. Nothing
can be difficult to Omnipotence; and as dreadful, as some Temptations seem, if
the help of God's Spirit be called down by fervent prayer, they will dissolve,
and melt, as Wax before the Fire: for as Flies never settle upon a Pot, that is
thoroughly heated, so Temptations fix not on the Man, whose heart is enflamed by
earnest Prayer, said Pimenius. A good Man, Paschas. c. 39.
says another, must fancy, that on one side of him, there is Fire, on the
other side Water, and as often, as he finds the House on fire, he must quench
it with the Water, i. e. whenever any evil thought rises in his mind, he must
have recourse to his Prayer, and extinguish it.

In these Prayers, the chief thing to be begged of God, is power and courage to
overcome the Temptation, not freedom from all Temptations: for though it is
lawful enough in some cases, to beg, that Satan's Angel may depart from us,
especially 2 Cor. 12. 8.
where the Temptation hinders us in the conscientious discharge of our duty;
yet for the most part it is safer to pray, that the Temptation may not overcome
us, than that it may totally leave us. For Temptations make us watchful, help
to polish our Souls, and advance our Assurance of Salvation: For indeed, how
shall we know, we have the Graces, and Fruits of God's Spirit, without
Temptations make the trial, or except by our resisting we learn to know, that
we have not received, the Grace of God in vain. It was therefore no ill advice,
which one Pastor gave to a Man, who intended for Seriousness, and prayed hard,
that God would remove all evil Suggestions from him, and accordingly was heard,
and began to be calm and easy. Go, says he to him, and beg of God, that these
Enemies may return, and pursue thee by Temptations, for this will make thy Soul
grow, and signally advance in Holiness: which counsel the young Man followed,
and when he found himself assaulted again by evil motions, he prayed no longer,
that he might be delivered from the opportunity of striving, but to be endowed
with patience to endure the Fight, and to vanquish the Temptation.

3. In getting others to pray for us; Our single Prayers many times will do no
good, and God wisely does not grant the Blessing, we pray for, on purpose, that
we may get others to join with us in our Prayers; so did St. Paul, 2 These. 3.
1, 2. 2 Cor. 1. 11. Joint Forces do storm Heaven, and when Prayers mount up,
as David went into the Temple, with the multitude that keeps Holy day, the
Almighty bows down his Ear, and sends them away with a Blessing. But then he
that desires a Religious man to pray for him, that God would give him Grace to
conquer, must join his own earnest endeavors with that good man's Prayer, else
he does but mock God, and the Holy man too, whose pains in Prayer he desires.
And to this purpose, I will set down a Passage in Ruffinus. A young Ruffin.
Vit. Patr. l. 3. c. 13.
man being much assaulted with thoughts of Uncleanness, or Lasciviousness, went
to a Divine of great Integrity and Seriousness, entreating him to supplicate
for him at the Throne of Grace, that he might be master of his Passions: The
honest man promised he would, and accordingly begged God's assistance in his
behalf, day and night. The young man still visited him, and bid him double and
treble his Supplications, for as yet he found no good, and desired him to
solicit the Almighty with very great importunity, and so the good Preacher
did; But finding the young man returning ever and anon, with the same
Complaints, he began to take on, and mourn before God, and admire, that God who
had formerly heard his Orisons, should deny him Audience now; But while he was
thus musing, he fell asleep, and in a dream, saw that young man sitting on a
Chair, and some evil Spirits, in the shape of Beautiful Women, dancing before
him; at which motions he expressed some Delight, and Satisfaction; and while he
thus pleased himself with the sight, an Angel came down from Heaven, and chid
him severely, because he did not rise at the dangerous spectacle, throw himself
down upon his Face, and wrestle with God in Prayer, in order to a Conquest.
With that, the Religious Divine awakes, and from the Dream, concludes the
reason, why God had not heard his Prayers, sends for the young man,
expostulates with him, and tells him; Friend, I am sensible, my Prayers can do
thee no good, for except thou will watch against thy unclean Thoughts, and take
pains thy self, and go about the work, like a man resolved, to be rid of the
Temptation, neither mine, or other men's Prayers, will be of any great advantage
to thee; For let a Physician administer Remedies, and Medicines never so
proper, if the patient will needs eat that which will do him hurt, and will not
abstain from things that are his bane, all the Physicians Care and Labor must
be lost: The young man heard him patiently, and being pricked at the heart,
threw himself down at the Preachers Feet, confessed his folly, and began to
afflict and mortify himself, and now the Temptation abates, and he is cured.

This desiring others to pray for us, when assaulted by strong temptations,
helps us to defeat that stratagem of the devil, whereby he keeps us from
revealing the thoughts of our Hearts, and the temptations we lie under, to
those who are able by their Advice and Counsel, to relieve us; How many Souls
have been restored to joy again, that have broke through this snare, and
opened, and disburthen'd their grief to some faithful Minister of the Gospel,
which before oppressed, and was ready to sink them into self-destruction! So
have I read of a Ruffin. lib. 3. Sect. 57.
distressed Christian, who being assaulted with blasphemous Thoughts, attempted
often to go to Divines, and consult with them about his Spiritual wants, but
still something or other hindered him from making his secret trouble known; at
last meeting with an eminent Saint, one Poemen, who seeing consternation in his
Face, asked him what ailed him, he discovered to him the Worm that gnawed his
Heart; and on a sudden he found such calmness and serenity in his Spirit, that
he seemed quite another man, which by degrees increased, as he followed the
good man's Counsel; which was, That whenever the Devil assaulted him with
Blasphemy, he should reply; Let thy Blasphemy Devil, be on thine own head, for
I Will have nothing to do with it.

4. In rising again, and being more cautious Luc. 22. 32.
for the future, in case, a Temptation does prevail. By this rising again, I do
not mean, going round like Witches, in a circle of Repenting, and Sinning, and
Sinning and Repenting; but if after long and strong opposition, we fall against
our wills, not to lie still one moment in the sin, but to get up with speed,
and put on greater Resolutions, and double our Diligence, that we may not be
surpised again; Thus did St. Peter, the ill company in the High Priests Hall,
presses hard upon him, and fear of being abused by them, prevails with him to
deny that Master, whom he saw in misery. But he has no sooner done the Fact,
but his Heart smites him, and he goes out and weeps bitterly; and after this no
torment, no pain, no contempt, no frown of great Men, no smiles of Princes can
persuade him to the same sin again; not Herod's imprisonment, not the stern
looks of the High Priests, not the indignation of the Sadduces, nor Nero's
cruelty; after this, he is so steadfast, that his Faith vies with Rocks, and
becomes like Mount Sion, which can never be moved.

It Is like Caesarius, the famous Nazianzene's Brother, might be tempted by the
Vid. Gregor. Naz. Epist. 17.
preferments, Julian the Apostate heaped upon him, to comply with the
ill-natured Emperor in his humor, and grow mealy-mouthed, and cowardly in
speaking for Christ, and vindicating his Divinity and Glory; But upon his
Brothers Letter to him; Behold, how readily the great man rises from his
slumber, tells the Apostate, that he will keep his preferments, upon condition of
dissembling no longer, forsakes the Glories of the Court, leaves his Treasurers
place, and prefers Poverty, Contempt, and Ignominy, before the acclamations and
salutations of the multitude, and in this despicable condition ends his days.

So did Ecebolius, Julians offers tempt Vid. Socrat. l. 3. c. 11.
him to desertion; he falls, accepts of the wicked Monarch's Favor, but here
he could not rest long, something within gnawed his heart; he rises, prostrates
himself before God's people, calls to them, Tread upon me, trample on this
unsavory Salt; and after this, we hear no more of his fickleness and
inconstancy.

To lie still in a notorious sin, is to sleep on a Dunghill, and which is
worse, to make our Bed in Hell; but he that like David, makes his fall, an
opportunity of being more serious, gets by his sin, and extracts an Oil out of
that stinking weed, which gives his Limbs new strength, and vigor, and alacrity.

This is to exercise our selves in resisting Temptations; and oh that the dull
world would understand what a stress the Holy Ghost lays upon this Labor! they
would not then let Temptations ride in Triumph into their Souls, they would not
open the Gates to these Locusts to let them in, but come out with Swords and
Staves against them, as against Thieves and Murderers. They would go another
way to work, than now they do. It Is a wonderful thing to see, how aukwardly Men
go about this Conquest; a serious Spectator must needs think they have no mind
to it, and that what they do, is for no other end, but to satisfy the secret
stings, and twitches of a frighted Conscience.

When men heretofore took delight in this Exercise, they studied, which way
they might overcome Temptations, and made it the great object of their
contrivance, how to be eminent in this Victory, how to silence the hellish
Dogs, that barked at them, and how to convince even the Devil himself, that
from the bottom of their hearts, they abhorred the sins, they were provoked to;
When they were tempted to unlawful Lusts, they resisted the motion by great
abstinence, and hard Fare, and harder Lodging; When they had a mind to resist a
temptation to Covetousness, they crossed Flesh and Blood, and gave away more
than they could spare; When they were minded to resist a temptation to Anger,
they did good to the Offender; When they would resist a Temptation to Revenge,
they would watch an opportunity to show their Love and Compassion to the
person, that had done them the injury; When they resisted a temptation to
Quarrel, or Litigiousness, they deceded from their own Right; When they would
resist a temptation of Vain Glory, they would do something, that should render
them contemptible; When a temptation to Pride, they called to mind their
Imperfections, their Defects in Grace, and how short they fell of the
perfection of greater Saints. Their Conquest cost them Pains, and he that takes
this way, discovers his sincerity in Rev. 2. 7. 11. 17. 27.
the opposition. Rev. 3. 5. 12. 21. c. 21. 3. 4. 7.


Who can read of eating of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the
Paradise of God; Of not being hurt by the Second death; Of feeding on the
hidden Manna, and receiving the White Stone, and in the Stone a new Name,
written, which no man knows, saving he, that receives it, of Ruling Nations
with a Rod of Iron; Of possessing the Morning Star; Of having his Name writ in
the Book of Life; Of having the honor of being confessed, and owned before God
the Father and his Angels; Of being clothed in White Raiment; Of being made a
Pillar in the Temple of God, whence he shall go out no more; of having the Name
of God engraven upon him, and the Name of the City of God, which is the New
Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from God; Of inheriting all things,
and of being freed from Fears, and Pain, and Death, and Sorrow, and Curses, and
Darkness; Blessings promised by the Holy Ghost to Men, who resist, and
overcome, who can read, I say, of all these, and feel no warmth, no heat to
dare temptations, and to strive for mastery? But then Christians, if you
resist, let nothing interrupt your resistance, but death it self. Remember who
it is, that cries, When the righteous turns from his righteousness, and commits
iniquity, he shall Vid. R. Mose Corduero tract. do anima. c. 7.
dye in his sin, and his righteousness which he has done, shall not be
remembered, Ez. 3. 20. To resist unto Blood is something, but to resist unto
Death is more; After Death the Enemy can tempt no more, but while there is Life
he will not give over; without we resist as long as he tempts, we expose our
selves to his Fury, and he will tempt, while we are above ground. If we are not
tired with resisting, we make him despair of success, and his Assaults grow
weaker, the more stiff we are in our Duty. I conclude this Exercise with the
Advice of the Pious Syncletica; The Devil, not being able Vid. Pelag. lib. 7.
c. 16.
to make people weary of walking in the ways of God by poverty, tries what
Riches will do; and if he prevails not by calumnies, and reproaches, he will make
an attempt by Praise and Honor; Where he cannot seduce by carnal Delights,
there he discourages by the tediousness and laboriousness of Religion; many
times by sickness, and longlasting miseries he tries whether he can discompose
good men, in their Love to their Gracious Redeemer. But Christian, let thy Body
be cut and wounded, fry in burning Fevers, and tormented with excessive Thirst;
if thou art a sinner, remember the torments of another World, and the
everlasting Fire, and this will keep thee from fainting under all the crosses
and miseries here; Rejoice, because God does visit thee, and have ever that
memorable Saying in thy mouth; The Lord has chasten'd, and Psalm. 118. 18.
corrected me sore, but he has not given me over unto death. If thou art Iron,
this Fire will purge away thy Rust. If thou art a Saint, and suffer such
things, from these great Conquests, thou will be advanced, and promoted to
greater Dignities in Heaven. If thou art Gold, this Fire will make thee finer.
Is Satan's Angel given thee to buffet thee? Rejoice to think whom thou art like,
for this was St. Paul's affliction, and St. Paul's Glory will fall to thy share.

XII Exercise.
To stand in awe of God, when we are alone, and no creature sees us. An
Exercise Commanded, Psalm. 139. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psalm. 4. 4. Psalm. 10. 13, 14.
Heb. 4. 13. One would think that the bare belief of the Being of God, should be
a sufficient Argument to any man to fear him, when he is alone, and behave
himself with that Reverence and Decency, he would use, were the greatest
visible Monarch of this World present with him. But alas! the generality of men
dare to do that in private, when none, but God and they are together, which
they would be afraid to do before the meanest slave; and their minds, after
their bodies are once locked up, are as busy to plot mischief and wickedness,
as if none, no not God himself could look into those Cabinets. They dare to
think that before God, which they would tremble to utter before men; and harbor
things in their hearts, in the sight of the Almighty, which they would not for
a world, men should know of, yet they matter not whether God knows it, or no;
and this is satisfaction enough to them, that they can hide their vain
imaginations from their neighbors. How does the Thief rejoice, when he finds
no person in the room, that can disturb him! How is the Fornicators, and
Adulterers Fancy tickled, to see, that the Chamber, or the House he is in, with
his Harlot, is void of company! Sots, and Fools! The God that gave them Life,
and Being, and who supports them every minute, looks upon them, and mourns, and
they regard it not!

A Christian is a man of another temper, and exercises himself unto Godliness,
when he is alone, as well as when he converses with his neighbors; nay, is
more industrious to please his kind and merciful Master, when retired from the
sight of Men, than he ordinarily is, when the World looks upon him. He is
afraid of sin, though there be no Magistrate by, to overaw him, and durst not
commit any thing, that is offensive to God, or injurious to his Neighbor, were
he in a Desert or in a Denn. He does good cheerfully, while none but God looks
upon him, and is glad he has an opportunity of doing it in Secret; because he
would not be so much as suspected to be guilty of Hypocrisy. He is as modest
in his Closet, as in his Diningroom, and behaves himself with the same gravity
in a Vault, that he would do in his Parlour. He is sensible no place can escape
an All-seeing Eye, and that there is no corner so secret, but the Father of
Lights shines into it. He remembers that God will call him to an Account for
secret sins, as well as for notorious Offenses; and therefore has the same
veneration for his Holiness, when all men are gone from him, as he has when he
is surrounded with society. He lives in the sense of Gods Omnipresence, and
whether he is on a Hill, or in the Valley, God is the same to him; The place he
knows, makes no variation in Gods Purity, and wherever the man is, God cannot
be far from him. He pities, or smiles at the Sinner that flatters himself, that
God sees him not, because he lurks in a Cave, and nothing appears so absurd to
him, as to fancy, that he that made the Eye, should not pierce into the
remotest corner.

Indeed, not to fear God, when we are alone, is not to fear him at all, and he
that shunns undecencies before Men only, shows that they are the Gods whom he
serves. Sobriety before men only, is a Sign, that nothing but Credit and
Interest keeps us in awe; and except we dread the very appearance of evil, when
God alone is with us, we are but a better sort of Atheists. What does it
signify, to believe a God, and to walk, as if there were none? and to what
purpose is it to adore him, when his greatness can have no influence, upon our
Consciences? To see in secret is Gods Prerogative, and we then deny it, when in
secret we dare break his Law, and affront his Glory. He could not be God, if he
took no notice of our Thoughts and Actions, when we are alone; and therefore
not to fear him when we are in private, is to say with the Fool, there is none;
To be delighted with unlawful Objects in our minds, while God looks on, is as
great an irreverence, as if a man should spue before a Prince; may, considering
the vast distance between a mortal King, and the immortal God, infinitely
greater, and therefore, he that stands more in awe of a Prince, than of his
God, does as good Si purpuratus Deum ita m^tueret, ut Regem. Angel^s foret.
Saad. Rosar. Pers. c. 1. p. m. 67.
as Blaspheme; for it is a tacit assertion, That Dust and Ashes deserves
greater Honor, than the King of Heaven. Every Prayer of such a man, will be a
witness against him in the last day; for in every Prayer, he acknowledges God's
All-seeing Purity, and by that acknowledgment, condemns himself, for not living
in private, like a man that did profess, and believe that Truth.

He that thinks he fears God, when he is careless of his Honor, and
Omnipresence in secret, may as well think he loves his Father and Mother, when
he calls them all to naught, and slights them, like dirt under his Shoes; and
indeed, if ever any man was guilty of Hypocrisy, such a man that believes God
sees him, and acts as if his Eyes were shut, must be a most notorious
dissembler. It is a perfect contradiction to believe Gods Omniscience, and not
to stand in awe of it, and the contrariety of the Mind and Actions in this
case, is so great, that did we not judge of Men's Wisdom by their Worldly
Prudence, we should think such a man rather distracted, than impious. If the
whole World were present with us, and the whole race of Mankind were within our
view, it is not so much, as when God is present with us, being alone, for the
Great Creator of all these men, is with us; He, on whose shadow the vast
Legions of Angels wait; He, at whose Name all Creatures bow their knees; and
whose Hand has made all things, is with us at such times; and he that is
afraid of the Creature, why should not he stand in awe of the Creator? Is the
Tool a greater thing than the Workman? or the Pot of greater consequence than
the Potter that did make it? and though we see him not with our Eyes, yet our
minds may perceive, and feel him; and though he does not justle us in our
walks, or rest, yet if we be sensible, that he is, we cannot but be sensible,
if we will, that he is present too. It Is not want of Power, but want of Will,
that makes us careless of taking notice of him; for we cannot own our common
Principles, or any Dictates of Nature, but we must own his Presence; and we had
as good deny our own Being, as deny his standing by us, wherever we are, and
being displeased with the sins we practice.

God is every where present, that we may always bear his Image in our minds;
Indeed, how can we forget him, that does every moment remember our frame, and
remember our wants and necessities, and does not forget our work, and labor of
Love? What a mighty favor do we count it, if a King does think of us, or
admits us into his Presence; and shall not we think it a wonderful mercy, that
the King of Glory, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace is never absent
from us, and is pleased always to take notice of us? The sick man receives
Comfort, if a friend do visit him; and should not our Souls rejoice, our weak,
our sinful Souls, that God does always look upon them, and takes their concerns
into consideration? If a Prince vouchsafe a favorable look to a Servant, he
thinks himself happy; and shall not we count our selves so, when our God never
turns away his Eyes from us? Behold, how the vulgar run to see a King pass by;
Our God not only passes by us, but this mighty God remains with us always,
every moment encircles us with the beams of his-Majesty, and shall not we stand
amazed at his Brightness? Nay, look how men hasten to see a Monster, some
unkown African Beast, and shall not our hearts leap to think, that an
incomprehensible Beauty is continually about us? The Queen of Sheba comes from
afar, to behold the Jewish King in his Glory, and when she sees him, wonders;
we every day behold a far greater, and far more splendid Monarch; and do we
make nothing of it? How! shall not we work to do him service, that works all
our Blessings for us? How can we deal worse with a man that hates us, than by
not looking on him, when he meets us? Is God our enemy, that we care not for
beholding him in secret, when he stands before us in our Closets? The Glory of
God surrounds us, penetrates our Souls, and Bodies, more than the Sunbeam does
the Crystal stone, and shall not we tremble, when we are alone, at so great a
Majesty? The Presence of Gods Wisdom provides for us, and sees, that we may
want nothing, is always busy about us, either to direct, or to rewards us;
nay, God does not trust his Angels with this Province, but himself watches over
us every moment, every hour like a Nurse, he carries us in his everlasting
Arms. Have we such a constant Benefactor continually about us, and are not we
concerned more at his Presence?

Behold Christian, when thou art alone, that God is with thee, and in thee, and
stands by thee, before whom, all Angels vail their Faces; at whose Presence
Devils tremble; who fills Heaven and Earth with his Glory; that God is with
thee, who is altogether lovely, the Center of Happiness, before whom all
Nations are as Grasshoppers, as the small Dust of the Balance, and as a drop at
the bottom of a Bucket, who by his Providence, maintains thy Soul in life,
charges the Devil not to drag thee into Hell, commands the Powers of darkness,
not to molest thee or murder thee, takes care of thy Self, thy Wife, and
Children, and watches day and night over all that thou have, that preserves thy
House from being burnt, thy Children from being drowned, thy Cattle from
rotting, thy Barns from being consumed by Lightning; that Commands, and thou
take thy Rest, speaks the Word, and no danger must come nigh; keeps thee as
the Apple of thine own Eye, and bids his Angels to carry thee in their hands;
This God, this Beneficial God, This Immense, This Infinite, This Bountiful,
This Gracious, This Munificent, This Liberal, This Charitable God is with thee,
and about thee every where, especially, when thou art by thy self, for then
there is none with thee, but he, and wilt not thou be conscientious in his
Presence?

Was ever Ingratitude like this? The most ungrateful slave, however he rails
against his Benefactor behind his back, yet is afraid to do it in his Presence;
and will you revile God to his Face? What is your sinning against him, but
reviling of him? What is your acting contrary to his Will, but abusing of him,
(...) he be in the room with you, looks you in the Face when you do so, do not
you reproach him to his Face? Ay, but Man would be angry with us, say you, if
we should abuse him, when he is present with us, and bring us into trouble; God
never punishes us when we sin against him in private, and none but he with us.
Disingenuous Wretches! Is your Eye therefore evil because God is good? Must you
be vain, because God is patient? Foolish, because he suffers long? Must you
sin, because he does not punish, or transgress his Laws, because by his Mercies
he would oblige you to Repentance? Will you slight him, because he is kind, or
undervalue him, because he caresses you to your happiness?

Sinner, Did the Lord Jesus appear to thee in a visible shape, while thou art
alone in thy Closet; Would not thou behave thy self humbly, modestly, and
seriously, and suit thy thoughts and actions, to the Presence of so Glorious a
Being? Why, Christ's Divinity is with thee now, and cannot his Divinity have the
same influence upon thy Spirit, that his Humanity would have? Is not his
Divine, above his Humane Nature, and is not the Deity more excellent, than the
most Glorious Image, or representation?

Inconsiderate man! If thou art minded to offend God, get Curtains, that can
hide his sight; for if he see, what madness is it, to conspire against him,
before him? Go get where God sees not, and then do what thou will: God stands
with infinite Ears, and Eyes, and Understanding about thee; and with as strong
application of Spirit, as if he left contemplation of himself, to pierce thee
with all his beams; and for him to see thy Disloyalties, is a greater shame,
than if they were represented, on all the Theaters of the World.

The Soul that lives in the thoughts of Gods Presence, prepares for her richest
Comforts; for how can he want Joy, that is sensible the Fountain of Joy is with
him? How can he want Support, that is sensible, that the God of all Consolation
is with him? How can he want a refuge, or hiding place, that is sensible he
has the rock of ages in the room with him? The Palm Tree bears Fruit, when
another Tree of the same nature is set by it; how much more will a Soul bear
Fruit, that is sensible, the Great Husbandman that has planted Heaven and
Earth, and gives Sap and Nourishment to all his Creatures, is with her, and
within her, and that that Sun of Righteousness is continually warming her with
his lively beams. Have not you seen a stone thrown into the Air, make all the
haste it can, to return to its Center; so whenever such a Soul is justled out
of her Orb, either by the World, or the Devil; the God that lives in her,
forces her to return presently to her Center; even to that God, in whom she
has all that heart can wish, or reason can desire.

Fear the Lord all ye his Saints, for there is no want to them, that fear him,
says David, Psalm. 34. 9. The Soul that fears him from a sense of his
Omnipresence, is that Soul, that can lack nothing, for it can lack no strength
to arrive to the highest degrees of Holiness, for this sense will call it away
from all absurd, and undecent actions, will not suffer her to fall into sin;
and like the Hands of Angels, preserve her Foot from running against a stone;
as a large spreading Oak, deeply rooted in the Earth, mocks the rage of winds;
so a Soul, in whom this Sense is fixed, can sing securely, under all the
outrages of hellish Furies. My Flesh trembles for fear of thee; so we read,
Psalm. 119. 120. The Septuagint render it (...).
Fix or nail my flesh with thy fear, because the Hebrew Word signifies both;
and the (...)
Word thus taken, is very emphatical; for as the Man, whose Hands and Feet, and
Body are nailed to a Tree, can stir no where; so he that lives in a mighty
Sense of the Almighties Presence, dares not stir from the strait way, or from
the paths of Righteousness: Such a man thinks himself obliged to work out his
Salvation, with fear and trembling; and when Flesh and Blood would have him be
angry, or laugh at a sin, or defile himself in secret, he dares not; how can I
commit this wickedness, and sin against God, says he, for God sees me; Where
this Sense is, there Envy must be gone, love of Money must take its leave, and
depart, Wrath and Malice dares not stay, Lust, and sinful Concupiscence must
die, and all irrational Passions must expire; This makes the Herb of Grace
culminate, and spread its wholesome Leaves; This makes the Art of Praying easy,
and draws forth streams of Tears. By neglect of this Sense, the World was lost,
and by this Sense the World must be recovered. Eve, though she had the
understanding of an Angel, yet at that time when she eat the forbidden Fruit,
she looked not upon that God, that bid her shun the Tree, and so she fell; By
looking on God wherever we are, we enter into a Tower which Enemies may
besiege, but cannot take, or batter. In a word, the most effectual means,
either to obtain or keep, or recover the Grace of God, is this Sense of Gods
Omnipresence. This is a Lanthorn to our Feet, and a Light unto our Paths; and
like Fire thrown into a hedge of Reeds, burns up the evil Thoughts, that do
annoy us; so that the Man in Pelagius was certainly in the right, whose Motto
it was, that looking upon God, in all places, and all Companies, and remembering
his Presence, is as necessary, as our breath, or the Blood that Circulates in
our Veins.

XIII. Exercise.
To do all things to God's Glory; An Exercise commanded 1 Cor. 10 31. Coloss.
3. 17. Ephesians. 5. 20. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. When I say all things, I totally exclude
all Sinful Actions, for no man can intentionally commit Sin, to God's Glory.
God indeed will glorify his Justice one day in the Sinners Condemnation; and
the perverse Transgressor, who will not Glorify God now, as God, shall hear
the Saints one day Admire, and Adore him for his Just Proceedings against
obstinate Offenders; and God many times from a Great Sinner makes an Admirable
Convert, but this does not justify a Man's Sinning to Gods Glory. He that sins,
sins to God's dishonor, and the man that transgresses his Commands, seeks to
bring a disparagement on the most spotless Being. But, by all things, I mean,
all Actions that have a Natural or Moral Goodness in them; and this Exercise
consists, 1. In giving Thanks for every Blessing we enjoy. 2. In doing all
things, whether Civil, or Religious, with a good and holy design, or with an
intent to promote God's Glory.

1. In giving Thanks for every Blessing we enjoy. He that is not sensible of
the great necessity of this Exercise, has never heard of what Moses, David,
St. Paul, and the whole Army of Saints have done, and he that knows not what it
means, has certainly forgot, that God is his Creator, and he his Creature. Not
to give God thanks for the Blessings we possess, is to be a Beast, nay worse
then a Beast, for the very Dragons Praise God in their kind, as we read, Psalm
148. 7. And yet to thank him without consideration of what we do, adds nothing
to our happiness, no more then a Parrot repeating some words out of a Psalm,
makes him any whit the more Rational. To give God thanks, requires attention of
the Mind, and the Man that Praises him must seriously break forth into
Astonishments at his Goodness. To say, I Thank God, and not to feel what I say,
is an argument of Carelessness, and there cannot be a greater sign of
Stupidity, then to Commend his Goodness, and not to mind what I mean by the
Expression. It is a sense of mine own unworthiness must force those Praises
from me, and a foresight of my own demerit oblige me to high and noble thoughts
of my great Benefactor. Every Blessing must lift up my heart to Heaven, and
every Mercy I receive, must make my Soul adore the hand that sent it. If my
Lips be only employed in the Exercise, I offer indeed the Calves of my Lips,
but continue a stranger to that Living Sacrifice I am to bring, which is my
reasonable Service. Not to Praise God for his Blessings, with admiration of his
Bounty, is as bad, as to be dumb in his Celebrations; and there is little
difference between him, that says nothing, and him that speaks, like a Man
unconcerned. He that in his Blessings reflects only on the Second Causes,
whereby it was procured, robs God of his honor; and to ascribe any Mercy to
mine own Wisdom, or Industry, or Friends, is no less then Sacrilege. Nay, if I
spend the Blessing, which was given me to do good with, upon mine own Lust, I
am perfidious; and if in stead of putting it to those uses, for which God
designed it, I make it serve me in my sins, I am so unfaithful a Steward, that
I am not fit to be received into Everlasting Habitations. I must see God in
every Blessing, and take notice of his Gracious Providence in the Dispensation.
I must not feed on it as Beasts upon Grass, without regard to him, that made it
grow; and indeed, I cannot put a greater affront in this case upon the
Almighty, then by not considering the operations of his hand. Every Blessing
has the stamp of God upon it; It bears his Image and Superscription, and
therefore it is injurious, not to give to God, the things that are Gods. To
prize the various Blessings of God, I must consider, and take notice, how my
wants and necessities are supplied, and when I see, wherein I do excel others,
I cannot possibly want matter of suitable Gratitude.

But Secondly, The greater part of the Exercise is yet behind, and that is, To
do all things, whether Civil, or Religious, with a good, and holy design, and
with an intent to promote God's Glory. This is a Work which few do mind, and
even many of those, that seem to do more then others, are defective in this
Duty. I do not deny, but that a Man may lawfully have two ends in every action,
a Spiritual and a Temporal, but the Spiritual end must be my chief end; and
that which must be the Principal Motive to such a work, must be a prospect of
doing good, or being serviceable to Gods Glory. I must Preach, and Pray, and
Sing Psalms, to Gods Glory, and Drink, and Eat, and lie down, and Sleep, and
Visit, and Discourse, and follow the Works of my Lawful Calling, to Gods Glory:
When I Eat and Drink, I must not do it to please my Appetite so much, as to be
more serviceable to my Master in Heaven; When I Visit, I must have a design of
Edification in it, and must resolve to drop some Savoury Discourse in the place
I go to. When I am going to take my rest, it must not be with an intent merely
to Sleep, and to refresh my Body, but chiefly with an intent, to be the better
able to do my Masters Work; When I enter upon the Works of my Calling, my
design must be, more to please God, and to obey his Will, then to provide for
the ease and satisfaction of my Flesh; When I rise in the Morning, I must rise
with an intent to spend that day for Eternity, and whatever I do, I must do it
more to please God then to please my self; But above all, my Religious duties
must have no other design, but that God may be glorified by them, and that his
Name may be advanced, and his Honor spread, must be the great end of all my
Alms, and Supplications. Christ's Interest must be my chiefest Interest, and I
am no complete Christian, till God becomes all in all to me. To be a favorite
of Heaven, this must be my Motto, To me to live is Christ; and I must not only
say so, but say it with that seriousness, that I may be able to call God to
Witness, that it is so. And though at every bit I eat, I cannot, and need not
say, I will eat this for God, yet it is possible to mind this great end in
every solemn Action, and when I sit down to eat, to intend some Glory to God,
suitable to the occasion.

There is nothing makes a greater alteration in our Duties, then the Design,
and many a Religious performance would certainly be accepted in Heaven, if the
Design were great and noble. Worldly designs prevail too often, even in the
severest duties; and nothing spoiled the Pharisees Austerity so much, as the
ill end they had in them. It was the Design, that made that vast difference
between the Offerings of Cain, and Abel, Abel's Sacrifice being accompanied
with Poverty of Spirit, with a heart sensible of the Greatness and Goodness of
God, and willing to express it is gratitude to the Father of Lights, from whom
every good and perfect gift descends; God vouchsafed it a gracious look;
whereas Cain's Offerings proceeding, either from force and custom, or from
complaisance to his Fathers command, was scorned, and undervalued.

God's Glory is best sought by selfcontempt; and the only way to exalt our
Maker, is to vilify our selves; The viler a Man makes himself, the clearer
sight he gets of God's Greatness; and he that looks upon himself as despicable
dust and ashes, is most likely to behold the brightness of that God that made
him. They say, That a Vessel, that has Ashes in it, will hold as much Water,
as it would, if there were no Ashes in it; whereas if other things should be
put into the Vessel, it would hold the less quantity of Water. So contempt of
my self will not keep out my Exaltation of God's Glory, nor my sitting in the
dust, obscure the splendour of my Creator. A Tree has Boughs that emulate the
height of Heaven, as well as Roots that sink deep into the Ground, and the
deeper the Root lies, the loftier commonly are the Branches: so that he that
aims at his own abasement, at the same time does what he can, to Magnify his
Gracious Redeemer. None deserves Glory, so much, as he that wants nothing; and
there is not a better Argument, that he deserves it, then this, that he makes
no profit of it. He that Glorifies God, to whom it is no advantage, does most
of all advantage himself; and he that gives all Honor to God, and none to
himself, gets more by it, then the most Ambitious Prince, that engrosses all
the Glory he can to his own Achievements.

God's Glory, and my Profit, are Sisters, and while I am not sparing in
promoting the former, the other comes in in course. God makes nothing for his
Glory, but what is also profitable unto Man; and Man's Emolument is so linked
together with God's Glory, that to seek to part them, is to attempt to part
Fire, and Heat, for the one is the necessary effect of the other. As God can do
nothing against his glory, so his perfection, and goodness do so necessarily go
together, that as the one challenges the Creatures giving him all the glory, so
the other cannot but work for the Creatures happiness.

Indeed, that is only profitable to man, which brings glory to God, and the
only way to mind our Profit, is to endeavor after that, which may advance Gods
glory. That man is idle, and a superfluous Creature in the World, that does not
seek Gods glory; for this was the use, the great use for which he was made a
little lower than the Angels; and if a man's profitableness, be to be guessed
from the end, he was made for, if he declines from that end, he is altogether
useless, and scarcely deserves the name of a Creature. The very being of a man
imports a necessity of his advancing Gods glory, and he that does not study to
advance it, is more senseless, than the man, that seeks to warm himself with
snow, or the Painter, that attempts to draw a Picture with a Saw of Iron; we
loose our selves, if we seek not Gods glory, and we consider not what we do if
we make any farther use of created Beings, than they are conducive to Gods
glory. All the Riches and Treasures of this World can do no good, without I
glorify God with them, and indeed I must count them all dross and dung, If I
will make them instrumental to advance Gods glory. Whatever I think, or speak,
or do, must be dedicated to Gods glory, at least that must be my general end;
and I cannot honor my self better, than by giving God the honor due unto his
name. It is a mighty privilege, that God will give me leave to advance his
glory, and I know not how great a favor God intends me, when he bids me to do
all things in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, giving thanks unto God, and
the Father through him. It is a Dignity, which the duller sort of Mankind, are
not aware of, and were their eyes clearer, they would strive who should exceed
the other in magnifying infinite goodness.

If I aim at Gods Glory in all things, I cannot be impatient in Adversity; for
as I have reason to believe, that even my Crosses will advance Gods Glory, so I
must glorify God in them by laying my hand upon my mouth, and acknowledging
him just in sending the affliction, and magnifying his Mercy, in that he did
not send a greater. If I must not seek things pleasant and profitable, but
only, as they may tend to Gods Glory; I dare not grumble under my Cross, for I
know not but I may glorify God more by the Affliction, than by Prosperity. The
Traveller that enquires for his way, is not concerned, whether men bid him go
this way, or that way, over the Plain, or through a Wood, but goes as he is
directed; and as long, as God directs me to seek, and advance his Glory, it is
no great matter, whether the way that leads to it, be smooth, or uneasy,
clean, or dirty, so it does but lead me to the Mark, I am to aim at. The
Patient desires health, but cares not how he comes by it, whether by bitter
Potions, or by sweeter Cordials; and I do not really seek Gods Glory, except I
am indifferent whether I advance it by Riches, or by Poverty, by Good report,
or by Evil report. The way I must leave to God, and whether the Sea be rough or
smooth, that I must commit to his Wise Providence, all my care must only be to
arrive at the intended Harbor.

This is it, what Christ means, by bidding us take care, that our eye may be
single, Matthew, 6. 22. it must aim at one Thing only, viz. Gods glory, if it
looks upon more objects at once, it confounds it self, and the man, that makes
use of it. There cannot be a nobler Mark, than this, and there is nothing more
proper for our great, and lofty Souls, than this Employment. This is to be with
Jesus about our Fathers business, and to mind the end, for which we came into
the World. This is to conform to God, and to be workers together with him in
the enlarging of his Kingdom. This is it, we pray for in the famous Prayer, Thy
Kingdom come, and we then live according to our Prayer, when the advancement of
that Kingdom is not the least part of our endeavors. This is to glory in the
Lord; and there can be no greater commendation, then that we seek to bring all
back again to the spring, or fountain, from which they had their being. God
took more care, and pains, about creating man, than he did about other
creatures, and whereas he spoke the Universe into being, about man, he
consults, and deliberates, how to make him after his own Image. And since Gods
perfection consists in glorifying himself, man can be man no longer, for he can
be Gods Image no longer, if he does not with all his might promote his Creators
glory.

This is to make Religion the darling of our Souls, and he answers the great
design of his Maker, who takes that care that God may be in all his Thoughts.
He that does so, shows, that he delights in God, and that God has engrossed
his chiefest joy. Then delight in God is come to a just pitch, when the Soul is
thus greedy to advance Gods glory, and then the mind does truly taste, how
sweet, and gracious the Lord is, when Gods honor becomes an ingredient into
all its designs and purposes.

Take the Wings of the morning, O my Soul, and fly away, that thou may be
at rest, and think how thy God has honored thee; How studious has God been
of thy Glory? How has he honored thee by making thee an Angelical Substance,
Sublime, and capable of soaring above this trasitory World? How has he
honored thee by putting all things under thy feet, and by making thee capable
to converse with him, to all Eternity? How has he honored thee, in that he
would not trust his Angels with the Charge of making thee, but would frame thee
with his own hands, and breath himself the breath of life into thee? How has
he honored thee by providing so glorious a Palace, as this lower World for thy
residence, and by promising thee a nobler building, made without hands Eternal
in the Heavens? How has he honored thee in that he has charged his Angels to
guard thee in thy going out, and in thy coming in? Nay how has he honored
thee, in that he has not spared his own Son, but has delivered him up to be
sacrificed for thy Sin, that thou might be capable of being exalted from
Earth to Heaven? How has he honored thee by taking notice of thy Prayers, and
Alms, and holy Labors, and by rewarding of them with Blessings great and
wonderful, and such as thou durst not have aspired to, had not his bounty
prompted him to such Liberality? Has God so honored thee, and art not thou
obliged to seek his glory? Has he glorified thee, and is he willing to give
thee greater glory, and will thou think much of glorifying him? Behold thy
Dignity, behold the Honor God has laid upon thee, and be ashamed of thy great
neglect of seeking his glory. Get up once more, and purify thy self. Learn to
love him dearly. Learn to see him in all things, and then thou will long for
his goodness, seek his praise, breathe nothing but his honor, and be zealous
for his glory.

XIV. Exercise.
To stir up, and to Exercise our Graces, as we have occasion, and to grow
stronger in the Grace of God, an exercise commanded, 2 Timothy 1. 6. 2. Pet. 1. 5,
6, 7, 8. 2 Pet. 3. 18. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 12. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1. By this Exercise I do not
only mean, when we are tempted to any sin, to practice the contrary Virtue, a
Subject, whereof I have already discoursed in the Eleventh Exercise; but to
become eminent in those Virtues, the seeds whereof lie scattered in our Souls;
it is not enough now and then to venture upon a single virtuous act, but the
virtue must become habitual to us, natural, and easy, and we must learn to
harden it into immobility.

My Faith must not only engage me to Praying, and Hearing, but must advance me
into a readiness to die with all Martyrs for the least Article, the Church has
taught me upon the Authority of Gods word; it must raise my Soul to a
transcendent love to the Law of God, to an insatiable hungring and thirsting
after him, to a mighty delight in his presence, to a sacred grief in his
absence, and to resolutions to seal the Truth of God with my own Blood. My
Hope must not only make me have a good apprehension of Gods Power and Clemency,
but must force me to repose all my Concerns on his holy Providence, make me
pray with fervor, and incessantly, and lead me on to trust him in most
desperate plunges, make me ashamed, to think, that a Patient, should trust his
health with a Physician, the Covetous his Estate with a Lawyer, the Blind his
Life with a Child, or Dog, and that I should not trust my self to the Bounty,
and Conduct of him, that has done all things well, that defends all Creatures
even to the Snail, and least root of Grass, defends Serpents, and Crows, and
showers down Blessings on his Enemies, and therefore cannot possibly be
supposed to forsake those, that hope in him.

My Patience must not only extend to such Wrongs, and Injuries, as do not
blemish much either my Fortune, or Reputation, but I must so exercise this
noble Virtue, that I may learn to bear, and weather far greater blows, even the
Censures of good men, and the contradictions of such, as are Persons of Credit,
and Interest; This grace must be so cultivated, that I may no longer call
Afflictions miseries, but donatives of mercy, gifts that come from my dearest
friend, God, that means to conduct me to my happiness, I must get up to a
higher form in this School, and learn, that I am a Christian not to be Rich,
and Pompous, and take my pleasure in the World (God need not have descended,
and shed tears, and blood, and given Precepts for this) but to bear the Cross,
and to become conformable to the Sufferings of Jesus. In a word, I must learn
to fear nothing so much, as that God will give over afflicting me.

My Meekness must not only teach me to be gentle to great men, but I must so
improve it, that it may appear to all that converse with me; and I must learn
to be meek, even to those, which I have power over, to those which are under my
Charge, and whom I could by stripes, and threatenings, force into respect, and
obedience; and when justice and conscience oblige me to punish, even in that
punishment, my mildness must be seen. I must learn to be a Lamb, and to imitate
the softness of Wool; for nothing appeases the angry Elephant, as the meekness
of the former, and nothing resists the fury of Cannon-shot, like the softness
of the other. I must not give over, till I have brought my self to a temper,
whereby my passions may be calm, and quiet, and serene, while those about me,
and who chide me and are angry with me, make a fearful noise, and are
transported with indignation.

My Self-resignation, may possibly serve me to leave my self to the Will and
Direction of God in the enjoyment of moderate Prosperity; but here I must not
rest, but advance this Virtue to a far higher pitch, that come what will,
whether Weakness, Feebleness, or Lameness, or Agues, or Fevers, or
Consumptions, or Falling Sickness, or the Stone, or the Gout, or Poverty, or
Nakedness, or contempt, or loss of Friends, or loss of Father, Mother,
Children, Sisters, Brothers, Relations, Benefactors, Money, Lands, Houses, etc.
I may conform entirely to the Will of God.

My Obedience may lead me to do several things, God has commanded, but I must
drive it farther, and learn to obey God readily, humbly, cheerfully,
universally, indefatigably, learn to obey him in things that cross my
inclination, my temper, my sensual appetite, that are against my profit, my
temporal Interest, my honor, and my natural desires, without disputing,
evading, or perverting his Commands, and though I apprehend not the reason of
his Commands.

My Modesty may oblige me to bashfulness in asking, but I must exercise it into
greater perfection, till I hate detraction, shun contention, avoid boasting,
keep secrets committed to my breast, fly idleness, watch against imprudence,
strive against irreverence, and leave all affectedness.

My Temperance may make me cautious, and afraid of eating, or drinking more
than nature requires; but this is not the only effect it must work in me, but
it must teach, and oblige me to go on and avoid curiosity in Diet, Clothes, and
Furniture, and bring me to Self-denial in Sleep, Recreations, Words, Gestures,
to ruling of my Affections, and to purifying of my Thoughts, and Imaginations.

My Moderation is not come yet to its full growth, while I do no more, but fear
overvaluing sublunary comforts beyond their intrinsic worth, and the end, for
which God does allow them; but I must make the virtue larger, it must grow in
me like the Lillies, and spread its branches, as the Cedars of Lebanon. I must
learn to keep my delight, and mirth in outward enjoyments, within bounds. I
must learn to moderate my grief, when they are taken away; in a word, weep, as
if I wept not, rejoice, as though I rejoiced not, and buy, as though I
possessed not, and use the World, as if I used it not. I must learn to be
moderate in my contests with my Neighbor, moderate in my censures, moderate in
my passions, moderate in my principles, moderate in my judgment, moderate in
disputes about Religion.

My Love to God is but weak, if I only stand up to vindicate his Word, and holy
Oracles, assert their Divinity, and their Truth, but I must blow the fire into
flames, learn to embrace mean and painful things for God, to bear incommodities
in duties with patience, to be undiscouraged in succesless Labors, root out
Vice, and plant Virtue in all that depend upon me. My love must be so
exercised, till God becomes the life of my Soul, the light of mine eyes, and
till I can say, Lord, Here I am, send me, give me Grace to do, what thou do
command, and command, what thou will. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine;
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his lips, for his love is better than Wine.
O, my love, my life, my desire, my delight, my riches, my treasure, my all, my
happiness, my hope, my comfort, my beginning, my end, too late have I known
thee, too late have I loved thee, O that I had loved thee sooner!

My Charity to my neighbor, is but in its infancy, while I am only civil and
respectful to him without prejudicing my self, but it must be exercised, and it
will grow large and lovely, extend to his Soul, as well as to his body, teach
me to be tender of his credit, compassionate to his calamities, helpful in his
distress, to rejoice at his prosperity, to admonish him to holiness, to
encourage him to good Works, and to forgive him, even as I hope to be forgiven
in the day of our Lord Jesus.

My Repentance must not only fill me with melancholy thoughts, about another
life; nor teach me only to suppress the sins, I have been guilty of; but I must
learn to strike at the root of sin; it must elevate my Soul, and make it
fruitful in all good works, and I must learn to hate sin, as much as I loved it
before, and to answer my degrees of sin with my degrees of contrition, and my
measure of vanity, with my measure of sanctification and righteousness.

My Redeeming the time must not only make me spend some hours in private
devotion, but I must learn to improve opportunities, whereby my better part may
be exalted, not to allow my self in idleness, to do that, which is worth
spending my time in, not to spend it in sin or satisfactions of the Flesh, to
part with vain thoughts and projects, to rise early, if my strength will
permit, to be industrious in my Calling, to season my natural, and civil acts,
and the Works of my Profession with holy contemplations, to remember, what will
stand me in most stead after death, and so to number my days, that I may apply
my heart unto wisdom, even unto that wisdom, which consists in Knowing, and
doing the Will of God, in procuring Peace, and Pardon, in mortification of our
Lusts, and in conformity to Christ's example.

Then I exercise all these Graces, when I work them into greater solidity, of
seeble make them lusty, and vigorous, and of fickle, and uncertain, make them
fixed, constant, and immovable, till I come to abound in the work of the Lord
Jesus, and into this strength and glory they may be wrought by the assistance
of Gods Free and Generous Spirit, who is nigh unto them that call upon him,
unto all such, as call upon him in truth. I dislike Ps. 145 18.
not the practice of some Christians, that do exercise some particular Grace,
more than the rest, and render themselves eminent in it, and make it their
chief business to be ready, prompt, and accurate in it, as Gregory the Great,
whose excellency lay in entertaining Strangers; as the pious Lucius of France,
who took great delight in visiting Hospitals, and serving the sick with his own
hands; as Tobit, whose Talent lay chiefly in burying Tobit. 1, 17.
the Dead out of Charity; or as that Lady, Cassian speaks of, who took into
Cassian collat. 18. c. 14.
her house a wayward, troublesome, peevish, choleric, poor Widow, that she
might become eminent in Patience. Such Exercises I confess are great and noble,
and befit the holiness of a Christian; but yet one particular Grace must not be
exercised to the decay of the rest, or with secret hopes, that God, who sees us
laborious in one Virtue, will dispense with our neglect of others. I am
sensible it is with Grace as it is with Nature, and some Graces as some Actions
are more suitable to our inclinations, than others, not but that we are obliged
to love, and embrace all, but some our affections are more violently carried
out after, than others, as a Father, though he is kind to all his Children, yet
by some secret instinct, or Propensity has a more tender affection to one,
than to another, and without all peradventure it is a very laudable and
commendable thing, to be industrious in any gracious Work, and Relious Action,
but however our inclinations may chiefly run after one particular Grace, the
rest also must be duly exercised, and fortified into habit, and a second
nature, else we have reason to suspect, that that seemingly holy fruit, is not
a Plant of our heavenly Fathers planting, who disperses influences, and
assistances sufficient for the growth of every Grace, and improvement of every
Virtue in the Soul, and consequently justly expects, that his Vineyard should
bring forth sweet Grapes, not some sower, and some sweet, but all sweet, and
all pleasing to a spiritual palate, and appetite.

Of the necessity of this Exercise none can doubt, that does but take pains to
read over the several Parables of the Gospel, wherein Grace is compared to
Seed, and sure no Gardener, or Husbandman ever threw Seed into the Ground, but
took care, that it might grow, and advance into a Blade, next into an Ear, and
in the end into ripe Corn: all the Exhortations, all the Admonitions, all the
Counsels, in Scripture, to Stedfastness, and Abounding, and Increasing, and
Going on to Perfection, do with one Mouth, and with one Voice, proclaim the
necessity of this Exercise. And, O Christians! if you would know, what it is to
recover the great loss you had in Adam, this Exercise will be your
Schoolmaster, this will, in some Measure, bring you up to that Innocence, and
Perfection he enjoyed in Paradise; This will reentitle you to that Image of
God, in which he was at first created; This will make the Divine Characters
which Sin has blotted, legible again; This will make the Divine Nature
flourish in you again; Make your Faces shine like that of Moses, when he
descended from the Mount: This will set a Beauty on your Souls, fit for God to
be enamored withal; By this you will be able to guess at the Glory of the
first Creation, and what wonderful Creatures your first Father and Mother were,
before the fatal Tree became a Snare to their Appetite: This will make you fit
company for your Head Christ Jesus, who therefore gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and Teachers, even for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all
come in the unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect Man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; for
indeed, this is growing up unto him in all things, from whom the whole body
joined together, and compacted by that, which every joint supplies, according
to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes increase in the
Body, unto the edifying it self in love, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13, 15.

XV. Exercise.
Every Night before we go to Bed, to call our selves to an Account for the
Actions of the Day, and Examine our Hearts, and Lives, how we have discharged
our Duty toward God, and toward Man; An Exercise commanded Psalm. 4. 4. 2 Cor.
13. 5. Jerem. 8. 6. This Exercise is the life of all the rest; and the great
reason, Pers. sat. 4. Ut nemo in sese tentat descendere nemo? sed praecedenti
spectatur mantica tergo.
why Men make no greater progress in Goodness, is because, they do not study
and search their own Lives, and Actions. How should we know, what good we ought
to do, except we examine, what evil we commit. The Merchant at night casts up
the gains of the day, and if he finds, he has lost more, then he has gained,
seeks to recover it with the first opportunity. It Is a wonderful thing, we
should examine our Servants about trifles, and inconsiderable matters, and
leave our selves, about whom Heaven and Earth are concerned, unexamined. A Man
tryes the Oxen he has bought, whether they be strong to labor, or no, and his
Horses, whether they will do him service or no, and sees, whether he has all
his Sheep, and whether none of his Cattle be lost; and shall we be such enemies
to our own Souls, as not to see, what condition they are in?

No Man can be a good Man, that neglects his Exercise, for every good Man must
be cautious of offending God; But How can any Man be cautious of offending him,
that does not search and see, what it is, that does offend him, and whether his
own actions be not the things, that do displease him. Nothing will make a man
more cautious, then this frequent calling himself to an account; and since
every rational person, that chooses the end, must necessarily choose the means
also, that lead to that end, it will unavoidably follow, that he that is a good
Man, and cautious of offending God, cannot but resolve upon this
Self-examination, the great means to arrive to that cautiousness. This was
David's practice, and long before him, Isaac, who went every Night into the
Psalm. 119. 54.
Field to Meditate, as we read, Genesis 24. 63. Psalm. 63. 6.
no doubt, in that Meditation, reflected on the Actions of the Day, that he
might Praise God for the particular Assistances, and Influences, he had felt,
and for the future watch against the Errors, and Defects, he had been guilty of
that day.

Men, to whom the Word of God never Vid. Auton. lib. 10. Sect. 37. (...).
Laert. lib. 8. in Pythag. and lib. 1. in Cleob. and Cicerlib. de senect. Cael.
Rhadig. lib. 11. lect. antiq. c. 1. Senec. de Ira. l. 3. c 36. Animus quotidie
ad rationem reddendam vocandua est, etc. Heraclitus interrogatus quid faceret,
respondit. (...). Plutarch. adv. Colot. and Julian. de Cynismo Orat. 1.
came, have seen the necessity of this Exercise, and thought, they could not be
Men without it; and, O my Friends! Can we be Christians without it? It was one
of the Canons of the Pythagorean Discipline, to call to mind what they had been
doing in the Day, and sometimes they reflected on what they had done two or
three days before. This was the Doctrine, and Practice of Cleobulus, and of
the Indian Gymnosophists, who strictly enquired, what good they had done in the
day time; And, How like a Christian does the Noble Seneca speak, when he tells
his Friend Novatus, The heart must every day be called to an account. So did
the brave Sextius, before he composed himself to sleep, when daylight was shut
in, he Asked his heart, What Disease, what Distemper of Nature have thou Cured?
What sin have thou withstood? Wherein art thou better? Wrath and Anger will
decay, and cool, if thus it be called to the Bar every day; What can be more
pleasant, then thus to explore the day? How soft must that rest be, that
succeeds this Examination! How sweet, how free, how easy must it be, when the
Soul is either Commended, or Admonished, and a Man is his own Judge, and turns
Critic upon his own Life? This Power I use, and every day I have Pleadings in
my Soul, when the Candles are taken away, and my Wife, knowing my Custom, has
left me to my self. I dive into the whole Day, and measure my Words and Actions
over again; I hide nothing from my self, I pass by nothing that I have said or
done, for why should I be afraid of mine own Errors, when I can say to my
heart, Take heed, do so no more, I forgive thee at this time. Thus spoke the
best Tutor of the worst of Princes; and though a Heathen, yet I do not see, how
a Christian could have delivered himself better.

It has been the serious study of Holy Men what Rules they might prescribe to
young beginners in Religion to subdue their Sins: Some, as St. Anthony, have
advised, to Write down the sins of the day past every night, and so to look
them over. Others (as Zenon) have directed Men to take a Coal of Fire now and
then, and hold it to their Fingers, till they feel the pain, and from thence to
conclude, what the Tortures of Hell will be. The Jews talk like Madmen, Rabbi
Eliezer ben Jacob in Minchah.
when they Prate of their Phylacteries, as Amulets against sin, and
Preservatives of Virtue. Nothing certainly will do it better, then this daily
Self-examination, for this will bring me to a right knowledge of my sins, set
them in order before me, and charge me home, as Nathan did the straying David,
Thou art the Man. This word was rash, That thought evil, This action was
contrary to the will of God, That was inconvenient, This savoured of baseness
of Spirit, and that of Pride; This Expression was Malicious, and that Gesture
proceeded from Ill Will, and Envy, etc. Not a few Men are lost, because they
will not know, that many of their Actions, or Words, are sinful, such
especially, as fit them for converse with vain People, and render them
acceptable to careless, sensual company; They are content with a General
Confession of their Sins, and flatter themselves, that they have done well
enough, when they have Confessed that they are Miserable Sinners. In their
Devotions they love to dwell on Generals, and shun coming to particular
Offenses, as a Malefactor does Self-accusation. Communing with their own
Hearts, would unveile to them the particular Errors of their Lives, and would
bring them to such a Knowledge of themselves, as would at once Instruct, and
Terrify them; and were they once acquainted with their particular
Miscarriages, they durst not sin against Knowledge, at lest very few would dare
to be so bold.

And, as this daily Examination would discover to us our particular Offenses,
so at the same time it would show us the multiplicity of those particulars, and
the multiplicity would fright us from the Commission, and oblige us to take
another course. The multiplicity of our sins would appear so unworthy, so
monstrous, so full of Ingratitude, that we should be ashamed to own our
dependence upon the Allmighty, and to heap Injury upon Injury, and Offense upon
Offense: This would make the Body of Sin look much bigger, then ordinarily it
does, and the vastness of the heap would be a discouragement from Sin, as a
Load, which the Porter cannot lift, frights him from the attempt of carrying it.

This Communing with our own Hearts would awaken our Consciences, and they
being once awake, would teaze, and haunt, and follow us, and not leave us till
we resolve to part with the dearest sins, we have; There is a mighty difference
between a Conscience, that is a sleep, or oppressed with cares, and pleasures
of the World, and a Conscience, that is broad awake. The Conscience that is hushed
into a slumber, lets the Sinner do any thing, he has a mind to, so much at
least, as is consistent with his Honor and Reputation of the World, it will
let him lie, swear, forswear, deceive, dissemble, be angry, etc. without
contradicting him; it will let him go to bed quietly, eat and drink, and go
into company without molestation, and though he fancies all the while, that his
Conscience is at peace with him, yet most certainly, it is nothing but
stupidity, and carnal security, which will end at last in fearful thundering,
and lightning; but a Conscience, that is awake, will disturb a man in every
place, he comes at; check him, if he does but look awry, represent to him the
mercies, and terrors of the Lord, bid him remember, he has a Soul to be saved,
assure him, that as light as such a sin may seem in other men's apprehensions,
it cannot but grieve a Holy God, fright him with flashes of Hellfire, show him
Tophet afar off, expostulate with him, how he can so much forget himself, as to
displease the most lovely, and most amiable being. This Conscience will do,
when it has shook off the chains of slumber, and if this be its nature, and
selfexamination rouzes it, it must needs follow, that this Communing with our
own Heart must be the best preservative against the infection of any sin
whatsoever.

The use of this Exercise appears to me so necessary, that I cannot forbear
enlarging upon it, and giving you what Directions I can, for the faithful
performance of it, and they are these following:

1. Let it not be done slightly, or superficially, as careless Servants sweep a
Room, leaving half of the rubbish behind them. Some Christians there are, who
being loath to be miserable hereafter, and sensible, that Christ must be obeyed
in every thing, will force themselves to do any thing, they hear, is their
Duty; but they do not properly perform the Duty, but only something like it,
that their hearts may not smite them for the total omission. They do it so
slovenly, and so overly, that they had as good have left it undone. The shadow
of a duty is one thing, and the substantial part of it is another, and he that
is expert in drawing the former, is not therefore not necessarily skilled in
the latter. He that calls himself to an account for the sins, he has
committed, and not for the neglects he has been guilty of, does the work by
halves; or he that spends only a few transient thoughts upon his Actions, and
presently interrupts the Task again with some impertinent business; or takes a
careless survey of his Behavior and Deportment, and mingles thoughts of the
World, or of sensual Pleasure, with those Contemplations of himself, shows he
has no stomach, no desire, no appetite to this Spiritual Food, that the World
does yet engross his desires, and affections, and that he thinks Heaven scarce
worth taby violence.

2. When you go about it, go about it willingly, and cheerfully, not like men,
that seem angry with God, for laying such a yoke upon the neck of his
Disciples. I do not deny, but that the Devil and our own Lusts will make
Objections against it, plead, that it is not necessary, or that hereby our
worldly Profit will be much obstructed, and that we do not read of many Saints,
that have used it, and that it is a thing not common, and that we must mind the
Works of our Calling, and that sleep will oppress us, if we go about this Work
at night, etc. The Devil did never yet let any man go quietly to Heaven; and
therefore such impediments he will certainly throw in any man's way, that has
serious resolutions not to neglect it; but these objections must be
courageously answered, vigorously resisted, and manfully opposed, for the
strong man will not leave the house, except you throw him out by force. He that
is afraid of discomposing his soft Lusts, and Passions, to be sure can do no
good here; and whatever unwillingness may creep, or steal upon us in this
Exercise, our business must be to strive, and pray, and labor hard against it,
and to resolve to cross it, whatever it cost us; Suggestions, that would make
us unwilling to venture, must not be dandled, courted, or flattered. No, but
must be beaten off with a strong hand, and we must not give over till the
Exercise becomes delightful to us; for as it is in the Works of Charity, so in
this, God ever loves a cheerful Giver. To go about this Work as the Ox goes to
the Shambles, to be forced, and dragged to it, as an untowardly Schoolboy to
his Book, to scratch our Heads, when we are to apply our selves to it, and to
be drawn to it by fears of Hell, and terrors within, is with the Jews, Mal. 2.
13. To cover the Altar of the Lord with tears and weeping, and crying out,
insomuch, that he regards not our offering any more, or receives it with a good
will at our hands.

3. Let it be done with an intent to be better. Whatever we do in Religion,
this must be our end. He that examines himself at night in course, or makes a
formality of it, and has no real intent to leave, and watch against the sins
and neglects, which upon examination he finds in himself, or to become more
serious, beats the Air, and what is worse, mocks the Almighty, and takes his
Covenant in his Mouth, while he hates to be reformed, as it is said, Ps. 56.
16, 17. One would think, no man should undertake this Task, but with an intent
to become more cautious of sinning, and more watchful against temptations; yet
such is the deceitfulness of our Hearts, that we are apt to fancy, God likes
the Duty, and regards not the Effect, as the Harlot, Prove. 7. 14. This day have
I paid my Vows, therefore came I forth to meet thee. She made her Vows, and
Prayers, not the means, but the end; Means they are indeed, whereby God would
makes us holier; but he that rests in the means, and goes no further, is like
unto a man, that works in a Garden, or Vineyard, and rids no ground; Labor is
the means whereby the Garden is to be manured, and cultivated, that it may
bring forth Flowers, Herbs, and Plants, and all manner of pleasant Fruits; He
that does not make this fruitfulness the end of his Labor, takes pains, but
does do nothing.

4. Let it be done with some aggravation of the defects, and errors of your
lives; which you detect by examination. The bare discovery of our neglects, or
defects, will signify little, except they be represented to our minds in such
black Characters, as shall work us into detestation. Being drawn at large, and
the offenses heightened from circumstances, and the defects considered, together
with the light, and knowledge we have, with the encouragements, motives,
arguments, God is pleased to give us, with the various opportunities we enjoy,
with the parts, gifts, abilities, the Almighty has bestowed upon us; they will
look more big and dreadful, and consequently the sight will make deeper
impressions upon us, and engage us to greater care and circumspection. On the
other side, where the influences, assistances, helps, and strength, and power,
against any sin, or temptation, or any other mercy we have received in the day
time, be heightened and made more lively, by considering our vileness,
unworthiness, wretchedness, and how undeserved these Blessings are, how they
savor of bowels of compassion of Gods Paternal care, and discover Gods
unspeakable love to his poor Creatures, and his immense liberality to Wretches,
that have deserved his anger and fury, and indignation; the Heart will be more
taken with them, and engaged to a more servent love to God, and to greater
alacrity to run in the way of his Commandments.

5. Those that have Families, let them by all means exhort their Children, and
Servants to this Exercise. Those I mean which are capable of it. And they are
capable of it sooner, than we aware, especially if we do entice them to it by
Rewards, and Promises, till custom has made it pleasant, and then they will
desire our approbation more, than our recompense. This is certainly part of
that walking within our houses with a perfect heart, which David makes the
necessary qualification of a good Housekeeper, Ps. 101. 2. Goodness is ever
communicative, and no man loves God truly, that does not desire others should
love him, as well as himself. It is the nature of true Devotion, to be active,
and zealous to make Proselytes, and indeed where the heart is enamored with
Gods Beauty, and Excellency, it is impatient, till it brings others into a
relish, and liking of it. If this Communing with our own hearts be profitable
to our own Souls, why should it not be so to the Souls of persons committed to
our trust? If we think it necessary to our Salvation, shall we think, those
under our Charge may find out another way to Heaven? If we look upon it, as a
sure Preservative, to guard us against Sin, shall we leave those, whose Souls,
as well as Bodies, we are to provide for, to secure themselves against Sin, as
well as they can? These are absurdities, which a Christian must not be guilty
of, except such Christians as the Angel of the Church of Sardis was, who had a
name, that he lived but was dead, Rev. 3. 1.

6. Take such a method in this daily Self-examination, as is most easy and
natural. Either proceed directly to contemplation of your outward, and inward
man, or lay the Decalogue before you, or make Christ's Sermon upon the Mount
the Rule of this Exploration. I will touch upon each of these Methods, and
leave it to your discretion, to take, which you please. Indeed we should not
need to descend to such particulars, had we to deal with men that were in love
with Religion, and would apply general things to themselves, think themselves
concerned in every Lesson, that is delivered in public; and when they hear
Sinners reproved and condemned, cry with the Disciples of our Lord, Master, is
it I? But our Business for the most part being with men, who like wanton
Children will scarce eat the Meat, that is cut for them, and are so choked with
the Cares and Riches, and Enjoyments of this World, that the loudest Thunders
of God make no impression on them, and fancy, because they are not particularly
named in the Bible, that therefore the Commands there given, do not belong to
them, we are forced to make the way, they are to walk in, as easy as we can;
remove the Stones out of it, and tell them every step of the way, in hopes,
that all these pains may work upon their good Nature, and oblige them to break
loose from the Kingdom of Sin and Darkness And therefore,

1. If the Actions and Motions of our outward, and inward man be made the Rule
of this Daily Self-examination, the particular questions, that must be proposed
to our Hearts, at night, must be such as these: To begin with the Senses;

As for the Ear; Have not I this day heard some ill, immodest, unsavory
Expressions used by others, and has it been a grief to me, has it been a
trouble to my Soul, to think that my God was abused and dishonored by it? Have
not my Ears been open to corrupt, and vain communications? Have not I been
tickled with some obscene, or filthy Story, I have heard? Have I heard my
Neighbor reviled, or ill spoken of, and have I done the duty of a Friend, and
justified his innocent Behavior? Have I heard this day of any undecent
deportment of any of my Family, and have I reproved them for it, or admonished
them to amendment of life? Have not I been pleased with the Commendations I
have heard men pass upon me, and has not their applause tempted me to
vainglory? Have I heard of losses I have had, with Patience? Have I heard a
man speak disgracefully of me without being enraged at the Calumny? Have I
heard men entice me to sin, and have I abhorred the invitation? Have I heard
men, Swear and Curse, and have I been concerned at the greatness of their Sin?

On the Lords day especially; Have I heard the Word this day with seriousness?
Did I come to Hear with Resolutions to Practice, what I heard? Was my Heart
affected with the happy Message of Grace and Pardon? Was not I more taken with
the Ministers delivery, than the great things he spoke of? Was it custom that
obliged me to go and hear, or was it a fervent desire to be edified, and built
up in my most holy Faith? Do I feel in my self any Purposes at this present to
do as I have been advised to day? Did I prepare my self for hearing the Word by
suitable Thoughts, and Contemplations of that awful Majesty, before whom I was
to appear? Did I feel any heat in my Hearing which was ready to consume the
Straw, and Stubble of my carnal Affections? Did I find any sweetness in the
Word of God, I heard to day? Was my heart ravished when I heard the joyful news
of Christ's Redemption to day? Was my Soul affected with the love of God, when I
heard it described to day at the Receiving of the Holy Sacrament? Have I done
my duty at home? Have I made my Servants and Children hear, what the Lord their
God requires at their hands?

As for the Eye; Have I this day lifted up mine Eyes to Heaven, and taken
notice of Gods Providence? Have not I fed mine Eyes with some unlawful
Spectacle? Have not I seen men sin, and laughed at it? Have not I beheld
immodest Actions, and been delighted with them? Has not the sight of such a
Vanity, transported me into admiration of it? Have I read a Portion of the Holy
Scriptures to day, and remembered to apply the things, I read of, to mine own
Conscience? Have I been enflamed with the goodness of the men I have read of?
Have the Duties and Precepts I have read caused in me a willingness to perform
them? Have I beheld the Finger of God in the Blessings, I have received to day?
Have I taken notice of Gods goodness to me, and mine, and stood amazed at it?
Have I looked upon the Works of God to day, upon Trees, and Herbs, and Flowers,
and admired the Wisdom, Glory, and Bounty of God?

As for the Tongue, and Lips; Have I wilfully spoke evil of no man to day? Have
not I rendered Railing for Railing, and Threatening for Threatening? Have I been
careful to drop something of God in the company, I have been in? Did not I Eat
and Drink to day, more to please my Appetite, then to repair the decayed
strength of my nature, that I might be more serviceable to God, and my
Neighbor? Did I take occasion to speak of something, that is good at my Table?
And when I craved a Blessing, was not my mind more intent upon the Meat before
me than on the Great God above me? Have not I been intemperate to day? Did not
I Eat, and Drink more than Nature required? Have I Prayed with my Family to
day, and did that Prayer proceed from an humble sense of our Spiritual Wants,
and Necessities? Have not I said something, whereby my Neighbor might suffer
in his Credit, and Reputation? Have I dropped never a Lie in my Shop, or Trade,
or in company, either in Jest, or for some Advantage, or to please Men? Have
not I rashly made, or falsely broke a Promise? Have I in my Addresses, and
Answers, showed all Meekness unto all Men? Have not I talked Surly, or Proudly
to a Man because he was Poor? Have not I disdained to speak to him, because he
went in Rags? Have I avoided foolish Talk, and when I have been tempted to
break a Jest, which was either Smutty, or might be some way prejudicial to my
Neighbor, have I suppressed it, and been more ambitious of being Grave, and
Modest, than of the Reputation of being Witty?

As for the Hands and Feet, whereby the Scripture usually expresses Man's
actions; Have I been diligent in the Duties of my Calling to day? Have I
defrauded no Man, deceived no Man? Have I dealt uprightly and honestly with all
Men? Have I shunned that company, which I was afraid would draw me into Sin?
Have not I complied with some sinful Action of the Company, I have been in?
Have I some way or other shown my abhorreney and detestation of their Sins?
Have I really endeavored more to please God than Men? What good have I done to
day? Have not I taken more pains, and care to dress my Body, than I have done
to beautify my Soul? Have not I been more curious about my Clothes, than about
my Graces? Have not I been more careful to make my Face pleasing to Spectators,
than I have been to approve my self to God? Have not I lost somewhat of the
Life of Religion, by going into such Society? Have not I spent my time in
idleness? Have I taken care to spend it for Eternity?

As for the Mind; Have I endeavored to disposses my Mind of Evil thoughts to
day? Have I called in Pious and Spiritual Reflections? Have I resisted Wandering
thoughts in Prayer? Have not I suffered worldy thoughts to eat out the virtue
of my Prayers? Have I in my supplications represented to my Mind, Gods
Greatness, Goodness, Majesty, and Holiness? And was I sensible of my Spiritual
Wants, and Necessities all the time? Have I been much in holy Ejaculations to
day? Was God first and last in my thoughts, when I Waked this morning, and went
to Rest last night?

As for the Conscience; Have I made Conscience of the least Sins to day? Have I
conscientiously discharged the Duties of my several Relations? Have I done, as
a person, in such a Relation would, and should have done? Have I made
Conscience of doing a thing, which I have either known, or feared to be a Sin?
Have not I made light of Sin? Have not I laughed at those Sins, I should have
Mourned at? Have I been concerned at other Men's Sins, as well as at mine own?

As for the Passions and Affections; Have not I given way to the Workings of
Pride, and Anger to day? Have not I been angry with my Neighbor without a
Cause? Have not I in a Passion given men ill Language? Have not I said that in
my Wrath, which now I wish I had not? Have not I been fiery and hot upon very
slight and trivial occasions? Have not I mistrusted Gods Providence? Have not I
been more careful about making provision for the Flesh, than about enriching of
my Soul? Have not I found greater joy in temporal, than in spiritual Blessings?
Has not such a vanity, such a Present, such a Gift affected, and ravished me
more, than the news of Gods Grace, and Pardon, and the influences of the Holy
Ghost? Have I watched against Wrath and Envy, and Malice, and immoderate Grief,
and carnal Mirth? Have I got ground of such a corruption? Have I been better to
day, than yesterday? Have I served God without distraction, more to day, than I
have done formerly?

Such questions as these you may put to your Hearts, if you mean to take your
outward and inward man into consideration. But then,

2. If you had rather make the Ten Commandments your Rule, the Account may be
taken in this manner. As to the First Commandment; Have not I this day confided
in the Creature more, than in the Creator? Have not I been wilfully ignorant of
some Truth, that has been brought to my Ears? Have not I despised God, by
rejecting some motions of his Holy Spirit? Have not I lived to day like a Man,
that does not believe the Promises, and threatenings of God? Have not I doubted
of some Truth revealed in the Word of God, or lived as if I had doubted of his
Providence? Has my Faith been lively this day? Did not I sink into carnal
Security? Have I exercised my Hope in God? Have I expressed my love to God to
day? Have not I loved some outward thing more than God? Has not my love to God
been in words only? Has it discovered it self in actions? Have I desired to be
at peace with God, and to be united unto him more? Have I done nothing, that
has savored of hatred or contempt of God?

As to the Second Commandment; Have I feared God to day, and have I feared him
more, than all the men, I have had to do with? Have I been very cautions of
offending him? Have I abhorred the motion, when I have been tempted to any
Evil? Have I obeyed God in sincerity? Has there been any known Sin, that I
have not shunned, or has there been any known Duty, which I was not more
forward to perform, than to omit? Have not I exalted my self, or thought my
self better than my Neighbors? Have I given God all the Glory, and have I
spoke very modestly of my self? Have not I been peevish and impatient, under
such a Providence, that has crossed my Designs? Have not I indulged my self in
Hypocrisy? Have I been more desirous to be, than to seem good? Have I given
God that Worship to day, which is due to him? Have I prayed to him in Truth,
and praised him with joyful Lips?

As to the Third Commandment; Have not I this day neglected an opportunity of
giving good Counsel, and Advice to men, related to me? Have not I shunned
discourses of God, and Holiness? Have I admired, and adored Gods Holy
Attributes? Have not I broke forth into rash Oaths? Have not I been ashamed of
standing up for the Glory of Gods name? Have I trembled to see God abused? Have
I showed Courage and Resolution when I have seen, or heard my God dishonored?
Have not I scandalized some Persons by my Actions? Have not I abused my
Christian Liberty? Have I magnified Gods Mercies, and dared to own God in the
Blessings I have received? Have not I extenuated, or denied Gods Mercies? Have
not I neglected the Gifts of God, that are in me? Have not I by my lukewarmness
betrayed Christ's Cause? Have not I neglected my Duty of Prayer upon the
account of some Wordly Interest? Have not I begged of God things, contrary to
the Will of God?

As to the Fourth Commandment; which does in a special manner, respect the
Lords day: Have I gone this day with joy into the House of God? Have I heard
the Word, and treasured it up in my Heart? Have not I aimed more at the
information of my Judgment, than at warming my Affections? Was it Curiosity, or
Piety, that led me to the Temple? Have I gathered my thoughts together in the
public Prayers of the Church, and has my Heart and Desires gone along with
the Supplications, the Minister of God put up to Heaven? Have not I thought of
my Trade, and Farms, and Oxen, while I have been repeating the words after Gods
Minister? Have I meditated, and bid my thoughts fly up to Heaven to take a view
of my Eternal rest? Have I Read in private? Have I called my Family together,
read to them, instructed them, made them give me an account of what they
remember? Have not I preferred my Worldly profit to day before my Duty? Have
not I stayed away from the public Worship of God for wordly Gain? When I
received the Holy Sacrament to day, were my thoughts fixed on the Cross of
Christ? Was my Soul affected with the Mystery of Gods love? Did my Sins grieve
me, when I beheld Christ Crucified? Did the sight of Christ's Crucifixion fill
me with indignation against my Sins? Did it fill me with serious deliberate
Resolutions to watch against them? Did it fill me with Praises and Adorations
of the stupendous Humiliation of the Son of God? Did it make me resolve to
imitate him in his Holiness? Have I according to the Apostles Command, laid in
store, as God has prospered me the foregoing week? Have I laid aside somewhat
of my Gain for Pious uses, to give to them, that need? Do I respect Gods
Ministers? Do I love them? Do I communicate to them, that teach in all Good
things? Do I forbear with their infirmities? Do I obey them in things that tend
to my Salvation? Do I give them that, which is due to them? Am I kind as well
as just to them, especially to those, who faithfully labor in Gods Vinyard?

As to the Fifth Commandment; Have I acted this day as a Father, as a Mother,
as a Master, as a Mistress, as a Magistrate, as a Tutor, as a Son, as a
Daughter, as a Servant, as a Subject, as a Pupil, as an old Man, as a young
Man, as a Husband, as a Wife, as a Minister, as a Hearer, as a Maid, as a
Widow, as a rich Man, as a poor Man, ought to act, and as they are commanded
by the Holy Ghost to act in their several Stations? Have I been thankful for
Kindnesses showed me? Have I kept my due distance to my Superiors? Have I been
officious to my Equals, kind to my Inferiors? Have I studied gravity in Words,
Actions, Gestures, and Postures, and Behavior? Have not I spoke Evil of
Dignities? Have not I been a Respector of Persons? Have not I connived at Sins
in my Children, or Friends, which I have reproved in a Servant, or one in a low
Condition? Have not I been negligent in providing for my Family? Have not I
spent that time in idleness which should have been spent, in working in my
Calling?

As for the Sixth Commandment; Have I been just in all my Dealings this day?
Have I hurt no body in Word, or Deed? Have I moderated mine Anger? Have I been
easily reconciled to persons, that did offend me? Have not I studied Revenge?
Have I looked up to Heaven, when I have been reproached, and minded the Supreme
Cause, that suffered this reproach to fall on me for my Sins, more than the
Instrument, or Person that abused me? Have I been willing to decede from mine
own right, for peace, and quietness sake? Have not I been Cruel, Harsh, Morose,
Ill-natured to Men? Have not I begun a Quarrel, or encouraged it, when it was
begun? Have I been sorry and troubled for any injury, that has been offered to
my Neighbor? Have I been compassionate, tenderhearted? Have I discharged the
Duty of a Friend to those, whom I have made believe, that I was their Friend?
Have not I pretended Friendship, when I had no love for them? Have not I
dissembled with men, flattered them, given them fair words, when in my Heart I
hated, or despised, or undervalued them?

As for the Seventh Commandment; Have I maintained Chastity this day? Have I
watched over my Thoughts, Inclinations, and Desires? Have I abhorred all
obscene, filthy, and impure Communications, and Actions? Have I been very
moderate in my Eating, Drinking, Recreation, Clothing, and Desires after these
outward Comforts? Have I dashed all evil Concupiscence in my Soul in its Birth,
and when first I felt it stirring? Have I been troubled, when I have heard of
the Adulteries, Fornications, and Lasciviousness of other men? If I met with
any immodest, or undecent Sight, did I turn away mine Eyes, and impregnate my
Mind with Arguments, and Reasons against any sinful complacency?

As for the Eighth Commandment; Have I come justly by those things, I have
gained this day? Do I possess nothing, that has been got by Deceit, or
Oppression? Have I been faithful to my Trust? Have not I suffered my Neighbor
to be wronged, when I might have prevented it? Have not I been guilty of
Covetousness? Or have not I been guilty of another Extreme, which is
Prodigality? Have not I thought much of giving something to the Poor, while I
have spared no cost to adorn my Back, and feed my Belly, considering the Plenty
God has given me? Have I been Hospitable and glad to feed some Stranger or
poor Housekeeper at my Table? Have I not spent Money upon my Sin, and Pride,
or Wantonness? Have not I consented to another Man's Injustice? If I have
wronged, or deceived my Neighbor, am I willing and ready to make restitution?

As for the Ninth Commandment; Have I spoke nothing but Truth to day? Have I
kept my word to day? Have I performed what I promised either to God or Man?
Have not I by Equivocations, Palliations of Sins, and Mental Reservations
sought to put a Cheat upon my Neighbor? Have not I been voluntarily ignorant
of such Deceptions? Have not I reported things for certain, which at the best
have been but doubtful? Have not I been peremptory in accusing my Neighbor of
an Error, when nothing but a conjecture, or surmise raised the Accusation? Have
I been candid, and open-hearted in my Dealings? Have not I betrayed the Secret
of my Friend? Have not I been wavering in asserting the Truth? Have not I been
very forward to censure others? Have I been silent, when I have had no certain
knowledge of things, and have I been willing to be better informed by others?
Have I patiently heard, what men could say for themselves? And have not I given
Judgment before I have heard the Cause?

As for the Tenth Commandment? Have I been contented this day with that
condition God has allotted me in this World? Have not I grumbled, and repined,
that God has not provided so well for me, as he has done for others? Have not
I been wishing, that I were in such a rich man's Case, or that I had such a
Estate, as my Neighbor has; or that I had such a House, such Means, such
Accommodations, as he is Master of; that I had as little to do, and had as
plentiful a Table, and as prosperous a Life, as he is blessed withal? Have my
Desires kept within their bounds, and have not I been ready to determine, what
State, and Condition, is fittest for me? And have not I thought my self wiser
than God, in fancying I might have done better in another State of Life, than
that he thought fit to place me in?

3. In the same manner Christ's Sermon upon the Mount may be laid before us,
and our Hearts called to an account by such Queries as these; Have I this day
exercised any Poverty of Spirit? Have I entertained low and humble Conceits of
my self? Has my Heart been very indifferent as to these outward Conveniences,
and unconcerned whether I have much of this Worlds Goods or no? Have my Sins
been a grief or trouble to my Soul? Have they made me take on and mourn,
because I have offended, a tender Father, a gracious God, a merciful Redeemer?
Have I studied Meekness, and Gentleness in my Answers, and Actions? Have I felt
a mighty hunger, and thirst after Righteousness in my Soul? Have I had an
opportunity to show myself Merciful; and have I embraced the opportunity? Have
I looked to my inward man, and endeavored to purify my Thoughts, Desires, and
Inclinations? Has my Heart gone along with my Prayer? Have I studied sincerity
in Devotion, sincerity in my Dealings, and sincerity in all my Speeches? Have I
carried my self peaceably? Have I given no just occasion to my Neighbor to
quarrel with me? Have I, to the best of my skill, and power, promoted peace
among dissenting Brethren, if I have met with any such? Have I exhorted them to
love, to kindness, to mutual forbearing one another? If I have heard any person
speak evil of me, because of my Conscientiousness, have I rejoiced at it? Have
I by my good example, endeavored to keep my Neighbors from sinning? Have I
been ready to give good Counsel to people, if they have desired it, and God put
an opportunity into my hand? Have I made the lesser Commandments my Rule, as
well, as the greater? Have I been afraid of calling my Neighbor Fool? Have I
been cautious of giving Men any Nicknames? Have I been easily reconciled, if
Men have been sorry for their Fault? Have not I cherished any unlawful Lust or
Desire after Man, or Woman? Have I shunned the occasions of such sins, as I am
very prone too? Have I contented my self in my common discourses with bare
assertions, without vehement Asseverations? Have I crossed Flesh, and Blood,
when I have found an unwillingness upon my Spirit to do a Duty, and done more,
than God's Spirit did at first prompt me to? And if any of my Neighbors has
desired me to do him a kindness, and I have been loath to do it, have I to
cross that unwillingness, done him a double kindness? How have I behaved my
self to them, whom I have looked upon as mine Enemies? Have I prayed for them?
Have I forbore to speak ill of them? Have not I remembered the Injury, and
withdrawn my self from doing that good to them, which I might have done, and
they desired me to do.? Have I done more than others? God has blessed me with
greater Mercies, than he has done some of my Neighbors, have I endeavored to
go beyond them in Goodness, as I do excel them in outward advantages? Have I
given some Alms to day? And have not I boasted of my Charity to others? Have I
been contented with Gods knowing of it? Have not I been desirous others should
know, what I do as to that Point? Have I prayed, and when my door was locked,
and any person knocked, while I was at Prayer, have not I broke off my Prayer,
and opened the door, and been more concerned for Men, and the World, than Gods
Glory? When I have fasted at any time, has not my Fast, been a Mock-fast, and
have not I upon the Credit of such a Fast, allowed my self greater liberty in
sinning, and minding vanity? Have I acted like a person, that believes I am of
greater Worth, than many Sparrows, and if God provide for them, that he will
provide much more for me? Have I entirely relied upon God in the use of lawful
means? Have not I tormented my self with Cares, and Carkings, about a
Livelihood? Have I taken notice how God takes care of Beasts, and Fowls of the
Air; and from thence taken occasion to strengthen my Faith? Have I made it my
first and chiefest Business to secure Gods Kingdom, and its Righteousness? Have
not I rashly judged, and condemned my Neighbor to day? Have not I spent my
time in tittle-tattle, and of what this, and of what the other Man or Woman
does? Have I minded mine own Errors more than my Neighbors? Have I been more
sollicitous to reform my self than others? Have I asked, and begged, of God
Spiritual Blessings with greater earnestness, and importunity, than Temporal?
Have I done by my Neighbor, as I would be done by? Have I walked very
strictly, and circumspectly? Have I been very Conscientious in my ways, and
been afraid of the very appearance of Evil? Have I given demonstration of the
sincerity of my Faith by my Works, and has my outward Conversation been
suitable to my Profession? Have I been a practical Christian, and has the Will
of God been the Rule of my Life, and Conversation?

And these are the Methods I thought fit to offer to your choice in this daily
Self-examination, or Communing with your own Hearts; Which Method soever you
choose, I doubt not, but by the Blessing of him, who sees your Works, it will
have the same effect upon you, it had upon David, whom it obliged to turn his
feet unto Gods Testimonies. Methods Ps. 119. 59.
are various, and differ according to our several apprehensions of things, and
one may be easier and more agreeable to us than another; But whatever Method we
use, it matters not much, so the chief things are but examined, which ought
principally to be reflected on.

A mighty sense of the necessity of this Exercise, will soon dictate Methods to
a Soul, that is sollicitous concerning it: Where different ways lead to a Town,
though one may be a nearer, another more about, yet if the several Parties meet
in the Town at last, it is well enough; So here, let this Communing with our own
Hearts, be in what method it will, if it do but produce the Effects, it should
do, it is commendable, and acceptable to Almighty God.

Nor is it necessary, that this Exercise must necessarily be performed at
night. He that finds himself fittest, and freshest, for it in the morning may
call yesterdays Actions to an account at that time, and expect the same profit,
and advantage by it; Some Christians are so watchful and jealous over their
Thoughts, and Words, and Actions, and Desires, that this Self-examination is
their constant attendant, wherever they go; and they have got such a habit of
it, that whenever they think, or speak, or act, they immdiately bring all to
this Touchstone, and weigh it in this Balance; they have a Scheme of the Will
and Precepts of God in their Minds; and if any Action of theirs chance but in
the least to clash with Gods Will, their Hearts presently smite them; they are
presently aware of it, and they cry presently, Lord, be merciful unto me a
Sinner! And such persons need not tie themselves exactly to an hour either
morning, or evening, who do nothing else in a manner, but examine themselves
all day.

And now what Arguments, what Motives, what Incentives, shall I give you to
oblige you to venture on this Exercise? God saw how necessary, how expedient it
was for your Souls, and therefore commanded it. He that sees all things, saw,
how this would make you like Trees planted by the Rivers of Waters, which bring
forth their Fruit in due season, and therefore spoke the Word and ordered it;
yet Good God! How loath are the generality of you to learn this Lesson! How
like Brutes do many of you go to Bed, without any consideration, without any
reflection, without asking your Hearts, whether you have done good, or evil! You
sin and are not concerned at it, you run on in your Errors, and feel no
compunctions; you offend God, and do not tremble at it; you wrong your Souls,
and are not troubled at it, and all, because you will not come to this
Self-examination at night. What makes you so backward to this Exercise? What
makes you go to it, as Malefactors do to the place of Execution? What makes you
shun this Watchtower, as if it were as bad, as the Valley of Hinnom? You are
sick, desperately sick, why should you be loath to know it? God tells you, that
you are sick, the Ministers of the Gospel tell you, that you are sick, your own
Consciences tell you, that you are sick, the Word tells you that you are sick,
and is it not worth enquiring, whether you are so or no? What, if it should be
so? Do not you deserve to die, that will not understand, or be sensible, that a
mighty Distemper is upon you, a Distemper that will certainly kill you, if not
prevented? Had not you better believe God, who cannot fright you with
Bugbeares, and believe your Ministers, that seek your welfare, and your
Consciences, that wish, you may be happy, and the Word, that would open your
eyes, than a few Lusts that care not what becomes of you, after a few years
Revelling here? The Exercise, I exhort you to, is so rational, that one would
think Motives are altogether needless; yet to prevent that Plea, that you know
not, why you should discommode your selves in this manner:

1. This is exceeding profitable Work; Profit is a mighty bait to you in other
Concerns, and why can it not be so here? Yes, I know the reason, it would move,
and persuade you as much in the case before us, if you could grasp, and feel
the Profit; However, you believe, you have Souls, as well as Bodies, and since
you grant, your Souls do not stand for Ciphers, sure, you must allow, that the
Profit, your Souls receive, is of moment, and deserves to be looked after; and
the profit, this Exercise yields, is this, It makes you acquainted with your
selves, Alas! What does it signify to be acquainted with your Estates, with
the number of your Houses, with the number of your Sheep, and Oxen, with your
yearly Rent, and what is like to come in from such a place, and what is likely
to come in from another, how many Trees are upon your Grounds, and what
Portions you are able to give with your Children, while you are unacquainted
with your selves? This Self-examination will tell you, what it is that aileth
you, what you may trust to, what the bent and bias of your Hearts is, what is
in the most secret recesses of your Souls, whether God be in you, and whether
you are guided by his Spirit, or whether Satan have taken possession of you,
whether you are in a safe, or dangerous state, where you are defective, where
you fail, and where you do amiss, what hopes you have, and whether those hopes
be well grounded, whether your Faith be Gold, or Dross, whether you have a
share in the Benefits of Christ's Death, and Passion, what God has done for
you, whether he has manifested himself to you, what power he has given you,
what influences he has imparted to you, what degrees of holiness, what joy,
what comfort, what peace he has communicated to you, what corruptions you must
chiefly pray against, what temptations you must watch against, what sins are
most likely to eclipse your glory, what are the fittest means to mortify your
Lusts, where your weakness lies, where you lie most open to the Devils
assaults, where you must fortify your selves, etc. All this you may come to
know by means of this Exercise; and if a General think it profitable to know
the number of his Soldiers, that he may sit down, and consult, whether he be
able with Ten thousand to meet him, that comes against him, with Twenty
thousand; if a Master of a Family think it profitable to know, what persons
there are in his house, how many, and how qualified, that he may proportion his
Expenses to their number; if a Tradesman think it profitable to know, what
Goods, there are in his Shop, what Commodities in his Warehouse, that he may
gratify his Customers; if the Artificer think it profitable to know the
motions of the Clock, he has made, that he may be able to mend it when out of
order? if a Farmer think it profitable to know, what Corn there is upon his
Ground, how his Barns are stored, and whether his Fruit will turn to account or
no, that he may set such Prizes on it, as it deserves, certainly a Christian
must needs think it profitable to be acquainted with himself, for hereby he may
prevent the day of Clouds and thick darkness, and move God to repent himself of
the evil, which he has said, he will do unto him, and do it not.

To know the Motion of the Sun and Moon, and Stars, is not so profitable, as to
know my self, and to be sensible of mine infirmities, gives me far greater
light, than if I were skilled in all the virtues of Plants and Shrubs, and
Minerals. If I know my self, I take the readiest way to know God too; and we
are assured, that to know him, and Christ, whom he has sent, is to have
eternal life.

The Heathens had reason to cry up Chilon, for making this the principle of all
Virtues, Know thy self; and indeed, he that cares not for knowing the
constitution, and complexion of his inward man, is a Sot, and weak. in his
Intellectuals, than Thales, who while he was poring on the Stars above, fell
into a dangerous Pit below; Had a man read all the Books in the World, and yet
took no account of himself, in Gods sight he would pass for a very ignorant
man, and the day of Judgment would find him a Fool, though he had been Keeper
of Ptolomy's Library. St. Bernard says most truly, Let thy Meditation, and
Contemplation begin Bernard. lib 2. de Consid. ad Eugen. Pap.
at thy self. Be not searching in vain into things without thee, while thou
neglectest thy self. If thou art Wise, thou loosest thy Wisdom, if thou art a
Stranger to thy self; and though thou know all Mysteries, the Secrets of the
Earth, and the deep things of the Sea, while thou art unknown to thy self, thou
art like a Man, that builds a House without laying the Foundation, and instead
of erecting a Fabric, prepares for ruin, and destruction. Whatever thou
erectest without thy self, will be but, like a heap of dust, which the Wind
will soon scatter, and disperse abroad; but learning to know thy self, thou
drinkest of thine own Fountain, and this is to sit down in the lowest place,
that thou may be exalted in due time.

2. Where men dare be so just, and kind to themelves, as to Commune with their
own hearts about the Words, Thoughts, and Actions of the day, there they
discover, that the Word of God is fallen on good ground, and that they do
receive it in a good and honest Heart, and keep it and bring forth Fruit with
patience. Upon this qualification depend all the Blessings of the Bible. No man
must ever hope to be saved, that is not wrought upon by the Word of God, where
this makes no impression men are given up to hard hearts, and reprobate Minds.

Because thine Heart was tender, and thou did humble thy self before God, and
did rend thy Clothes, and weep before me, I have even heard thee also, says
the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. Self-examination is a Testimony of a tender Heart,
of a Heart that believes, and trembles, of a Heart, that takes notice of what
God says in his Word, and receives it with veneration, of a Heart, that is
sensible, that God's Promises and Threatenings will certainly be fulfilled, and
accordingly fears, and hopes, and acts, and ventures, and follows the Lamb,
whethersoever he goes.

3. That common Argument, Men allege, as a discouragement from this Exercise,
I must use here, as a powerful Motive to oblige them to this Self-examination;
The Devil hinders them, and disswades them from it, they cry. But because he
does dissuade you, therefore you have reason more vigorously to apply your
selves to this Exercise; for he would fright you from it, but that he sees it
will certainly make you leave his Kingdom. As some in Nero's time who
persecuted the Christians, said, That the Christian Religion, could not but be
good, and wholesome, and excellent, because so wicked a man, and so great a
Monster fought against it; So this Self-examination must needs be an excellent
thing, because the Devil uses so many stratagems to oppose it. His business is
to ruin Souls, as ours is to save them; and there must needs be something
more, than ordinary in this Duty, because he throws in so many Impediments, and
Remora's to put a stop to this advantageous Exercise.

4. Happy the Man, that is not afraid of judging himself, that can look into
this Glass, and is not ashamed to see his own Deformity, nor ashamed to behold
what manner of Man he is; this is the Man of whom the Son of Man will not be
ashamed before God and his holy Angels: He that loves to look upon himself,
shall see and taste, how Sweet, and Gracious the Lord is. O how much safer is
it to let our Children, I mean our Thoughts, and Words, and Actions, pass
through this Fire now, than to leave our selves altogether to the Judgment of
God in the last day! By being our own Judges now, we may prevent the severity
of the Judge of Quick, and Dead, in that day. By judging our selves every day,
the strength of our Souls is renewed, our Minds get new light, our Affections
new encouragements, our Hearts new motives, and our inward Man new Arguments to
shake of the clogs of Sin, and of a deceitful World.

God who cannot Err, and can sooner cease to be, then do any thing, that is
amiss, yet had no sooner finished any of his Works, in the first Creation, but
examined, and considered them immediateately, which makes Moses take notice,
that God saw, that it was Good, no doubt, to show us an example; When the Lord
Genesis 1. 10.
Jesus shall one day appear in Robes of Celestial Light, and sit on the Throne
of his Glory, and summon the careless World to come to Judgment. O how
cheerfully will the Man, that now sits Judge upon his own Actions, be able to
present himself before that Dread Tribunal. His Heart will not suggest to him
such fears, and terrors, as the Man will find, who has not thought this
Exercise worth his care: He will be able to look upon Christ as his Father, as
his Friend, as his Advocate, as his Intercessor, as his Mediator, that will
stand between him, and Gods anger; his Conscience will bid him take courage,
and lift up his eyes with joy, because his Redemption draws nigh. This must
needs be so, for we are told by the Apostle, If we would judge our selves, we
should not be judged of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 31. To judge our selves is to walk
after the Spirit, and to mind the things of the Spirit, and we know, there is
no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit, Romans 8. 1. when thus we call our selves to an account, we
act like the Children of God, ^^^e Children, that are afraid of offending their
Heavenly Father, and if Children then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joint Heirs with
Christ, Romans 8. 17.

And these are the constant, daily, and standing Exercises which a Man, or
Woman that names the Name of Christ, must necessarily apply themselves to, if
they will not rest in a form of Godliness, and delude their own Souls;
Christianity is no idle Calling, and they that stroke themselves for being
Christians, and sit with folded Arms and yawn, and stretch themselves upon
their Couches, have learned their Divinity of the Devil. Work hard is the
Christians Motto, and there is nothing implies a greater contradiction than
Idleness, and Christianity. Shall any man talk of Ease, and Softness, that in
his Baptism has vowed himself to a continual Warfare, and engaged himself to
fight under the Banner of Jesus? The time of rest is to come, the present time
is designed for Labor, and Vid. Chrysostom. in 2 Epist. ad Timoth. Hom. 8.
Trouble. A Christian must not look for rest here, God has promised him no
such thing, till he comes to Heaven. Nothing in Nature is idle, and shall a
Christian be the only idle thing in the World?

I know there is no man but finds some Business or other to divert his
Thoughts, but in vain, Sirs, do you talk of Business, while the Business of
your Souls lies at six and sevens. No Worldly Employment deserves the Name of
Business in comparison of this, we speak of. These Exercises are the Business,
we come into the World for, and he is idle, that does not work the work of God.
Did ever any man hire a day Labourer, to see him only Eat lustily, or Walk up
and down in the House, with his Hands in his Pocket? And can we be so
unreasonable as to think Christ hires us to take our pleasure here, when he
has so much work for us to do? Day Laborers spend the greatest part of the
day about their Masters Work, and employ but an hour or so, in Eating, so must
the greatest part of our time be spent in our Great Masters Work, and the least
in our worldly Business. The Work our Master has to do for us, are these
Exercises, and he that said, Go to the Ant thou Sluggard, and consider her
ways, and be wise, certainly never Prove. 6. 6.
intended we should sail on a gentle stream to the Port of Glory.

Which of the two do we count most useful, a Ship that lies still in the
Harbor, or that which encounters with the Waves and Billows of the Sea? the
standing Water, or the flowing Stream? the Iron that lies by, or that which we
do daily take pains about? And which of the two do you think, can God
favorably look upon, the Soul that is busy, and bestirs her self, is
industrious and laborious to make sure of Heaven, or the Soul, that lies
dissolved in Ease and Idleness? While David was engaged in a War, he had no
leisure to defile himself with Bathsheba; while Solomon was busy in building
the Temple, his Women could not seduce his Heart; while Sampson was fighting
with the Philistines, Dalilah could not entice him; so here, while you are
busy in these Exercises, you cannot be taken Captive by the Devil. There are
indeed men, that are worthy of their Hire, but then they are Laborers, not
Loiterers; and though Christ promised refreshment, yet it is to those alone,
who have tired themselves with Working, and take their Masters Yoke upon them,
and learn to exercise themselves, as he did, Mat. 11. 28.

These Exercises will make you capable of being admitted to a very great
intimacy and friendship with the Infinite Majesty of Heaven, The secret of the
Lord is with them that fear him says the Man that had found it by experience,
Psalm. 25. 14. Through these Exercises the Soul comes to be defecated from her
dross, from carnal Lusts, and Affections, and is made fit company for the
Deity, for so enamoured is God with these Exercises, that the Soul that runs in
this Race, is in a capacity of drinking of the Rivers of Gods Pleasures; O how
great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee! Ps. 31.
19.

Gods Goodness is a Treasure inexhaustible, a Subject so full of Charms, that
the more a man thinks of it, the more he may; the thoughts of it put the Soul
into a kind of Fever, for the more she drinks of this living water of life, the
more she may; other Arts and Sciences a man may bring to perfection, and see
the utmost of them; but Gods Goodness, there is no coming to the top of it; the
Soul that contemplates it this hour, sees in it new Mysteries the next; and he
that is ravished with the contemplation of it to day, is ready to loose his
Reason in the admiration of it to morrow. It is a Fountain of Life, which sends
forth a thousand Streams, and yet is as full as ever. It is the hiding place of
a Holy Soul, and the Scripture means nothing else by Gods Banqueting House,
but his Goodness. This enriches the Soul beyond all the Wealth, that the World
boasts of; and I know not what name to give to its Influences; for like the
heat of Fire, they can only be felt, but cannot be painted.

It is the sweetest Labyrinth for a Man of Thoughts to loose himself in, and
the more a man is lost in it, the greater pleasure, he feels, and lies softer,
than the Sybarite upon his Bed of Roses. Humane Tongue is not able to describe
it, and the safest way is to stand amazed at it, and to say nothing, silence
being the truest sign of admiration. Not one in an hundred knows, what it
means, and nothing but a Beam of Heaven let into the Mind, can give the Soul
any lively apprehensions of it. It is a thing that affects the whole Body, as
well as the Soul, and if the Soul feels, what it is, its ready to wish for more
Souls, and Bodies to participate of the satisfaction. Thousands feed upon this
goodness, yet have no sense of it, and were all men sensible of it, there is
not one would go to Hell, or turn Proctor for the Devil. If it be seen clearly,
it charms, and the Understanding that beholds it without a Glass, and with open
face, must protest it is the sweetest, and most reviving Cordial imaginable.

This lively sense of his Goodness, the Almighty vouchsafes to those that thus
exercise themselves unto Godliness, for these are the men, that fear him; The
Lord is their Shepherd, and they shall not want, they shall not want a friend
in adversity, Ps. 23. 1.
when Lovers, and Friends, are put far from them, and their acquaintance into
darkness, God will be their Friend, when they have no person to advise or to
consult with, or to make their complaints to, he will guide them by his
Counsel, when their Flesh, and their Heart fails, and all Creatures fail
them, God will be their Strength and their Portion for ever; He Will hear their
cry, they shall unbosome themselves unto him, and he will bow down his Ears to
them, tell their wanderings, put their tears in his Ps. 56. 8.
Bottle, and write all their sighs and groans in his Book. What a comfort is it
to have a Bosom-friend here on Earth, to whom we can speak our Minds, who will
bear the Burden with us, and compassionate, and pity us, and to whom we can
unlock, and open the very inside of our Hearts; But then, what a comfort must
it be to have God for my Friend, whom I can have recourse too in all my
Necessities, make my moan to, and tell him, how my Heart is grieved, who will
not laugh at my Calamity, nor mock, when my fear comes, whose Bowels yearn over
me, who will advise me for the best, bid me lay my wearied head in his Bosom,
direct me to the breasts of consolation, from which I may suck life, and
vigor, deal sincerely with me, act for me, speak for me, and contrive my good,
and be concerned for me, as if my Necessities were his own.

Such honor have all his Saints; so kind, so good, so wonderfully kind is God
to all such, as exercise themselves unto Godliness, they shall want nothing
that is necessary either for Soul, or Body. Their Souls shall be fed with the
Promises of the Gospel, guided by the Eternal Spirit, provided for from the
Storehouse of Grace, and Mercy, nay their Bodies shall never want, and God
will either bless their Industry, and Labors of their Callings, as he did St
Paul's diligence, 2 Thessalonians. 3 8. or turn the Hearts of other men toward them,
who shall relieve them, assist them, receive them, and redress their
Grievances, as he did in the Case of Onesimus, Philem. v. 12. or send an Angel
from Heaven, to feed them, as he did Elijah, 1 Reg. 19. 5. Nay suppose that it
should be expedient for Gods Glory, that they suffer want of Necessaries, yet
even then, they shall not want Grace to support them, Courage to bear up under
it, Joy to keep their Heads above Water, and Resolution to trust in him, though
the Lord should kill them, as we see, 2 Cor. 12. 9

Alas! What can they want, while God supports them? God! that Horn of Plenty,
that Ocean of Goodness, that Sea of Kindness, that Perfection of Beauty, that
comprehensive Light, that inexhaustible Fountain of Bliss, that Center of
Happiness, that Rock of Ages, that Spring of Comfort, that Treasure of
Beatitude, that Storehouse of Provision, whose Years do not fail, whose
Munificence never decays, who can never be Poor, whose Liberality is infinite,
who Gives before Men Ask, who is Present, when he seems to be Absent, whose
Love no Rhetoric can explain, whose Riches the Tongues of Angels cannot reach,
and you may as well say, that Solomon in all his Glory was in Want, as think,
that they whose Shepherd God is, can be in Want. They want no other Shepherd
but him, no other Comforter but him, no other Riches but him, no other Pleasure
but him, no other Friend but him, no other King, no other Master, no other
Father, but him; if they want a Father, he will be more to them than a Father, if
they want a Mother, a Sister, or a Brother, he will be more to them, than all
these can be, as they that have the Light of the Sun, have more, than if they
had an hundred Candles in the room; for they have him who is Allin-all; so that
in their very wants, they can rejoice in him, in their very Misery they can
boast of him, in their danger confide in him, in their necessities roll all
their cares upon him, and when Heaven and Earth are like to be confounded, and
mingled together, look up, and cry, God is our refuge, a present help in the
time of trouble, therefore will we not fear, though the Earth be moved, and
though the Hills be carried into the midst of the Sea, Psalm. 46. 1.

What if they have not the outward Comforts of this present World, the Reward
God intends them, lies beyond this Earth. These outward Conveniences are
Rewards too low, and mean, for God to bestow, and there would be no difference
between such men, and those that have their Portion in this life, should God
heap upon them such Blessings of his Left Hand; God lets them want these
outward ornaments on purpose, to let the World know, that he has nobler things
in store for them, not but that sometimes even those, that are diligent in
these Exercises, have much of this Worlds Goods, but that does not make them a
whit the happier, but only increases their Account, and obliges them to greater
Liberality, and greater circumspection in their Stewardship.

Behold Christians! To what still Streams, to what pleasant Pastures these
Exercises lead you! what a rich Table they prepare for you in the presence of
your Enemies, how they Anoint your Heads, and make your Cups run over! These
Exercises attract the noblest Spectators imaginable. Have not you read, have
not you heard, what the presence of a Monarch can do with Wrestlers, and Men of
Activity? What valiant Acts have some men performed in the Olympic Games,
(whence the word Exercising unto Godliness borrows its name) when some great
Princes have looked on? Men have attempted to do more than Men, when the
presence of a King has enlivened their endeavors; and as tedious as these
Exercises may seem to some of you, yet is not the company, that beholds your
fight and labors motive enough to descend into the field? Behold the Holy,
Blessed, and Glorious Trinity becomes a Spectator; The Father is present, to
applaud the attempt; The Son present to encourage it; The Holy Ghost present to
crown it, and round about the Throne of this bright Majesty stand the Myriades
of Angels, and they all look on.

Christian, fancy thou see David fighting with Goliath in a Valley between two
vast Mountains, while on the one there lies encamped the Army of the
Philistines on the other, the Host of Israel, think what Courage and Resolution
it must infuse into the young Soldiers heart, to see himself gazed and stared
on by two Armies of Friends and Enemies! Why? thy Condition, while thou
exercisest thy self unto Godliness is the same, thou stand in this Valley of
Tears, on one Hill stands the Great God of Heaven and Earth, with all the Host
of Heaven, and beholds, what thou art doing, on the other are spread all the
Legions of Hellish Furies, ready to triumph in thy fall: Can there be a greater
encouragement, than to see a Glorious God before thee ready to set the Laurel
on thy Temples, if thou dare follow after, that thou may apprehend that,
for which thou art also apprehended of Christ Jesus? Nay he calls to thee from
the Hills of Heaven; Fear not, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by
thy name, thou art mine, when thou passest through the Waters, I will be with
thee, and through Es. 43. 1. 2.
the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee, when thou walk through the fire
thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, and shall
not this tempt thee to do more then thy careless Neighbors, more than nature
will agree to, more than thy sensual Appetite will like of, more than the sober
Heathens do, and shall not this make thy Righteousness surmount that of
Hypocrites, and painted Sepulchers? Arise, and depart, for here is not thy
rest; Rest! Ay, that is the glorious Fruit of this Tree of Life, that is the
comfort which these Exercises end in. The weary day-labourer after his toilsome
Work in the Field, the Seaman after his hard tugging at the Oar, and laboring
in Storms, and Tempests, does not rest so sweetly, as he that exercises himself
day and night unto Godliness; for he rests on the down of Angels, on the Wings
of Cherubims, on the Breast of Jesus, and shall rest ere long in Abraham's
Bosom, in the Bosom of Glory, in the Bosom of Everlasting Mercy, where life is
to be found in its perfection, life without sorrow, life without fear, life
without corruption, life without disturbance, life without change, life without
deformity, life without discontent, life without dishonor, life without envy,
life without decay, where no Adversary comes to molest it, no Sin to spoil its
Beauty, no Temptation to break its order, no Devil to discompose its Harmony,
where the day is everlasting, the Hours measured by Eternity, and Months and
Years by infinity of Bliss and Glory.

Go to now, ye careless Men, that are more frighted by these Exercises, than by
all the terrors of the burning Lake: As laborious as these Exercises seem to
be, without them expect no Rest, no Peace, no Tranquillity; for there is no
peace says my God unto the Wicked. Expect Es. 57. 21.
Grief, Trouble, Anguish, despairing Thoughts, a turbulent Soul, an affrighted
Conscience, for these must certainly be the Portion of your Cup one day. How
should your life end in rest, who never tried your strength in these Exercises?
Lift up your Eyes and behold the man that exercises himself unto Godliness;
Hear what becomes of him at his death; Blessed are the Dead which die in the
Lord, from henceforth, yea says the Spirit, that they may rest from their
Labors, and their Works do follow them, Rev. 14. 13.

There remains therefore a Rest for the People of God, a Rest, which Tempests
cannot shake, Storms cannot annoy, Frosts cannot chill, and Heats cannot
consume; a Rest, where there is Joy without Mourning, Tranquillity without
Labor, Honor without a Period, Wealth without danger of loosing it, Beatitude
without the least shadow of Calamity. What Songs? What Hymns? What Music? What
Praises? What Hallelujahs? What Melody? What Harmony is to be met with there?
where the Citizens of Heaven are all Organists, and the Spirits of Men made
perfect join in perpetual Concert, to sing Salvation to our Lord, and to the
Lamb for ever and ever; Where Bitterness and Gall have no place, where
Wickedness, and Malice must never look in, where Want and Poverty must for ever
cease, where Quarrelling and Accusing and Impleading one another will all have
done, where all Violence and Discord dies, and all Grief, and Pain, and Anguish
is swallowed up in an Eternal Jubilee.

We read of Men, as of Diocletian, of Spartacus, of Aeneas, of Rustan, of
Mahomet, that from Shepherds and mean Men, have come to be great Lords and
Emperors; but this is nothing to the happiness, that he can be confident of,
that seriously exercises himself in the Task, I have laid down; the time will
come, I see the joyful day approaching, I see it by the Eyes of Faith, when
this humble Soul, this laborious Saint, this Self-denying Christian, this
contemptible Man shall change his Rags into Purple Robes, and be translated
from a momentary Sorrow to an Eternity of Rest and Satisfaction, where the Lamb
that is in the midst of the Throne shall feed him, and shall lead him unto
living Fountains of Waters, and God shall wipe all Tears from his Eyes; Then
shall be fulfilled the saying, that is written, they that Sow in Psalm. 126. 5,
6.
Tears, shall Reap in Joy; he that goes forth and Weepeth, bearing precious
Seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his Sheaves with him

While young Hercules, says the Apologue, Vid. Basil. Tom. 1. Hom. 24 ad
Adolescentes.
was doubting within himself, which way he should take, whether that of Vice,
or the other of Virtue, behold, there appeared to him, two Women, one
gloriously apparelled, with tempting Looks, and gay Attire, and a flowing
Mantle, that wantoned in the Air, promising him present satisfaction, and
whatever his sensual Appetite could desire; but saying nothing of what would be
the exit or consequence of all this; the other stood aloof, with a meager Face,
in a ragged Garb, and torn Clothes, promising nothing but Sweat, and Labor,
and danger at first, but behind her was a Scene of Triumph, and at the end of
her Swords and Daggers hung Pearls and Rubies, and the richest Stones. The
valiant man soon smelt out the Cheat of the former, and resolutely chose to
become a Disciple of the other.

Thus acts the Man, that exercises himself unto Godliness, he slights Pleasure,
and embraces Labor; for he knows that bitter beginnings, will have a glorious
end; and as Jason fought his way through Serpents and Wild Bulls, to get the
Golden Fleece, and became Master of it, so he swims contentedly through a Sea
of Wormwood to find a new World of sweetness, and satisfaction; and the years
during which he serves for this Rachel, seem to him, but as so many days, for
he loves what he sees not, and believes what he cannot grasp, yet believing he
rejoices, with joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

Hitherto I have discoursed of the ordinary, constant, and daily Exercises of a
Christian. The extraordinary follow in order, and they are,

1. Vowing, 2. Fasting, 3. Watching, and 4. Self-Revenge.
I call them Extraordinary, because they are to be used but now and then, when
either some great corruption is to be subdued, or our Devotion wants quickening,
or when God's Glory requires it, or when our Neighbors welfare and edification
is to be signally promoted; To make these Exercises daily, and constant, were
the way to ruin the body, and to obstruct the Soul in her flights to heaven,
and instead of honoring God, to render our selves incapable of his Service.
They are in the nature of Salt and Vinegar, to give a relish to our Spiritual
Food, but they would be but ill Meat, were they made our Diet: Some that have
attempted to make them their daily Employment, have exposed themselves to the
Devils Tyranny, and by going farther than God designed, or required, have been
suffered to fall into unspeakable inconveniences.

That using severities upon our selves is sometimes necessary, is evident from
hence, because our Bodies naturally are enemies to our Souls, and nothing is so
great a clog to our Spirits, as our sensual Appetite. The more the Body is
denied, the freer is the Soul in her Motions, and the less the Flesh is
reguarded, the more the Spirit soars and mounts up to its Center. It is
certainly our indulging our carnal ease so much, that makes us dull and lazy
in God's Service, and had we the art of crossing Flesh and Blood, our Duties
would be performed, with greater life and fervency. But here the Golden mean
must be used, and to avoid extremes, is without doubt, the safest way we can
walk in. As a man by a total neglect of these Exercises, will make but a very
slow progress in Religion, so he that uses them too much, may fall into diverse
Snares, and Temptations. Discretion must be the Rule, and Prudence the Guide in
things of this nature. Those that want this compass, must suffer themselves to
be entirely guided by wiser Men; and Laymen, whose occasions will not permit
them to consider of every step of the way, must here resign themselves to the
guidance and conduct of serious and able Ministers, who, if they have any sense
of the power of Godliness, will be ready to rejoice at the Work, and readily
direct them, that they may get safe to Heaven.

I do not deny, but that these Exercises have been, and are abused in the
Church of Rome, but shall their perverting the Primitive Institution, make us
regardless of the Duty? and because they go beyond the just bounds of these
Severities, must they therefore be quite laid aside, and despised as useless?
Whoever rejected Wine, because Men make themselves drunk with it? Or did ever
any man forswear eating Meat, because the Glutton eats till he makes himself
sick with it? I shall speak distinctly of these Extraordinary Exercises, and in
each of them lay down certain Rules, that must be observed in the practice, to
free them from the brand of Will Worship, Superstition, or sinful voluntary
Humility.

I. Extraordinary Exercise.
And this is Making Vows; An Exercise used and practiced by the Saints before
the Law, Genesis 28. 20. under the Law, Psalm. 116. 14. 18. and under the Gospel,
Act. 18. 18. Act. 21. 23. 24. and commanded, Psalm. 76. 11. That a Vow is a
deliberate, voluntary, solemn Promise made to Almighty God of things Lawful,
and Possible, is so known a thing, that I need not insist much upon the
definition. Every purpose is no Vow, nor is a bare intention to do such a
thing, to be reckoned among these greater obligations of the Soul. A Vow made
in drink is a Sin, but no Vow, because a Vow requires the presence of Reason,
and deliberation, and the same may be said of a Vow made in the height of
Anger and Passion. To oblige my self by a Vow to do a thing that is forbid by
the Law of God, is Impiety, or to Vow a thing, which lies not in my power to
perform, is Folly and Distraction. Not to repent of such Vows, is to continue
in Sin, and the longer the repentance is deferred, the more we aggravate our
condemnation. Of this nature were those Vows, the Jews made to the prejudice of
their Parents, whereof Christ speaks, Mat. 15 4. 5. It is a gift by whatsoever
thou might be profited by me, i. e. a Vow whereby Children that had any ill
will to their Parents, Vowed their Goods and Moneys to the use of the Church,
and by that means pretended, they could not break their Vow, and relieve their
Parents.

To make Vows, is as lawful now, as it was in the days of Moses; nor does any
command of the Gospel forbid us to enter into such Engagements. Vowing is not
an Appendix of the Ceremonial Worship, but a dictate of the Law of Nature, and
who knows not, how that the Gentiles by the instinct of this have made such
Vows in time of danger and Necessity. As we are Christians, we are to give all
diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, and to make use of all
wholesome things that may promote salvation; Phil. 4. 8.
and since these Vows do as much promote Religion as any other means, it is but
reason, we should think of them, and not neglect such useful Obligations. And
to direct my Reader in this Exercise, I shall show him, 1. when and upon what
occasions such Vows may, and must be made; and, 2. what Rules must be observed
in the making. 3. Encourage him to the making of them. And, 4. Enforce the
Obligation to keep them after they are made.

1. When and upon what occasions such Vows may, and must be made. And to this I
answer,

I. In Time of great Trouble and Necessity. I will go into thy House with
Burnt-Offerings, I will pay thee my Vows, which my lips have uttered, and my
mouth has spoken, when I was in trouble, says the Royal Psalmist, Psalm. 66.
13. 14. It was a time of fear, and danger, when Jacob entered into a Vow to
consecrate the Tenth part of his Income unto God, and Pious uses, Genesis 28. 20.
And it is like, it was in imitation of him, that Alban the British King Vowed
the Tenth part of all his Goods to God, when he was assaulted by the Normans;
And such Vows are ordinarily made upon condition, that God do actually grant
the Blessing, we expect. So the Children of Israel, Numb. 21. 2. If thou will
indeed deliver this people into my hands, then I will utterly destroy their
Cities, and so Clodoveus the French King justly Vowed, when oppressed by the
Almaines, that if God would give him the Victory, he would certainly become a
Christian. And in the same manner, a Christian may lawfully Vow in sickness,
that if God will restore him, he will keep the day of his deliverance holy unto
the Lord; or if in a Storm at Sea, that if God shall be pleased to bring him
safe to Shore, he will give an hundred or two hundred Pounds, or more, to some
Hospital. And though God is no Merchant, that sells his Gifts or Blessings, yet
in these Cases, like an indulgent Master, he is willing to encourage us to our
Duty, and to bring us to a sense of his Mercy, and he is so far from taking
these conditions in our Vows ill, that very often, he grants the Blessing, for
which we bound our Souls, on purpose to make us in love with his Service; and
though the names of those that have Vowed, and yet after their Vows have
perished are not written down upon Tables, as the Atheist Diagoras scoffingly
said, yet where God does not grant the Mercy, that is desired in the Vow, it is
either, because he sees that the person Vowing is not in good earnest resolved
to perform his promise, or because the grant of the Blessing desired would
prove an occasion of his greater dissoluteness, or because he intends better
things to the man that Vows, than the things he begs, or hopes upon his Vow to
enjoy.

II. After some signal deliverance from Danger and Calamity. To Vow after some
such Mercy, is a thing so natural with ingenuous Spirits, that even the
good-natured Seamen in Jonas, c. 1. 16. though they were Heathen, when the Sea
ceased from raging, feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered a Sacrifice unto
the Lord, and made Vows. Prodigious deliverances strike the Soul into
amazement, and a Man that has any sense of the unexpected favor, can do no
less than Vow unto God some signal Devotion by way of Gratitude for the Mercy.
The deliverance is great and signal, and the devotion ought to be so too. The
Vow shows, that the Gratitude is hearty, and nothing is so great an Argument,
that the sense of the Mercy is vigorous, and lively, as when we bind our selves
to make returns some way suitable to Gods Benignity. It cannot but be pleasing
to God upon such occasions, to Vow, that either we will pray seven times a day
with David, or that we will allow something more, than ordinary for charitable
uses, or that we will be more diligent in visiting the Sick, the Widow, and
the Fatherless, or that we will go into such ill company no more, or that we
will shun such occasions of evil, or that we will take care of some poor
Children, and either breed them up, or keep them at School, or get them to be
instructed in the Principles of Religion, or that we will employ so much time
every day in working for indigent and distressed persons, etc. Such things as
these are or may be all within our own power, and consequently may lawfully be
Vowed, and we have reason to believe, that for Christ's sake God will behold
these Free Will Offerings with a Gracious eye, because they proceed from love;
and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him, says the Apostle, 1 John 5. 16.

III. When some strong Corruption is to be subdued, and an easy matter will
not make it yield. When after many weak purposes, we relapse into the Sin, and
notwithstanding our Resolutions against it now and then, suffer our selves to
be misled into it. In such Cases where gentle Remedies will do no good, it is
fit, yea necessary, to use stronger Medicines; and where our Flesh does baffle
our good purposes, to cross it with stronger Vows. He that finds himself
inclined to drink immoderately, when he comes into company, has no better way
to overcome the Sin, than by Vowing, either not to drink at all in such
Societies, or to drink but one Glass and no more, or to abstain from such a
Liquor, which is apt to intoxicate him, or not to come into company which he
knows, will tempt him to intemperance. The man that finds himself subject to
carnal pollutions, may certainly forbear them, if he will enter into solemn
Vows, never to be guilty of such sins again. If the Swearer would make a Vow to
God to give a Crown to the Poor, if ever he swear again, without all
peradventure the Sin in a short time would die, provided he has Conscience
enough to keep his Vow; And all grosser Sins, as gaming obscene discourses, and
Atheistical talk, etc. may be vanquished thus. If the Adulterer would solemnly
Vow, and add Imprecations to his Vow, not to come to his Harlot again, and the
Fornicator, not to embrace the strange Woman again, they might break the neck
of these dreadful sins, and indeed one such Vow shall do more, than twenty
fainter Purposes, or Prayers.

In lesser Sins, and sins of infirmity, it is not so safe to Vow, as in the
other, because we are too apt to be surprised into such Errors, and to commit
them before we are aware, yet he that Vows to do something, that is irksome to
Flesh, and Blood, in case he yields to any lesser sin; by example, in case he
lies in Jest, or in case he breaks out into a Passion, etc, takes the readiest
way to subdue the corruption, and to be Master of his Spirit; As to Vow, not to
sin at all, would be rash and foolish, and promising a thing ordinarily
impossible; so to Vow to mulct our selves, if we commit a trespass of
infirmity, is to act like Wise men, and such, as are in good earnest resolved
to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of Flesh, and Spirit, and to perfect
holiness in the fear of God.

IV. When we find a backwardness, or unwillingness upon our Spirits to do a
duty, we find commanded, or are put upon by the secret instigations of our
Consciences. He that finds himself loath to pray three times a day, must Vow,
that he will do so, and then he must do it, and whatever unwillingness may
remain after the Vow is past, time and use will make it easy. He that is loath
to do good to the Man that has formerly wronged him, must Vow to God, that he
will do it, and force himself to it. Nature, where it will not be led, must be
drawn by violence, and though unwillingness in the performance of a Duty makes
no very sweet perfume in Heaven, yet that offering violence to our Natures, is
a kind of conquering our selves, and consequently is an acceptable present to
the great Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. This way he that was loath
to visit a Neighbor, against whom he had some prejudice, may be brought to a
Christian temper again; and he, that would not sing Psalms, but at Church, may
be reformed. This way the man that before cared not for good discourses, may
come to speak of spiritual things with delight, and satisfaction, and he that
was a Stranger to Hospitality may come to open his House and Heart to the
Stranger and Traveller. In all these Cases, Vows are seasonable, and what Rules
are to be observed in Vowing, is the second particular I am to treat of.

2. The Rules that are fit to be taken notice of in this Exercise, are these
following.

1. These Vows must not be made to Saints; For a Vow is a Religious Worship,
and therefore to be given to none, but God. Among the Papists, it is true, such
Vows are common, but we have not so learned Christ, nor did Antiquity allow
this Profanation; and though Marcellina St Ambrose's Sister seems to have made
a Vow to St Laurence for her Brother Vid. Baron. Annal. Tom. 4. ad an. 383.
sect 15. qui citat Ambros. orat. in Fun. fratr. Tuis enim votis apud sanctum
Martyrem Laurentium impetratum nunc cognoscimus commeatum.
Satyrus's good Voyage; yet do the words used by St Ambrose, who relates the
Story, import no such thing, for he tells his Sister, that by her Vows at St
Laurence the Martyrs, her Brothers safety was procured, and those Vows might be
Vows to God made in St Laurence's Church or Oratory, where the Bones of St
Laurence were buried, it is not necessary, to conclude, that the Vow was made
to the Saint. However the practice of a Woman, is no Law, and had she made a
Vow to the Saint by her Brothers approbation, we know, who it was that said,
Vow and pay unto the Lord your God, Psalm. 76. 11. nor do we read in all the
Word of God, that any Vows were ever made, but unto him that understands our
thoughts afar off, and to whom it was said, Praise waits for thee, O God, in
Zion, and unto thee shall the Vow be performed, Psalm. 65. 1. Nor do the
latexamples of Chosroes King of Persia, making a Vow to St Sergius, of King
Pepin Vowing to St Suibert, or of Otho the Great Vowing to St Laurence, make
the thing more lawful; for an ill custom being once broacht, it shall not want
Followers, if the subtle Prince of the Air can any way contribute to the itch
of imitation.

II. These Vows must be serious, not only in respect of the matter, but in
respect of the manner too. As to the Matter, they must not be slight, and
trivial things, that are Vowed to God; He that should Si quis voverit se
abstenturum a lacte, tunc licitum ipsi est serum, si a sero, concessum est ei
lac. si a caseo tum ille prohibitus est itsi. sive sit salitus, vel non
salitus, etc. Massech. Nedarim. c. 6. Mishn. 5.
Vow, that he will ride abroad such a day to take the Air, or go into his
Garden such an hour, or go and buy such a thing, he stands in need of, or have
such a dish of Meat for his dinner, etc. would make a Jest of this Sacred Tie,
and profane an Ordinance, which God looks upon to be of the greatest weight,
and moment. And as to the manner of the performance, it is fit that the Vow
should be accompanied with Prayer, and Supplications, for Gods assistance in
the due performance, and therefore the Greeks by one word express both Vow and
Prayer. Prayer sanctifies the Vow (...).
and fastens the Soul in her resolution to keep it. Hence it was that the
Saints of old, made their Vows, while they were on their knees, the same
posture that they used in Prayer. To this seriousness belongs sequestring our
selves at that time, when we Vow from all other Secular Businesses, and entering
into our Closets, or retiring into places where no persons or divertisements
are like to distract us; A Vow requires the attention of the whole Mind, and he
that Vows while he is doing something else, shows he has no mind to perform,
what his lips have uttered. The man in Plutarch therefore Plutarch de Lacon.
Apophtb. Vid. and lib. de ira cobib.
played the fool with Heaven, that Vowed he would throw himself from a
Precipice, and when he came to it, changed his Mind, and nulled the Vow with
this Jest, I did not think that this Vow had need of another Vow to see the
first effectually performed. Those Heathen Philosophers, he speaks of in
another place, were more rational, and serious, that Vowed to abstain from
their Wives, and to deny themselves of Wine a twelvemonth; and for some certain
time to shun Lying, and consequently to Worship God by Continence; for these
Vows they made with great Solemnity, and from a sense of Virtue and Goodness,
which made them very strict in the observance of those Promises.

III. In these Vows its fit, such limitations should be added, as are
necessary, and may free the mind from scruples afterward, when they are to be
performed. He that Vows to set aside a certain day in the Month for Fasting,
and Prayer, had need except Sickness, and such other inconveniences as may
endanger his Life, or Health in the performance; for if he do not, when such
accidents do afterward happen, they are apt to distract the Mind, and while the
Votary is tossed between his obligation to God, and the preservation of his
Health, he makes his Breast like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest. And
though some Casuists think Vid. Massech. Nedarim. c. 3. mishna 1 and 3.
that upon such Accidents a man is free from Sin, if he do not keep his Vow,
yet to a person, that is very Conscientious, it is not so satisfactory, as when
himself (...).
has made these Exceptions. Had Jephtah, Judge 11. 30. 31. observed this Rule,
he had not brought that grief and anguish upon himself, which afterward
Quatuor vota sapientes absolvunt, vota persuasoria, vota Hyperbolica, vota
errorum and vota necessitatem patientium, etc. Vota necessitatem patientium
quae sunt? Si quem voto obstrinxerit socius suus, ut comedat apud eum,
aegrotaverit autem ipse, aut impediverit eum aqua, etc.
was ready to overwhelm him; Vowing in general, that whatsoever should first
meet him, upon his return from the Slaughter of the Children of Ammon, he would
certainly Sacrifice, and Offer for a Burnt Offering, without any limitation,
provided it be fit to be Offered, or provided it be no rational Creature, or
provided it be of the clean Cattle, that is in my possession, or provided it be
not another Man's; Vowing, I say, at large, without any such exception, when his
Daughter met him, he knew not how to evade the obligation of the Vow, and
therefore was forced, at least thought himself obliged to Sacrifice his only
Child, for he did unto her, says the Text, according to his Vow, which he had
Vowed, v. 39.

IV. When such Vows are made, it is fit we should write them down in a Book, or
in Paper, that we may remember, what we have Vowed, and what the particular
things are, we have promised to the Almighty. The Roman Soldiers, when they
went to War, having made certain Vows to God, used to write them on Tables, and
fasten them to the Gates of the City, that they might be sure upon their return
to pay their Vows. Our Memories are frail, and treacherous, and things are not
so soon forgot, when committed to Paper, or a Book. The Oath God made against
Amaleck, he caused to be written in a Book, Exodus 17. 14. and Samuel wrote the
manner of the Kingdom in a Book, 1 Samuel 10. 21. and indeed remarkable Passages,
or Occurrences deserve no less. Sickness, Business, or Divertisements may put
things out of our Minds, whereas if they be noted, or written down, we can
refresh our Memories, when we please, and remember the very circumstances, we
were under when we did, or saw, or met with them. Vows are actions of great
concernment; writing of them down gives us fresh suggestions of the occasion of
such engagements, and serves to kindle a new zeal in us to perform them. When
they are once past, there depends so much upon the observance of them, and the
performance or nonperformance of them, have so great an influence upon the
happiness, or unhappiness even of our lives here on Earth, that they may justly
be looked upon, as things of the greatest moment, and therefore we cannot be
too careful about them, and why may not writing down of our Vows be a Monument
of our Sincerity, Seriousness, and Gratitude, as much as the Primitive
Christians hanging up Boards, and Clothes in the Church, which had on them the
Picture of the Joint, or Part of the Body, where they had been diseased, or
distempered, after they were delivered, as a Testimony of their Thankfulness?

V. The end of these Vows must be Gods Honor and Glory. If the end be, that we
may with greater liberty live in a certain Sin we delight in, the Vow is so far
from tending to Gods Honor, that God is despised, and thought to be altogether
such a one, as we our selves. Such Vows as have no good ends, I am afraid are
too common in the Church of Rome, where Men by Vowing to go in Pilgrimage to
such a Saints Shrine, or to Jerusalem, or to such a Chapel of our Blessed
Lady, think they purchase a prerogative or privilege to continue in those
darling Sins, their Profit or Pleasure does consist in, or to neglect some
greater and weightier matter of the Law, and though this is called by their
Votaries, seeking Gods Glory, yet whatever does tend to the advancement, or
cherishing of any sin, cannot possibly tend to Gods Glory, let men's pretenses
be what they will; for if the bare saying that I aim at Gods Glory, would serve
turn, who almost would be damned? Since men may plead, that they sin abundantly
on purpose that Gods Grace may abound; in these Vows destruction of the body of
sin must be chiefly aimed at; for God is honored by nothing so much, as by the
ruin of the Devils Kingdom.

VI. Commutations, and Dispensations of Vows must be slighted, as things alien
from true Religion. These Practices are common in the Roman Church. By
Commutations of Vows, they mean changing the matter of one Vow into another, i.
e. He that has Vowed to give so much to the Poor, changes the Vow, into a Vow
of Fasting, and so breaks the former Vow, and substitutes an easier, or more
convenient in the room of it. But these commutations, are no better than
Falsifications, for in a Vow I bind my Soul to God that I will do that
particular thing I have mentioned, and not another, and if God does not release
me of the performance, who was the party, I promised to, what can humane
Authority signify in the case? It Is true, where the thing I have Vowed is
either impossible or sinful, there I may lawfully make another Vow of something
that is good or possible, but that does not excuse the sin of the first, nor is
this properly a Commutation, but a Testimony of my Repentance for the rashness
of the former.

The same may be said of Dispensations, how should man be able to dispense with
the nonperformance of my Vow, who has nothing to do with it, and most
certainly, cannot give away Gods Right, who by my Vow is made absolute Owner of
that Service, I resolve upon, and has so great a Propriety in it by my
voluntary resignation of it to him, that it is no less than Sacrilege in man to
attempt it? The Parasites of the Court of Rome allow the Pope, besides his
pretended power to absolve Vid. Constit. Sixth. 15. Etsi Dominici gregis, etc.
Ludov. Lopez part. 1. instruct. consc. c. 49. Jo. Azor. p. 1. last. moral. l.
11. c. 19.
Men of their Oaths, power to dispense with five sorts of Vows, with Vows to
enter into Orders, with Vows of entering into a Monastry, and perpetual
Chastity, with Vows to go in Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, with Vows to visit the
Thresholds of the Apostles St Peter and St Paul, and with Vows to salute St
James of Compostella. Though we Protestants justly question whether some of
these Vows be lawful, and whether the matter of them be not contrary to the
Will of God, yet suppose, they are lawful, as the Church of Rome holds, who
gave the Pope Authority to deliver men from the Obligations, they have engaged
themselves in to God Almighty? These Vows all this while are not made to the
Pope, but to God, and how comes the Bishop of Rome to know Gods Mind in this
particular, or to give away Gods right? By what Title or Prerogative? We should
call him Knave, if he should tempt a man to be false to his Word after he had
past it to his Neighbor; and is it honesty to invade the Almighty's Power, and
give people leave to be false to their God, when God has given no other Rule
in Vowing, but paying what is Vowed to him? In Vows Promissory or Conditional,
in which man is concerned, there if the Party concerned releases the Person
Vowing, he may be excused from the actual performance of it, because in this
case man is the principal person concern d in the Vow, and God is only made
Judge and Witness: b. e. I Vow to Almighty God solemnly, that I will pay such a
man Fifty pounds, which I owe him. If he remit me that Sum, I am not bound to
pay it; for his remitting it is as much, as if I had actually paid it; and
though the Vow was made unto God, yet it was made to him only as a Witness, not
as a Proprietor, and the thing to be performed was not so much promised to be
performed to him, as to my Neighbor, with whom I have dealings in the World.
But this justifies not man's dispensing with a Vow made directly to God, as the
Proprietor of the thing we Vow: b. e. If I Vow that I will be sure to Pray duly
with my Family at Mornings, and at Nights, or that I will Catechize my
Children, and Servants such a day, or that I will reprove such a Man in private
for his Oaths, and sinful Life, etc. In such Vows, no Creature in the World can
dispense with my Enagagements, or assure me that I shall go unpunished, if I
neglect the performance; for these do directly concern God and his Service, and
Man is not the chief Party to whom the Promise is made, but God himself, who
thereupon will expect to see the Vows fulfilled according to the due intention
of the Mind.

It Is true, Numb. 30. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. a Father, and a Husband are permitted
to dispense with the Vows, the one of his Daughter, the other of his Wife, if
they hear of it, and think the dispensation necessary, and convenient; but this
permission cannot extend to Superiors Vid. Massech. Nedarim. c. 11.
in general, else what Honesty or Faith could be expected in the World, if
inferiors could be dispensed with by those (...)
that are above them. The Jewish Commentators restrain those Dispensations to
the Vows of Fasting and Self-denial only, and so much they gather from v. 13.
Every Haec sunt vota quae ille irrita reddere potest, si quid sit de rebus in
quibus est afflictio animae e. g. si quae dixerit, fi lavero me, aut si non
lavero, si ornavero me, aut si non ornavero, etc. Vel si dixerit, Sunto mihi
munus fructus mundi vel fructus hujus regionis, etc,
Vow, and every binding Oath to afflict the Soul, her Husband may establish it,
or her Husband may make it void; but it is more probable, that the Vows, that
might be disannulled by the Father or Husband, might be Vows concerning giving
away a Sum of Money to Pious and charitable uses; the Father and the Husband in
these Cases, the Propriety of the Money and Goods in the House being in them,
it was reasonable they should be consulted with in things of this nature; but
if they heard of such Vows and did not contradict them, they were to stand,
their silence importing consent, though it may be said, that the persons here
mentioned, whose Vows might be dispensed with by their Parents, and Husbands,
might be persons under age, not arrived yet to the full use of their Reason, or
mature Understanding, what a Vow meant; and though the Jews tell us, that a
Woman might lawfully make a Vow at 11 years of age, and a young man at 12, yet
we have no warrant for this belief in Scripture, and few People are so ripe at
that age, as to know or consider the Importance, End, Weight, Consequence, and
Nature of so Solemn an Obligation.

3. And having thus explained to you, what necessary Rules are to observed, in
making Religious Vows, the next thing, I am to do, is to exhort you to a sober,
holy, and moderate use of them, and you will not think the exhortation
unreasonable, if you do but reflect;

1. That this Religious Vowing will be a great Argument of your readiness to
please God; We look upon it as such in David; I have Sworn, and will perform it,
that I will keep thy Righteous Judgments, Psalm. 119. 106. It showed the great
proneness of his Mind to prove, what was that good, and acceptable, and perfect
Will of God. Readiness to please God is made in Scripture the indeleble
Character of a Christian; and we are assured, that God judges of our Actions by
this readiness, 2 Cor. 8. 11, 12. Where this readiness is not, Men serve God by
force, and what they do in Religion, is more from fear of Judgment, than love
to Gods Holiness; and such Services God respects not, because the Heart is cold
Vows are acts of Resolution, and there must be a great sense within, that draws
these Promises forth. And what is this sense and Resolution but effects of the
Souls readiness to express its esteem of Gods favors. He that Vows an act of
Devotion, breaks through difficulties, and there is not a better sign, that the
Heart is ready to please its great Owner, than when it can wade through
hardships to do him service

2. These Religious Vows are signs of the Hearts sincerity. Signs that we do
not play at fast and loose with God, that our hatred against sin is not
feigned, nor our anger counterfeit; that we do not only pretend willingness to
part with our lusts, but have in sober sadness determined their destruction.
Sincerity of Heart is so much insisted on by the Holy Ghost, that the most
specious Acts of Worship are rejected as dung, while they come not attended
with this qualification. By a Vow a man resolves to put a stop to sin, and
shows that he will have no offs, and on's but intends to silence and hush the
sinful desire for ever, and this is honest, done like a Nathancel, an Israelite
indeed, in whom there is no guile, Joh. 1. 47.

3. These Vows put us to some streights, and are therefore the better sign,
that we enter in at the straight Gate, and walk in the narrow Way that leads to
Life. A Man has very great reason to suspect his Religion, which does not put
him to inconveniences, nor obliges him to any Selfdenyal. A Vow drives the
Soul into a narrow path, and restrains her freedom, ties her up to a Law, and
by that Law she must go, and dares not swerve, or deviate from it; and yet it
is a pleasing Bondage, and the Soul voluntarily yields to the yoke, to avoid
being disso^^e. 'Twas generously said of David (...), 2 Samuel 24. 24. I will not
(...)-Offerings unto the Lord my God, of that which cost me nothing: So most a
Christian say, I will not walk in a way, but what has some straitness in it;
and since these Vows do signally pinch Flesh and Blood, and confine it to
boundaries, and limits, they yield this satisfaction, That we are in a likely
way to be saved.

In a word; By such Holy Vows we assure our hearts, that we do not take sin to
be such a harmless thing, as the World makes of it, and that we have other
apprehensions of Religion, then careless sinners have, and that we do in good
earnest believe, that Gods word is of great weight, and will be infallibly
fulfilled; That we do not conform to Hypocrisy, nor think, that Devotion
consists altogether in making clean the outside of the Cup, and Platter; That
we value the Examples of Saints more, than the Customs of the World, and are
resolved to be guided more by the Actions of a few Mortified Men, than by the
inconsiderate doings of a Multitude.

4. But then, if we enter into such Holy Vows, let us dread Violation of them,
as we would do committing the blackest Villainies, which is the Fourth
Particular I am to Treat of. And the breaking of them will appear very
dreadful, if we reflect,

1. That this violation is no less than Perjury. A Vow, and an Oath, are much
of the same Nature, and accordingly in Scripture, they are used promiscuously
one for the other, Numb. 30. 13. For though it is said, that a Vow is made only
to God, and an Oath many times both to God and Man, yet still in both God is
made Witness, Judge, and Revenger: What some of the Papists say, in this case,
that the Pope can Dispense with a Vow, and not with an Oath, is Childish, and
unworthy of a rational Man's disquisition. Since God makes them to be one and
the same thing, why should we invent dist^nct^^ns, to make them different; and
being the same, if we presume to violate a Vow we have made, we cannot possibly
avoid the guilt of Perjury, a sin so great, that in its heinousness it goes
beyond Adultery, and Murder; beyond Adultery, because, in this, the crime is
immediately committed against our Neighbor, but in the breach of Vows it is
immediately levelled against God's Nature: beyond Murder; because in this, a
command of the second Table is wilfully broken, but in Perjury, a Precept of
the first, which, as it concerns God immediately, so it is of greater dignity,
and consequence, not to mention, that in Perjury Men deny Gods Wisdom,
Knowledge, and taking notice of their Monstrous sin; It Is true, in all sins,
the sinner is guilty of this denegation, but in this more especially, because
God is appealed to, as knowing the very secrets of the heart, which Faith is
manifestly and desperately denied in violation of such Vows, and turns the
crime into Blasphemy.

2. This violation of Vows is a thing, which the very Heathen have abhorred,
Vid. Stobaeum, Sermon. 28. de perjurio.
the most Idolatrous People in the World have dreaded it, as one of the
greatest Enormities Man can possibly be guilty of; which made one of them say
merrily, That such Men as break their Vows, had need get themselves New Gods,
for the old ones would never let so great a Crime pass unrevenged: They have
Writ Books against it, Declaimed against it, and thought it rational, that
persons who make so bold with the Allmighty, should be banished from Humane
Societies. They have detested such violations, as things contrary to the
Instinct of Humane Nature, Doomed such sinners to Notorious Punishments, and
left them to the All-revenging Eye of Heaven.

3. And indeed, he that has been no careless spectator, reader, or observer of
affairs in the World, cannot be ignorant, how severely God has in this life
punished such Presumptuous Violations, Men that have dared to be so Hellishly
bold, have either come to some fearful end, or have suffered signally in their
Estates, or Fortune, or Reputation, or have fallen into strange Terrors, and
Anguish of Conscience, or have been forced like Cain, to be Vagabonds on Earth,
and even then, when they have fled from one place to another, to hide their
shame, Vengeance has followed them, so dangerous a thing it is to play with a
Consuming Fire.

My self have known persons, who, upon the breach of their Vows, have fallen
into that disconsolate, dejected condition, that they have run into Despair,
and have turned a Deaf Ear to all the Comforts of the Gospel. Something within
has sat heavy on their hearts, and in the midst of their health they have
consumed, and pined away, and no Drugs of Apothecaries, no Medecines of
Physicians, no Kind Addresses of their Friends, have been able to bring their
Minds to any Calmness, or Serenity, but they have rolled on from one Pensive
Thought to another, till at last they have been ready to lay Violent Hands upon
themselves, and, like Judas, tossed from one place to another, have not been
able to exchange their pain with their place.

4. This Violation of our Vows is a kind of Challenging God's Vengeance. It
looks, as if we dared the Allmighty, defied his Thunder, and mocked his Arm of
Justice; for when we make a Vow, we do as good as desire God to revenge our
Violation, if we break it, and therefore to break it wilfully, must needs
participate of contempt, and undervaluing of his Vengeance, as if he either
durst not, or could not punish it; or had so little regard to his Honor, and
Justice, as to let such Enormities go scot-free: Such Sins, if truly
interpreted, will look very big, and if the consequences of them be considered,
it will be found, that they entrench strangely upon God's Honor, and
Prerogative. This makes Men generally so afraid of breaking their Vows, that
they even venture to keep rash, and inconsiderate Vows, because they think it
safer to keep them, then by violation to put such notorious Affronts upon him
that dwells in the Heavens. And this was it that Solomon aimed at, Eccles. 5.
4. When thou Vowest a Vow unto God, deser not to pay it, for he has no
pleasure in Fools; Pay that which thou have Vowed: Better is it that thou
should not Vow, then that thou should Vow and not pay.

Such men, as do not pay, are Fools indeed, for they seek to put a Cheat upon
the Allmighty, and to deceive him, whose Eyes are like Flames of Fire, and
behold both the inside and outside of their hearts. Silly Wretches! as if a
Grasshopper could circumvent a Giant, or a poor Worm outwit the greatest Sages.
Such Follies meet with Judgments of the same Nature, and as such Sinners mock
the Most High, so he also will Laugh at their Calamity, and Mock, when their
Fear comes, Prove. 1. 26.

5. If we break the Vows we make to God, What Man can trust us after that? If
we are Treacherous to our God, how should we keep Faith with Men? If we Vid.
^au. Cle^. ^i. 2. Gener. 11.
are unfaithful in greater Matters, Who will commit lesser to our trust? When
Canstantius, Constantines Father, had given order, That such Christians, as
would not Sacrifice to the Heathen gods, should depart his Court, but those
that would Offer Incense to Idols might stay; and not a few, for fear of losing
their Places, hereupon Offered Incense, while others quitted all they had,
rather then they would sin against God; He Generously called those back, who
had laid down their Employments upon the account of Conscience, and chose them
for his Friends, and Banished the other, that had consented to his Unjust
Decree, saying, That Men, who were not true to their God, could never be true
to their Prince: And the same may be said of these Violations of Solemn
Promises, made to the Allmighty; Men that can deal so unworthily with him, How
should they deal honestly with their Neighbors? So that in breaking our Vows,
we Cancel that Obligation, which must make us honest in our Dealings, and
should all Men do so, Humane Societies would soon come to an end, and all
things drop into disorder, and confusion.

6. How can God believe us, after such violations of our Vows, in case
afterward we come to stand in need of his help, and to move him to pity, fall a
Promising again? How justly may God Answer, as he did the Israelites, in a case
much like it, Go and cry to the Gods, whom you have served, for I will deliver
you no more. Judge. 10. 13, 14. How justly may God reply, upon this occasion,
you shall Cheat me, you shall Cozen me, you shall Impose upon me no more. How
should I believe your promises now, that have falsified your Word already? This
many a Man has found, and having basely violated his Vows, when afterward he
has come to lie upon his Deathbed, and cried out for mercy, God has stopped
his Ears, and said, When you stretch forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes,
and when you make many Prayers, I will not hear you, for your hands are full of
Blood, as he said to the Jews, Es. 1. 15.

It is said of Esau, Heb. 12. 17. That he sought the Inheritance of his
Brothers Blessing carefully with Tears, but found no place of Repentance, i. e.
With all his Tears and Prayers, he could not make his Aged Father undo, what he
had done, or take away the Blessing from him, to whom he had already imparted
it: and truly, after such violations of our Vows, we have reason to fear, that
God will deny us that Grace we beg for in the time of our Extremity, or that we
shall be given up to a Hard Heart, and Reprobate Mind, for making so light of
Gods Purity and Holiness; we may justly fear, that God will not set much by our
Prayers and Supplications, when we come to stand in need of his Gracious Looks,
and Influences.

I could add here, that a person that breaks his Vows, or makes no Conscience
of keeping them, knows not where he shall stop in Sin, for no Sin after this
can come amiss to him, he is prepared for every Evil Work, for Murder,
Adultery, Deceit, and all other Wickedness; and is now ready to do any thing
the Devil bids him. But, what has been said shall suffice. I conclude this
Point with St. Austin's words, in his Epistle to Paulinus: Having once Vowed,
thou art no more thine own Master, and thou dare not do otherwise; if thou do
not, what thou have Promised, thou art infinitely worse, then thou were, before
thou did Vow. Thou had not then been worse, but only less holy, but if thou
break'st thy Word with God, thou art more wretched, and miserable; and
therefore how much happier will thou be, if thou performest it.

II. Extraordinary Exercise.
Fasting, An Exercise commanded, and recommended, Joel 2. 15. Mat. 6. 16, 17
18, 19. Luc. 2. 37. Act. 13. 2. 1 Cor. 7. 5. By Fasting, I mean, either a Total
Abstinence from Meat and Drink, or where Nature is not able to bear it, an
Abstinence from all pleasant Food, or Palatable Meat and Drink, for both these
fall under the notion of Fasting, as we see, Jon. 3. 5, 7. Dan. 10. 3. And the
end of this Abstinence must be Sequestring our Thoughts from the World, or
dedicating our selves to God, which makes it a Religious Fast; And a Fast that
God has chosen, and an Exercise unto Godliness; without this qualification,
Fasting comes not within the compass of Religious Exercises; and he that Fasts
to cure a Surfeit, or to get himself a better Stomach, or because the
Physician, and his Constitution requires it, does God no Service by it, but
only gratifies himself.

Fasts are commonly distinguished into Jon. 3. 6. 7. Episcopi universae plebi
mandare jejunia assolent Tertull. adv. Psychic. c. 13.
Public and Private, and as the Public are Commanded, and Ordered, either by
the Civil Magistrate, or the Governor of the Church, either to prevent a
Public Judgment, or to remove it, if it be already come; or to keep up the
Memory of some Dreadful Calamity, that has formerly oppressed a People; so a
private is Instituted and Managed, either by Masters of Families, or by private
Christians, to quicken themselves in Duty: And these private Fasts are the
things that I shall chiefly press and insist upon, not but that a Christian is
obliged cheerfully to embrace the Opportunity of Public Humiliations, but they
being ordered but seldom, his Religious Concerns lay a Necessity upon him to
use this Exercise more frequently in the place where he dwells, or sojourns.

Nor is this a New Exercise, we charge upon you, but such a one, as the Church
of God has, in all Ages, made use of to obtain God's Favor, and the Light of
his Countenance. The Jewish Church, after that Moses had led the way in Fasting
Forty days, and forty nights, soon learned to keep days of Abstinence upon the
Account of Devotion. Indeed, God himself showed them the necessity of this
Exercise, when Rev. 16. 29. he gave them order to Afflict their Souls, i. e. to
Fast on the Tenth day of the Seventh Month, or September, by a Statute for
ever. This was the Great Day of Expiation; and they not only abstained from
Meat, Drink, Ornaments, Curious Dresses, and all manner of Pleasures, but went
Barefoot, Confessed their Sins, Bewailed them, and Cried mightily unto God, to
be Merciful to them for His Names sake, or for the Messiah sake, who was to
come, and expiate their Sins by his own Blood.

But here they did not rest; and God having once acquainted them, that he was
delighted with such Humiliations, and Abasements, if rightly managed, they
began now to make use of them upon all occasions, when any Signal Calamity
Invaded the Land, as appears from the Proclamation of King Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. and by what Esther did, by the advice of Mordecai, Esther 4. 16.
and we may suppose, private Men, when any Pressures, or Miseries threatened
them, did the like. Not long after, when God thought fit to pour out his Wrath
upon Jerusalem, and the Inhabitants thereof, and the Goodly Temple was
destroyed, and burnt down to the ground, the Jews thought themselves obliged to
make more frequent use of this Exercise, and accordingly they Instituted Four
Solemn Anniversary Fasts. The First they appointed to be in the Fourth Month,
or in June, in memory of the Breach made in the Wall of the City of Jerusalem
by the Chaldaean Army, Jer. 52. 2. The Second in the Fifth Month, or in July,
in memory of the Burning of the Temple, and of the whole City of Jerusalem,
Jer. 52. 13. The Third in the Seventh Month, or September, in memory of the
Murdered Gedaliah, upon whose Death followed the DISPERSION of the Jews, Jer.
41. 1, 2. The Fourth in December, or the Tenth Month, in Memory of
Nebucadnezzar's besieging the City of Jerusalem, 2 Kings 25. 1. And these
yearly Fasts they did punctually observe, not only in their First Captivity, or
Exile, but after that Cyrus had given them leave to return into their own
Country, even unto the time of Darius Hystaspes. And two of these Fasts the
Prophet Zachary takes particularly notice of, as most remarkable, viz. that of
the Fifth and Seventh Month, Zach. 7. 5.

This Devotion, as Men among the Jews began to separate themselves from their
Neighbors into Societies, and Orders, and undertook to lead a stricter life
then the Crowd, so it increased signally, and Fasting became a Characteristick
Note of Men, eminently Religious, which makes the Pharisee afterward, Luc. 18.
12. say, That he Fasted twice in the week, i. e. Mundays, and Thursdays,
because that on the fifth day of the Week Moses ascended to the Mount of God,
and on the second he returned from thence, a Custom which the Son of God does
not mishke, though it was a voluntary Institution, but finds fault only with
their insisting on these outward observations, while they neglected the greater
Works of Charity.

The Christians having learned this piece of Devotion among the Jews, soon
improved it, and because they would not be outdone by the Pharisees in Fasting,
resolved to Fast two days in the week as well as they, but changed the days,
and pitched upon Wednesdays and Frydays, because that on Wednesday the Jews
took Counsel together, how to Murder Christ, and on Friday, the Savior of the
World died. And these two standing Fasts the Christians in Tertullians time
used to call Stations, because Vid. Ignat. C^^m. Alex. Tertull. and Atbasp.
O^^^r. vat. lib. 1. c 47, 48, 49.
they went to Church on those days, and stayed there till the Ninth hour, or
Three of the Clock in the Afternoon, and some, as Montanus his Disciples, till
Night, which makes Tertullian, when he became a Montanist, call the Fasts of
those, that Fasted only till Three of the Clock, Stationum semijejunia, half
Fasts, or half Stations; and though the word Station seems to import standing,
yet they did not so much stand in Prayer on those days, as lie prostrate upon
the Ground; and because they spent those days in Mourning, and Confessing
their Sins, they called them Stations, from the Toil, and Hardship of
Soldiers, which stand Centry in Cold and Frosty Nights, and undergo the
various storms of Wind and Weather.

And indeed, about this time, the Discipline of Fasting became so rigorous,
that Men brake into Schisms, and divided from the Church, not about Points of
Doctrine, as they do now, but about strictness of Life, and Vied one with the
other in Fasting, and Abstinence; and I am apt to believe that while these
disputes about Fasting were very hot, that the Christians here, and there might
begin to bethink themselves of an imitation of Christ's Fast, and began to
practice the Quadragesimal or Lent-Fast, for being jcer'd by Montanus his
Disciples, that they fasted only forty hours, i. e. Vid. Tertull. de Jejun. c.
1. 2.
on Good-fryday and the Saturday before Easter, during the time that the
Bridegroom was taken away from them, and continued in the Grave, they unwilling
to be outdone by Schismatics, might think of enlarging their days of
Abstinence, and by degrees from two days, came to four, from four to six, from
six to fourteen, and from Vid. (...).
fourteen to forty; for, as in St Austin's Judgment, the Apostles left no
certain Rules for fasting Days, so it seems more than probable from Irenaeus
his Testimony in Eusebius, that before this time, the Christians, some fasted
but Vid. (...).
one, some two, some more days, some forty hours only before Easter.

What we read of the Fasts of Christians in the following Centuries, especially
the Third, Fourth, and Fifth, is very stupendous, for St Basil, St Jerome, and
St Austin assure us, that not a few Christians Vid. Basil. Epist. ad Episc.
Sebast. Hieron. vit. Pavli c. 5. August. de morib. Eccles. Hieron. de vit.
Hilarion. c. 6.
in those days would fast three days together, and neither eat, nor drink any
thing, till the third day at night; not to eat or drink at all, or to fast
every day till night was a very common thing then, and no man counted that
Abstinence any great matter. Of Hilarion says St Jerome, that from the one and
twentieth to the seven and twentieth year of his Age, he lived for three years
upon a sort of Pulse called Lentiles softened only in cold water, and the three
other years upon dry bread, and salt, and water, from seven and twenty to
thirty he sustained himself only with Herbs, and raw Roots, that grew wild in
the Field, from 30 to 35 his Diet was a little Barley Bread, and Colworts,
without any Sauce; but finding his Eyesight decay upon that Selfdenial, he
added Oil by way of Sauce to his Herbs, and so run on in his Race till he was
63, tasting of neither Apples, nor Pulse, nor any other thing; from 63 to 83
his Diet was no more but Sops made of Meal, and Herbs; and yet as slender as
this diet was, he never eat till Sun-ser. Thus far St Jerome, and he protests,
Hieron. vit. Pauli c. 5.
and appeals to Jesus, and his Holy Angels, as Witnesses of the truth of what
he says, that about Syria he has seen persons, of whom one having shut
himself up in a Cave for thirty years together, lived upon nothing but
Barley-Bread and muddy Water, and another in another Cottage made his Meal a
days of nothing else but five dry Figs.

To that height of maceration, and crucifying of the Flesh, did Fasting come in
those Ages; and though I am not bound to believe all that Antiquity has
written about the miraculous Fasts of Men, how Ammonius did never eat any
thing, that was boiled, or baked, or roasted, how Conon for thirty years
together did eat but once a week, how Eusebius lived upon fifteen dry Figgs
forty days, how one John was supported without Food ten years, how Maria
Aegyptica had nothing to feed upon for seventeen years together, but three
Loaves of Bread, how Pityrion did eat but twice a week, how Polychronius has
been known to fast seven days together, how Posidonius eat no Bread in forty
years, etc. Though I say, I am not bound to believe all these, and such like
passages, Antiquity has left upon Record, yet without controversy, the
Abstinence of Men in those times was wondrous great, voluntary Abstinence I
mean, for nothing put them upon it but Religion, and a desire of a more
endearing converse with the Father of Lights, with whom there is no
variableness nor shadow of turning.

And though it would be in vain, and next to ridiculous to desire any of my
Readers to tread in the steps of these Giants in Fasting, yet I must with very
great seriousness, exhort you, that are not ashamed of being Christians, to
make Religious Abstinence your more frequent Exercise; and to this purpose it
will be conveient to speak something of the time, and occasion, when this
Exercise is most proper; 2. how it must be managed; and, 3. what it is, that
makes it necessary.

1. Of the time, and occasion, when this Exercise may be most proper, and here
the best Rule to go by is the Scripture, and the Examples of Saints, and these
will inform us, that it is proper at any time, and the oftener the better, but
particularly,

I. When we lie under some Temporal Afflictions, whether that Affliction
consist in losses, or in the malice, hatred, or ill will of Men, or in some
other crosses and disappointments, that may befall us in this World. In such
cases David ever had recourse to this Exercise, as we see, Ps. 69. 10. 11. and
acknowledged the justice of God, confessed God did him no wrong in suffering
such troubles to seize upon him, prayed for mitigation of his misery, or for
deliverance, and he fasted on purpose that his Prayers might be more piercing.
The same thing he did when his Child lay sick, 2 Samuel 12. 16. He besought God
for the Child, and fasted, and lay all night upon the Earth: Fasting is an
acknowledgement of our vileness, and he that abstains from Meat and Drink upon
a Religious account, confesses that he has deserved to be starved to death;
and it is natural for Mankind to believe, that such humiliations and abasements
are prevalent with the Deity.

II. When any of our Friends, or Relations, or Neighbors fall into more than
ordinary trouble, our compassion and tenderness to their disconsolate estate is
best expressed by fasting and supplications, and in this also David's example
is remarkable, who went so far in his charity, as to fast even for seeming
friends, but real enemies, Psalm. 35. 13. But as for me, when they were sick, my
clothing was Sackcloth; I humbled my Soul with fasting, and my Prayer returned
into my own Bosom, i. e. was answered, and heard, and they were delivered.
Selfishness has so prevailed in the age, we live in, that we think it scarce
worth the trouble of a Fast, to procure God's mercy for our selves, much less
for others. Good Lord! What an unbelieving World is this! Men believe not that
God will work any mighty work upon their fasting, and therefore slight it.
Heretofore men believed it, and saw wonders, and God blessed them, and was
entreated not only for them, but for their Neighbors and Relations too.

III. When we would be rid of any inordinate Lust or Affection. Fasting in
these cases weakening the Body, weakens such Lusts, and Affections too, which
have too great dependence upon the body, and are more vigorous, as the Body is
pampered, and gratified, and what Christ says of that evil spirit, Matt. 17.
21. may be most truly applied to such Lusts, This kind goes not out but by
Fasting and Prayer. These Lusts are certainly enemies to our Souls, for they
war against them in St Peter's Phrase, 1 Pet. 2. 11. and as a General that
means to take a strong Town, cuts off their Provision, and will not suffer any
Corn or other Commodities to be carried thither, whence it comes to pass, that
the enemy must necessarily at last yield himself, so inordinate Lusts must be
starved out, and if you bring a famine upon them, you take away their strength,
and deprive them of their courage, and briskness, said Moses in Ruffinus, for
what is stronger than a Lion, yet let him want his Ruffin. lib. 3. devit.
Monach. sect. 66.
Food, and he becomes as weak as the feeblest Animal.

IV. When we stand in need of Grace, or of some Virtuous Habit, or of Conquest
of some particular temptation. In this case Abstinence is exceeding profitable,
not that our empty stomachs do in their own nature contribute toward it, but
the Abstinence fits us for seriousness, that seriousness for earnestness, that
earnestness for Gods favor. And therefore it was that the Angel told Daniel,
Dan. 10.

12. From the first day, that thou did set thy heart to understand, and to
chasten thy self before thy God, thy words were heard, to show that fasting
fits the Soul for fervent Prayer, and God denies nothing to such intercessions,
Jam. 5. 16. and indeed where men can so esteem the Grace of God, as to take
pains for it, Gods arms are ever open to them, for what the Heathens observed
long ago, holds true still, To the industrious God denies nothing. Nothing
discovers our Dii omnia laboribus vendunt.
esteem of a thing, so much as our contentedness to undergo some hardship for
it, and while we deny our Bodies often the satisfaction they crave, they learn
by degrees to be more obedient to Faith and Reason, and consequently are less
impediments to those Graces which require a Soul, that can live above sense,
and sublunary objects. Hence David to learn contentedness in adversity, though
exceeding dry, yet would not drink the water that his Grandees fetched for him
from the Well of Bethlehem, 2 Samuel 23.

16. and in imitation of him, some in the Primitive Church to learn
cheerfulness in want, when they have almost longed for a certain sort of Food,
and have got it, yet have been unwilling to taste of it, though their appetite
was eager after it, and for this very reason I think it was, that the
Pythagoreans used to sit down at a Table full of the greatest dainties and Vid.
Diodor. Sicul. in Menag. Not. ad Diog. Laert. lib. 8.
varieties, and with coming stomachs too, and in the midst of their hunger and
greediness after Meat, rise from Table, and forbear eating, or cause all to be
taken away, and continue fasting, and all to learn self-conquest, and to get
their Souls more raised above the World.

V. When we undertake any great Work or Office, it is very fit to consecrate it
with a Fast. So Christ entered upon his Office of Prophet with Fasting, Mat. 4.
1, 2. and St Paul and Barnabas, when ordained to be Preachers of the Word,
began that tremendous Work with Fasting, and prayer, Act. 13. 3. a thing so
decent, that the very Heathens have seen the necessity of it, which was the
reason why those that were going to consult the Oracle, were obliged to fast,
and those that were to be admitted to Sacrifice or Minister to the Egyptian
Isis were commanded Vid. Tertul. de anima c. 16. Plutarch de Isid. and Osir.
to fast ten days, and those that were to be Priests of Jupiter were ordered to
abstain from all Flesh, and things, that were heated by fire, and they among
the Indian Philosophers, that were initiated into the Service or Worship of the
Sun, durst drink neither Wine, nor eat any Flesh, and Amphiaraus laid it down
as a Rule, that those that came to receive and give the true, and clear meaning
of the Oracles, must debar themselves of all Vid. Volae terran. lib. 13. c. 55.
Food one whole day, and three days besides of Wine.

VI. When the Church of God is groaning under persecution, or some other
grievous oppression. This obliged the man of desires the Prophet Daniel to
retire frequently, seeing the Temple and City of Jerusalem lie desolate, and in
rubbish, he fasted often, deprecating Gods Wrath, and indignation against his
People, Dan. 10. 3. and on the same account St Cyprian applied Vid. Cyprian
Epist. 8. 15.
himself to this Exercise, when the Church was grievously afflicted by the
Pagans, and good reason, that he, who is a Member of the Church, should make
the Churches concern, his own, and burn as it were, when that burns, and be
weak when that is weak, and be afflicted when that is afflicted. So much the
relation, every private Christian has to that mystical Body does import,
without which he is no Member, but an excrement of that body, as Warts, and
Wens are in Bodies natural, deformities rather than ornaments, and which merit
resection more, than conservation.

VII. When a Sinner first turns from his evil ways: Nothing can beautify his
Soul more than this Abstinence, whereby he confesses his demerit, that God
might justly take away his holy Spirit for ever from him, the true Food of his
Soul, and that which must preserve him unto Salvation. So much the Prophet Joel
intimates, when he bids such men, as in good earnest turn to God, make fasting
part of that mortification, Joel 2. 12. Turning to God is giving what
demonstration we can of the sincerity of our repentance, and hatred of sin, and
abhorrency of our selves. So that fasting being part of that demonstration, it
must not be left out. Ahab himself, though a notorious Hypocrite, yet was
sensible that there could be no turning to God, without this Exercise, which
made him when he heard the Words of Elijah, apply himself to repentance, and to
give some demonstrations of its being extraordinary, and as he thought sincere,
He rent his Clothes and put sackcloth upon his flesh and fasted, and lay in
sackcloth, and went softly, 1 Kings 21. 27.

VIII. Where a man has been guilty of some notorious Sin, as Murder, Adultery,
Fornication, Oppression, Blasphemy, Atheism, etc. and repents, it is fit he
should keep a Fast now and then, to represent unto himself the dreadfulness of
his sin, and the infinite patience of God, and what a mercy it is, that God
has turned him from darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan unto God.
Such sins eat deep into the Soul, and they had need be remembered often, and our
detestation of them had need be expressed frequently by holy Abstinence; They
are enough to damp all hopes of comfort, enough to deprive us of Gods Presence
by Grace, and of his presence by Glory. They are sins, that let in all the Host
of Hell, and the Soul must fall very low, before the Devil can have such
mastery over her. The horror of such sins requires frequent compunctions,
frequent compunctions are caused by frequent Abstinence, and that makes fasting
necessary on such occasions. In all probability David's Fasts were more
frequent than ordinary after his commission of Murder and Adultery, and when we
hear him complain, My knees are weak through fasting, Ps. 109. 24. and I wept
and chasten'd my Soul with fasting, Ps. 69. 10. We may justly conclude, that
these Exercises had relation to the sins, we have mentioned.

2. And having said so much of the time, when this Exercise may be most proper,
I must in the next place let you see, how it must be managed.

And, 1. As I said in the beginning, In such Fasts there must be a forbearing
of all Meat and Drink. To forbear Flesh, and to eat Fish is no Fast at all, for
this is but changing one delicacy for another, and the same may be said of Wine
and Sweetmeats, which the Papists make use of in their Fasts, while they will
taste no Broth, no Eggs, nor any thing, that has relation to Flesh. These at
the best are Mock-fasts, and are so far from serving to elevate the mind, that
the fumes of such dainties oppress it as much, as flesh will do. The ancient
Christians indeed used their (...), sometimes in their Fasts, especially in the
week before Easter, which consisted in eating those things which had little or
no juice in them, but that was but just to support nature from fainting, there
being little nourishment in them, and in imitation of those Christians a man
may in his Fasts make use of Bread, and Water, or Small-beer, if nature will
bear no emptiness and yet may be truly said to Fast, because it is an
Abstinence from all pleasant Food, but to fast in Wine and Fish is to play the
Epicure, not the Hermit.

2. These Fasts must not be broke till the evening. The Grecians and Coptite
Christians at this day seldom extend their Fasts beyond three or four of the
clock in the afternoon, and usually break them, when evening Prayer is ended,
and though the Primitive Christians used to do so on their weekly Fasts, i. e.
on Wednesdays and Fridays, yet in other Fasts they protracted and prolonged
them even to Sunset, and some to a much longer time, as I showed before. Those
that did heretofore fast only till three of the clock in the afternoon, it is
like might take that custom from Cornelius, Act. 10. 30. who seems to say that
he was fasting till the ninth hour, which is the time, we speak of, though
others think that he fasted four days together; But the usual measure of such
Abstinence is the evening, or when the Artificial day is at an end.

3. In such Fasts our particular sins, and neglects must be thought upon,
confessed, lamented, aggravated, and deplored; for such days are true
humiliation days, and nothing is like to make us so humble as the consideration
of our offenses, and demerits, and the wrath of God, which is due to us
thereupon; sin, if seriously viewed in all its consequences, will certainly
appear very dreadful, odious, and intolerable, and will show us what monstrous
Creatures we are, and that is enough to humble us even into hatred of our
selves, and accordingly this was the custom of old, Neh. 9. 1. 16, 17. Dan. 9.
3. 4. 5. and that is the reason, why such Fasts are sometimes expressed by
mourning, and weeping only, because mourning for sin, which has provoked the
Almighty must be one principal part in this Exercise, Zach. 7. 3.

4. In such Fasts deprecations must be made for the Nation we live in, and
indeed for all Mankind; for such humiliations must infuse tenderness, and
compassion into us, if they do not, they are not of the right stamp; If I am
truly sensible of mine own sins, I cannot but pity my Neighbors, my Relations,
my Acquaintance, and other men, who are involved in the same misery, and are as
liable to the anger of God, as my self, and if I have any pity, any compassion
for my self, I cannot but have pity for others too, but how does my pity show
it self, but by becoming an intercessour for them, as well as for my self? and
though I am the principal person, that want mercy on such occasions, yet my
fellow Christians must not be left out, except I can see men drowning without
being concerned, whether they have a deliverer, or no.

5. In such Fasts, the Word of God must be diligently read, and read with great
attention; especially such portions of Scripture, as contain some of the
severest threatenings of God, and his Commands, which we have been most
negligent of, and upon such passages reflections must be made, and those
Threatenings and Commands applied to our selves, and our hearts asked, how they
feel themselves under these comminations, and whether they are sensible of
their Errors; as the Eunuch of the Queen of Aethiopia said to Philip, Of whom
does the Prophet speak of himself, or of another man? Act. 8. 34. so when these
threatenings occur, the interrogation must be; Of whom does God speak, of me or
of another? Am not I guilty of the same sin, and may not I justly think, he
speaks of me, as well as of another?

6. With these Devotions in such Fasts praises of God may be mingled now and
then, and Gods various Blessings laid open to our view, that we may learn to
admire his goodness, and our strange ingratitude, and in this the Israelites in
Nehemiah, are our Precedents, of whose Fast we read, that they divided the day
of their Fast into four parts, one part they consecrated to confessions of Sin,
the second to reading the Word of God, the third to thanksgiving and praising
God, the fourth it is like to begging Blessings Spiritual and Temporal for
themselves, and for their brethren, Nehem. 9. 1, 2, 3. An excellent pattern,
and which, if followed may keep us from being tired with devotion on such
occasions.

7. In such Fasts, holy, serious, and gracious thoughts are absolutely
necessary; thoughts suitable to that mortification, and the great concern we
are about; for as we need not lie upon our faces all day, but may lawfully rise
sometimes, and walk, so in that walk, or while we are not reading, or praying,
our minds must be busy with contemplations of our spiritual wants, and the
ways and means how they may be supplied, our eyes must be fixed upon Heaven,
and God's justice, and vengeance surveyed with an impartial eye, till it makes
us wish with Jeremy, O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears, that I might weep day and night for the iniquities of my sins! Jerem. 9.
1.

8. Alms and Works of Charity must accompany such Fasts; for thus we are
taught, Es. 58. 6. 7. Is not this the Fast that I have chosen? To undo the
heavy Burdens, to deal thy Bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the Poor,
that are cast out, to thy house? In such Fasts we come to beg a considerable
Alms of God, and God is resolved to observe his own Rule, With what measure you
mete, with the same it shall be measured to you again, Luke 6. 38.
and that the merciful shall obtain mercy* What pity can we expect from God at
such times. while we shut up our bowels of compassion to the needy? Though we
our selves fast, yet that is no Rule for them that are in distress, and want
daily Food, and we then fast with some comfort, while we make them eat, that
are destitute of necessaries, and conveniences.

9. In such Fasts we must have no ill 1 Kings 21 9.
designs. He that with Jezehel fasts to circumvent an innocent Naboth, fasts
not to God, but to the Devil, and he who has some interest, or intrigue to
carry on, and can effect it by nothing so easily as by a Fast and Humiliation,
to bring people into a good opinion of him, takes strange pains to make God his
implacable enemy. To provoke God by downright works of darkness is all one
would think, that wickedness can aim at; but to convert Religion into sin, and
by a Fast to hold a Candle to the Devil, is a Villainy, which has no name, and
therefore the punishment due to it, can have no bounds, no measure. He that
Fasts upon the account of the great injustice, and oppression he has been
guilty of, in hopes, that God will let him enjoy the estate or means, he has
wrongfully gotten, without restitution, observes a lesser Command, and breaks a
greater. The design in such Fasts must be no other but to cloth our Souls with
greater righteousness, and to get our hearts filled with greater zeal to Gods
glory. To think that a Fast will excuse my sin, or Abstinence serve for a cloak
to cover my unlawful desires, or make my Lusts, and wilful Follies, pass for
Peccadillo's in Heaven, are thoughts, which require no other confutation, but
God's thunder; and where people can think so ill of God, and Religion, there is
no other way to convince them, but by Viols of wrath, and cups of trembling and
astonishment.

10. In these Fasts new Resolutions must be made, against those sins, we find
our selves very prone, and inclined too; without this, our Fasts are but cold
services, and our Abstinence but a formality. It Is therefore well observed by
the Jewish Vid. (...) c. 2. sect. 1.
Doctors, that it is not said ^^ the Ninevites, that God saw their Fa^^ng and
their Sackcloth, but their Wor^^, and that they turned from their evil ways.
Without such Resolutions, we only fast for strife, and debate, and to smite
with the fist of wickedness, as it is said, Es. 58.

4. but do not fast to God. If we have been defective in any duty, new
resolutions must be made against the neglect, new resolutions to be more
careful in the performance, new resolutions to watch more, and to overcome our
selves. This is to renew our Covenant with God, and when we do so, God will be
found of us, 2 Chronicles. 15. 12. 15. To weaken our Bodies in fasting, while our
sins continue vigorous and strong, is only a seeming imitation of a Nation,
that does righteousness, and forsakes not the Ordinances of God, but no real
following after righteousness, as God complains of the Jews, Es. 58. 2.

XI. Our intent in such Fasts, must be to fit our selves for the influences of
God's Spirit. One great reason why the Christians of old had so plentiful a
Portion of God's Spirit vouchsafed to them, was without doubt their great
Temperance, and Abstinence, which makes the Soul more agile, and lively, and
consequently quickens her understanding, and prepares her for those
communications of the Deity. I can lay no very great stress upon the place,
because it concerns a particular person, yet it is remarkable however, that the
Evangelist speaking of St John the Baptist's Abstinence, immediately subjoins
the privilege, we speak of, Luke 1. 15. He shall be great in the sight of the
Lord, and shall drink neither wine nor strong drink, and he shall be filled
with the Holy Ghost, as if Abstinence attracted that invisible ininfluence, and
God loved to converse more with persons that are enemies to pampering of their
Bodies, than with those, that delight in corporal Food, and choicer Diet.
Indeed the more the Body is cherished the more sleepy will the Soul be, and the
less it is cocker'd, and pleased, the more active will the Spirit be; and I
think I may lay it down for a Maxim, that the greatest Revelations, and
Inspirations have been vouchsafed to Men that have been most given to
Abstinence. Of Anna the Prophetess it is particularly said, that she served God
with Fasting much, Luke 2. 37. Not that I would encourage men to aim at
extraordinary Visions and Revelations in their Fasts, but so much I dare
promise them, that by frequent Religious Fasts, they may obtain great
assistances of God's Spirit, to subdue their corruptions, and to do great
things for God, and to arrive to more than ordinary content, and satisfaction.
And this calls me to another observation,

12. That these Fasts, if the Soul shall receive any great good by them, as I
hinted before, must be frequent. Once a year, or once in half a year to deny
our selves in Meat, and drink, upon the account of devotion, is may be, to do
more, han profane persons, but not to do more, than hypocrites; it is the
frequency of study, makes men Scholars, and the frequency of speaking makes men
Masters of a Language. Frequent touching of the Strings makes a man a good
Lutenist, as frequent working at a Trade, makes a man an excellent Artificer,
so he that repeats this Exercise often, will not only get a facility in the
performance, but his Soul will signally thrive by it, supposing still that the
days be spent, as I have directed; and though we cannot lay down a certain Rule
for all men, because their Constitutions and employments are different; yet I
should think, that once a month at least any private Christian might keep a
solemn Fast to obtain mercy, and find Grace to help in the time of need. Those
who have more time, may take the first Christians for their pattern, and
exercise themselves either once, or twice a week in such Abstinence. The
Scripture has not given us any particular instructions about it, because God
would have such Exercises come freely from us without constraint, and then they
become Golden Viols full of odours, as St John speaks, Rev. 5. 8.

13. When we fast thus, our care must be not to despise others, that do not.
Every man stands, and falls to his own Master, and I that know not another
Reasons, why he neglects such Exercises, must not therefore judge him, as
profane. I must still consider, that I have more need of such Self-denials,
than other men, and though they do not for the present apply themselves to
these stricter Rules of living, God will in time acquaint them with their duty.
I know my own wants and necessities best, and my first care must be to save
mine own Soul. As other men's neglects must be no examples to me, so neither if
they do not do, what I do must I cry, Stand off, for I am holier than thou art.
This may befit a Pharisee, but does not become a Christian, and whatever
effects Grace produces in the Soul, to be sure contempt of others is no Fruit
of that Tree.

14. Those that are under the yoke, as Servants, or Apprentices, and are
desirous of this Exercise, must take such days, as their Masters, and
Superiors will allow, or when they can be best spared from their work and
employment, and if it be replied, that they have no other days, but Sundays and
Holidays, I answer that there is no place of Scripture that forbids turning the
Lords Day, or other Festivals, in case of necessity into days of humiliation,
especially, where the severity of Masters, and Mistresses is such, that they
will neither Vid. Canon Apostol. 55. (...): Auth. Epist. ad Philipp. Ignatio
adscriptae.
enter into Gods Kingdom themselves, nor suffer those, that will, to enter. The
Eastern Church heretofore made it a crime to fast on Saturday, or on the
Sabbath day, except the great Saturday before Easter, yet the Western Church
ventured it; and what was a Festival in the East, was a Humiliation day in the
West, and no doubt, they had their different reasons for it, as the Eastern
Church, made it a Festival to oppose the Heresy of Marcion, who fasted that
day; so the Western made it a day of Humiliation, because the Disciples of our
Lord were overwhelmed with grief and sorrow that day, for the loss of their
Master.

This passage I mention on purpose to show, that though the Lords day, and
other Holidays be Festivals, yet it has not been unusual to change Festivals
into fasting days, and consequently a person that is under such Bondage, may no
doubt lawfully spend them in such mortifying Exercises, because he has no
other days to employ in such Devotions.

15. They that are Masters of their time, and have liberty to choose what days
they think fit for this Exercise, may do well to pitch on such days, when
together with their private devotions, they may have opportunities to hear a
Sermon, or to be present at the public Prayers of the Church. For these
public Devotions keep the private warm, and as one hand washes the other, so
the private fits the Soul for the public, and the public makes her return
with greater appetite to her private Confessions, and Orisons. On such days,
when our private Devotions are on the wing, and our hearts hot within us, we
are the fitter to join with our follow Christians in public, and may
contribute to the hearing of their Prayers, for since the exaudition of Prayer
depends much upon the fervor of it, Abstinence, as I said before, being a
great means to give heat, and fire to our Prayers; we may on such days, by our
addresses to God in public, as well as private, signally promote not only our
own, but also our Neighbors welfare and happiness.

16. When at night we break our Fast, it is fit and convenient we should be very
moderate in eating and drinking, least with the severities of the day we forget
our resolutions of better obedience too. He that has fasted all day, and gluts
himself again at night, seems to be glad that the devotion is over, and to take
greater delight in his corporal, than spiritual Food, and Nourishment. The
serious frame of spirit, we have been in all day, must be preserved at night,
and sure I am, that feeding our selves to the full at such times, will very
much debilitate, and weaken the noble sense, we had all day, and therefore a
courser diet than ordinary is fittest at night, when we have been with God all
day. It keeps in the holy fire, and helps to maintain the serious thoughts, we
have had; for the courser the Meat, or Food is, the less palatable will it be
and the less palatable, the less delight a man will take in it, and the less
delight he takes in it, the more he will reflect on the sad truths, that have
been in his mind all day.

To this purpose I remember a passage Procop. de aedif. Justinian, Imp.
in Procopius concerning Justinian the Emperor. The week before Easter, says
he, he fasted every day, and led a very severe life, such as meaner men would
scarce have endured. All the day long he abstained from Meat and drink, and
being hungry at night, would not suffer his Servants to set either Bread or
Wine, or any curious dishes upon his Table, but caused some Coleworts, and
common Herbs of the Field, macerated for some days in Vinegar, to be brought up
to him, and of these he did eat, and his drink was water, nor did he eat of
this Food to satiety, but having tasted a little, would give over again, scarce
taking so much, as would suffice nature,

3. And having laid down these Rules, my Reader will suppose, that I would not
have mentioned them, but with an intent to exhort him to the frequent use of
this holy Abstinence, the third particular, I promised to offer to your
consideration.

The Grecians at this day, scarce take us, who call our selves Protestants, for
Christians, because we fast so little, thinking it impossible, to be followers
of the Primitive Church, and not to imitate them in this Exercise. The truth
is, it is a thing so ^i^tle practiced among us, except it be now and then, when
we are put upon it by the Magistrate in some imminent danger, that he that knows
any thing of the ancient Church, may wonder, how we come to leave out so
considerable a part of devotion. Fasting has got so ill a reputation among us,
because the Roman Church has miserably perverted the use of it, that the
generality are afraid to venture upon it, for fear they should be guilty with
Lot's Wife, of looking back toward Sodom, from which they are escaped. But
most certainly, this Exercise is a Christian Exercise, in despite of all those
abuses, and was practiced in the ancient Church, as surely as the present
Church of Rome is departed from that ancient way of holiness. Go through the
whole Nation, you will not see one Family in twenty set themselves to seek the
Lord by a solemn Fast, through the whole year; and I dare say, there are
thousands, that never heard, or considered, that it was their duty. Gluttony,
and Luxury, and Eating, and Drinking heartily are made such necessary
attendants of Men's lives, that they think, should they fast one whole day, and
spend the whole day in Confessions, and Prayers, they should certainly die at
night. It Is a sign they have a high esteem for Religion all this while, sure
they do not think their Souls worth any thing, that do not, or will not refresh
them now and then by such Abstinence; for the Soul never feeds better, than
when the Body fasts.

Hear this ye drowsy, lazy, careless Christians, what do you call your selves
Christians for, if you will not do as the ancient Christians did? What made the
first Planters of the Christian Religion fast so often, if they had not
apprehended it exceeding necessary? Were they Fools for doing so, or if they
had not judged it highly expedient, would they have been so weak, as to have
made it their most frequent Exercise? Can you think that Gods Spirit will ever
visit you, while you mind nothing so much as your Belly? Is fullness of Bread,
the way to be filled with the Holy Ghost? Do you ever hope to overcome the
Lusts of the Flesh without this Exercise? Do you think your evil desires will
ever die, without you chastise them by fasting into better manners? Do you
think the World and its Glories will ever become contemptible in your eyes, if
by such Abstinence now and then you do not learn to despise it? Do you think
you will ever become eminent Saints, while you are all for eating and drinking?
Has God denied himself so far, as to deliver up his Son for you, and cannot
you deny your selves in a little Meat, and drink for his sake, that you may
take his death and passion into greater consideration? Do you think, God is so
fond of you, that he will make you partakers of the Divine Nature, while you know
not, what denying the Body means? Do you think, you will ever get any great
portion of Grace, while you think much of attending the Lord, in such
mortifications? Do you think, your minds will ever pierce into the Mysteries of
Gods love without such Humiliations? Do you think, you will ever be admitted to
those high degrees of Gods favor, that the Saints of old arrived to without
such abasement? Do you think your eyes will ever be as clear as theirs, while
your Fasts are not as strict as theirs? Do you think, you will ever feel that
joy, they felt, without such preparatives?

To add some other Motives, and encouraging Arguments.

1. By eating we were lost, and by fasting we must recover. Had Eve fasted, and
abstained from the forbidden Tree, fasting would have been needless, and
superfluous now, and if fasting was necessary in Paradise, shall it not be more
needful now? Of the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat,
said God, Genesis 2. 17. If the Medicine was wholesome, before we were sick, how
much more wholesome must it be, now we are so? Was it expedient before our
Lusts were in Rebellion against our Reason? And shall it not be more expedient,
now that they war against the Soul? Had Adam hearkn'd to this Voice of God, he
had never heard, that more dreadful word, Earth thou art, and to Earth shall
thou return; It was want of fasting, brought death, and trouble, and anguish
into the World; and if things are cured by contraries, hot things by cold, and
cold by hot, that first Luxury had need be expiated, and cured by Abstinence.

2. Fasting thus, we imitate the Holy Angels, they eat not, they drink not, and
yet they praise God day and night; they have indeed Bread to eat, but that
Bread is no other but the light of Gods countenance, which continually feeds
and nourishes them into the highest happiness. When I say we imitate them, I
press no such imitation, as that Monk pretended to, that would needs live like
the Angels of God, and went into a barren Wilderness, taking no provision with
him, believing that God would feed him without a Metaphor with Angels Food, but
finding after a few days, that for want of convenient Food, he was ready to
faint and die away, he returned to his friends again, and one of them hearing
him knock, and calling, open the door, for I am such a one. It Is impossible,
said his friend, for such a one is become an Angel, if thou art an Angel, what
do thou stand knocking here for? But he continued knocking confested his
weakness, and begged of him to let him in, and give him somewhat to support
nature, and that he might recover strength. I mean no such imitation, but as
fasting makes our Souls fly up more vigorously to Heaven, and fits us for
divine contemplations, and heavenly meditations, so far we may be said in this
Exercise to imitate those blessed Spirits, whose contemplations of the divine
goodness are always sprightly, and ravishing.

3. Frequent fasting is that, which will preserve health and life better, than
any Physic whatsoever. What makes so much work for Physicians but eating and
drinking to intemperance? Nay do not Physicians cure men by Abstinence? and if
that be their great remedy, why should we not make use of it, before we have
need of them? Gouts, and Fevers, are best cured by fasting, and for bearing
nourishing Victuals; If it lie in our power to prevent diseases, who can pity
us, when we fall into them, seeing we were wilful in the procuring? So
advantageous, so profitable is God's service, it heals not only the inward, but
the outward, man too, conserves nature in its vigor, the eyes in their
strength, the limbs in their nimbleness, and the head in an even temper. What
made the ancient Hermits, that kept almost a perpetual Fast, live so long? Why!
their frequent fasting: So true is that saying of Solomon, The fear of the Lord
prolongeth days, Prove. 10. 27.

4. If you would displease the Devil, fast, if you would please him, neglect
this Exercise. Nothing pleases the Prince of Darkness more, than feeding high,
by this he tempted the Israelites into Idolatry, Numb. 25. 2. By this he tempts
men to Pride, to Fornication, to Adultery, to Lustfulness, to Wrath, to Malice,
to Revenge. By fasting the Devil is expelled, by fasting his power is weakn'd,
by fasting his temptations loose their sting. By continual feeding and filling
our selves he darkens our Understanding, clouds our Reason, dulls our Devotion,
makes us indisposed for Gods service, and deprives us of that light, whereby
our feet should be guided into the ways of peace. How long then do ye halt
between two opinions, if the Lord be God, follow him, but if Baal be God,
follow him, 1 King. 18. 21.

5. Will not the very Heathen shame you in the last day, if you neglect this
Exercise? Vid. Diog. Laert. lib. 10 de Epicuro. and lib. 8. de Pythag.
Epicurus himself lived upon Bread, and Water, and Apples, and Herbs, saying,
that Bread and Water would satisfy Nature, and what was beyond that, was not
to satisfy Nature, but Luxury. The like did Pythagoras before him, who
defended that this slight (...).
and slender diet would not only preserve men's health, but furnish them with
excellent Notions, and clarify their Reason. Hieron. tom. 2. lib. 2. contra
Jovin.
St Jerome from Heathen Writers, tells us, how under Saturn the First, men lived
altogether upon Fruits, and Apples; how under Cyrus many of the Persians lived
altogether upon Salt, and Bread and Water, and Barley Flower; How the ancient
Priests of Egypt abstained from all Flesh and Wine, did eat Bread but seldom,
made Herbs, and Fruits of the Earth their only Diet, and would not touch either
Milk or Eggs, saying, that the one was but liquid Flesh, and the other nothing
Blood, only the color changed; and how the Persian Magi made use in their Diet
of nothing but Flower, and Herbs I do not from hence infer, that you must
change your Diet, but only this, what a Witness this temperance of the Pagans
will be against you one day, even against your intemperance, and feeding high,
and unwillingness to apply your selves sometimes to this Religious Exercise of
Fasting, and Abstinence.

6. So strange a power has this Exercise with God, that by virtue of it many
have wrought Miracles. I know not whether that old observation will hold water,
that Elijah, while he kept to Bread and Water, wrought Miracles; but after
Author Sermon. ad fratr. in Erem. perper^m adscr. Augustino. Hieron. cit.
he began to eat Flesh, that power ceased. However, herein the Fathers agree,
that by Fasting Daniel stopped the mouths of Lions; by Fasting, the three young
Men at the Court of Babylon quenched the violence of the fire, which makes St
Jerome cry out, How lovely is this Exercise, which appeases God, asswages the
rage of Lions, and chases Devils? By rusting the Israelites overcame the
Ama^^kites; by fasting Joshua stayed the course of the Sun; by fasting Lazarus
comes to be received into Abraham's Bosom. I conclude this Subject with the
words of St Ambrose, Great is the Virtue of Abstinence, an Exercise Ambros.
lib. de Eli^ and jejun. c. 1, 2.
so glorious, that the Son of God himself was enamored with it. The fasting
Elijah speaks the word, and the Heavens become Brass; By fasting he raises the
Widows Son to life again, commands Rain, calls for fire from above, and is
wrapped up in a fiery Chariot into Paradise; By his Forty days fast he obtains
the honor of the Divine Presence, and the more he Fasts, the greater Marks of
Gods favor he receives, stops the Stream of Jordan and turns its slimy bottom
into dust. For what is Abstinence but a Picture of Heaven? it is the life of
Angels, the death of sin, the grave of evil concupiscence, the means of
salvation, the root of grace, and the foundation of chastity. By this men climb
up to Heaven a nearer way; And by the strength of this Elias ascended, before
the Horses of fire mounted him on high.

III. Extraordinary Exercise.
Watching. An Exercise commanded and recommended, Mat. 26. 38. 40. 41. Marc.
13. 37. 1 Pet. 5. 8. Act. 16. 25. Act. 20. 7. By watching here I do not mean
watchfulness of the Mind, a Subject, I have already sufficiently discoursed of
in the Ordinary, and constant Exercises, but abstinence from sleep, and keeping
our selves awake for devotion sake; in a word, that which the Primitive Church
has expressed by Vigils, either sitting up the greatest part of the night, or
rising at midnight to praise God, and to magnify his goodness. And though I do
believe, that in the places, I have quoted for this piece of Self-denial,
Christ intends chiefly mental Watching; yet some of the expressions are such,
that they cannot but import corporal Watching too; and since people cannot be
supposed to be exhorted to Vigils in the day time, when the greatest part of
Mankind are awake, it must follow, that this Watching imports Self-denial in
Sleep at night. And the reason of the necessity of this Exercise is given by St
Chrysostom, The night was not made that we should spend, and consume it all in
Sleep, witness your Seamen, Tradesmen, and Artificers. So the Church of God
rises at midnight; Imitate her, and behold the dance, and order of the Stars;
How profound is the silence of nature, how quiet are all things! stand amazed
at Gods dispensation. Now is the Soul nimbler, subtiler, quicker, fitter to
behold things sublime, and great. The Darkness may lead thee into contemplation
of thy sin, and consequently into compunction, seeing the Sky embroidered with
Lights, what an excellent consideration will this produce of thy Creators
Wisdom! Midnight Prayers strangely incline Gods favor, especially if thou make
that time a time of Lamentation, which others make a time of Rest and Laziness.

Night-Devotions in all probability have been very early in the World, and God
seems to have given men an item of them by his appearing to them so often in
the night. Before day Abraham rose to sacrifice Genesis 22. 3.
his Son. In the night it was, that Genesis 28. 11. 12.
Jacob wrestled with God, and received the Blessing. In the night it was, that
Genesis 32. 24.
God led the Children of Israel out of Exodus 12. 12.
Egypt. Samuel cried unto the Lord all night. Judith rose up in the night, and
1 Samuel 15. 11.
performed her Devotions; and who Jud. 12. 1. 6.
knows not what the mighty David says of himself that he washed his Couch Ps.
6. 6.
with his Tears at night. In the night, Luc. 2. 8. 11.
the Son of God was Born, and the Angel of the Lord brought the news of it to
the Shepherds.

The Heathen themselves, by a natural dictate of Reason thought it unjust to
spend all the night in sleep without some expressions of Gratitude to their
Deities. This made them not only sacrifice a Cock to the Night, which they
adored as a Goddess; but by Watching and sitting up at night, and praying to
their Gods, testify their respect, and homage to that Being, from which they
thought their Blessings did drop down. It Is true, many of their nocturnal
Devotions, were impious, profane and ridiculous, but still this argues, that
they thought it rational, and a duty to the Gods they worshipped, to adore them
in the night as well as in the day; not only the Vestals rose in the middle of
the night to sacrifice, but the Indian Philosophers too paid their respect to
the Sun at night; for it was their God, and the same they did in other places
to Venus, Bacchus, Apollo, Minerva, which makes Cicero and Seneca Cic. de
legib. 2. Senec. de provid. c. 5.
speak highly in commendation of such Vigils or devotional Watchings, if they
be used with Sobriety. How the Christians came to exercise themselves this way
is soon guessed at, if we reflect on what Christ had told them, that he would
come to Judgment in the night, or to use Mat. 25. 43.
his own words, as a Thief in the night. Rev. 3. 3.
They trembled at the word, he had spoke, Marc. 13. 35. Watch therefore, for ye
know not, what time the Master of the house comes whether at even or at
midnight, or at the Cock crowing, or in the morning; and this made them deny
themselves in their Sleep so often, and rise to praise God, lest coming in the
night, he should find them unprepared.

The example of David was a great motive also; for at midnight will I rise and
give thanks unto thee, says he, Psalm. 119. 62. For the Christians in those
ages had a custom, which is much out of fashion now, whatever they found, that
any holy man had done before them, if it were possible, they would imitate him
in that service, and devotion. This made Paul and Silas, pray and sing praises
at midnight, and from hence, as well as Act. 16. 25.
from Christ's watchword it was, that the Plin. Sec. lib 10.
Christians in Pliny's time, used to meet before day, and sing a Psalm to
Christ, as Epist. 79. Tertull ad Uxor. l. 2. c. 4.
unto their God. And these Meetings Tertullian calls Nocturnal Convocations, as
the Prayers then used were afterward called Lamp-devotions, or
Candle-Devotions. And though I do not deny but that the Persecutions of those
ages were Preces Lucernariae.
partly the cause of their meetings at night, when their Adversaries the
Heathen were asleep, and therefore unlikely to disturb them in their Worship,
yet this could not be the sole Reason; for sometimes they had respit, and lucid
intervals, even under Heathen Emperors, and yet they continued their Vigils,
and night services.

These night-devotions were in process Epiphan. in Compend. Hieron. Ep. ad
Eustoch. and Demetr.
of time performed in this order. 1. When daylight was shut in. 2. When they
were going to bed. 3. At midnight. 4. By break of day; hence it is, that St
Jerome bids Eustochium rise twice or thrice, out of her bed at night to Prayer,
and these four hours of Prayer at night joined, with the three hours in the
day, made up that ordinary Devotion which they undertook in imitation of Holy
David; Seven times a day do I praise thee, because of thy Rigteous Judgments,
Ps. 119. 164. for Vid. Chrysoft. ad Ps. 118.
they prayed at nine of the clock in the morning, because then the Holy Ghost
descended upon the Apostles, at twelve of the Clock at noon, because then the
Son of God was crucified, and at three of the Clock in the afternoon, because
then Christ gave up the Ghost.

The Heathen, especially in the first and second Centuries after Christ, took
so much notice of these midnight devotions of the Christians, that they
ordinarily called them Owls, and men that shunned daylight, and though it is
true, they accused them of promiscuous Copulations, eating of Children, and
such Crimes, partly because they could not tell, what they did in those night
Assemblies, and therefore suspected it must be some ill thing they did, because
they made use of the night; partly because the villainous Gnostics, who called
themselves Christians, committed abominations much like these; yet the World
found afterward, that it was their love to their Creator, and Redeemer, that
made them watch, and pray, and praise and sing the goodness of their God at
midnight. It happened afterward that these Night devotions were abused; for Men
and Women using to meet at night in Churchyards to praise God, some were so
profane as to commit wickedness together, and made those Devotions
opportunities of impure and lascivious Actions; upon Vid. Council. Eliber. can.
35. Placuit prohiberi, ne foeminae in coemiter. pervigilent eo q^od saepe sub
obtentu orationis latenter scelera committant.
which account they were forbid, especially to the Women, by the Eliberitane
Council, about the year 305. after Christ; yet this restrained not the sober
use of this Exercise, either in private houses, or in public places, where men
met by themselves; whence it came to pass that in the succeeding ages, they
went so far, as to institute Societies of men, which they called (...), or men
that never slept, who relieving one another, sung praises to God day and night
without any intermission or interruption; For as soon as one company had done,
another began, and thus they represented Heaven, and the Joys of Angels here on
Earth. This Zeal in these latter ages is grown cold, and the lukewarmness of
the present times is such, that he seems to be a setter forth of new Gods, that
Preaches up this kind of Exercise; yet I know not, whom we can imitate better,
than the Christians, who lived in times of the purest Devotion, and to see, how
far this Exercise may be revived among us, is the attempt of the following
Discourse; and to make it practicable, I shall first lay down some Rules
concerning it, and then add some encouragements.

The Rules are these following.

1. There being at this day no public meetings of Christians at night upon the
account of devotion; what is done, must be done by private persons in their own
Chambers, or Houses. Where there are no public Societies to encourage us,
there our own Zeal must prompt us to such Exercises; and did private Men and
Families begin it once, the Governors of the Church, would soon encourage it
publicly, who only forbear to urge it, because the age will not bear such
watchfulness. A Christian that is Zealous for God's glory, stays not for a
public Summons, if he find that such an act of Piety, is acceptable to God,
and it is enough to him, that the Saints of old did use it. What is ordered by
God, or Man in public, is only to kindle fervor in Men's breasts at home, and
as a man for to pray need not every time, he is to kneel down, run to a public
Church to pray, so neither is a Christian obliged to neglect this Watching upon
the account of devotion, because it is not exercised in public. It Is enough,
that the Church does recommend it to private Christians, though she cannot as
yet bring private Christians to use this Self-denial publicly. It were to be
wished that the Ministers of the Gospel did begin this Exercise, and possibly
some well-disposed Christians would follow them, but the age we live in is so
very apt to call all things Superstition, and Rags of the Whore of Babylon,
that looks like Selfdenial, that even those Divines, that would observe these
Vigils publicly, dare not, for fear of greater inconveniences.

2. As I told you in the beginning, that these Vigils, or Watchings to devotion
at night, had reference either to sitting up the greatest part of the night, or
to rising at midnight, and employing some time in Prayers, and Praises, so
where a man means to make use of the longer Vigils, he would not do amiss, if
he used them once a week; though, if a man can bring himself to it, the Vigils
appointed by our Church, are an excellent Rule to go by. To sit up one night in
7 certainly cannot be prejudicial to Health, when we see persons upon more
trivial occasions without doing themselves any hurt, sit up two or three nights
in a week. The Christians of old, by what Tertullian tells us, sat up two
nights in a week upon the Tertull. lib. de jejun.
account of Religion; how happy should we think our selves to be, if we could
persuade men to sit up but one. The shorter Vigils or rising at midnight to
devotion, and spending some time in Pious acts, and Exercises may easily be
performed, and practiced every night, especially by Men and Women, who are
single, and have nothing to take care for, but the things of God; and there can
be no great difficulty in it, if we will but force our selves, and push nature
forward where it is loath to go. This would make us awake as duly about that
time, as we do at seven or eight of the Clock in the morning. Nature is a very
tractable thing, especially where people are healthy, and will yield to modest
violence, and the Scepter of Reason, and use will make that facile, and easy,
which Men look upon under the wrong notion of impossibilities.

3. The Exercises proper for these Vigils, as I have partly intimated already,
are praying, singing of Psalms, or reciting and repeating such Psalms as are
most suitable to our Wants and Necessities, and Meditating. Theodosius the
Emperor Vid. Socrat ^ib. 7. c. 22.
did so, rose in the night, with his Sisters, and their chief employment was to
sing Psalms, he one Verse, and they another; So little were Kings, and Princes
ashamed in those days to express their Zeal in Religion. These Exercises drive
away the tediousness of the night, and turn darkness into day. These make the
Sun of Righteousness rise upon us with healing under his Wings, and fill the
Soul with oriental Splendor. These make the black night look lovely, and are
the best weapon to disperse all terrors, the Officers Hell may scatter at that
time among Gods Creatures. He that must have variety of employments at such
times to prevent weariness, may begin with musin upon Gods wondrou, Works, upon
the blackness and deformity of Sin, and the dismalness of that Soul, that is a
stranger to Divine Illumination. From Meditation, he may proceed to Prayer, and
from Prayer to Singing; or if he be not able to Sing, to rehearsing the Songs
of the Sweet-Singer of Israel; These happy Changes, like so many different
Musical Instruments, will give new delights to his Soul, and make him loath to
give over. These like rich Liquors, fill the heart and all the faculties
thereof with a divine briskness, and make the Soul rise from her devotion with
a sacred relish, and appetite.

4. These Vigils, or Watchings at night to acts of devotion may be prejudicial
to persons, that labor under weakness of body, nay and to such as work hard in
the day time, whether the Work be Preaching or Servile labor; yet do not
people work hard every day, nor do Ministers Preach every day, nor does
weakness continue every day, and therefore these must not be made impediments
for the total neglect of this Exercise: sometimes people, that have worked all
day cannot sleep, and had not they better consecrate that time to the praises
of that God, who neither slumbers, nor sleeps? However on those days, that men
do not spend their Spirits with any extraordinary service or toiling, may not
the Soul be ravished at night, and summoned to apply her self to this
delightful severity? Shall the softness of the Bed keep the Soul from such
employment? or the warm down of the Pillow hinder a Christian from crying out
with the excellent Psalmist, My heart is fixed, my heart is fixed, I will sing
and give praise. Awake up my glory, awake, I my self will awake right early,
Ps. 57, 7.

5. This Exercise at night may lawfully be neglected, if the evil that may
ensue upon it, be greater, than the good which can be expected from it. This I
speak, not only with respect to what men may find upon the frequent use of this
Exercise; for a man may find upon frequent Trial, that it either indisposes him
for nobler Duties, or discomposes him in his Health, whereby he is hindered from
doing God farther service, and in such cases it may without sin be laid aside,
but also with respect to the offense, his Neighbor may take at it; for it may
happen, that a weak Christian may sink into great perplexities, because his
strength will not bear this Exercise, while my example makes him look upon it
as necessary; or a man may have a Wife, that is exceeding tender of him, and
upon his exercising himself in this manner, may either lead him a very unquiet
life, or make her self sick with vexing and grieving at his austerities, upon a
fancy that it will shorten his life, or cast him into some dangerous sickness,
and consequently by her continual, and importunate, quarrelling about it, cause
great disorders in the Family, and by that means put a stop to the free course
of some greater Duties; and in both these cases, it may lawfully be omitted;
for God always bids us measure the exercise of our Duties by the good that
flows from them, and therefore it the evil, or mischief accidentally attending
such Exercises, be greater than the good that we can suppose to reap by them
God certainly requires not the practice, or performance of them. Yet even here,
it is fit we use such Arguments to our Neighbors or Friends, as may discover to
them the weakness of their surmises, and the needlesness of their Scruples, for
fear we seem too easy in yielding to the neglect of a thing, which otherwise
may be a great Promoter of Holiness.

Indeed in the great moral Duties of the Gospel, which are expressly, and
peremptorily commanded, I must neither hearken to Father, nor Mother, neither
Wife, nor Sister, nor Children, but as St Jerome speaks, trample upon them all,
rather than neglect a known duty, and undergo all the inconveniences, and
reproaches in the World, rather than commit a sin wilfully; but this will not
hold in circumstantial things, such as this praising of God at midnight is; for
these must ever give way to the more substantial Duties of brotherly Kindness,
and Charity.

6. He that ventures upon these Vigils, or Exercises either all night, or for
sometime at midnight, must be a person, that loves God fervently, and in vain
do I, or any man alive, attempt to bring any person to this piece of
Selfdenial, without that person knows, what a strong love to God means. No man
can watch, that does not love. As weary as Jacob was with his Journey, yet love
Genesis 32. 22. 24.
would not suffer him to sleep at night, but he must awake to contemplation;
and while he was engaged in it, the Angel of the Covenant wrestled with him, and
blessed him. Love shakes off drowsiness, and rest it self makes it restless.
Love breaks forth the more vigorously at night, the less there is to hinder it
in its operations. Love makes such Exercises easy, and a Christian that has
love to spur him on, runs cheerfully in this narrow way. Love carries him
beyond inconveniences, and makes him desirous to lose his life, for him that
gave it. Love embraces all opportunities to exercise its gratitude to the Lord
Jesus, and there is no time comes amiss to this inestimable Grace. He that
either has felt or read what love will do to Friends on Earth, will be able to
guess at the truth of what I do propose, and sure he never knew yet what being
sick of love is, I mean of love to Christ, that never found himself in a
disposition, or temper to say, By night on my Bed I sought him whom my Soul
loves; I sought him, but I found him not; I will rise now, and go about the
City in the Streets, and in the broad-ways I will seek him, whom my Soul
loves, I sought him, but I found him not. The Watchmen that go about the City
found me, to whom I said, saw ye him, whom my Soul loves? It was but a little,
that I passed from them, but I found him, whom my Soul loves, I held him, and
would not let him go, until I had brought him into my Mothers house, and into
the Chamber of her that conceived me, Cantic. 3. 1. 2, 3.

7. That this Exercise of rising at midnight to Prayer may be more
satisfactory, and effectual, I would advise to going to bed betimes, that
nature being refreshed with some sleep before that time, may be the fitter for
this service; and, it is very probable, that those who in the Primitive Church
used this Watchfulness, observed this Rule. In this Age Tradesmen, and those
that have any toiling Employment in the World, have brought themselves to an
ill custom of sitting up at their Trade till midnight almost, and having tired
themselves with running after their Worldly profit all day, it cannot be
otherwise, but they must find themselves very unfit for this nocturnal
Exercise. If ever a man becomes Master of this Virtue, he must learn to
accommodate his business to his Religion, not his Religion to his business; and
as Spiritual fervor must be the first mover, and principal wheel that must set
this a going; so where Religion is thought worth nothing, all that we have
said, must be as the news of the destruction of Sodom was in the Ears of Lots
Kinsmen, a pretty Tale, and that is all. If Euclides of Megara thought not much
of it, to consult Socrates in the night, why should we think it troublesome to
participate of Gods instructions in the night-season? We, I say, who are to
tread in the steps of the great Bishop and Shepherd of our Souls, and it was
his custom, we know, to rise in the morning a great while before day, to go
into a solitary place to pray, Marc. 1. 35.

8. The Task will be more easily, and more cheerfully performed, if we can get
one or two or more of our acquaintance to join with us in these nocturnal
Exercises; Company is a great encouragement to such acts of Piety, and man
being naturally a sociable Creature, Society not only comforts him, but is a
spur to devotion, especially to such devotion, as is attended with severity.
One keeps the other from fainting under his Burden; and if one grows cold, the
others zeal is enough to inspire him with new vigor and alacrity. Those seven
men, Ruffinus Ruffin. lib. 3. de vit. Monach. sect. 199, 200.
speaks of, who divided the night, and allotted four hours for sleeping, four
for praising of God, and prayer, and four for working, and likewise the day,
and appointed six for working, three for reading, and praying, three for
eating, and walking, without all peradventure found great encouragement in one
another Society, and this their order would scarce have lasted so many years
as it did, if it had fallen to any single persons lot to keept it up.

The same Author has a passage of another company, seven in number, who on
Saturdays about three of the Clock in the afternoon used to meet, and having
eaten together (for in that age they eat but once a day, and commonly toward
the evening) they fell into spiritual discourses, banishing all secular
business, and laying aside all thoughts of Worldly things, and talked only of
Heaven and future Glory, of the rest of Saints, and of the misery of the
Damned; and when they had spent some time in such discourses, they sat up all
night, praising and magnifying, and singing the goodness of God; and this they
continued, (pausing now and then, and spending some time in silence and
meditation) till three of the Clock in the afternoon next day, and so they
departed again every one to their several Habitations.

So great a support does the Soul receive from good Society, that is of the
same mind, of the same fervor, and of the same zeal and earnestness to
glorify God; and a man will do that, encouraged by Society, which before he
could not have been drawn to perhaps by the strongest enforcives, or arguments.

From these Rules, I come in the next place to recommend to my Readers this
nocturnal Exercise, and to give them some encouragement to this piece of
Selfdenial. The Arabians tell this passage, or fable of the Ostrich, that when
she intends to hatch her Eggs, she fits not on them, as other Birds, but the
Male and Present State of Egypt, p. 64.
Female by turns hatch them, with their Eyes only, and if one be hungry, and
minded to seek for Food, it gives notice to the other by a certain cry, to
come, and relieve it, and being come, it continues looking upon the Eggs so
long till the other be returned; and they add, that if either of them should
but leave looking on never so little a time, the Eggs would spoil and rot. I do
not warrant the truth of the Story, however the Coptite Christians are so
persuaded of the reality of the thing, that they hang up a lighted Lamp in
their Churches between two Ostrich's Eggs, over against the Priest that
officiates, to bid him be attentive, and watchful about their devotions.

I know not whether such an Emblem would be any great engagement to Christians
in this age, to watch at night to the Exercises, I have mentioned; but however,
the Subject is not so poor and barren, as to be destitute of Arguments. And

1. Does this Exercise seem so grievous to you, that can rise at any time in
the night to get some considerable gain? Would you think it troublesome to rise
at midnight to get ten or twenty pounds? were you sure to get every time you
rise at night, half a score of Broad pieces of Gold, would not you make a shift
to get up? This shows you can do it, and, but that you think, you may save your
Souls at a cheaper rate, you would certainly do much for their profit, and
advantage too. Sure the Soul may get considerable gain by such vigilance. In
the dead of the night, while other people sleep, to get up and to converse with
God, is to be truly ambitious of His favor, and it is his Rule, I Love them
that love me, and those that seek me early, shall find me, Prove. 8. 17. where
God sees a holy Soul thirsting for him in the night, he certainly satisfies
that thirsty Soul with goodness, and opens for her Rivers in high places, and
Fountains in the midst of Valleys, makes her Wilderness a Pool of Water, and
her dry Land Springs of Water, Es. 41. 18. where men prevent the dawning of the
morning, to meditate in in his word, God hears their voice according unto his
loving kindness, and quickens them according to his word, Psalm. 119. 147. 148,
149. This is the best preparation for the duties of the following day, and he
truly begins the day with God, that at midnight rises to give thanks unto the
God of his salvation.

2. Behold how Highwaymen and Thieves can rise at midnight to Rob and Murder
Men! Behold how watchful those unhappy Creatures are to circumvent the unwary
Traveller! Are these wretches so watchful to loose their Souls, and shall Ut
jugulent homines surgunt de nocte latrotrones. Ut teipsum serves, non ex
pergisceris? Horat. Epist. lib. 1. Ep. 2.
not we be as watchful to save ours? Shall they think the Devils service worth
their watching at night, and shall not we think the service of our God worth so
much? Do they watch to contrive mischief, and shall not we do so to contrive
our felicity? The silent night rouzes their Spirits into action, and shall it
dead ours altogether? Shall not we do as much to make sure of Heaven, as they
do to make sure of Hell? Or is the undoing of our selves a more charming act,
than securing our everlasting interest? How many are there that can sit up
drinking and dancing and revelling all night? Can the Devils Votaries deny
themselves, for their Master, and shall we do nothing for ours? Is the true God
the only Deity, that deserves no Self-denial at our hands? And must the Devil
be adored with greater revereverence than He, at whose presence Devils tremble?
Men are not weary of playing at Cards, or Dice all night, and cannot they watch
one hour with Christ at night? Can Men break their sleep to mind the works of
Darkness, and shall not we break ours, for doing things, which become the
Children of Light?

3. To rise thus at midnight to praise God is an act of Charity to our
Neighbors; for Thieves, and Purloiners finding us up at a time which they
pitch upon for their Robberies, may be afraid of making attempts upon a
Neighbors house, for fear of being discovered by us, who are awake, and
engaged in devotion. Not to mention, that such Exercises of singing praises
unto God, may strike the Robber, if he hear them, into fear and trembling, and
oblige him to go away without his intended Prey, as much as the innocent
Infants smiles did the Turk, that came with an intent to Murder it; so that
this Watching at night is to contribute in part to the public Good, and to be
instrumental in our Neighbors Preservation.

4. How happy will it be to be, found praying and praising God, should God
(...). Ignat. Epist. ad Polycarp.
call us away from this World, at midnight. Blessed is the Servant, whom his
Master, when he comes shall find so doing; Of a truth I say unto you, that he
will make him Ruler over all, that he has, Luc. 12. 43. 44. One great reason
why the Primitive Christians rose at midnight to Prayer, as I said before, was
because they knew not, but Christ might come at that time to Judgment. Did they
thus prepare for his coming above Sixteen hundred years ago, and have not we
far greater reason to watch for his coming, upon whom the ends of the World are
come? Did they think the Day of Judgment was near at hand, and shall not we
fear it much more? Did they think to keep their Garments white, and their Lamps
burning against the Bridegroom came, and shall not we think so much more? Were
they afraid of being a sleep at midnight for fear a noise should be made,
Behold the Bridegroom comes, and have not we far greater reason to be afraid?
Did they so long ago shake of all carnal security, in expectation of the coming
of the Son of God, and shall we lest quietly all night without thinking once
what our case may be? Sure there is some strength in these Arguments, if the
ground were but fit for them, if our hearts were but prepared for them, if the
thorns and briars of worldly cares did not choke them; and as tedious as the
Exercise may seem to be, certainly means might be found out to make it easy.
And,

1. Use would make it so. In the Works of St Teresa there is mention made of
one Peter de Alcantara, who for forty years had slept but one hour and a half
Opp. Teres in vita. c. 47.
in a day and a night and that he found nothing so trouble some to him, as
breaking himself of his sleep, which to effect, he always sat when he slept.
Aristotle, to wake himself in the night, would hold a brass Ball in his hand,
over a Copper Vid. Diog. Laert de Aristotele.
Basin, when he composed himself to rest, which Ball when he was fast a sleep,
would drop out of his hand into the Basin, and with the noise it made, awake
him, and give him notice, that it was time to apply himself to his Studies
again, and his Scholar Alexander the Great would sometimes imitate him in that
particular, and nothing but use made it easy to them. Of Mecoenas indeed we
read, that for three years together he slept not at all; and Physicians in
their observations have taken notice that some have lived without sleep nine
days, some ten, some fifteen, without any prejudice to their health; but these
examples we may justly look upon as Miracles, rather then effects of use, and
custom; by use a man may much abridge himself in his sleep, but cannot
ordinarily attain to a perpetual vigilance, and as to be always waking, is to
be Immortal, so to sleep more, than is needful, is like death, rather than life.

2. And to this use we shall arrive the sooner, if we eat very moderately; for
it is the fumes of a full stomach that cause immoderate sleep. Eating little
will support nature better than plentiful Meals; We first corrupt nature, and
teach it to crave more than it wants, and the ill custom brings a necessity
upon us to keep up our intemperance. By this moderate eating Maercellus
Strategus in Commodus his time, brought himself to that vigilance, that he was
the object of all men's admiration. It was St Anthony the Hermits slender and
simple diet, that enabled him to observe those laborious Vigils, we read of,
and hence it was, that he used to quarrel with the Sun, when he saw him rise,
for disturbing the joy and sweet communion he had with God all night, so true
was that saying of Scopelianus of old. That the night is the best friend of the
Soul, and participates of the Wisdom, and Glory of the Deity.

3. Nothing will facilitate this watchfulness at night, more than frequent
contemplations of what others do, and have done before us. They were men, and
so are we; they carried flesh and blood about them, and so do we; they had
infirmities of the flesh, as well as we; we have Souls as well as they, and may
have courage as well as they, if we will take the same reasons, they did, into
consideration. A shadow of this Virtue is to be seen in the Cock and Lion, the
former of which Plin. Hist. Not. ^. 10. c. 21.
Pliny justly calls a Creature born to call People out of their Beds, and the
latter therefore was made by the Ancients the Symbol of vigilance.

The Valor. Flacc. in Argonaut.
Dragon that kept the Golden Fleece, was always awake, and the Hundred-ey'd
Shepherd then ceased to live, when he ceased to watch; Emblems these are of the
Exercise before us, and the Lord Jesus therefore continued in Prayer all night,
to show that if the Master could watch for the Servants, the Servants have
reason to watch for their Master, says the eloquent Chrysol. (...). de servo
Vig
Chrysologus. Of the Pantarba or Shining-stone they report, (...). 3. c. 14.
that in the middle of the night it sends forth a grateful splendor, and seems
to turn night into day. Whether there be such a Stone, or no, I dispute not,
but the Moral of it, are these nocturnal Praises, and Hallelujahs; these make
it day at midnight, and whatever darkness may be on the face of the Earth, I am
sure, in a Soul that uses them, the Sun shines, and a glorious charming Light
arises. The night they say is a time, that Spirits walk abroad; It Is true
enough, where men use this Exercise; for an Infinite Spirit, the God of Grace
and Peace walks forth to meet them, and the Soul makes her Chamber another
Mahanaim, Genesis 32. 1, 2.
a walk for the Host of God. I conclude this Subject with the words of Nestor
in mer, to Diomedes, and the rest.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Which I thus Paraphrase,

What, Sleep all night, and The Enemy so near,
When from the Camp you may their Voices hear?
Is it not time unto our Arms to fly,
When but a Hill 'twixt them and us does lie?
Up, stand upon your guard, my Children, watch,
Lest the bold foe you unawares do catch;
And in your slaughter triumph, and do scorn
Your braver Souls, like Men to ruin born.
IV. Extraordinary Exercise.
Self-Revenge; An Exercise insisted on, 2 Cor. 7. 11. and practiced by St Paul,
1 Cor. 9. 27. and by Timothy, 1. Tim 5. 23. I distinguish this Exercise from
the rest, not because Fasting, and Vowing, or Watching have nothing of
Self-revenge in them, but because the word is more general, and includes all
other lawful severities, which holy men have used upon themselves; so that this
Exercise takes in all other acts of Self-denial, undertaken on purpose that the
Soul may learn to die to the World, and to have her conversation in Heaven, an
Exercise, as ancient, as Christianity, nay, as ancient, as the Law of Moses;
for it began as early, as the Nazarites who neither cut their Hair, nor (...)
heads nor drank Numb. 6. 2, 3* ^, 5, 6 7.
any Wine, or strong D^^^k nor tasted of any Liquor of the Grapes, ^^ eat any
dried Grapes, nor any thing (...) was made of the Liquor of the Grapes, (...)
of any strong Drink; severities used on purpose, and by Gods approbation, that
they might more entirely dedicate themselves to God s service; And these
austerities we find afterward used by Elijah the Prophet, of whom we read,
that he was a hairy man, and girt with a Girdle of Leather about his Loins; I
know some 2 King. 1. 8. (...)
understand the expression, a Hairy man, of a hairy Garment, but this sense
seems not to agree with the Hebrew Language, which does not use to express a
man's Garment by such words; but the nature or external shape, and form of his
Body; so that he seemed liker Vid. Paphaut. vit. Onuphr. c. 2.
Onuphrius, who met Paphnutius in the Wilderness, hairy all over, insomuch that
little else could be seen about him, a piece of austerity the Prophet made use
of, that he might learn to despise the World, and that no temptations might
make any impression upon him, which usually insinuate into our Hearts, and
Affections, where the body is used delicately, and men take care to dress up
themselves curiously to please the eyes of the Spectator; and though it is true
that Elijah was a forerunner of St John the Baptist, as St John Baptist was of
Christ, and St John is said to have had his Raiment of Camels hair, which seems
to make it probable, that this hairiness of Elijah was only in his Clothes,
because his Antitype, or Successors was so; yet the Prophecy that God would
send Elijah before the great day of the Mal. 4. 5.
Lord Jesus his appearing in the World, imported not that he would be exactly
like him in his way of living, and the form of his body, but that he should
come in the Spirit and Power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the
children, and the disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just, as the Angel said to
Zacharias, Luc. 1. 17.

These severities were afterward practiced by the Rechabites Jer. 35. 6, 7.
for they neither drank Wine, neither they, nor their Sons for ever; neither did
they build Houses, nor sow Seed, nor plant Vineyards, nor possess any Land, but
dwelt in Tents all their days, poor, and mean, and minding the Salvation of
their Souls. When they ceased, the Essenes, and the Pharisees took up that
discipline. Vid. Philon. (...).
The Essenes lived retired from the World, avoided Cities, and Crowds of
People, as temptations to looseness, and debauchery, hoarded up no Money,
purchased no Lands, but lived altogether upon the labor of their hands, and
nothing in the World could oblige them to have a hand in making Spears, or
Swords, or Arrows, or Breast-plates, or Arms, or any other Instruments of War,
because they said, God had ordered, Mankind should live peaceably. They
despised Riches, Honors, Pleasures, delicate Dishes, and lived upon little,
contented with a course Diet, and aiming at nothing in this World, but Food and
Raiment, if ten of them met, none would speak till he had first obtained leave
of the other nine; and they ever wore but one Coat, and wore it so long, till
it was quite worn out, and then they thought of purchasing another, and all
this they did, that might learn to die to the World, and live, like men, that
had Souls to be saved. The Pharisees went much farther in these severities,
even to Superstition. Besides the first Fruits, they paid double Joseph. Antiq
lib. 18. c. 2. Epiphan. Panar. lib. 1. c. 16.
Tithes; and besides these Tithes, they gave away, the Thirtieth, and the
Fiftieth parts of their Incomes to the Church, or the Treasury for the Poor;
they lay on hard Beds, had sometimes no other Pillows, but Cylinders, and many
times Pillows filled with Straw, and Nails, and sharp Stones, that they might
not sleep too long, but awake to Prayers, some would knock their heads against
a Wall, and others hurt their feet in going along the Streets, because they
walked with their eyes shut, being loath to look upon a Woman; and others, as
Christ says, Mat. 23. 15.
would compass Sea and Land to make a Proselyte, disfigure their Faces, and
look Mat. 6. 16.
very ruefully, insomuch, that they seemed Skeletons rather than Men. Though
they had Wives, yet they would tie themselves to Continence, and Chastity, some
for four, some for nine, some for ten years, and keep themselves undefiled from
all carnal pollution.

Whether St Paul learned the severities, be used upon his body, in the School
of the Pharisees, at the feet of Gamaliel, we cannot tell, but that he used
them seems to be very plain, from 1 Cor. 9 27. I See Dr. Hammond, on Luke 18.
keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, where the Greek word (...).
as a learned Critic of our own observes, is very emphatical, and signifies to
strike under the eye, or to give one a blew eye, as Wrestlers in the Isthmian
games, that cuffed one another, and wounded one another; and though it is
uncertain, whether the Apostle proceeded so far in this mortification, as to
wound himself, or beat himself to that degree, that those Agonists did, yet it
is more than probable, that he did afflict his body, and sought to keep it
under as a Servant, or as a Wrestler does his fellow, that it might not be able
to strike again, and undertook such austerities, as made his Soul more than a
Conqueror.

Indeed Christ himself lived but poor, destitute, and afflicted, and had not,
where to lay his head, and whether it was in imitation of Christ, that they
would be conformable to him in all things, or whether it was out of emulation
of the Jews, that it should not be be said that the Essenes, and Pharisees did
more than they; the Christians about that time, and in the succeeding ages
seemed to think themselves obliged to put their Bodies to some afflictions, and
severities in this World, for the glories of another, which made Nicholas the
Deacon, whom we read of, Act. 6. 5. instill this Principle into his Disciples,
that they should (...), abuse, or mortify the Flesh, use their Bodies coursly,
that they Vid. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 26. Clem. Alex. sirom. lib. 3. sect.
3. Nicephor. Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 15.
might be more active in Spiritual Concerns, and the same Doctrine, says
Eusebius was taught by the Apostle Matthias, and though many have slandered
Nicholas, and branded him, as an Apostate, and the Author of a Heresy,
mentioned, Rev. 2. 15. and as one, that gave way to promiscuous copulations,
and made Scortation a venial sin; yet the holy man has been wronged, as
appears by Eusebius, and Clemens Alexandrinus, and it is very likely that those
who called themselves Nicolaitans, having heard Nicolas use that Motto, that
the Flesh must be abused, defended their impure Doctrine with that saying, and
from thence were called Nicolaitans, whereas Nicolas understood no more by it,
than that Flesh must be subdued, and bridled by such severities as we are able
to bear, that our Faith and Hope may become more lively, and our inward and
outward Man more expedite for Heaven.

If they be Christians, that Philo speaks Philo de vit. contemp.
of in his Book of a Contemplative Life, (Eusebius and St Jerome think so) St
Mark the Evangelist it is like instructed them, in these severities; for they
used them, and were the wonder of the World; and who knows not, how the
succeeding S. Basil. ad Amphiloch can. 57, 58. 59. 72, 73. Council. Ancyr. can.
2, 3, 4, 5 and seq. Con. Nicen. 1. can. 11.
ages, pressed this Self-revenge upon all those, that were fallen either into
Adultery, or Idolatry, or Murder, and repented; and what severities they
inflicted on them, how they obliged them to stand in a torn Garment at the
Church door, and made them weep and fall down before the believers, that
entered into the Church and beg of them, to pray for them? how after this
severity, they placed them among the Catechumenes, then gave them leave to
receive the Blessing of the Congregation, and when they ha^^ (...) through all
this Discipline, they gave (...) leave at last to join with believers in their
Prayers and Sacraments.

Tertullian, who lived about the year, Tertul. de de Poenit. c. 8, 9. and
Cyprian de lapsi^ and Epist. 31.
203. after Christ, expresses these severities thus. Repentance is a Discipline
of Humiliation, and Prostration, and enjoins such a c^^^^^sation, as provokes
and allures Gods mercy. It determines, what Meat the Penitent must eat, what
Clothes he must wear; it bids him go and wallow in Ashes, lie in Sackcloath,
throw dust upon himself, let his Soul melt into grief, and treat those Members
scurvily that have been Instruments in sinning, to eat and drink nothing that is
pleasing to the Palate, but only so much as will keep Soul and Body together,
to Pray, to Weep, to Sigh, to Howl, to Roar, to fall down at the knees of Gods
Ministers, Pacian. Paraenes ad poenit. Biblioth. Pp. tom. 3.
and to beg of all, he meets with, to supplicate to God for him. This is
Repentance. If you repent you must, says Pacianus, weep before the Church,
lament your lost, and sinful life in a sordid Garment, you must pray, and roll
on the Earth; if any invite you to the Bath, or some such Divertisement, you
must refuse to go; if any bid you to a Feast, you must say, these things are
for the happy, I have sinned against God, and am in danger to perish for ever,
what should I do at Banquets, who have wronged the Lord? you must take the poor
by the hand, beseech the Widow, lie at the feet of the Presbyters, and beg of
the Church to forgive you, and you must do any thing rather than perish. And
accordingly Natalius the Confessor, when corrupted with Money, he had suffered
Euse. Eccl. Hist. lib. 5. c. ult.
himself to be made a Heretical Bishop, and afterward by a signal Providence
became sensible of his Error; the first thing he did was to put Sackcloth and
Ashes upon himself, and to break forth into a large stream of Tears, and fall
down at the feet of Bishop Zephirinus, and of the whole Clergy, nay, and of the
Laity too, and to entreat them to weep with him, and seek Gods Face, and the
restoration of his favor to him, and therefore the Author of the Sermons of
Saints in St Austin's Works, tells us, Repentance for Sermon. 41. de Sanctis.
Crimes and greater Sins, must be attested by strong Cries, and Tears, by
Roaring, and Howling, by voluntary Separation from the Communion of Saints, by
Mourning, by a long continued sorrow: It Is necessary, that he who has sinned
to the scandal of many, should repent to the edification of many. We must mourn
on such occasions, for the loss of our Souls, as we bewail the dead Carcasses
of our Friends* If a man have lost a Wife, or a Son, or a Woman her Husband,
they tear their hair, beat their Breast, continue in sadness, and shed Tears a
great while together* Thus must we deal with our forlorn Souls. Shall we take
on thus for dead Flesh, which we cannot raise to life again? And shall we not
mourn for a Soul, that has been dead, and may by repentance be brought to life
again? And upon this Account Theodosius as great an Emperor as he was,
repenting of the slaughter committed by his Theodoret. lib. 5. c. 17.
order upon the Thessalonians, fell down upon his Face in the Church, his Soul
with David cleaved to the dust, he tore his Hair, beat his Forehead, and washed
the Ground with his Tears. Be Ambros. lib. ad Virg. corr. c. 8.
contented, says St Ambrose to the Virgin, that had suffered her self to be
defloured, to undergo any Labor, any shame, any disgrace in the World, so thou
can but escape eternal Fire; judge thy self with rigor, and severity; break
loose from the cares of this life, count thy self dead, think how thou may
revive, and live again; Put on a mourning Garment, chastize thy polluted
Members with due severities; Cut off thine hair, which has given occasion to
Luxury. Let thine Eyes run down with Tears, which have looked lasciviously upon
Man: Let thy Face grow pale, which once looked fiesh, and lively with
impudence; macerate thy Body, put on a careless Dress, crucify thy Senses,
fright the people with thy Ashes, and Hair-cloth; let thy Heart melt like wax,
let this be thy Life, thus order thy Conversation, let this be the Dress of thy
Repentance, and then thou will dare to hope, if not for Glory, yet for freedom
from eternal punishment. And the like advice he gives to the Man that deflour'd
her. Get thee into the Prison of Repentance, gird thy Bowels with Chains,
macerate thy self with Sighs, beg the help of Saints, throw thy self down at
the feet of the Elect, banish all blandishments from thy Soul, and by continual
Weeping, and Mourning, cleanse thy Heart, To this purpose speaks the Author of
the Oper. Hieron. tom. ^.
Epistle to Susanna in St. Jerome's Works, the greatness of the Wound in the
Conscience, must ever be answered by the greatness of Repentance, and
Repentance is not a matter of Words, but Actions. And you then perform it, if
you set before you the Glory from which you are fallen, the Book of Life from
which your name has been blotted out, and the outward darkness, where there is
howling and gnashing of Teeth, and which you are become obnoxious to. And
having fixed this Principle in your Soul, that Repentance is the only refuge
after Baptism; you must think no Labor, no Rest, no Pains too much, nothing
undecent, or unhandsome to be freed from everlasting Torments. Think on these
things, and become a severe Judge of your own Actions. In the first place you
must bid farewell to all the cares of this World, and look upon your self as
dead to this Earth, and let your only study be, how to rise to life again. Then
take and put on a mourning Weed, and punish thy Mind and Members with daily
castigations. Cut off thy hair, which has been the occasion of thy Luxury.
From thine Eyes let bitter Tears flow down, because by them thou have defiled
thy Soul. Let thy Face grow pale, which thy sins have given a cheerful, lovely
color to. Strew Ashes on thy Body, let Hair-cloth sting thy Flesh, let thy
Heart melt like Wax within thee, crucify thy Senses, which have let in the
Poison. This is the Process of Repentance, and doing so, though thou may not
hope for any high degree of glory, yet thou may be confident, thou will be
freed from everlasting anguish; so Nineveh escaped her ruin. In this manner
was the mighty David justified. He that spares not himself, him will the
Almighty spare. Great sicknesses must have signal Cures; great Crimes require
great Satisfaction. On these Planks thou may swim out of the gulf of
Perdition. These are the Agonies, the Pangs of a true Repentance.

Of this Theodorus was so sensible, that Chrysostom. tom. 5. Epistol. ad Theodor.
lapsum.
being fallen into Fornication, and become sensible of his great transgression,
he went and retired from the World, shut himself up in a Cave, lived there the
remainder of his days upon Bread, and Water, and spent his time in Fasting, in
Prayer, and in watering his Couch with his Tears; and indeed this advice was
duly followed by the noble Paula, though she was guilty of no such Crime. After
Hieron. in vit. Pa^^. Romans
her Husbands decease, she could never be persuaded to sit down at Table with a
Man, though never so holy. Even in a Fever, she would not lie upon a soft Bed,
but on the Ground upon a Mat. She bewailed and wept over her little Sins, as
much, as if they had been the greatest Crimes, and when St Jerome exhored and
admonished her not to spoil her Eyes with weeping, but preserve them for
reading the holy Scriptures; No, said she, this Face of mine must be besmeared
with dirt, which formerly I have painted and patched. My body must be
afflicted, and used coursly, which formerly has been given to Carnal ease, and
wordly delights; my frequent laughter must be revenged with perpetual weeping;
My soft Linen, and my precious Silks must be changed into uneasy Sack cloth,
and I who have endeavored to please the World, and my Husband, must now learn
to please Christ entirely.

St Jerome himself was not backward in this Exercise, I wrapped my self up in
Hieron. Epistol ad Eustoch.
Sackcloth, says he and struck the Members of my Body, which would scarce hang
together, to the ground, I remember, I cried aloud, sometimes I joined the
night to the day, and mourned, and did not give over beating of my body, till
the Lord rebuking Satan's Angel, shed into my Soul Peace, and tranquillity. And
of the same Judgment was St. Chrysostom, who to fit himself for the holy
Ministry, as soon as he was made Reader, retired into a Mountain, where joining
himself to a Syrian Hermit, he learned Austerity, Continence, Chastity, and
Mortification. In this condition he spent four years, and then to subdue the
Lusts of the Flesh more perfectly, he absconded himself in a desert place,
where his Lodging was, no other, than the bare Ground, his Table no other than
a great Stone, and his Exercise nothing but Reading and Studying the
Scriptures, and mastering his Carnal desires, and sensual Appetite.

And indeed about this time, viz. about the year 390. after Christ, these
Exercises began to be almost universal; In Egypt especially men used such
severities upon themselves, that we that never tried them, would scarce
believe, that ever there were such men, or that they did those mighty things
which are recorded in History: Soon afteer these times, Men that used these
Austerities began to sink by little and little, into an Opinion of Merit, and
to look upon these Works as Meritorious of Gods favor, and acceptance, not
only for themselves, but for others too, which fancy spoiled the whole Design,
and made that a Sacrifice of Fools, which used with Humility and low Conceits
of themselves, would have passed for excellent Devotion, and under this
Character of Merit, and satisfaction, the Church of Rome retains some of these
severities at this day, which made our Church at the first Reformation abolish
the abuse, yet not so, as to forbid Christians the moderate use of them. The
Grecian, Ethiopian, Armenian, and Coptick Churches in the East do also
preserve them still, but much as the Papists, they use them as compensations to
God for the sins they live in, which makes the oblation odious.

The greatest severities among Christians in this age, seem to be those which
are used in Egypt by Men of the Order of Vid. Present State of Egypt, p. 181,
182, etc.
St. Anthony, and the Carthusians among the Papists; As to the former, their
Rule obliges them not only to renounce Matrimony for ever, but to possess no
Estate, to dwell in the Wilderness, to be clothed with Wool, to be girt with a
Leathern Girdle, to eat no Flesh, nor drink Wine, except great necessity compel
them, to spend their time in Prayer, and Worshipping of God, and having their
Minds always running upon God, Reading the Scriptures, sleeping upon a Mat, or
on the Earth, not to take off their Clothes, to prostrate themselves 150 times
a day, which they call making so many (...). Vid. Euchol. Graec. in ord. Sacr.
minist. Est (...), quae sit cre manibu^que terrae affixis cum genu^m inflexione
and (...) si mirus corpus inflectant. Jac. Goar, in Euchol. p. 12. The Kaloirs
upon Mount Athes kiss the ground, or make such Repentances and prostrations
Three hundred times every day, Ricault of the Greek Church, c. 11.
Repentances. Some that are counted holier than the rest prostrate themselves
on their Faces, and Bellies, with their Arms across three hundred times every
night, before they go to sleep.

And in imitation of these, the Vid. Sur de vit. SS. tom 5. and Hospin. de
orig. Mon. lib. 5. c. 7.
Carthusians among the Papists wear Haircloth next to their Skin, eat no Flesh
at all, no not in Sickness, or extreme Necessity, eat no Fish neither, but what
is freely bestowed upon them, eat Bread with the Bran in it, never speak to one
another, never stir out of their own College except the President, and the
Caterer, and live for the most part upon Bread, and Water, and Colworts, and
Pease, and Beans, etc. eat but once a day, and all their employment is Reading,
Writing, Praying, and Laboring. But that which renders both the severity of
the former, and the austerities of the latter insignificant in the sight of
God, is, that the former are forced to do, what they do, and the latter hope to
merit Heaven for themselves and others by it, and both lay a greater stress
upon these outward severities, than upon the inward frame, and disposition of
the heart.

So that these outward severities are like a narrow Bridge, over which a man
must walk with very great cautiousness and circumspection, for there is danger
both on the right and left hand, and he that does noth carefully look to his
steps, may fall, and while he flatters himself with hopes of Heaven, exclude
himself from it.

To direct my Reader in this point, and to acquaint him with the limits of this
Exercise how far these severities may be lawful, and in what cases expedient,
and wholesome, and practicable, I shall lay down these following Rules, and
Observations.

I. Whenever they are used, all opinion of Merit must be laid aside. Merit is
nonsense in Divinity, and though the word occurs frequently in ancient Writers;
yet it is plain to any judidicious Reader, that they meant by Meriting no more,
but obtaining, or getting what God has promised Since we must allow, and
confess, that we are Creatures, the greatest holiness and strictness
imaginable, can never come under that notion strictly taken; for the distance
betwixt the Creator, and the Creature is infinite, and Man by being a Creature,
owes himself and all he has, and all he can do to the Creator; and the mercy
of being Created, or receiving a Being from nothing, and being continually
preserved (not to mention the vast Work of Redemption, and the innumerable
other Blessings God has both promised, and conferred on Man) is so stupendous
a Condescension, and a Bounty so astonishing, that it is impossible any Creature
should deserve any thing at the Creators Hands. The Angels themselves that sin
not, cannot deserve any favor from him, for being Creatures, all they do is
nothing but Duty, and is no more but what God may justly expect from them, as
their Maker, and Conservator, as much as a Master may challenge his Servants
industry. Does he thank that Servant, because he did the things that were
commanded him? I trow not, so likewise ye, when ye have done all, that ye are
commanded to do, say we are unprofitable Servants, we have done that, which was
our duty to do, says Christ most truly, Luc. 17. 9. 10.

And if you reply here, that these severities are not things commanded, and
therefore being free will Offerings, over and above what is commanded, it is
just, they should deserve more than ordinary favor at God's hands, I answer,
that though I cannot say, that they are no where commanded, yet let us suppose
they are not, still these severities in themselves are not at all acceptable to
God, but only as they are accompanied with other Duties, that are expressly
commanded, without which God looks upon them no more, than on a Butchers
killing of an Ox or Sheep, and being only Appendixes to such Duties, as are
expressly commanded, and not acceptable but for those Duties, as will appear
more in the sequel, they cannot be supposed to be so considerable as to Merit;
Nay should a Man use the greatest severities, that were ever used by Men, and
should he exceed all Mankind in such austerities, even the Indian Brahmanes,
and put himself voluntarily to the greatest Pain and Tortures imaginable for a
thousand years together. The severity, which at the best is but finite, and
attended with regrets, and imperfections could never deserve a Glory infinite,
perfect, and eternal, for in merit there must be an equality, or parity between
the Work, and the Reward, and no man can be said to deserve that, for which he
takes not proportionable pains. And therefore he that thinks to merit Heaven by
such severities, affronts the Almighty, and merits Hell, and Everlasting Fire.
Vid. Hieron. de S. Fide lib. 2, c. 2.


That Jew was certainly distracted (Simeon Ben Jochai was his name) that
boasted, he had so well deserved at the hands of God, by his Righteousness and
severity of Life, that if he had been so minded, he could have Redeemed all the
Men and Women that should be born after him, from the everlasting Wrath of God;
and if his Son Eleazer should but join the Merits of his Righteousness with
his, they might go near to save the whole World from being condemned in the
last day. This is Bedlam-talk, and yet it were to be wished, that the Church of
Rome did not participate of this madness, when they talk of the Treasury of
their Church, the Merits of their Saints, and their Works of Super-errogation,
whereby they free many Souls out of Purgatory; and how such a wicked Man wrapped
up in a Monks Habit at his death, has been immediately transported into
Heaven, etc. One would admire, how men in their Wits can talk at this Rate, but
that I see even David could feign himself mad at the Court of Achish for his
Interest, and then no marvel, if these Men, finding what grist this Doctrine of
Merits brings to their Mill, venture to be extravagant in their expressions
concerning it.

II. Whenever these severities are used, they must not be used to give God
satisfaction for the sins we have committed. To give God satisfaction by any
thing, but the Cross and death of Christ, is an expression which should sound
harsh in a Christian Ear, and be banished from the confines of Divinity. Here
the Church of Rome exceeds, and deviates again from the Primitive Rule, and
while Vid. Bellarm. de poenit. lib. 4. c. 7.
they look upon these severities as satisfactions given to God for the guilt of
the temporal punishment, that remains after remission of sins, they seem to
follow no Rule but that of their own fancy; for the Scripture is a Stranger to
this notion of satisfaction, and though David and other Saints, have used these
severities, yet we never read, that they intended them, as satisfactions to
God, whom they had offended, but had other ends in them, such as we shall name,
as we go along; It Is not to be denied, but that the Fathers use the word
satisfaction often, when they discourse of such mortifications, but by those
satisfactions they do not mean satisfactions given to an offended God, but to
the Church, and the People of God, as signs, whereby our Fellow Christians may
conclude, that our Repentance is real, and free from Hypocrisy.

Nor, III. Must they be used, in hopes, that God will dispense with our sins
for the future, much less, that he will pass by those that we have committed,
without sincere repentance, merely for these severities: Alas! it is easier to
punish the Body, than to leave a sin; and while the Sinner can enjoy his Lusts,
what need he care, if for a day or two he is a little rigid and unkind to his
Flesh, that unkindness will quickly wear out again, and the body fitted for
commission of new offenses. God does not value these severities at this rate; a
penitent heart is more pleasing to him than a thousand Lashes, and a Soul that
grieves for offending a Gracious God, looks lovelier in his eyes, than a bloody
Side, or the imaginary Wounds of St Francis. He that thinks that God will let
him sin, because he whipped himself on such a day, takes God Vid. Bonav. Legend.
Franc. c. 13.
for some Heathen Deity; and indeed to lay a greater stress upon afflicting the
Body, then upon forsaking of sin, is to contradict that notion, the Holy Ghost
delivers of God, that he must be worshipped in spirit and in truth. Joh. 4. 24.


Nor, IV. Must they be used with an unwilling mind, where the inward repentance
of the Soul makes the Will resolute in the use of them, they may pass for
excellent Offerings, but being performed by force, or merely because a
Superior commands them, this evacuates the virtue of the affliction. Hence
those among the Papists, that either suffer themselves to be hired to perform
the Ceremony of Self-affliction on Good Friday, or being once engaged in such
an Order, use them not out of any sense of Sin within, but because the Rule of
their Order does oblige them to it, whatever Conceits they may entertain of the
Opus operatum, or Work it self, God still looking to the spring from which all
these mortifications flow, they prevail no more, than the Indians going to
Church, merely because their Masters force them, prevail with him, to send his
Spirit into Vid. Acost. lib. 5.
their Hearts, crying Abba Father.

Nor, V. Is it fit, that weak or sickly persons should use them. Though many
Christians in the Primitive times, would thus afflict themselves,
notwithstanding their bodily infirmities; yet we find, 1 Timothy 5. 23. that in
these cases men must use moderation. The Body being disabled, I do not see, how
the Soul can perform those noble Operations, she is other wise capable of, no
more than a Workman, whose tools are naught, can promise you an excellent piece
of Manufacture. The Body is a Servant of the Soul, and we know, if our Servants
be out of order, our Work must be left undone. Strong and healthy Bodies will
bear it better, and if they loose something of their florid complexion, there
is no great hurt done. Mortification to some Bodies would be a preservative of
health, and such voluntary afflictions would spend many of those superfluous
humors, that disorder them. In all these severities, men must be their own
Physicians, and consider what their Bodies are able to bear, and what they are
not. And yet lazmess, and softness of life, and love to Carnal ease, must not
make us pretend, that our Bodies will not bear them; This is best known after
we have had experience, and when we foresee a signal danger, it will then be
time to forbear them. Our Bodies are able to endure a great deal more, than we
are willing to believe, and the reason, why people are weary of any thing,
that is irksome to Flesh and Blood, is because they lie buried in Lust, and
Sensuality. He that is weak already, had not need make himself weaker than he
is, and Sickness is for the present, severity enough to subdue in us all
disorderly Affections, and in these Cases, it is infallibly true, what the
Apostle says, that bodily exercise prosits little, 1 Timothy 4. 8.

And as these severities are not fit to be used by sickly and weakly persons,
so neither must they be used by the Strong to the distervice of their Souls. In
a word, the Body must not be used so coursly, as to make it useless to the
Soul; and therefore the Saints of old observed most truly, that our Bodies are
like Garments, if you take care of them, they will last a great while; but if
they be totally neglected, they will wear out in a very short time; To mortify
the Body is one thing, to kill it is another, and he that would not be guilty
of Self-murder, must not be too lavish in these severities. It was a good
answer of St Anthony the Hermit, to a Huntsman, that had taken notice of his
former austerities, and saw him laughing, and merry with his Brethren, that
came to see him, and was scandalized at it; Bend thy Bow, says he, he did so;
Bend it more; he obeyed him; Bend it yet more. No, answered the Huntsman, then
it will break Just so, Vid. Pelag. lib. 10. de Dicret.
says he, is it with these severities, too much of them spoils all, but the
moderate use of them may preserve both Soul and Body to Eternity.

I do not believe it was possible without a Miracle, for Besarion to stand
forty nights in a Hedge of Thorns, that continually pricked him, though some do
confidently report it, and if he did so, I do not see of what use his Body
could be to his Soul after such Torments. Nor do I know what to say to that man
in Dionysius, that being at Prayer, and a Scorpion biting Vid. Dionys. Exig. in
vit. (...)
him, and shedding Poison into his Foot, insomuch that it swelled immediately,
pained him exceedingly, and conveyed the infection to his very Heart, yet would
not move from his place, nor take care to resist the noxious Animal, till he
had done his Prayer; for though he was restored to his former Health by the
Prayer of Pachomius, yet no rational Man, can think well of such severities,
where men may prevent their death, and will not, and I know not, whether it be
not tempting of God, rather than trusting him, where he has put the means to
save our lives into our hands, and we neglect them.

Nor, VI. Must the stress of Repentance be laid on these severities. This I
have already touched upon, and I cannot but mention it again, because without
great care and watchfulness men are apt to be deluded by the Devil into
misconstruction of this Exercise, as if God were more pleased with this
Exercise, than with the Repentance. Men may possibly be pleased with these
outward Austerities more than with inward Reformation, but God, who sees
further, cannot. His piercing eye looks through the Bowels, and if the Root be
sound, loves all the Branches that spring from it, if the Foundation be good,
casts a favorable Eye on all the Ornaments of the Structure; This Root, this
Foundation is a sincere Repentance, or a Heart enamored with the Beauty of
Holiness. If this Rod buds and blossoms, and bears such Fruit, it is accepted
in Christ Jesus; without a contrite Heart severities are but a deceitful Bush,
whereby Men are deceived into a good opinion, that there is excellent Wine to
be found in the House, but find nothing but Gall, and Vinegar, a stately Gate
to a Swine-stye, and paint laid on upon a homely Face, which makes the
Mortification ridiculous. And therefore,

VII. These severities must be only demonstrations of the sincerity of our
Repentance, when they are used, they must be used to convince our selves, and
others, that we do in good earnest abhor the sins, we have been guilty of. When
our Hearts grieve for the provocations we have given to the Almighty, and
temptations come in, and our frighted Consciences would make us believe, that
our sorrow is but counterfeit; there is no better way to dash, and beat back
the despaining suggestion, than by offering some violence to our Bodies; for
being naturally lovers of ease and softness, when we can thus deny our selves,
and can be revenged for our sins upon our selves, we give very good evidence,
that what we profess is (...), and that our Tears are flowing from a Heart
sensible of the Majesty, and Purity of the Great Creator. And this was the
reason, why the noble (...), repenting of her being married (...).
to another Husband, while the former, from whom she had been divorced, was
living, came into the Church with her Hai^ dishevel^d, with her Hands, and
Neck, and Lips all di^ty, and bemired with lying in Dust and Ashes for some
time; and for this St Jerome commends her highly, because hereby she discovered
the reality, and sincerity or her Repentance.

VIII. These severities are of great use in our endeavors to despise the
World, and to lead a truly Spiritual Life. Indeed our love of the World has
need of (...) co^^osives. It Is a Distemper which is (...) to be dispelled by
flatrery, (...) is it cured by a few angry words, such as Eli gave his two Sons
Hophni and Phinees. Without it be corrected, and and lash d, the Weed will
overrun the Ground, and endanger the Soul even in the midst of ordinary
devotion. The Body is ever a Bosome-friend to this love of the World, and
therefore if the Body be proceeded against with harshness, this love feels the
smart, and begins to abate in its Grandeur, and Loftiness. The Body being put
to pain, it is satisfaction, faint, and it begins to lower it is Topsails, and
to dwindle away into nothing; such Mustard being laid on these Breasts, the
Child soon gets an aversion from sucking them, and this bitterness drives the
Soul to seek for sweeter Object in Heaven. And upon this account it was, that
Sylvanus the Bishop of Philippo^olis went always Vid. Secrat. lib. 7. c. 3.
(...). lib. 2^.
in Sanda^s made of Hay, even in the City of Constantinople; and the Rural
Bishops in the Diocese of Rome, denied themselves of all Wordly Rotinue and
Splendor, while those of Rome lived in all the Pomp and Bravery the World
could afford.

IX. Either to subdue a corruption, or to prevent yielding to a sin, these
severities may be very helpful. Such severities fright away the corruption, and
make Satan himself stand amazed at what we are going to do. Seeing the love of
God so strong in us, that for his sake we can put our selves to great
inconveniences, he departs, and finding that Gods favor is dearer to us, than
our ease and interest, his next conclusion is, that he must find out other
Subjects to impose, and Work upon. When Hilarion applied himself to the
subduing of his Lusts, he spoke to his Body, Come thou Beast, Vid. Hieron. in
vit. Hilarion.
I will not feed thee with Barley, but with Chaff; I Will so order thee, that
thou shall not kick; I Will subdue thee with the hunger, and thirst; I Will lay
Weights upon thee; I Will afflict thee by Heats, and Colds, that thou shall long
for Victuals more than for Lustful Objects. And so he did, laboring hard, when
the Sun shined hottest; and praying and singing all the while he was at Work;
and thus he became Master of his Passions. In the same manner Zenon traveling
one day through Palaestina, and seeing a Bed of excellent Cucumbers, Ruffin.
vit. sen. lib. 3. c. 7.
a Fruit he naturally loved, and finding temptations in his Breast to steal
some from the Owner, it came into his Mind, that Thieves, when taken by the
Magistrate, are usually tormented, I must therefore, says he, try whether I
can endure Torments before I steal; and accordingly he laid this punishment
upon himself for coveting another man's Goods, and stood five days in the Sun
frying his Body in the intolerable heat; and being able to endure it no longer,
I see, says he, I must not steal, for I cannot endure Torments; and so he
passed on without gratifying his desires.

X. If you ask me, what severities are fit to be used upon such occasions, I
must answer that it is impossible to prescribe to all men the same severities,
for their Bodies, Constitutions, Tempers, and Inclinations are different, and
consequently that, which may do well with one, may not be so proper for
another; I will therefore set down some examples, and leave it to them, that
think it expedient to make use of these Exercises to choose, such, as they find
least injurious to their Constitution. I have read of a holy Man in Egypt, who
being tempted by a Harlot to acts of uncleanness, and feeling the temptation
work, lighted a Candle, and burnt his Fingers one by one, till by the smart and
pain of his Flesh, he forgot all thoughts of impurity. One Nathyra being taken
out of an obscure Hermitage, where he lived poorly and abstemiously, and
mortified himself to a very great degree, and made Bishop, lived now more
severely than ever, lay harder, and denied himself more than he did when he was
in his solitary condition, because said he, I am now under greater temptations.
Pachomius wore Hair-cloth next to his skin, sometimes to keep his Body under.
One Masch. prat Spirit. c. 24.
in ^^^^ba, if he heard of any poor man, that had not wherewithal to buy Corn,
to sow his Ground, would go, and without the Poor man's knowledge, buy some, and
sow it for him; sometimes he would take Bread and Water with him, and sit in
the Highway that is between Jordan and Jerusalem and thereby relieve needy
Travelers; where he saw men carry great Burdens upon their Backs, when they
came to a Hill, he would help them to carry them up the Hill; sometimes would
carry up their Children; if he met with any that was naked, he would give him
his Clock, and if he found any that was dead by the way, he would go and bury
him, with Psalms, and Prayers. Serapion sold himself, and became a Servant on
purpose, that he might have an opportunity Heraclid. paradic. 24 Gregor.
Dial^g. lib. 3 c. 1.
to convert the Sinners he sold himself too, much like Bishop Paulmus, who
Pawned himself for a poor Widows Son, and went into Captivity, to deliver him
out of it. St James the Apostle, says St Chrysostom, prayed not with a
Cushion under him, but with his bare knees so fixed to the ground, that they
became like Camels Hoo^s, hard, and msensible. Others when any Lustful thought
came upon them, would take some great Burden upon their Shoulders, and carry it
up and down till they were quite spent. Others that have been single man, as
Christ advised, that young man, Met. 19. 21. have sold all they had, and given
it to the Poor. Others, as Christ enjoins, Mat. 5 39. have, according to the
Letter, turned their left Cheek to him, that has smote them on the right, and
have gone two miles with him, that would have compelled them to go one; others,
as the Apostles did, 1 Cor. 4 12. 13 when they were reviled they blessed, when
they were defamed, they entreated; others, when they have found a regret upon
their Spirits, that they had given away too much to the Poor, have gone back,
and doubled the Sum they had given away, on purpose to cross the evil motion,
as is it said of the famous Author of the Book of Martyrs; others have parted
with their dearest Profit, which they have believed was unjustly gotten though
they became Beggars by it; others have put their Flesh to pain with Iron
Pricks, Nettles, and Thorns, that they might not think of that sin, they were
prompted to; others have sold their Coaches, and rich Laces, and Ornaments, and
learned to go on foot, and in plain Garments, that they might be able to do
more good in this present World; others have stinted themselves in their Diet,
and either eaten only of one dish, or have eaten no Meat at all, but Herbs, and
Roots of the Earth, as I showed in the beginning of this Discourse; others have
punished themselves with some days silence for speaking things which were not
convenient, etc. These various examples, I mention, not because I think they
require imitation in every particular, but to show, how he that means to be
Master of the same Virtues, or intends to prevent, and subdue the same Sins,
that these men mortified, may some such way arrive to the same Felicity, and
Victory.

XI. Whenever any of these severities are used, they must be used with great
humility; To grow proud upon the use of them, is to pervert their design, and
to fall into a high opinion of our own holiness, is to wound Religion with her
own Sword; I must not despise others, that use them not, nor think that I am
the better man, because my Neighbor is not acquainted with these Mysteries. My
sins may require that, which another may not, and if I do excel him in this
point, he may overtop me in another. These rigors must be carried on with
secrecy, and I must not be ambitious to let other men know, what I do in
private, that they may admire me. I may indeed speak of them, where I can
edify my Fellow-Christian by them, but must not therefore think the worse of
my Brother, because he will not do, as I do. I must always think very low of my
self, and believe, that I have need of such Plasters, which others, that are
more Righteous, than I, may omit, and yet be in a safe condition.

XII. Dscretion must be the great guide in these severities, so I said in the
beginning, and this is it, that must govern this Chariot, else with Phaeton, it
will set the course of nature on fire; where this Light has been wanting, Men
have fallen into Pits, and Ditches, from which they have been pulled out with
great difficulty, and sometimes have perished in them. Discretion must take
care, that all these Rules I have mentioned be observed; if this Watchman falls
asleep, the City may ^oon be taken by the Enemy. These severities are like
Chemical Medicines, as they may do great good, if skilfully applied, so they
may do much harm, if made use or by an ignorant Practitioner; Antiquity gives
us an account of several inconveniences Men have run into for want of
discretion. Some have been persuaded into so high a conceit of their holiness,
that they have expected Miracles; others have been deluded into an opinion,
that they were impeccable, and by that means have been exposed to great Fa^ls;
and Errors. Discretion, whether our own, or some faithful Ministers, will teach
a Man, to hold an even course, and to avoid the Rocks that are on both sides of
him, and the Vessel thus guided, may bring us safe to the everlasting Harbor.

And now, I must say to those, that read these Lines, as Christ said to his
Disciples in the point of abstaining from Marriage, Mat. 19. 12. He that is
able to receive it, let him receive it; I cannot and dare not press these
severities as absolutely necessary, yet thus much I will be bold to tell you,
that the Saints of old thought Heaven could not be had without them. They
verily believed, that there must be a conformity to Christ, not only in active
obedience, but in sufferings too; and where God did send no affliction upon
them, they thought themselves obliged to inflict some on themselves; This
produced that vast number of Virgins, wherein the Church then triumphed; By
Hair-cloth and Sackcloth, and denying their Bodies, even Necessaries, by mean
Attire, and carelessness in their Dress, and deforming themselves, and going
barefoot, and enduring heat, cold, hunger, thirst, and nakedness, they became
Conquerors of their Lusts, and Spectacles to Angels and to Men. Alas! you that
at this day call your selves Christians, and are fond of all the bravery, that
the Silkworm and the curious hand can make, (to the Female Sex I speak
particularly) that must have such Washes for your Skin, such Paint for your
Cheeks; such Patches for your Faces, and go from one Glass to another to see
whether this Curl is in its exact Figure, whether this Lace sits well, whether
this Mien becomes you, or whether you are entirely Modish, that keep such a
stir with your Fans, and Instruments of Pride in public Prayers, are more
afraid to hurt your Knees, than your Souls, and more discomposed, if justled,
than if you lost Gods favor, and practice no more Religion, than is just
consistent with your Lusts, that are more concerned, if your Hoods and lighter
Vails, and flowing Mantles do but sit amiss, than if we thunder out Gods
Judgments against you, that must serve God with ease, and elbow-room, are
discomposed and disordered with every trifle, and as soon as the Lords day is
over, go from one Playhouse to another, and know not which way to look for
Starchedness and Wantonness, and exactly observe the mode and figure of your
Gate, and conform accurately to the vain Gesture, the Dancing Master taught
you, and are careful about nothing so much, as about being dressed A-la-mode,
and whose Discourses chiefly are about Fashions, and Fineries: Alas! Had you
lived in the Primitive times, there is no man would have taken you for
Christians. The Primitive Saints would have reckoned you may be among the
Gnostics, or among the better sort of Heathens, but they would have wondered at
your impudence, if you had called your selves Christians; for they looked upon
all those Gaudes that now you dote on, as part of that Pomp and Glory of the
World, which they had Abjured in Baptism. How you come to be Christians in this
Age, Heaven knows, I am afraid you are none of Gods making.

The Primitive Saints were such Enemies to all Vanity, that they would scarce
allow the Female Sex any Looking-Glasses to behold their Faces in, which made
some of them make use of Vesiels of Oil to behold themselves; and they took
none to be Christians, that did not conform in Habit, and Dress, and Behavior
to Christ, as well as in Doctrine. Tertullian makes himself very merry with
those that pretended to be Christians, and called for such a Bodkin to dress
their Hair, and the Blushes of such a Paper to beautify their Faces, and
fasted with delicate Wines, as Persons whose Religion could not be treated of,
but with Jest and Mockery.

The Christians in those days lived like people, that had not their Portion in
this Life; their Pomp lay all in Holiness, and all their Bravery in making
their Souls rich, and beautiful, and indeed where so much Cost, and Time, and
Pains, is bestowed upon dressing the outward Man, the inward commonly goes like
a Beggar, or lies unregarded; where their condition, and dignity required
difference in Clothing, they wore may be Sackcloth next to their Skin, to
remember, that though they were in the World, yet they were not of the World.

The Age we live in will not bear these severities, Men's Lusts have made that
necessary, which heretofore would scarce have been thought convenient, so
strangely is Religion altered from what it was, and let no Man tell me here;
that to Preach up severities, is to teach People to turn Heathens again; for
the Priests of Baal cut themselves with Knives and Laucers, till the Blood
gushed out upon them, 1 Reg. 18. 28. we urge no such severities, as shall
disable the Body from doing the Work, that is proper for it, nor do we look upon
God as a Tyrant, or a Deity, that delights in Blood, as those Heathens did,
much less do we think that any such severities merit God's favor, or his
Audience, as they did; no, the severities which we recommend to Christians are
such as the Primitive Fathers used, severities, which nothing but love to God
produces, and a hatred of Sin, and a willingness to be rid of those Lusts, and
Temptations, which do so easily beset us.

Nor is this to reduce men to Popery; for I have already showed, how the
Papists do abuse these rigors, and pointed at the Rocks, that must be shunned:
In matters of these Bodily severities, the Papists have not forged a new
Doctrine, but have only turned an old Doctrine into Superstition, and run it
into excess, and extravagance, which bitter Rind being pared away, the Fruit
may be wholesome, and like the Leaves of the Tree of Life for the healing of
the Nations. Rev. 22. 2^


In vain does the slothful Sinner plead, that God commands no such severities;
I believe, if he looked into the Bible with seriousness, and attention, he
would find more Commands, that urge these severities, than he is aware of. The
5th and 19th Chapters of St Matthew, the 6th of St Luke, and the 12th of the
Romans, diligently considered, will convince a rational Man, that the Holy
Ghost is no enemy to these severities; and suppose there were no express
Commands for it, as long as we have so many examples of Saints before us, that
have used them, and as long as we are commanded to imitate those that have gone
before us in their holiness, these examples will not want much of the nature of
peremptory Commands.

But it is very common with Men, that are for an easy Religion, to find out
excuses. No wonder, if Men whose God is their Belly, whose Glory is their
Shame, and who mind earthly things, speak against these severities. It Is their
interest to talk against them, and they would be undone, if their Guts should
want those soft Morsels, they used to feed upon: Their Lusts tremble at these
rigors, and therefore they must be unlawful. Nothing is Religion with them that
crosses their sensual Appetite, though in good truth, Christianity is nothing
else but crossing our sensual Appetite. It Is true, no man yet hated his own
Flesh, but still these severities are no Signs of Men's hating their own Flesh,
but certain Marks, that a Man loves his own Flesh, and that he is willing to
save his Soul and Body in the day of our Lord Jesus, Without doubt he loves
himself most, that denies himself most, and no Man believes a Heaven and a
Reward to come, like him, that will not allow himself the comforts and ease of
sensual pleasures here; such a man shows that he is not of this World, but that
he is chosen out of the World, and has laid up his Treasure in another. Our
Blessed Redeemer, that commanded Sea and Earth, might certainly have lived
better, and more to his ease, if he had been minded to do so, than he did; he
that bid Peter take up a Fish out of the Sea, and told him, he should find a
piece of Money in the Fish, might as well have commanded all the Riches in the
Sea, and bid his Disciples take them up, as they had occasion; but no, he chose
an humble, despicable, self-denying Life, to show, that thus his Followers must
do, for the Glory, which is set before them; and because he made himself of no
Reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, therefore God did highly
exalt him, and gave him a name above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus
every Knee should bow: I am not ignorant, that Christ did many things suitable
to the great design he came for, and for our sake became Poor, that we might be
rich; but still Christ's life is exemplary, as well as expiatory, and though we
cannot imitate him in his extraordinary Fast and Miracles, yet the Apostles
seem every where to intimate, that if we mean to inherit the Glory he entered
into, we must do, what he did, meaning what is possible for us to follow him
in; his steps we are to tread, and accordingly the Primitive Christians we find
did imitate him in most of his Self-denials, things for which we do admire
them, yet cannot find in our hearts to follow them. We live, as if there were
no other World, and whatever there may be within, there appears little without
to convince a Spectator that we seek another Life. Our greediness, after the
comforts of this Life, discovers how little we believe a future Recompense, and
there appears so little in our lives that looks like laboring after a future
happiness, that one would think we believe not one word of the Bible. We are
most concerned for a livelihood, and instead of seeking first God's Kingdom,
and its Righteousness, the first thing we seek, is to get an Estate, and a
comfortable subsistence, and then we may take up a little more Devotion than
formerly we did. This is it, we would fain live plentifully and bravely here,
and enter upon a more plentiful and glorious Estate hereafter; whereas the
Scripture seems to make this World, and that to come, things opposite and
contrary, and the ways of living in order to the enjoyment of these two totally
different; and it was the belief of Christians in the purer Ages, that it was
impossible to Reign with Christ hereafter, without suffering with him here, and
none of them thought of living with Christ in Heaven, except they died with him
here on Earth, i e. died to the needless Comforts and Pleasures of this Life,
and lived like Men of another Country. They gathered so much from Christ's
saying, Luc. 6. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. 25. Woe unto you, that are Rich, for ye have
received your Consolation; Woe unto you that are full, for ye shall hunger; Woe
unto you, that laugh now, for ye shall mourn and weep; Blessed be ye Poor, for
yours is the Kingdom of God; Blessed are ye that hunger now, for ye shall be
filled; Blessed are ye that weep now, for ye shall laugh. Whosoever is wise, and
will observe these things, even they shall understand the loving kindnesses of
the Lord. I cannot but mention here St Austin's words in his Manual. O my Vid.
Aug. Manual. c. 15.
Soul, were we to endure Torments for some years day by day; were we to suffer
the Pains of Hellfire for a considerable time, in order to see Christ Jesus in
his Glory, and to be joined to the Blessed Society of Triumphant Saints; Were
it not worth suffering all this to be partakers of so great, so vast, so
stupendous a Glory? Come on then, let Devils prepare their Temptations, and
make their Arrows sharp against me; let my Body be broke through Fasting; let
Sackcloth press my Flesh; let great labors burden my outward Man; let
frequent Watchings dry up my Moisture, let this Man clamor against me; let
another molest me; let Cold and Frost bow me down; let my Heart grumble; let
the Heat burn me; let my Head ache; let my Breast burn; let my Stomach be full
of Wind; let my Face grow pale; let me be weak all over; let my Life be
consumed with Grief, and my Years with Mourning; let Rottenness enter into my
Bones, and under me let Worms and Maggots Crawl. None of these things shall
move me, neither count I my life dear, so I may but again rest in the day of
Visitation, and ascend to converse with the People prepared for the Lord. For
O! what Glory will the Saints possess there! How great will be their joy, when
they shall shine as the Sun in the Firmament! When God shall number his People
and advance them according to the (...) degrees of their goodness (...)
holiness, and shall reward them according to their Righteousness, when he shall
give them for Temporal, Celestial things, for Trifles they have lost for him,
great and ample Treasures! Behold what an accumulation of Happiness it will be,
when the Lord shall lead his Saints to take a view of his Fathers glory, and
make them sit down with him in Heavenly Places that God may be all in all.

Thus spoke the Christian Father, and what he spoke he practiced; And lest any
of us after all that has been said, should use tergiversations, and make
Excuses and Apologies for his neglect, I shall conclude all with a direction
out of Maimonides. How shall a Man arrive, says he, to these Virtues? He must
get a Maimonid. Hilcoth. Deoth. c. 1. sect. 7. (...)
Habit of them, and to get this Habit, he must fall to work and exercise
himself, and do it the second and the third time, as he does in lesser Virtues.
He must continually return to his Task, till it become easy to him, and the
Toil and Weariness of it vanish, and these Virtues become one with his Soul.

FINIS.
A LETTER TO A PERSON OF QUALITY, CONCERNING The Heavenly Lives OF THE PRIMITVE
CHRISTIANS.
A LETTER TO A Person of Quality, etc.
SIR,
THE great Sense you have of the Narrowness of the Way, and the Straitness of
the Gate, which leads to Life, has made you very often importunate with me to
give you an Account of a little Book, which Fronto the Learned Canon of Paris
Writ, Concerning the Heavenly Lives of the Primitive Christians; not but that
there is a larger and better Account given of that Subject by a late Writer of
our Church; but, because you hoped, the smallness of the Treatise might be a
temptation to Readers to peruse it, who often times are frighted with the bulk,
and vastness of the Volume. I have at last obeyed your Commands and though what
I have (...) not so much a Translation, a^ a Paraphrase; and the Liberty I have
taken to resect some things, that were needless, and to add here and there some
passages out of ancient Authors, as were proper and necessary, seem to be bold,
and unusual; yet, as it is, you have it; and I was the more willing to let it
go abroad in company of this Book, because it may serve to illustrate some
passages in the Exercises I have been describing. An Account of Front 's
Letter to the Archbishop of Roan.


It is in a manner impossible to consider the first beginning and original of
the Church, and to reflect on the Cradle, as it were, and Swaddling Clothes of
that Body whereof we are Members, without speaking something like Paradoxes,
and Mysteries. The first Christians, though newly Born, yet there is nothing to
be seen in them that is any way Childish, or so mean as to offend a Judicious
Eye, or unworthy of the esteem and approbation of the gravest Philosopher; and
the Church in that Age, though an Infant, yet from it is Birth, was so lusty and
vigorous, that though like Hercules it never crushed Snakes and Vipers in its
Cradle, yet its Attempts and Enterprises were more Masculine; for it conquered
Tigers, Lions, and what is worse, Fire and Flames, and the sharpest Torments.
It knew nothing of the infirmities, and weaknesses of a tender Age, but did in
its Youth things becoming the seriousness and sobriety of the oldest Men. And
though its growth was prodigious, and its Merits increased with its Years, yet
even upon its first entering into the World, its bigness and vastness seemed to
vie with that of the Earth, for it introduced a new World into the Universe.

Such was the Beginning, and first Institution of the Christian Church, that in
it we find Men, who voluntarily became little Children, Children who in Wisdom
exceeded Patriarks, Virgins, who had the Prudence and Gravity of Matrons, and
Matrons endowed with Virginal Modesty, and Chastity. Men of gray Hairs, and old
in Years, but Children in Malice, Pride, and Ambition; and it was hard to say,
which were the Old, and which the Young Disciples, for the younger sort strove
to equal, if not exceed the elder in Devotion.

Holiness was their Ornament, and Men were counted Great, as they arrived to
high Degrees of Piety, and the more Religious any Man was, the greater Majesty,
and Respect he was thought worthy of

The Light they came attended withal filled the World, as the Sun does the
Universe, which comes forth from its Eastern Conclave, and presently diffuses,
and spreads its Light over all the surface of our Hemisphere. So soon did the
World feel the influences, and operations of these new Stars, and were forced
to acknowledge their Divine Power and Virtue; for they pressed through the
Chaos, Mankind lay in, as Souls do pierce through Bodies, and the Life, Sense,
and Understanding they taught them, was wholly New, so different from what was
in the World before, that Men gazed at the Spectacle, and lost themselves in
the Admiration.

What advantages the Soul can be supposed to give the Body, the same did the
first Christians afford to the benighted World; and whatever inconveniences
the Body puts the Soul to, the same did the besotted World bring upon the first
Christians; for as the Soul tenders the Bodies Welfare, so did they the Worlds;
as the Soul directs the Body to do things rational, so did they the World; as
the Soul restrains the Body from doing mischief to it self, so did they the
World; and as the Soul makes the Members of the Body Instruments of
Righteousness, so did they attempt to reform the deluded World into Holiness:
On the other side, as the Body afflicts the Soul, so did the World persecute
those first Christians; as the Body makes the Soul live uneasy, so did they
incommode these excellent Men; as the Body puts ill Constructions on the
actions and admonitions of the Soul, so the World did put the same on theirs,
and as the Body seems to long for nothing so much, as the ruin of the Soul, so
the destruction of those Saints, was the great thing the World then did aim at.

Of such Persons was this Church made up, who had not their original out of the
Brain of Jupiter, as the Poets fable of Minerva, but from the Bloody and
Wounded Side of the Crucified JESUS. The Water and Blood which flowed from
those Wounds, was that, which gave them Being; and though their Principle was
Water, yet it had this Virtue, that it made them all fiery, and filled them
with Zeal and Holy Flames; and as in the beginning of the Gospel. their Lord
and Master was born of a Woman without a Man, so came they from a Man without a
Woman, and the Miracle of their Birth was in a manner as great, as their
Masters; for the Holy Ghost that impregnated the Blessed Virgin, baptized them
too, and the same Spirit, that raised the Mighty JESUS from his Grave, quickened
their Mortal Bodies, and transformed them into new Creatures.

They were a Commonwealth made up of Great, and Low, of Rulers, and Underlings,
of Governors, and Subjects; and yet nothing was more hard, than to distinguish
one from the other; for whatever the difference might be, they esteemed one
another equal, and by their carriage one would have concluded that they had
been all of the same degree and condition. Their Pastors and chief Men were
more known by their Munificence and Good Deeds, than by their Coats of Arms, or
Splendour of their Offices.

They seemed to be all of the same Kindred; for the Aged they honored as
Fathers, and the Youths they tendered as their Children. Those of the same Age
called one another Brethren, and these were the names they gave one another;
and in these Titles they gloried more, than Men now-days do in the lofty
Epithets of Duke, Earl, Baron, Knight, or Gentleman.

You might see amongst them abundance of Mothers, that never had any Children,
and Virgins took care of innocent Babes, as if they had been Mothers. No Family
complained of Barrenness or Unfruitfulness, for they never wanted Children to
provide for, and those that had none of their own, would be sure to find some
to take care of. None wanted Paternal Care, while so many Fathers studied to do
good, and Men were readier to Give, than others were to Ask, and seemed to be
sorrowful if they had not Objects, upon which they might exercise a Paternal
Charity.

There was hardly a Widow among them, that complained of Solitariness, or
sought Comfort in a second Husband, and second Marriage was counted little
better than Adultery. Their Widows were the same, that they were whilst their
Husbands lived; and finding that upon their Husbands death, they were become
Sisters of many Brethren, they aimed at no other Contract, but that with
Christ, who if they were found wothy, would, as they thought, marry them at
last to the Service of the Church, where they might exercise that Maternal Care
to the Poor, and Needy, which formerly they used to express to their own
Children. Here you should see none Rejoicing, that he had any thing of his own;
for whatever he had, he looked upon his Fellow Christians as Coheirs, and was
so well contented, that they should inherit with him, that he thought, that
which he had, a Burden, if his Neighbors were not to share in his
Possessions. This present Life was the least thing they minded, while that to
come, engrossed their Thoughts and Considerations. They were so entirely
Christians, that in a manner they were nothing else, and cared not for being
any thing else, lest if they should be something else, they should be suspected
of deviating from their Masters footsteps.

Hence it was, that the Pagans accused them of Unrighteousness, and
Unprofitableness, as if they were dead Weights in the World, contributing
nothing to the welfare and prosperity of Mankind, and as if they stood for
Ciphers in Humane Societies, though none were more ready to communicate of the
Profit of their Labors to others than they, and did therefore on purpose keep
close to their Calling and Profession, that they might be able to relieve the
Needy. And though they were loath to take upon them the Employment of
Magistrates, and Governors, lest the Emperors and Gods Commands should clash,
and they lie under a temptation of obeying Man more than God; yet, whenever
they were thought worthy to bear Office in the Church, they readily embraced
the Charge, that they might be in a greater capacity to improve the Talents,
God had given them, to his Glory, and his Peoples good, and were pleased with
the Trouble of the Office, that the World might see, they had no design of
Gain, or Worldly Interest in the Administration.

They spoke little, but their Thoughts were always Great, and Heavenly; and as
they looked upon sublunary Objects, as too mean for their lofty Minds to rest
on, so their care was to keep the Eyes of their Understandings fixed on that
World, which fades not away.

In the eye of the World, they were Pythagoreans, and a kind of Dumb-Men; but
when they met one with the other, and CHRIST was named, perfect Peripateticks,
and no Philosophers would be freer in their Discourses than they. Their
business was to live, not to talk great Matters; and the name Christian did so
charm them, that though there were various degrees of Men among them,
Ecclesiastics, Laymen, Virgins, Widows, Married Persons, Confessors, Martyrs,
and Friends; yet the name Christian swallowed up all, and in this they
triumphed beyond all other Titles in the World; which made Attalus in Eusebius,
when the Governor asked him, what Countryman he was, who his Father and Mother
were, what Trade, Profession, and Employment he was of, whether he was Rich, or
Poor, give no other answer, but this, That he was a Christian. And the same did
the excellent Blandina. And by this answer they gave the World to understand,
that their Kindred, Pedigree, Nobility, Trade, Profession, Blood, etc. did all
consist in this one Thing, and that beyond this, there could be no greater
Honor and Dignity.

Their Communications or Answers in common Discourse were Yea, Yea, and Nay,
Nay. An Oath they shunned as much as Perjury, and a Lie among them was more
rare, than a Sea Monster is to the Inhabitants of a Continent; for they said,
that in their Baptism they were Signed with the Mark of Truth, and that they
could not be Servants of the God of Truth, if they should yield but to the
least appearance of Falsehood.

Christ was the charming Word among them, and they heard nothing with greater
joy, than that glorious Name. His Death and Sufferings raised their Souls, and
his Cross was more Precious to them, than Rubies. Hereby they learned to
despise the World, and the Marrow, Virtue, and Efficacy of their Religion, was
the Death of JESUS.

This Death they remembered, not only in the Sacrament, but at their common
Meals, and when they refreshed their Bodies with Meat, and Drink, they talked
of that Meat which would feed them into Everlasting Life; and herein they
walked contrary to the custom of the Drunkards of old, who used to carry a
Death's Head with them to their drunken Meetings, and set it upon the Table,
and with the sight of that, and remembrance of what they must shortly come to,
encouraged themselves in Drunkenness. The first Christians remembered indeed the
Death of Christ at their ordinary Tables, but it was, to make Pain, and
Torment, and Death, and the Cross familiar to them, for the Afflictions of this
Life they looked upon, as the Midwives, that promoted their new Birth, and the
best Companions of their Faith, and the faithfullest Nurses of their Hopes.

In the Cities and Towns where they lived, none was unknown to the other; for
they Prayed together, heard the Word together, met frequently at Meals
together, and were continually helpful one to the other; Infomuch that
wherever they met, they knew one another; and when they durst not with their
Lips, yet with their Eyes and Gestures, they would salute one another, send
Kisses of Peace one to another, rejoice in the common Hope, and if permitted,
assist one another in Adversities. This is one of us, says such a Saint, for
we have seen him in our Oratories, we have Prayed with him, we have been at the
Lords Table together, we have heard the Scriptures read together, we have
kneeled together, we have been instructed together. O happy Kindred! which
comes by Prayer, and Communion of the Body and Blood of JESUS! O blessed
Relations! where Men are not called Brothers of the Sun or of the Stars, as the
ancient Tyrants styled themselves, but Brethren of CHRIST, Children of GOD, and
Citizens of Heaven!

When a Christian, who was a Stranger, came to them, before ever he showed his
Testimonials, they knew him by his lean Visage, and meager Face, which his
frequent Fasting had brought him to, by the Modesty of his Eyes, by the Gravity
of his Speech, by his Gate, and Habit, and mortified Behavior; for something
Divine did shine through their looks, and one might read the Characters of the
Spirit in their Countenance. Nor is it very strange, that a good Man should be
known by his Carriage, for to this day, a serious Person, though he says
nothing, something in his Lineaments, and Features, and Postures, will betray
the inward Zeal, and Sincerity of his Soul, and his deportment will discover,
there is something more than ordinary in him, as much as the Roman Senator was
betrayed by the Perfumes about him.

Whenever they were thrust into the Crowd of Malefactors, their
Fellow Christians soon guessed who they were, for they hastened with Meekness to
their Martyrdom, and without expressing any impatience, or indignation,
submitted their Necks to the stroke of the Axe, prepared for them. They used to
look frequently up to Heaven, and one might by their smiles see that between
God, and them, there was more than ordinary Correspondence. Sometimes they
would provoke the Executioners to begin their Torments, and be earnest with the
Hangman, not to delay their Agonies. Sometimes they would laugh at the Pain
they suffered, and in the very jaws of Death betray a taste of Immortality.
They looked upon Christianity as a Religion, that taught them to suffer
valiantly, and to them it was no other but a Science, to instruct Men to
despise Riches, Honors, and Torments too, in order to Everlasting Glory.

Their Presidents, and Pastors, were known by no other Character, but that of
Officiousness, and Charity, nor had their Shepherds any other mark to be
distinguished by, but their willingness to advance the good of the Sheep, and
their readiness unto every good Word and Work. And indeed so were the
Christians in general known by their mutual Love, and kind Offices.

If any fell sick, the rest did cheerfully run to comfort him, and this
Employment their Women were chiefly ambitious of, who seldom stirred out of
their own Houses, but upon such occasions, and when they resorted to their
Oratories. They were seen but rarely in the Streets, except such charitable
Employments called them forth; for none denied her Neighbor her care, nor
could any wordly Respects discourage them from that Officiousness.

If any were Rich, or Noble, they were the readier to express their compassion,
and Women of the highest Descent were the forwardest to assist the Calamitous
in their need; for Religion had mortified in them all Punctilio's of Honor and
State, and made them remember that in Christ they were all equal. She in whose
Veins the noblest Blood did run, would say of her poor distressed Neighbor, she
is my sister, my fellow-Member, one that has part with me in my Dear Redeemer*
If she be ancient, she is my Mother said she, if younger, she is my Daughter;
nor were these expressions names of course only, but they were written in their
hearts, and their Lips spoke what their Minds believed, and these words were at
once pronounced, and thought. Hence it was, that the greatest Ladies touched
their poorer Neighbors Sores, bound up their Wounds, applied Plasters to
them, made their Beds, and tended them, as the meanest Servants. Here you might
see the industry of one, there the sweetness and patience of another; one would
turn the Sick, the other help her up, the third dress her, the fourth feed her,
and in all this, the sick Creature saw, as it were, the Face of the Lord JESUS
She that tended the Sick, looked upon Christ in her that was sick, and she that
was sick, thought she saw Christ, in the Person that tended her. So Divine, so
Heavenly were their Works of Mercy, that one was to the other in Gods stead,
and that saying of Christ, What you have done unto the least of these my
Brethren, you have done it unto me, departed not from their Memories. Thus
stood the case with the Holy Women then, and this advantage they reapt by their
Charitable care, that when their Husbands died, they were taken as Deaconnesses
into the Church, and thus they prepared themselves for Christ, and the Churches
Service.

If any were imprisoned upon the account of Religion, all that knew them, would
fly to them. No Keeper so hard-hearted, but they would find out a way to smooth
him, no Lock, no Bar so strong, but they would make a shift to break it, either
by their Gifts, or their soft Answers, not to make the Jailers false to their
Trusts, but to get an opportunity to see their Suffering Friends; And when they
saw them, one would kiss their Chains, and Fetters, another lay his Lips to
their Wounds, a third give their bruised Members and tired Bodies such
refreshment as was needful; and as dismal as the Dungeon was, here they would
discourse of Christ, sing Psalms, pray together, and their Pastors would come
and Administer the Lords Supper to them, requiring no other Temple then that of
a devout Heart, nor standing upon the Ceremony of an Altar, but that of a
wounded Spirit.

If any of them were driven into Exile, in every place they met with Brethren,
and Fellow Christians, and these would run to them, comfort them, lead them
into their Houses, and treat them as Members of their own Family, especially
when by Letters from their Brethren, they understood, that for CHRIST his sake
they were driven from their native home.

Were any condemned to Work in Mines, or Quarries the neighboring Christians,
that heard of it, would presently come together, help the innocent Man,
endeavor to make his burden light, feed him with Victuals, and assist him in
the performing of his Task.

Were any of them sent through the Malice of the Heathen Governors to the
Correction-House, or forced to Labor hard in Caves and Dens, or lamentably
scourged, beaten, and abused for the name of the Lord JESUS. The rest that
heard of it, would not complain, nor think their Brethren unhappy, but rather
count themselves so, because they were not counted worthy to suffer for the
name of JESUS, and therefore would wish, that this might be their Lot and
Portion too.

If the fury of Tyrants abated, or remitted, at any time, and the imprisoned
and afflicted Believers got leave to return home again, some wounded, some
bruised, some with disjointed Bones, some half Burnt, some Maimed, some with
one Arm, some with one Eye, some with one Leg only; their Friends would run out
to them, and strive, who should first receive them into their Houses. Happy the
man that could kiss their Wounds, and refresh them with Necessaries and
Conveniences, and the longer any Man could harbor such a Christian at his
House, the happier he thought himself to be. And such Men as had thus suffered
for Christ, they honored for the future, and esteemed them equal with their
Pastors, and Presidents. Indeed out of these, they chose their Bishops,
thinking those fittest to serve at Christ's Altar, who had already made
themselves a Sacrifice for him. Thus Men purchased the degree of Pastors by
their Holiness, and their eminent Sanctity, which pressed even through Wounds,
and Tortures, for the name of Christ prepared them for that Function. Men that
were strong to suffer, they justly thought might be fittest to labor in God's
Church, and they that had been such Champions for the truth, they looked upon
as the properest Instruments to defend it to their death.

Nor did their kindness extend only to their Friends, but reach even to their
greatest Enemies; and they that just before were persecuted by them, if their
Persecutors fell sick, or were afflicted, or the Plague of God came upon them
these injured Christians would offer their Services, support them, comfort
them, admonish them, attend at their Beds side, and lend them their helping
hand, cherish them, supple their Sores, relieve them, and with a pity great and
magnanimous, weep over their calamitous Estate to the amazement of the Pagan
World, who were now ready to look upon them as Angels, when but just before
they thought them as bad, as Devils.

Poverty was the least thing that troubled them, nor did Want sit so heavy on
their Souls, as it does on ours, for they had learned to undervalue Riches, and
that which made them slight it, were these two impressions the Apostles
Doctrine had made on their Souls.

1. This sunk deep into their Hearts, that here we have no Continuing City, but
we seek one to come. That all we see here, is but shadow, and imagery, but the
substance is not yet Visible; that the fashion of this World will pass away,
and the Gaudes and Glories below the Moon afford no real satisfaction. This
made it ridiculous in their eyes, to snatch at a Butterfly or a Flying Feather,
and they rationally believed, that whatever is subject to time, and change,
will certainly make it self Wings, and flee away, and leave the Soul as empty,
as it found it, and that therefore their Thoughts must be turned another way,
even there where constant satisfaction, lasting content, permanent happiness,
perfect beauty, and uninterrupted joys are to be found; and indeed, this duly
weighed, will breed a mighty contempt of Temporal things, and a certain
expectation of future Bliss.

2. Another thing that did no less contribute toward it, was their Belief,
that the end of the World was at hand, and the day of Judgment approaching. The
time is short, cried their Pastors, the Lord is coming, He will be upon you
before you are aware; to what purpose will ye treasure up Riches, Lands, Goods,
Houses, which the Fire will shortly consume, and carry away? Hence it was, that
they lived every moment in expectation of the last day, and troubled not their
heads with thinking how they should fill their Barns, and their Coffers, for
they knew not, how long they should enjoy them; and no marvel, if under these
thoughts and circumstances, they freely parted with their Worldly Goods, sold
their Lands, and Houses, and bought no more, and brought what they had, and
laid it down at the Apostles feet, that they might follow a Naked Savior naked.

Nor did the care of their Children fill their Hearts with anxious Thoughts,
for they were sensible, that whenever the Church had notice of their want, they
would certainly be relieved, and looked after; for as many Fathers and Mothers
left their Estates, and what they had to the Church, so the Church employed
those Legacies, or Gifts, to support all those that should be necessitous.
Besides this, their Pastors both by their Doctrine and Example admonished them
to be diligent in working with their own hands, that they might get something
not only to be beneficial to themselves, but to others too and indeed they
thought they did little or nothing, if of what they got, they did not
communicate to those, who were not able to help themselves.

They had nothing, that was superfluous; and hence it was, that there was but
little striving about what they left. To lay up much Goods for many years, they
thought was fitter for Heathens than for Christians and having seen no such
thing in their Master, they could not tell, how it could be proper in his
Servants.

They believed, that it was their Pastors Office to take care of all, to
maintain the Poor, and to distribute to all according to their several
necessities; for since God took that care upon him to feed the World, they
thought, it would not be unbecoming his Ministers to do so too. This made them
entrust at first the Apostles, and afterward their Spiritual Pastors with what
they could spare, to receive of them again, when they should stand in need. And
now their Teachers did truly become their Fathers, and they acknowledged
themselves to be their Children, and owning them for their Fathers, they gave
them a Right to admonish them, to correct, to reprove them, to direct them, and
to lead them to Perfection, and owned a strong obligation at the same time to
love, honor, reverence, and obey them.

And though the number of Christians was already prodigiously increased, yet
were not their numbers troublesome to their Pastors, who loved to do good, and
to spend themselves, and to be spent in that Service; Men who had no design,
but to lay themselves out for God, and his Church and with Moses were contented
to be surrounded with people all day long, to discharge that Paternal care of
their Souls, and Bodies, which they had undertaken. Nor were their Pastors
therefore the Richer, because their Disciples brought what they had to them,
for they that were to receive from them, were more, than those, who gave; and
they took it in, only with a design to disperse it again among the Needy. Love
of Money, and admiration of Riches, and anxious worldly Cares and desires of
Hoarding, were things they had an antipathy against and though out of that
Stock they provided themselves with Necessaries, yet for engrossing any thing
to themselves, besides, was a thought as far from their Minds, as the Heaven,
they longed for was from that Earth, on which they trampled, and looked upon
with pity and scorn; for, Alas! what greediness could there be in them after
Temporal Means, who were already greater than the World could make them, and
took delight in nothing, but surveying that glory, which ere-long they should
rejoice, and triumph in?

So that they took the Peoples Money, without any danger of Covetousness They
were Men, that had fought for Christ, and left all to follow him; they were big
with the Promises of the Gospel, and consequently with hopes of Everlasting
Joys, had already tasted of the Powers of the World to come, and mocked at
Worldlymindedness. They remembered that they were but Stewards for the Poor, and
Nursing Fathers to Persons in distress, and Presidents of the Hospitals. Nor
did their High Places make them uneasy in their Poververty, for they loved it,
and made choice of it as a Companion, and a Friend. This made the People love
them exceedingly, not because they took delight to see their Pastors poor, but
because they saw, that they, who had so much Money at their disposal, would
make no use of it for their own interest; but were contentedly poor in that
Plenty, and would want themselves rather than see others faint.

If any were so Malicious as to traduce their Teachers, and brand them with the
guilt of Covetousness, or Slander them, their Pastors used no other Weapon to
put by the Sting, but Meekness to the Backbiter, and their own innocence by
degrees dashed, and and wiped away all aspersions. Hence the Christians gave
them their own freely, for they believed they could loose nothing by it, and
long experience had so confirmed that belief, that Envy it self could make no
impressions upon them to the contrary; when it was in their hands, they thought
it was safer than in their own; and being hereby freed from abundance of Cares,
and Encumbrances, they pressed more cheerfully to the promised Mark.

If any Christian kept any Land in his hands, his care was so to use his
Income, as to give God the First Fruits of it, to bring his Gifts to the
Church, to lay by somewhat for Alms, to help and assist the Sick, and to
relieve Prisoners and Captives, not only such as were within the Verge of the
Town he lived in, but others also. Thus did those Men live under Riches, as
under Thorns, and were sensible of nothing so much, as this, that great Wealth
is but a great Temptation to be Vain, and Sensual, which made them use this
Self-denial in their Incomes.

He that for a kindness, he did to his Neighbor, expected a Recompense, was
looked upon, as a Person greedy of filthy Lucre; and he that could do nothing
for his Friend, without a Reward, or prospect of some Profit to himself, was
censured like a Person ignorant of the Fundamental Law of their Religion.
Usury, Interest, and such names, were scarce heard of among them; and
oppression was a thing, which they thought none that named the of Name of
Christ, could be guilty of. In a word, they desired nothing so much in this
World as to be quickly gone from it, and they thought it the joyfullest news
imaginable to understand, that they were to be dissolved, and to go to Christ.

This was the Temper, Nature, and Constitution of that Commonwealth. The
Members of it looked mean, and contemptible. Nothing about them was pompous,
either in Clothes, or Diet, or Habitation, or Housholdstuff Such among them, as
were Noble or Learned, or of a gentile Extract laid aside their Pride, and all
their swelling Titles, forgot that they were better Born, or Educated than
others, and became like their Brethren. Plaiting and Curling the Hair was a
thing that both their Men and Women proscribed from their care, and they
thought that labor lost, which was employed on such Superfluities. They were
jealous of their serious frame of Spirit, and therefore all such Dresses, as
might serve to infuse vanity into their Minds, or damp their zeal to Religion,
they shunned, as they did Houses infected with the Plague. They minded no such
things as Modes and Fashions, nor did any new Habit, or Ornament that came up,
entice them to imitation. Decency was their Rule, and Modesty the standard of
their Habit, and Conversation. They wore nothing about them that was either
Costly, or Curious, and their greatest study and contrivance was, how to
advance their Souls, and make them fit for the Wedding of the Lamb; Laying on
either White or Red upon the Face, or disfiguring it with something black, and
of Kin to Hell, they knew not what it meant, Their Garments were either Linen
or Woollen, or Furr, or Sheeps-skin, and their Furniture Mean and Homely.

Without God, they attempted nothing, and whatever Enterprise it was, they
betook themselves too, they sanctified it by Prayer, and Supplication. If they
went out either to sow, or to Plough, or to Reap, or to Build, God's Blessing
was first sought, and begged, and they never put on their Clothes, but
entertained themselves all the while with some holy reflections. Theaters and
seeing of Plays they hated, as a thing contrary to their Profession; and though
the Heathen despised them for it, looked upon them as unsociable, Men of
pitiful Spirits, Strangers to the Art of Conversation, Melancholy Wretches,
Brethren of Worms, and no better than Vermin of the Earth; yet they mattered
not their Censures, and triumphed more in a good Conscience, than the other
could do in all the Vanities and Glories of this present World. The Worlds
Contempt, was their Glory, and they were proud of being Scorned and Undervalued
by the vulgar Crowd, that they might with greater earnestness long after a
better Inheritance. If any wanted Business, he would find some, and they that
had no need to work for their living, worked for the Poor. Idleness they had an
aversion from, as from the root of Evil, and Great Men and Women would do
something, which the Needy might be the better for. The greatest Lady would not
disdain to Spin, or Sow, or Knit for her distressed Neighbor, and like Bees,
they were ever busy, and employed for the common Good.

The love of the World was death to them, and they thought it a certain Sign,
that they had no Portion in Christ, if they should serve both God and Mammon.
To be in the World, and not of the World was their Motto, and to be other Men,
than they seemed to be, was the thing they chiefly aimed at. They seemed to be
profane, because they would worship no Heathen Gods, but were the devoutest
persons in the World to the true God, and they forgot to be Men, that they
might be the better Christians. Not a few left their high Places, and great
Dignities to become Christians, and chose to be low, and contemptible in the
World, that they might have no impediments in their way to Heaven.

Servants never concerned themselves to get their Freedom, for their Masters
were Christians, and themselves were so; both cheerfully discharged their
Duties one to another, and consequently lived in perfect Peace, and Unity. Many
Servants, that might have had their Freedom, would not, because they lived
sufficiently happy under their Believing Masters, and while they saw nothing
but love in their Masters, their very Bondage was perfect Freedom

Where a whole Family was Christian, they all did rise together, and at one and
the same time, Prayed and Read, and Sung Psalms, and observed one way and
custom in their Devotions. If one Family had any thing to do more than
ordinary, the neighboring Family would help them. If one was to Fast, his
Neighbor Fasted with him; If one was to pray for some signal Blessing, his
Neighbor did Pray with him; if one wept, his Neighbor did weep with him; if
one Mourned, his Neighbor Mourned with him, as if both had committed the same
Sin; In a word, they had their Joys and Sorrows common, and they might be said
to be all in one, and one in all.

In their Meals they were temperate, so Abstinent, that our Fasts were but
their ordinary way of Living; and indeed one reason, why they were so holy at
their Tables, was because for a long time either before, or after Meals they
constantly received the Eucharist. And in such Meetings they made love one to
another, made their Friendship inviolable, for they Sealed it with the Blood of
JESUS. These were true Love Feasts, and they were managed with that Gravity,
Chastity, and Modesty, and Singing of Psalms, that the World might see, it was
a preparation for a greater Supper.

Their Houses were open to Strangers, as well as to their Friends and
Neighbors; and where the Traveller could produce a Certificate, that he was a
practical Christian, he could not fail of a most hearty Welcome. Hospitality
was their Badge, and he that would not receive a Brother into his House,
because Poor, and Ragged, was either forbid the Church, or not suffered to come
into it.

Their Pastors and Rulers obliged them to certain Fasts, but besides those, of
their own accord they chastn'd themselves very frequently. In their Fasts they
were exceeding strict, and they so emaciated their Bodies by these rigors, that
their Faintness, Weariness, and Sackcloth and Ashes seemed to force Heaven to
Pity and Compassion. In short, whatever was Voluptuous, they hated, and looked
upon, as unsuitable to the Crucified JESUS, and so improper for that perfect
Wisdom, they aimed at, that they proscribed it as an Enemy and shunned it like
the rankest Poison, and admitted no more of it but what was just necessary, for
the support of that Life, the Great Creator had given them to spend to his
Glory.

And though they never had studied Pythagoras, yet both their Faith and Reason
told them that as the Body waxes stronger by the death of the Soul, so the Soul
becomes more valiant, and lively by the death of the Body. This made them
Conquerors of those Pleasures of the Flesh, which in all Ages have weakened the
bravest Men into Women, melted Hearts of Iron, and conquered the greatest
Conquerors of the World

To suppress such satisfactions of the Flesh, they were so watchful, so
courageous, so magnanimous, that they seemed Angels more than Men, and were
actually nearer to God, to whom they lived, than to the World, in which they
lived. In their lives, Chaste and Modest; in their Married estate Moderate, and
Holy, and not a Man came near his Wife, after he perceived, or had notice that
she was with Child, till she was delivered, and even then when they came
together their thoughts were so innocent, that they proposed no other end but
Procreation of Children to be brought up in the fear and nurture of the Lord.
In the very Works of their Calling, they would sing of Christ, and converse
with Spiritual Objects even in their Sleep and Dreams, and consequently were
always ready for Prayer, and holy Ejaculations; so addicted to the love of
Goodness, that they could not endure a vicious Person; and if they met with any
such in their Assemblies, did thrust him out from their Communion, and made it
Criminal for any Christian either to Eat, or Drink, or Converse, or Talk, or
keep Company with him.

They took particular notice of him, who taught any thing contrary to the
Doctrine of their Pastors, and no Plague Sore was shunned more, than a new
up-start Principle. If they heard any thing contrary to the Faith delivered to
the Saints, they either stopped their Ears, or made haste to be gone from the
place, the dangerous Tenet was published in. New Fangles were that which their
Teachers seriously warned them against, and the great Character of Heresy was,
that the Doctrine was New, and unknown to the Apostles. To continue this Purity
of Doctrine in their Church, their custom was, to read the Scripture, and to
hear it explained by their Pastors in public Congregations; and though they
read it at home, yet they were fearful to explain any thing, but what they had
heard their Pastors explain in public before, and according to their
Expositions, they understood those Oracles.

It was a very common thing in those days, both for Laymen and Clergymen to
learn the Bible without Book, and many of them had the Word so ready, that
nothing could befall them, but they had a Plaster or Medicine ready from that
inexhaustible Treasury. From hence their Souls got more than ordinary strength,
and nourishment, and their Minds received that vivacity, and quickness, that it
gave life even to their Bodies, starved almost through Watching, Fasting, and
other voluntary Penalties.

Of their Teachers they were so observant, that without them they would begin
nothing, and go no where without their Letters of Recommendation. Without their
Advice, they would not Marry, nor do any thing considerable in their Civil
Affairs without asking their Counsel and Approbation, for they looked upon
them, as their Fathers, and as Religion had made them so, so they thought the
obligation to consult them upon all occasions was the stronger. These they
received into their Houses, as the Saints of old did Angels with Joy, and
Trembling, and whenever they met them, though upon the Road, or in the Streets,
they would fall down, and kiss their Feet, and refuse to rise, till they had
given them their Blessing and Benediction; to which Blessing, they said, Amen.
and rose again, and so parted with a Kiss.

They thought it no small happiness to lodge their Pastors at their Houses; for
when they had them, they believed they had got some good Spirit in their
Houses, and with them they prayed, and hoped, that now their Prayers could not
miscarry, when joined with the Incense of those, who had so often moved God to
be merciful to a whole Congregation. For this reason, they were desirous to
entertain Pious men in general to do them good, and to relieve them, as they
did their Domestics, for they thought the presence of such Men a Blessing to
their Families, and a Protection from innumerable Evils, that might otherwise
befall them.

From the Unity and Peaceableness of their Teachers it was, that the Christians
then, though very numerous, continued unanimous in the Primitive Doctrine, and
Discipline, and though the several Assemblies might differ in Rites, and
Ceremonies, yet the mighty love they bore one to another, constrained them to
overlook those differences; and though they varied in some outward Acts of
Worship, yet their Affections, were so strongly glewed together, that nothing
but death could break the League or AAmity.

If one Neighbor chanced to quarrel with another, and they broke forth into
Contention, and Enmity, they were so long excluded from the Prayers of the
Assembly, till they had cordially reconciled themselves one to the other. This
punishment was then thought great and grievous, and Men were so uneasy under
these Excommunications, that the fear of them kept them from Animosities, and
rather than undergo such Censures, would suffer themselves to be defrauded, and
when they were beaten, would not beat again, when reviled, would not revile
again; and when abused, would not abuse again, nay look upon an unjust Calumny
as a piece of Martyrdom, and therefore bear it undauntedly. Those that knew
themselves guilty of a great Sin, durst not appear in the public; and they
that were fallen into any notorious Errors, durst not so much profane the
Prayers of the Church, as to appear there with the rest of the Assembly. So
great was the dread of Gods Majesty in those days, that even a desperate
Offender was afraid of taking Gods Covenant in his Mouth, while he hated to be
reformed.

Their meeting or coming together to Pray they esteemed a thing so Sacred, that
no Frowns, no Thunders, no Threatenings of Tyrants could make them forbear; and
being Conscious of their innocence, they justly thought, their enemies might by
their Authority forbid, but could not with any color of Reason prohibit their
Assemblies. This made them flock to their Oratories, though it was death to go;
and Parents with their Children would run, though the next news, they were like
to hear was, Christianos ad Leones, Throw those Dogs to the Lions. Though they
were thrust into Mines, and Prisons, yet they would find opportunities to Pray,
and Celebrate the Communion together; for some of their Brethren, that knew of
their distress, flocked to them; and the first thing they did together, was
laying force on Heaven with their Tears and Prayers; for indeed, it was death
to them not to join with their Fellow Christians in Supplications, and strong
Cries; for though they were very diligent in this Duty in their private Houses,
yet they took no Prayers to be so weighty or prevalent, as those, that were
offered up in company.

The days they appointed for public Prayer, were the Lords Day, the
Anniversaries of their Martyrs, and Wednesday and Friday every week, on which
two days they had their stations, fasted and humbled themselves before Almighty
God; besides their Vigils at night, which they thought sinful to spend without
Prayer, and Celebrations of Gods Goodness, and Holiness. Strange was their
Longing for the House of God, and the thirsty Earth cannot gape for Rain and
Water more, than they panted after their going with the Pious Multitude to
their Oratories; which made Dionysius Alexandrinus, when driven into Exile, and
used very coursly by the Soldiers that had the charge of him, complain in a
Letter to his Friend how near it went to him to be deprived of those
opportunities of meeting his Brethren on the usual Festivals; and this he
professes was infinitely more troublesome to him, than to be chaced from his
native home, or live upon Bread, and Water, or to lie on the cold Ground, or to
endure other inconveniences.

In their public Assemblies, even little Children, that had been Baptized,
would come, and appear among the graver sort, and beg of their Pastors to offer
up their Prayers for their advancement in the ways of Holiness, and give
themselves up to their Direction, and Government. So fervent were all sorts of
people among them; and they seemed ambitious of nothing so much, as of
exceeding one another in strictness, and watchfulness.

That they used the Sign of the Cross much, cannot be denied. Indeed they made
no Crosses of Gold, or Silver, but would cross their Breasts, and Foreheads, as
a Badge of their Profession, and whether they were going or standing, or when
they met one another, or were to sit down at Table, or to take their rest, even
in the Streets, and Marketplaces, they would sign themselves with this Sign,
and without this they scarce undertook any thing, the rather, because it
distinguished them from the Heathens, and was a Testimony of their joy, that
they were counted worthy to suffer reproach for the name of their Crucified
Redeemer.

It is almost incredible what cost they bestowed upon the Burials of their
deceased Friends; and they were so resolute in it, that though their Enemies
both envied, and reviled, and sometimes punished them for it, yet they went on,
and looked upon it as sinful to neglect those Bodies, when dead, which in their
lifetime had been Temples of the Holy Ghost. The care they took to embalm them
was such, that the Arabs professed they got more Money for their perfumes of
the poor Christians, than of the richer Pagans, who yet were never without
Incense in their Idol-Temples. Such Pains and Cost did they bestow in
performing the Exequies of Gods Servants; and though they had little in the
World, yet what they had they were very free of, on such occasions, for they
looked upon such Men's Funerals as Prologues to their Eternal rest, and this
Cost was an Emblem, how much God valued those Saints that died in the Lord, and
how richly he would crown them, when they had run their Race with Patience.

To their Princes, and Magistrates they were ever very submissive, and in all
lawful things obedient to a tittle. In their Prayers they always remembered
them, and though they persecuted and afflicted them, yet that did not abate
their Zeal, and Vows for their welfare and prosperity. Rebellion against their
Governors, they hated, as Witchcraft, and ever thought it safer to suffer, than
to resist. Hence they paid Tribute without murmuring; for their opinion was,
that no Man could have that power, except it were given him from above. His
Tyranny could not make them neglect their Duty, nor his ill Government tempt
them to forget their Allegiance; where the Man was rough and hard-hearted, that
was over them, they looked upon the Providence as a Means to try their Faith,
and even then, when they might have resisted and conquered, they would not,
because they thought it was unsuitable to their Religion.

This was to be a Christian; a thing outwardly contemptible, yet at the same
time, with the hand of Faith grasping Heaven, and the immense Glory of
Paradise, and laboring day and night, that he might have something to give to
Gods Ministers, to the Poor, and to his own family.

Not a few of them renounced the satisfactions of Matrimony lived single,
forsook all, retired into Deserts, buried themselves in Poor Cottages, studied
the Scriptures, contemplated Heaven, and lived to God.

Some traveled into far Countries, Preached the Gospel, and when they had laid
a good Foundation there, went farther, and spent their Lives in Pains, and
Labors, and doing good.

Thousands of their Virgins freely and voluntarily dedicated themselves to God,
and would be married to none but him; and though many times they were tempted
by rich Fortunes, and Offers of great consequence, yet nothing could alter
their Resolutions of continuing Virgins, and so they lived, and so they died,
as they lived to Christ, so they died in him; Their Zeal was great, and their
Fervor signal, and even then, when Christianity began to decay, their Lights
did so shine, and burn, that they were enough to have revived it again into its
former Glory, if men would but have set their Examples before them, and
afforded them any serious consideration.

It Is true, even among these Christians in the purest Ages, there were diverse,
that by their Lives disgraced that noble Religion. But these were chastized
with very severe Discipline, and as long as they were in a state of Sin, were
not looked upon as Christians; nor did any Christian converse with them. If
they repented, they were forced to make their repentance public, and for some
years together, were forced to give such demonstration of it, that the Devil
himself could not but acknowledge the sincerity of it. By Weeping and
Prostrating themselves before Gods people, and imploring the assistance of
Believers, and a hundred such austerities, they sought to be reconciled to God,
and to his Church, which made the Fathers say, That the Penitent were no
Scandal, but an Ornament of the Church: They were in a manner a distinct
Church, and the way to get among the true Believers, was now harder than at
their first embracing of Christianity; yet these Penitent might truly say of
themselves as the Spouse in the Canticles, I am black, but comely, O ye
Daughters of Jerusalem. Cant. 1. 5.


With this kind of Life, the first Christians amazed the unbelieving World, and
their Power and Number quickly grew so formidable, that the Emperors themselves
began to be startled at their progress, and therefore employed their Might and
Greatness to oppose it. To crush their towering Piety, the Heathens showed them
Racks, Flames, Gibbets, Grid-irons, Cauldrons, boiling Oil, Lions, Bears,
Wild-Bulls, and set before them the Worldly Prudence of Philosophers, but by
the Grace and Assistance of that JESUS, who strengthened them, they were more
undaunted at their Torments, than their Hangmen, did fight with Lions, and
smile, and were more daring than the Flames they suffered in, firmer than the
Racks, that broke their Bones, and by their practices surmounted all the great
Acts that were ever done by Heroes, and the most famous Conquerors. They
overcame Death by a desire of Death, and were more willing to die, than their
Executioners to suffer them. Their Blood proved the Seed of the Church, and the
more they Massacred, the more their numbers grew, till the Emperors themselves
became Christians, and were forced to yield to the Faith, and Patience of
JESUS, and the Christians at last gave Law to those, who at first did Stab, and
Murder them, and Conquered them in the end, who in the beginning Butchered them
like Dogs, and such inconsiderable Animals.

And now, SIR, it is very likely that some, who may chance to read these Lines,
will look upon the Account, I have given you, as a Spiritual Romance, an Emblem
rather of what Men might be, were they in a more perfect State, than of what
they generally were.

But they that shall pass this Censure on the Premises, do but betray their
ignorance, and I can only send them to the Writers in those Ages, when
Christianity was decked and adorned with these Jewels, and quoted by my Author,
such as Ignatius Polycarp, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Athenagoras, Minutius
Felix, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Cyprian, and others that
succeeded them; and if people, to favor their Lusts will neither believe, nor
take pains to search into the truth of things, all that can be said, is, that
they are resolute in their Infidelity.

Sir, I am persuaded you have chosen the better part, and as I do not question
your Belief of these passages, so that these Saints may be your Pattern, and
their Actions the great Rule of your Life, and the Spirit of God your Guide in
these ways of Holiness, is the hearty Wish and Prayer of,

SIR, Your Affectionate Friend, and Servant, Anthony Horneck.

FINIS.

