depiction of a woman

ADVICE TO A DAUGHTER, AS TO Religion, Husband, House, Family and Children,
Behavior and Conversation, Friendship, Censure, Vanity and Affectation, Pride,
Diversions.

The Sixth Edition.

To which is added THE CHARACTER OF A TRIMMER, AS TO The Laws and Government,
Protestant Religion, the Papists, Foreign Affairs.

By the late Noble M. of H.

Printed for M. Gillyflower and B. Took, 1699.

THE Lady's New-Year's-Gift: OR, ADVICE TO A DAUGHTER, Under these following
Heads: Viz.

Religion, Husband, House, Family and Children, Behavior and Conversation,
Friendships, Censure, Vanity and Affectation, Pride, Diversions.
The Sixth Edition, exactly Corrected.

LONDON, Printed by W. H. for M. Gillyflower, at the Spread-Eagle in
Westminster Hall, 1699.

Licensed,

Jan. 9. 1689. Rob. Midgley.

THE CHARACTER OF A TRIMMER, HIS OPINION OF

I. The Laws and Government. II. Protestant Religion. III. The Papists. IV.
Foreign Affairs.
By the late Noble M. of H.

The Third Edition.

LONDON, Printed for M. Gillyflower and B. Took, 1699.

THE PREFACE.
IT must be more than an ordinary provocation than can tempt a Man to write in
an Age overrun with Scriblers, as Egypt was with Flies and Locusts: That worst
Vermin of small Authors has given the World such a Surfeit, that in^te^^ of
desiring to Write, a Man would be more inclined to wish, for h^^ own ease, that
hecould not Read; but there are some things which do so raiseour passions, that
our Reason can make no Resistance; and when Madmen, in two Extremes, shall
agree to made common sense Treason, and join to fix an ill Character upon the
only Men in the Nntion who deserve a good one; I am no longer Master of my
better Resolution to let the World alone, and must break loose from my more
reasonable Thoughts, to expose these false Coyners, who would make their Copper
Wares pass upon us for good Payment.

Amongst all the Engines of Dissension, there has been none more powerful in
all Times, than the fixing Names upon one another of Contumely and Reproach,
and the reason is plain, in respect of the People, who though generally they are
incapable of making a Syllogism or forming an Argument, yet they can pronounce
a word; and that serves their turn to throw it with their dull malice at the
Head of those they do not like; such things ever begin in Jest, and end in
Blood, and the same word which at first makes the Company merry, grows in time
to a Military Signal to cut one another Throats.

These Mistakes are to be lamented, though not easily cured, being suitable
enough to the corrupted Nature of Mankind; but it is hard, that Men will not
only invent ill Names, but they will wrest and misinterpret good one; so afraid
some are even of a reconciling sound, that they raise another noise to keep it
from being heard, left it should set up and encourage a dangerous sort of Men,
who prefer Peace and Agreement, before Violence and Confusion.

Were it not for this, why, after we have played the Fool with throwing Whig
and Tory at one another, as Boys do Snow-Balls, do we grow angry at new a Name,
which by its true signification might do as much to put us into our Wits, as
the other has done to put us out of them?

This innocent word Trimmer signifies no more than this, That if Men are
together in a Boat, and one part of the Company would weigh it down on one
side, another would make make it lean as much to the contrary; it happens there
is a third Opinion of those, who conceive it would do as well, if the Boat w^nt
even, without endangering the Passengers; now it is hard to imagine by what
Figure in Language, or by what Rule in Sense this comes to be a fault, and it
is much more a wonder it should be thought a Heresy.

But so it happens, that the poor Trimmer has now all the Powder spent upon him
alone, while the Whig is a forgotten, or at least a neglected Enemy; there is
no danger now to the State (if some Men may be believed) but from the Beast
called a Trimmer, take heed of him, he is the Instrument that must d^stroy
Church and State; a new kind of Monster, whose deformity is so exposed, that,
were it a true Picture that is made of him, it would be enough to fright
Children, and make Women miscarry at the sight of it.

But it may be worth the examining, whether he is such a Beast as he is
^ainted. I am not of that Opinion, and am so far from thinking him an Infidel
either in Church or State, that I am neither afraid to expose the Articles of
his Faith in Relation to Government, nor to say that I prefer them before any
other Political Creed, that either our angry Divines, or our refined Statesmen
would impose upon us.

I have therefore in the following Discourse endeavored to explain the
Trimmer's Principles and Opinions, and then leave it to all discerning and
impartial Judges, whether he can with Justice be so Arraigned, and whether
those who deliberately pervert a good Name, do not very justly deserve the
worst that can be put upon themselves.

THE Trimmer's Opinion OF THE LAWS AND GOVERNMENT.
OUr Trimmer, as he has a great Veneration for Laws in general, so he has more
particular for our own, he looks upon them as the Chains that tie up our unruly
Passions, which else, like wild Beasts let loose, would reduce the world into
its first State of Barbarism and Hostility; the good things we enjoy, we owe to
them; and all the ill things we are freed from is by their Protection.

God himself thought it not enough to be a Creator, without being Lawgiver,
and his goodness had been defective toward mankind in making them, if he had
not prescribed Rules to make them happy too.

All Laws flow from that of Nature, and where that is not the Foundation, they
may be legally imposed, but they will be lamely obeyed: By this Nature is not
meant that which Fools and Madmen misquote to justify their Excesses; it is
innocent and uncorrupted Nature, that which disposes Men to choose Virtue,
without its being prescribed, and which is so far from inspiring ill thoughts
into us, that we take pains to suppress the good ones it infuses.

The Civilized World has ever paid a willing subjection to Laws, even
Conquerors have done homage to them; as the Romans, who took Patterns of good
Laws, even from those they had subdued; and at the same time that they
Triumphed over an enslaved People, the very Laws of that place did not only
remain safe, but became Victorious; their new Masters, instead of suppressing
them, paid them more respect than they had from those who first made them: and
by this wise method they arrived to such an admirable Constitution of Laws,
that to this day they Reign by them; the Excellency of them Triumphs still, and
the World pays now an acknowledgment of their obedience to that Mighty Empire,
though so many Ages after it is dissolved; and by a later instance, the Kings
of France, who, in practice use their Laws pretty familiarly, yet think their
Picture is drawn with most advantage upon their Seals, when they are placed in
the Seat of Justice; and though the Hicroglyphick is not there of so much use to
the People as they would wish, yet it shows that no Prince is so Great, as not
to think fit, for his own Credit at least, to give an outward, when he refuses
a real worship to the Laws.

They are to mankind that which the Sun is to Plants, whilst it cherishes and
preserves 'em. Where they have their force and are not clouded or suppressed,
every thing smiles and flourishes; but where they are darkened, and not
suffered to shine out, it makes every thing to wither and decay.

They secure Men not only against one another, but against themselves too; they
are a Sanctuary to which the Crown has occasion to resort as often as the
People, so that it is an Interest as well as a Duty to preserve them.

There would be no end of making a Panegyric of Laws; let it be enough to add,
that without Laws the World would become a Wilderness, and Men little less than
Beasts; but with all this, the best things may come to be the worst, if they
are not in good hands; and if it be true that the wisest Men generally make the
Laws, it is as true, that the strongest do often Interpret them: and as Rivers
belong as much to the Channel where they run, as to the Spring from whence they
first rise, so the Laws depend as much upon the Pipes through which they are to
pass, as upon the Fountain from whence they flow.

The Authority of a King who is Head of the Law, as well as the Dignity of
Public justice, is debased, when the clear stream of the Law is puddled and
disturbed by Bunglers, or conveyed by unclean Instruments to the People.

Our Trimmer would have them appear in their full luster, and would be grieved
to see the day, when, instead of speaking with Authority from the Seats of
Justice, they should speak out of a Grate, with a lamenting voice like
Prisoners that desire to be rescued.

He wishes that the Bench may have a Natural as well as a Legal Superiority to
the Bar; he thinks Men's abilities very much misplaced, when the Reason of him
that pleads is visibly too strong for those who Judge and give Sentence.

When those from the Bar seem to dictate to their Superiors upon the Bench,
their Furrs will look scurvily. about them, and the respect of the World will
leave the bare Character of a Judge, to follow the Essential knowledge of a
Lawyer, who may be greater in himself, than the other can be with all his
Trappings.

An uncontested Superiority in any Calling, will have the better of any
distinct Name that Authority can put upon it, and therefore if ever such an
unnatural Method should be introduced, it is then that Westminster Hall might
be said to stand upon its Head, and though Justice it self can never be so, yet
the Administration of it would be rendered Ridiculous.

A Judge has such power lodged in him, that the King will never be thought to
have chosen well, where the voice of Mankind has not beforehand recommended
the Man to his Station; when Men are made Judges of what they do not
understand, the World censures such a Choice, not out of ill will to the Men,
but fear to themselves.

If the King had the sole power of choosing Physicians, Men would tremble to see
Bunglers preferred, yet the necessity of taking Physic from a Doctor, is
generally not so great as that of recieving Justice from a Judge; and yet the
Inferences will be very severe in such cases, for either it will be thought
that such Men bought what they were not able to deserve, or which is as bad,
that Obedience shall be lookd upon as a better Qualification in a Judge, than
Skill or Integrity, when such sacred things as the Laws are not only touchd,
but guided by profane hands; Men will fear that out of the Tree of the Law,
from whence we expect Shade and Shelter, such Workmen will make Cudgels to beat
us with, or rather that they will turn the Cannon upon our Properties, that
were entrusted with them for their Defense.

To see the Laws Mangled, Disguised, Speak quite another Language than their
own, to see them thrown from the Dignity of protecting Mankind, to the
disgraceful Office of destroying them; and, notwithstanding their Innocence in
themselves, to be made the worst Instruments that the most refined villainy can
make use of, will raise Men's Anger above the power of laying it down again, and
tempt them to follow the Evil Examples given them of Judging without Hearing,
when so provoked by their desire of Revenge. Our Trimmer therefore, as he
thinks the Laws are Jewels, so he believes they are no better set, than in the
constitution of our English Government, if rightly understood, and carefully
preserved.

It would be too great Partiality to say they are perfect or liable to no
Objection; such things are not of this world; but if they have more
Excellencies and fewer Faults than any other we know, it is enough to recommend
them to our Esteem.

The Dispute, which is a greater Beauty, a Monarchy or a Commonwealth, has
lasted long between their contending Lovers, and (they have behaved themselves
so like Lovers, who in good Manners must be out of their Wits,) who used such
Figures to exalt their own Idols on either side, and such angry Aggravations,
to reproach one another in the Contest, that moderate men have in all times
smiled upon this eagerness, and thought it differed very little from a
downright Frenzy: we in England, by a happy use of the Controversy, conclude
them both in the wrong, and reject them from being our Pattern, not taking the
words in the utmost extent, which is a thing, that Monarchy, leaves men no
Liberty, and a Commonwealth such a one, as allows them no Quiet.

We think that a wise Mean, between these barbarous Extremes, is that which
self-Preservation ought to dictate to our Wishes; and we may say we have
attained to this Mean in a greater measure, than any Nation now in being, or
perhaps any we have read of; tho never so much Celebrated for the wisdom or
Felicity of their Constitutions: We take from one the too great power of doing
hurt, and yet leave enough to govern and protect us; we take from the other,
the Confusion, the Parity, the Animosities, and the License, and yet reserve a
due care of such a Liberty, as may consist with Men's Allegiance; but it being
hard, if not impossible, to be exactly even, our Government has much the
stronger Biass toward Monarchy, which by the general Consent and Practice of
Mankind, seems to have the Advantage in dispute against a Commonwealth: The
Rules of a Commonwealth are too hard for the Bulk of Mankind to come up to;
that Form of Government requires such a spirit to carry it on, as dos not dwell
in great Numbers, but is restrained to so very few, especially in this Age,
that let the Methods appear never so much reasonably in Paper, they must fail
in Practice, which will ever be suited more to Men's Nature as it is, than as it
should be.

Monarchy is liked by the People, for the Bells and the Tinsel, the outward
Pomp and Gilding, and there must be milk for Babes, since the greatest part of
Mankind are, and ever will be included in that List; and it is approved by wise
and thinking Men, (all Circumstances and Objections impartially considerd) that
it has so great an advantage above all other Forms, when the Administration of
that Power falls in good hands; that all other Governments look out of
Countenance, when they are set in Competition with it. Lycurgus might have
saved himself the trouble of making laws, if either he had been Immortal, or
that he could have secured to Posterity, a succeeding Race of Princes like
himself; his own Example was a better Law, than he could with all his skill
tell how to make; such a Prince is a Living Law, that dictates to his subjects,
whose thoughts in that case never rise above their Obedience, the Confidence
they have in the virtue and Knowledge of the master, preventing the Scruples
and Apprehensions to which Men are naturally inclined, in relation to those
that govern them; such a Magistrate is the Life and Soul of Justice, whereas
the Law is but a Body and a dead one too, without his influence to give it
warmth and vigor, and by the irresistible Power of his virtue, he does so
reconcile Dominion and Allegiance, that all disputes between them are silenced
and subdued, and indeed no Monarchy can be Perfect and Absolute without
exception, but where the Prince is Superior by his Virtue, as well as by his
Character and his Power; so that to screw out Presidents and unlimited Power,
is a plain diminution to a Prince that Nature has made Great, and who had
better make himself a glorious Example to Posterity, than borrow an Authority
from Dark Records, raised out of the Grave, which besides their Non-usage, have
always in them matter of Controversy and Debate, and it may be affirmed, that
the instances are very rare of Princes having the worst in the dispute with
their People, if they were Eminent for Justice in time of Peace, or Conduct in
time of War, such advantage the Crown gives to those who adorn it by their own
Personal virtues.

But since for the greater Honor of Good and Wise Princes, and the better to
set off their Character by the Comparison, Heaven has decreed there must be a
mixture, and that such as are perverse and insufficient, or at least both, are
perhaps to have their equal turns in the Government of the World, and besides,
that the Will of Man is so various, and so unbounded a thing, and so fatal too
when joined with Power misapplied; it is no wonder if those who are to be
governed, are unwilling to have so dangerous as well as so uncertain a Standard
of their Obedience.

There must be therefore Rules and Laws: for want of which, or at least the
Observation of them, it was as Capital for a Man to say that Nero did not play
well upon the Lute, as to commit Treason, or Blaspheme the Gods. And even
Vespasian himself had like to have lost his Life, for sleeping whilst he should
have attended and admired that Emperors Impertinence upon the Stage. There is
a wantonness in great Power that Men are generally too apt to be corrupted
with, and for that Reason, a wise Prince, to prevent the temptation arising
from common frailty, would choose to Govern by Rules for his own Sake, as well
as for his Peoples, since it only secures him from Errors, and does not lessen
the real Authority, that a good Magistrate would care to be possessed of; for
if the Will of a Prince is contrary either to Reason it self, or to the
universal Opinion of his Subjects, the Law by a kind restraint rescues him from
a disease that would undo him; if his will on the other side is reasonable or
well directed, that Will immediately becomes a Law, and he is arbitrary by an
easy and natural Consequence, without taking pains, or overturning the World
for it.

If Princes consider Laws as things imposed on them, they have the appearance
of Fetters of Iron, but to such as would make them their choice as well as
their practice, they are Chains of Gold; and in that respect are Ornaments, as
in others they are a defense to them, and by a Comparison, not improper for
God's Vicegerents upon Earth; as our Maker never Commands our obedience to any
thing, that as reasonable Creatures we ought not to make our own Election; so a
good and wise Governor, though all Laws were abolished, would by the voluntary
direction of his own Reason, do without restraint the very same things that
they would have enjoined.

Our Trimmer thinks that the King and Kingdom ought to be one Creature, not to
be separated in their Political Capacity; and when either of them undertake to
act apart, it is like the crawling of Worms after they are cut in pieces,
which cannot be a lasting motion, the whole Creature not stirring at a time. If
the Body has a dead Palsy, the Head cannot make it move; and God has not yet
delegated such a healing power to Princes, as that they can in a moment say to
a Languishing People oppressed and in despair, take up your beds and walk.

The Figure of a King, is so comprehensive and exalted a thing, that it is a
kind of degrading him to lodge that power separately in his own Natural Person,
which can never be safely or naturally great, but where the People are so
united to him as to be Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone; for when he is
reduced to the single definition of a man, he sinks into so low a Character,
that it is a temptation upon Men's Allegiance, and an impairing that veneration
which is necessary to preserve their Duty to him; whereas a Prince who is so
joined to his people that they seem to be his Limbs, rather than his Subjects,
Clothed with Mercy and Justice rightly applied in their several ^laces, his
Throne supported by Love as ^ell as by Power, and the warm wishes ^f his
devoted Subjects, like never-fail^^g Incense, still ascending toward ^im,
looks so like the best Image we ^^n frame to our selves of God Al^ighty, that
Men would have much ado ^ot to fall down and worship him, and ^ould be much
more tempted to the ^in of Idolatry, than to that of Disobe^ience.

Our Trimmer is of Opinion, that ^here must be so much Dignity insepa^ably
annexed to the Royal Function, ^s may be sufficient to secure it from in^olence
and contempt; and there must ^e Condescensions from the Throne, ^^ke kind
showers from Heaven, that ^he Prince may look so much the more ^^ke God
Almighty's Deputy upon Earth; for power without love has a ^errifying aspect,
and the Worship which ^s paid to it is like that which the Indi^ns give out of
fear to Wild Beasts and Devils he that fears God only because there is an Hell,
must wish there were no God; and he who fears the King, only because he can
punish, must wish there were no King; so that without a principle of Love,
there can be no true Allegiance, and there must remain perpetual Seeds of
Resistance against a power that is built upon such an unnatural Foundation, as
that of fear and terror. All force is a kind of foul play, and whosoever aims
at it himself, does by implication allow it to those he plays with; so that
there will be ever Matter prepared in the minds of People when they are
provoked, and the Prince, to secure himself must live in the midst of his own
Subjects, as if he were in a Conquered Country, raise Arms as if he were
immediately to meet or resist an Invasion, and all this while sleep as
unquietly from the fear of the Remedies, as he did before from that of the
Disease; it being hard for him to forget, that more Princes have been destroyed
by their Guards than by their People; and that even at the time when the Rule
was Quod Principi placuit Lex esto: the Armies and Praetorian Bands which were
the Instruments of that unruly Power, were frequently the means made use of to
destroy them who had it. There will ever be this difference between God and his
Vicegerents, that God is still above the Instruments he uses, and out of the
danger of receiving hurt from them; but Princes can never lodge Power in any
hands, which may not at some time turn it back upon them; for though it is
possible enough for a King to have power to satisfy his Ambition; yet no
Kingdom has Money enough to satisfy the avarice of under-Work-men, who learn
from that Prince who will exact more than belongs to him, to expect from him
much more than they deserve, and growing angry upon the first disappointment,
they are the Devils which grow terrible to the Conjurers themselves who brought
them up, and cannot send them down again; And besides that, there can be no
lasting Radical Security, but where the Governed are satisfied with the
Governors. It must be a Dominion very unpleasant to a Prince of an elevated
Mind, to impose an abject and sordid servility, instead of receiving the
willing Sacrifice of Duty and Obedience. The bravest Princes in all times, who
were incapable of any other kind of fear, have feared to grieve their own
People; such a fear is a glory, and in this sense it is an infamy not to be a
Coward: So that the mistaken Heroes who are void of this generous kind of fear,
need no other aggravation to complete their ill Characters.

When a Despotick Prince has bruised all his Subjects with a slavish Obedience,
all the force he can use cannot subdue his own fears, Enemies of his own
Creation, to which he can never be reconciled, it being impossible to do
injustice, and not to fear Revenge: there is no cure for this fear, but the not
deserving to be hurt, and therefore a Prince who does not allow his thoughts to
stray beyond the Rules of Justice, has always the blessing of an inward quiet
and assurance, as a natural effect of his good meaning to his People, and tho
he will not neglect due precautions to secure himself in all Events, yet he is
incapable of entertaining vain and remote suspicions of those, of whom he
resolves never to deserve ill.

It is very hard for a Prince to fear Rebellion, who neither does, nor intends
to do any thing to provoke it; therefore too great a diligence in the
Governors, to raise and improve dangers and fears from the People, is no very
good Symptom, and naturally begets an inference, that they have thoughts of
putting their Subjects Allegiance to a Trial; and therefore not without some
Reason fear before hand, that the Irregularities they intend, may raise Men to
a Resistance.

Our Trimmer thinks it no advantage to a Government, to endeavor the
suppressing all kind of Right which may remain in the Body of the People, or to
employ small Authors in it, whose Officiousness or want of Money may encourage
them to write, though it is not very easy to have Abilities equal to such a
Subject; they forget that in their too high strained Arguments for the Rights
of Princes, they very often plead against humane Nature, which will always give
a Biass to those Reasons which seem of her side; it is the People that Reads
those Books, and it is the People that must judge of them; and therefore no
Maxims should be laid down for the Right of Government, to which there can be
any Reasonable Objection; for the World has an Interest, and for that Reason is
more than ordinary discerning to find out the weak sides of such Arguments as
are intended to do them hurt; and it is a diminution to a Government to Promote
or Countenance such well affected mistakes which are turned upon it with
disadvantage, whenever they are detected and exposd; and Naturally the too
earnest Endeavors to take from Men the Right they have, tempt them, by the
Example to Claim that which they have not.

In Power, as in most other things, the way for Princes to keep it, is not to
grasp more than their Arms can well hold; the nice and unnecessary enquiring
into these things, or the Licensing some Books, and suppressing some others
without sufficient Reason to Justify the doing-either, is so far from being an
Advantage to a Government, that it exposes it to the Censure of being Partial
and to the suspicion, of having some hidden designs to be carried on by these
unusual methods.

When all is said, there is a Natural Reason of State, and undefinable thing,
grounded upon the Common Good of Mankind, which is immortal, and in all Changes
and Revolutions, still preserves its Original Right of saving a Nation, when
the Letter of the Law perhaps would destroy it; and by whatsoever means it
moves, carries a Power with it, that admits of no opposition, being supported
by Nature, which inspires an immediate consent at some Critical times into
every individual Member, to that which visibly tends to preservation of the
whole; and this being so, a Wise Prince instead of Controverting the right of
this Reason of State, will by all means endeavor it may be of his side, and
then he will be secure.

Our Trimmer cannot conceive that the Power of any Prince can be lasting, but
where it is built upon the foundation of his own unborrowed virtue, he must not
only be the first Mover and the Fountain, from whence the great Acts of State
originally flow, but he must be thought so to his People that they may preserve
their veneration for him; he must be jealous of his Power, and not impart so
much of it to any about him, as that he may suffer an Eclipse by it.

He cannot take too much care to keep himself up, for when a Prince is thought
to be led by those, with whom he should only advise, and that the Commands he
gives are transmitted through him, and are not of his own growth; the World
will look upon him as a bird adorned with Feathers that are not his own, or
consider him rather as an Engine than a living Creature; besides, 'twould be a
Contradiction for a Prince to fear a Commonwealth, and at the same time create
one himself, be delegating such a Power to any Number of Men near him, as is
inconsistant with the Figure of a Monarch: it is the worst kind of
Co-ordination the Crown can submit to; for it is the exercise of Power that
draws the respect along with it, and when that is parted with, the bare
Character of a King is not sufficient to keep it up; but though it is a
diminution to a Prince, to parcel out so liberally his Power amongst his
Favorites, it is worse to divide with any other Man, and to bring himself in
Competition with a single Rival; a Partner in Government is so unnatural a
thing, that it is a squint-eyed Allegiance that must be paid to such a double
bottomd Monarchy. The two Czars of Muscovy are an Example that the more
civilized part of the World will not be proud to follow, whatsoever Gloss may
be put upon this method, by those to whom it may be of some use, the Prince
will do well to remember, and reflectupon the Story of certain Men who had set
up a Statue in Honor of the Sun, yet in a very little time they turned their
backs to the Sun, and their Faces to the Statue.

These Mystical Unions are better placed in the other World, than they are in
this, and we shall have much ado to find, that in a Monarchy Gods Vicegerency
is delegated to more Heads than that which is anointed.

Princes may lend some of their Light to make another shine, but they must
still preserve the superiority of being the brighter Planet, and when it
happens that the Reversion is in Men's Eyes, there is more care necessary to
keep up the Dignity of Possessions, that Men may not forget who is King, either
out of their hopes or fears who shall be. If the Sun should part with all his
Light to any of the Stars, the Indians would not know where to find their God,
after he had so deposed himself, and would make the Light (wherever it went)
the Object of their Worship.

All Usurpation is alike upon Sovereignty, its no matter from what hand it
coms; and Crowned Heads are to be the more Circumspect, in resspect Men's
thoughts are naturally apt to ramble beyond what is present, they love to work
at a distance, and in their greedy Expectations; which their minds may be
filled with of a new Master, the old one may be left to look a little out of
Countenance.

Our Trimmer owns a Passion for liberty, yet so restrained, that it does not in
the least impair or taint his Allegiance, he thinks it hard for a Soul that
does not love Liberty, ever to raise it self to another World he takes it to be
the foundation of all virtue, and the only seasoning that gives a relish to
life, and though the laziness of a slavish subjection, has its Charms for the
more gross and earthly part of Mankind, yet to men made of a better sort of
Clay, all that the World can give without Liberty has no taste; it is true,
nothing is sold so cheap by unthinking men, but that does no more lessen the
real value of it, than a Country Fellows Ignorance does that of a Diamond, in
selling it for a Pot of Ale. Liberty is the Mistress of Mankind, she has
powerful Charms which do so dazzle us, that we find Beauties in her which
perhaps are not there, as we do in other Mistresses; yet if she was not a
Beauty, the World would not run mad for her; therefore since the reasonable
desire of of it ought not to be restrained, and that even the unreasonable
desire of it cannot be entirely suppressed, those who would take it away from a
People possessed of it, are likely to fail in the attempting, or be very
unquiet in the keeping of it.

Our Trimmer admires our blessed Constitutions, in which Dominion and Liberty
are so well reconciled; it gives to the Prince the glorious Power of Commanding
Freemen, and to the Subject, the satifaction of seeing the Power so lodged, as
that their Liberties are secure; it dos not allow the Crown such a Ruining
Power, as that no grass can grow where e're it treads, but a Cherishing and
Protecting Power; such a one as has a grim Aspect only to the offending
Subjects, but is the Joy and the Pride of all the good ones; their own interest
being so bound up in it, as to engage them to defend and support it; and tho in
some instances the King is restrained yet nothing in the Government can move
without him; our Laws make a distinction between Vassalage and Obedience;
between devouring Prerogatives, and a Licentious ungovernable Freedom: and as
of all the Orders of Building, the Composite is the best, so ours by a happy
mixture and a wise choice of what is best in others, is brought into a Form
that is our Felicity who live under it, and the envy of our Neighbor that
cannot imitate it.

The Crown has power sufficient to protect our Liberties. The People have so
much Liberty as is necessary to make them useful to the Crown.

Our Government is in a just proportion, no Tympany, no unnatural swelling
either of Power or Liberty; and whereas in all overgrown Monarchies, Reason,
Learning, and Enquiry are hanged in Effigy for Mutineers; here they are
encouraged and cherished as the surest Friends to a Government established upon
the Foundation of Law and Justice When all is done, those who look for
Perfection in this World, may look as the Jews have for their Messiah, and
therefore our Trimmer is not so unreasonably Partial as to free our
Governments; and from all objections, no doubt there have been fatal Instances
of its Sickness, and more than that, of its Mortality, for sometime, though by a
Miracle, it has been revivd again: but till we have another race of Mankind,
in all Constitutions that are bounded, there will ever be some matter of
Strife, and Contention, and rather than want pretensions, Men's Passions and
Interests will raise them from the most inconsiderable Causes.

Our Government is like our Climate, there are Winds which are sometimes loud
and unquiet, and yet with all the Trouble they give us, we owe great part of
our Health unto them, they clear the Air, which else would be like a standing
Pool, and instead of Refreshment would be a Disease unto us.

There may be fresh Gales of asserting Liberty, without turning into such
storms of Hurricane, as that the State should run any hazard of being Cast away
by them; these struglings which are natural to all mixed Governments, while
they are kept from growing in Convulsions, do by a mutual agitation from the
several parts, rather support and strengthen, than weaken or maim the
Constitution; and the whole frame, instead of being torn or disjointed, comes
to be the better and closer knit by being thus exercised; but what ever faults
our Government may have, or a discerning Critic may find in it, when he looks
upon it alone; let any other be set against it, and then it shows its
Comparative Beauty; let us look upon the most glittering outside of unbounded
Anthority, and upon a nearer enquiry, we shall find nothing but poor and
miserable deformity within; let us imagine a Prince living in his Kingdom, as
if in a great Gally, his Subjects tugging at the Oar, laden with Chains, and
reduced to real Rags, that they may gain him imaginary Laurels; let us
Represent him gazing among his Flatterers, and receiving their false Worship,
like a Child never Contradicted, and therefore always Cozened: or like a Lady
complemented only to be abused, condemned never to hear Truth, and consequently
never to do Justice, wallowing in the soft Bed of wanton and unbridled
Greatness, not less odious to the Instruments themselves, than to the Objects
of his Tyranny; blown up into an Ambitious Dropsy, never to be satisfied by the
Conquest of other People, or by the Oppression of his own; by aiming to be more
than a Man, he falls lower than the meanest of 'em, a mistaken Creature,
swelled with Panegyricks, and flattered out of his Senses, and not only an
Encumbrance, but a Nuisance to Mankind, a hardened and unrelenting Soul, and
like some Creatures that grow fat with Poisons, he grows great by other Men's
Miseries; an Ambitious Ape of the Divine Greatness, an unruly Giant that would
storm even Heaven it self, but that his scaling Ladders are not long enough; in
short, a Wild and devouring Creature in rich Trappings, and with all his Pride
no more than a Whip in God Almighty's hand, to be thrown into the Fire when the
World has been sufficiently scourged with it: This Picture laid in right
Colors would not incite Men to wish for such a Government, but rather to
acknowledge the happiness of our own, under which we enjoy all the Privilege
Reasonable Men can desire, and avoid all the Miseries many others are subject
too; so that out Trimmer would keep it with all its faults, and does as little
forgive those who give the occasion of breaking it, as he does those that take
it.

Our Trimmer is a Friend to Parliaments, notwithstanding all their faults, and
excesses, which of late have given such matter of Objection to them; he thinks
that though they may at sometimes be troublesome to Authority, yet they add the
greatest strength to it under a wise Administration; he believes no Government
is perfect except a kind of Omnipotence reside in it, to exercised upon great
Occasions: Now this cannot be obtained by force alone upon People, let it be
never so great, there must be their consent too, or else a Nation moves only by
being driven, a sluggish and constrained Motion, void of that Life and Vigor
which is necessary to produce great things, whereas the virtual Consent of the
whole being included in their Representatives, and the King giving the sanction
to the united sense of the People, every Act done by such an Authority, seems
to be an effect of their choice as well as a part of their Duty; and they do
with an eagerness, of which Men are incapable whilst under a force, execute
whatsoever is so enjoined as their own Wills, better explained by Parliament,
rather than from the terror of ic^urring the Penalty of the Law for omiting
it, and by means of this Political Omnipotence, what ever Sap or Juice there is
in a Nation, may be to the last drop be produced, whilst it rises naturally
from the Root; whereas all power exercised without consent, is like the giving
Wounds and Gashes, and tapping a Tree at unseasonable Times, for the present
occasion, which in a very little time must needs destroy it.

Our Trimmer believes, that by the advantage of our Situation, there can
hardly any such sudden Disease come upon us, but that the King may have time
enough left to consult with his Physicians in Parliament; pretenses indeed may
be made, but a real necessity so pressing, that no delay is to be admitted, is
hardly to be imagined, and it will be neither easy to give an instance of any
such thing for the time past, or reasonable to presume it will ever happen for
the time to come: but if that strange thing should fall out, our Trimmer is not
so strait-lac'd, as to let a Nation dye, or to be stifled, rather than it
should be helped by any but the proper Officers. The Cases themselves will
bring the Remedies along with them; and he is not afraid to allow that in order
to its preservation, there is a hidden Power in Government, which would be lost
if it was designed, a certain Mystery, by virtue of which a Nation may at some
Critical times be secured from Ruin, but then it must be kept as a Mystery; it
is rendered useless when touched by unskilful hands; and no Government ever
had, or deserved to have that Power, which was so unwary as to anticipate their
claim to it: Our Trimmer cannot help thinking it had been better, if the
Triennial Act had been observed; because it is the Law, and he would not have
the Crown, by such an example, teach the Nation to break it; all irregularity
is catching, it has a Contagion in it, especially in an Age, so much inclined
to follow ill Patterns than good ones.

He would have a Parliament, because it is an Essential part of the
Constitution, even without the Law, it being the only Provision in
extraordinary Cases, in which there would be otherwise no Remedy, and there can
be no greater Solecism in Government, than a failure of Justice.

He would have had one, because nothing else can unite and heal us, all other
Means are mere Shifts and Projects, Houses of Cards, to be blown down with the
least Breath, and cannot resist the difficulties which are ever presumed in
things of this kind; and he would have had one, because it might have done the
King good, and could not possibly have done him hurt, without his consent,
which in that Case is not to be supposed, and therefore for him to fear it, is
so strange and so little to be comprehended, that the Reasons can never be
presumed to grow in our Soil, or to thrive in it when Transplanted from any
other Country; and no doubt there are such irresistible Arguments for calling a
Parliament, and tho it might be denied to the unmannerly mutinous Petitions of
men, that are malicious and disaffected, it will be granted to the soft and
obsequious Murmurs of his Majestys best Subjects, and there will be such
Rhetoric in their silent Grief, that it will at last prevail against the
Artifices of those, who either out of Guilt or Interest, are afraid to throw
themselves upon their Country, knowing how scurvily they have used it; that day
of Judgment will come, tho we know neither the day nor the hour. And our
Trimmer would live so as to be prepared for it, with full assurance in the mean
time, that the lamenting Voice of a Nation cannot long be resisted, and that a
Prince who could so easily forgive his People when they had been in the wrong,
cannot fail to hear them when they are in the right.

The Trimmer's Opinion concerning the Protestant Religion.
REligion has such a Superiority above other things, and that indispensable
Influence upon all Mankind, that it is as necessary to our Living Happy in this
World, as it is to our being Saved in the next, without it Man is an abandoned
Creature, one of the worst Beasts Nature has produced, and fit only for the
Society of Wolves and Bears; therefore in all Ages it has been the Foundation
of Government: and tho false Gods have been imposed upon the Credulous part of
the World, yet they were Gods still in their Opinion, and the Awe and Reverence
Men had to them and their Oracles, kept them within bounds toward one another,
which the Laws with all their Authority could never have effected without the
help of Religion; the Laws would not be able to subdue the perverseness of Men's
Wills, which are Wild Beasts, and require a double Chain to keep them down; for
this Reason it is said, That it is not a sufficient ground to make War upon a
Neighboring State, because they are of another Religion, let it be never so
differing; yet if they Worshipped nor Acknowledged any Deity at all, they may be
Invaded as Public Enemies of Mankind, because they reject the only thing that
can bind them to live well with one another; the consideration of Religion is
so twisted with that of Government, that it is never to be separated, and tho
the Foundations of it ought to be Eternal and Unchangeable, yet the Terms and
Circumstances of Discipline, are to be suited to the several Climates and
Constitutions, so that they may keep men in a willing Acquiescence unto them,
without discomposing the World by nice disputes, which can never be of equal
moment with the public Peace.

Our Religion here in England seems to be distinguished by a peculiar effect of
God Almighty's goodness, in permiting it to be introduced, or rather restored,
by a more regular Method than the Circumstances of most other Reformed Churches
would allow them to do, in relation to the Government; and the Dignity with
which it has supported it self since, and the great Men our Church has
produced, ought to recommend it to the esteem of all Protestants at least: Our
Trimmer is very partial to it, for these Reasons, and many more, and desires
that it may preserve its due Jurisdiction and Authority? so far he is from
wishing it oppressed by the unreasonable and malicious Cavils of those who take
pains to raise Objections against it.

The Questions will then be, how and by what Methods this Church shall best
support it self (the present Circumstances considered) in relation to
Dissenters of all sorts: I will first lay this for a ground, That as there can
be no true Religion without Charity, so there can be no true humane prudence
without bearing and condescension: This Principle does not extend to oblige the
Church always to yield to those who are disposed to Contest with her, the
expediency of doing it is to be considered and determined according to the
occasion, and this leads me to lay open the thoughts of our Trimmer, in
reference, first, to the Protestants, and then to the Popish Recusants.

What has lately happened among us, makes an Apology necessary for saying any
thing that looks like favor toward a sort of Men who has brought themselves
under such a disadvantage.

The late Conspiracy has such broad Symptoms of the disaffection of the whole
Party, that upon the first reflections, while our thoughts are warm, it would
almost persuade us to put them out of the protection of our good Nature, and to
think that the Christian Indulgence with our compassion for other Men's
Sufferings cannot easily deny, seems not only to be forfeited by the ill
appearances that are against them, but even becomes a Crime when it is so
misapplied; yet for all this, upon second and cooler thoughts, moderate Men
will not be so ready to involve a whole Party in the guilt of a few, and to
admit inferences and Presumptions to be Evidence in a Case, where the Sentence
must be so heavy, as it ought to be against all those who have a fixed
resolution against the Goverement established? besides, Men who act by a
Principle grounded upon Moral Virtue, can never let it be clearly extinguished
by the most repeated Provocations; if a right thing agreeable to Nature and
good Sense taks root in the heart of a Man, that is impartial and unbiased, no
outward Circumstances can ever destroy it; its true, the degrees of a Man's Zeal
for the prosecution of it may be differing, faults of other Men, the
consideration of the public, and the seasonable Prudence by which Wise Men
will ever be directed, may give great Allays; they may lessen and for a time
perhaps suppress the exercise of that, which in general Proposition may be
reasonable, but still whatever is so will inevitably grow and spring up again,
having a Foundation in Nature, which is never to be destroyed.

Our Trimmer therefore endeavors to separate the detestation of those who had
either a hand or a thought in the late Plot, from the Principle of Prudential
as well as Christian Charity toward Mankind, and for that reason would fain
use the means of reclaiming such of the Dissenters as are not incurable, and
even bearing to a degree those that are, as far as may consist with the Public
Interest and Security; he is far from justifying an affected separation from
the Communion of the Church, and even in those that mean well, and are
mistaken; he looks upon it as a Disease that has seized upon their Minds, very
troublesome as well as dangerous, by the Consequence it may produce: he does
not go about to excuse their making it an indispensable duty, to meet in
numbers to say their Prayers, such meetings may prove mischievous to the State
at least; the Laws which are the best Judges, have determined that there is
danger in them: he has good nature enough to lament that the perverseness of a
Part should have drawn Rigorous Laws upon the whole Body of the Dissenters, but
when they are once made, no private Opinion must stand in Opposition to them;
if they are in themselves reasonable, they are in that respect to be regarded,
even without being enjoined, if by the Change of Time and Circumstances they
should become less reasonable than when they were first made, even then they
are to be obeyed too, because they are Laws, till they are mended or repealed
by the same Authority that Enacted them.

He has too much deference to the Constitution of our Government, to wish for
more Prerogative Declarations in favor of scrupulous Men, or to dispense with
Penal Laws in such manner, or to such an end, that suspecting Men might with
some reason pretend, that so hated a thing as Persecution could never make way
for it self with any hopes of Success, otherwise than by preparing the deluded
World by a false prospect of Liberty and Indulgence. The inward Springs and
Wheels whereby the Engine moved, are now so fully laid open and exposed, that
it is not supposable that such a baffled Experiment should ever be tried again,
the effect it had at the time, and the Spirit it raised, will not easily be
forgotten, and it may be presumed the remembrance of it may secure us from any
more attempts of that Nature for the future; we must no more break a Law to
give Men ease, than we are to Rifle an House with a devout intention of giving
the plunder to the Poor; in this case, our Compassion would be as ill directed,
as our Charity in the other.

In short, the veneration due to the Laws is never to be thrown off, let the
pretenses be never so specious; yet with all this he cannot bring himself to
think, that an extraordinary diligence to take the uttermost penalty of Laws,
upon the poor offending Neighbor, is of it self such an all-sufficient virtue,
that without any thing else to recommend Men, it should Entitle them to all
kind of Preferments and Rewards; he would not detract from the merits of those
who execute the Laws, yet he cannot think such a piece of service as this, can
entirely change the Man, and either make him a better Divine, or a more knowing
Magistrate than he was before, especially if it be done with a partial and
unequal hand, in Reverence to greater and more dangerous Offenders.

Our Trimmer would have those mistaken Men ready to throw themselves into the
arms of the Church, and he would have those arms as ready to receive them that
shall come to us; he would have no supercilious look to fright those strayed
Sheep from coming into the Fold again; no ill-natured maxims of an Eternal
suspicion, or a belief that those who have once been in the wrong can never be
in the right again; but a visible preparation of mind to recieve with joy all
the Proselites that come amongst us, and much greater earnestness to reclaim
than punish them: It is to be confessed, there is a great deal to forgive, a
hard task enough for the Charity of a Church so provoked; but that must not cut
off all hopes of being reconciled, yet if there must be some anger left still,
let it break out into a Christian Revenge, and by being kinder to the Children
of Disobedience than they deserve, let the injured Church Triumph, by throwing
shame and confusion of face upon them; there should not always be Storms and
Thunder, a clear Sky would sometime make the Church look more like Heaven, and
would do more toward the reclaiming those wanderers, than a perpetual terror,
which seemed to have no intermission; for there is in many, and particularly in
English Men, a mistaken pleasure, in resisting the dictates of Rigorous
Authority; a Stomach that rises against a hard imposition, nay, in some, raise
even a lust in suffering from a wrong point of Honor, which does not want the
applause, from the greater part of Mankind, who have not learnt to distinguish;
constancy will be thought a virtue even where it is a mistake; and the ill
Judging World will be apt to think that Opinion most right, which produces the
greatest number of those who are willing to suffer for it; all this is
prevented, and falls to the ground, by using well-timed Indulgence; and the
stubborn Adversary who values himself upon his resistance whilst he is
oppressed, yields insensibly to kind Methods, when they are applied to him, and
the same Man naturally melts into Conformity, who perhaps would never have been
beaten into it. We may be taught by the Compassion that attends the most
Criminal Men when they are Condemned, that Faults are much more natural things
than Punishments, and that even the most necessary acts of severity do some
kind of violence to our Nature, whose Indulgence will not be confined within
the strait bounds of inexorable Justice; so that this should be an Argument for
gentleness, besides that it is the likeliest way to make these Men ashamed of
their Separation, whilst the pressing them too hard, tends rather to make them
proud of it.

Our Trimmer would have the Clergy supported in their lawful Rights, and in all
the Power and Dignity that belongs to them, and yet he thinks that possibly
there may be in some of them a too great eagerness to extend the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction; which tho it may be well intended, yet the straining of it too
high has an appearance of Ambition that raises men's Objections to it, and is
far unlike the Apostolic Zeal, which was quite otherwise employed, that the
World draws inferences from it, which do the Church no service.

He is troubled to see Men of all sides sick of a Calenture of a mistaken
Devotion, and it seems to him that the devout Fire of mistaken Charity with
which the Primitive Christians were inflamed, is long since extinguished, and
instead of it a devouring Fire of Anger and Persecution breaks out in the
World; we wrangle now one with another about Religion till the Blood comes,
whilst the Ten Commandments have no more authority with us, than if they were
so many obsolete Laws or Proclamations out of date; he thinks that a Nation
will hardly be mended by Principles of Religion, where Morality is made a
Heresy; and therefore as he believes Devotion misplaced when it gets into a
Conventicle, he concludes that Loyalty is so too, when lodged in a Drunken
Club; those Virtues deserve a better Seat of Empire, and they are degraded,
when such Men undertake their defense, as have too great need of an Apology
themselves.

Our Trimmer wishes that some knowledge may go along with the Zeal on the right
side, and that those who are in possession of the Pulpit, would quote at least
so often the Authority of the Scriptures as they do that of the State; there
are many who borrow too often Arguments from the Government, to use against
their Adversaries, and neglect those that are more proper, and would be more
powerful; a Divine grows less, and puts a diminution on his own Character, when
he quoteth any Law but that of God Almighty, to get the better of those who
contest with him; and it is a sign of a decayed Constitution, when Nature with
good diet cannot expel noxious Humors without calling Foreign Drugs to her
Assistance; So it looks like want of health in a Church, when instead of
depending upon the power of that Truth which it holds, and the good Examples of
them that teach it, to support it self, and to suppress Errors, it should have
a perpetual recourse to the secular Authority, and even upon the slightest
occasions.

Our Trimmer has his Objections to the too busy diligence, and to the overdoing
of some of the dissenting Clergy, and he does as little approve of those of our
Church, who wear God Almighty's Liveries, as some old Warders in the Tower do
the King's, who do nothing in their place but receive their Wages for it; he
thinks that the Liberty of the late times gave men so much Light, and diffused
it so universally amongst the people, that they are not now to be dealt with,
as they might have been in Ages of less enquiry; and therefore in some well
chosen and dearly beloved Auditories, good resolute Nonsense backed with
Authority may prevail, yet generally Men are become so good Judges of what they
hear, that the Clergy ought to be very wary how they go about to impose upon
their Understandings, which are grown less humble than they were in former
times, when the Men in black had made Learning such a sin in the Laity, that
for fear of offending, they made a Conscience of being able to read; but now
the World is grown saucy, and expects Reasons, and good ones too, before they
give up their own Opinions to other Men's Dictates, tho never so Magisterially
delivered to them.

Our Trimmer is far from approving the Hypocricie which seems to be the
reigning Vice amongst some of the Dissenting Clergy, he thinks it the most
provoking sin Men can be guilty of, in Relation to Heaven, and yet (which may
seem strange) that very sin which shall destroy the Soul of the Man who
preaches, may help to save those of the Company that hear him, and even those
who are cheated by the false Ostentation of his strictness of life, may by that
Pattern be encouraged to the real Practice of those Christian Virtues which he
does so deceitfully profess; so that the detestation of this fault may possibly
be carried on too far by our own Orthodox Divines, if they think it cannot be
enough expressed without bending the Stick another way; a dangerous Method, and
a worse Extreme for Men of that Character, who by going to the outmost line of
Christian Liberty, will certainly encourage others to go beyond it: No Man does
less approve the ill-bred Methods of some of the Dissenters, in rebuking
Authority, who behave themselves as if they thought ill manners necessary to
Salvation; yet he cannot but distinguish and desire a Mean between the
sawcyness of some of the Scotch Apostles, and the undecent Courtship of some of
the Silken Divines, who, one would think, do practice to bow at the Altar, only
to learn to make the better Legs at Court.

Our Trimmer approves the Principles of our Church, that Dominion is not
founded in Grace, and that our Obedience is to be given to a Popish King in
other things, at the same time that our Compliance with him in his Religion is
to be denied; yet he cannot but think it a very extraordinary thing if a
Protestant Church should by a voluntary Election, choose a Papist for their
Guardian, and receive Directions for supporting their Religion, from one who
must believe it a Mortal Sin not to endeavor to destroy it; such a refined
piece of Breeding would not seem to be very well placed in the Clergy, who will
hardly find Presidents to justify; such an extravagant piece of Courtship, and
which is so unlike the Primitive Methods, which ought to be our Pattern; he
has no such unreasonable tenderness for any sorts of Men, as to expect their
faults should not be impartially laid open as often as they give occasion for
it; and yet he cannot but smile to see that the same Man, who sets up all the
Sails of his Rhetoric, to fall upon Dissenters; when Popery is to be handled,
he does it so gingerly, that he looks like an Ass mumbling of Thistles, so
afraid he is of letting himself loose where he may be in danger of etting his
Duty get the better of his Discretion.

Our Trimmer is far from relishing the impertinent Wanderings of those who pour
out long Prayers upon the Congregation, and all from their own Stock, which God
knows, for the most part is a barren Soil, which produces Weeds instead of
Flowers, and by this means they expose Religion it self, rather than promote
Men's Devotions: On the other side, there may be too great Restraint put upon
Men, whom God and Nature has distinguished from their Fellow Laborers, by
blessing them with a happier Talent, and by giving them not only good Sense,
but a powerful Utterance too, has enabled them to gush out upon the attentive
Auditory, with a mighty stream of Devout and unaffected Eloquence; when a Man
so qualified, endued with Learning too, and above all, adorned with a good
Life, breaks out into a warm and well delivered Prayer before his Sermon, it
has the appearance of a Divine Rapture, he raises and leads the Hearts of the
Assembly in another manner, than the most Composed or best Studied Form of Set
Words can ever do; and the Pray-wees, who serve up all their Sermons with the
same Garnishing, would, look like so many Statues, or Men of Straw in the
Pulpit, compared with those who speak with such a powerful Zeal, that Men are
tempted at the moment to belive Heaven it self has dictated their words to em.

Our Trimmer is not so unreasonably indulgent to the Dissenters, as to excuse
the Irregularities of their Complaints, and to approve their threatening Styles,
which are so ill-suited to their Circumstances as well as their Duty; he would
have them to show their Grief, and not their Anger to the Government, and by
such a Submission to Authority, as becomes them, if they cannot acquiesce in
what is imposed; let them deserve a Legislative Remedy to their Sufferings,
there being no other way to give them perfect redress; and either to seek it,
or pretend to give it by any other Method, would not only be vain, but Criminal
too in those that go about it; yet with all this, there may in the mean time be
a prudential Latitude left, as to the manner of preventing the Laws now in
force against them: The Government is in some degree answerable for such an
Administration of them, as may be free from the Censure of Impartial Judges;
and in order to that, it would be necessary that one of these methods be
pursued, either to let loose the Laws to their utmost extent, without any
Moderation or Restraint, in which at least the Equality of the Government would
be without Objection, the Penalties being exacted without Remission from the
Dissenters of all kinds; or if that will not be done (and indeed there is no
reason it should) there is a necessity of some connivance to the Protestant
Dissenters to execute that which in Humanity must be allowed to the Papists,
even without any leaning toward them, which must be supposed in those who are
or shall be in the administration of public Business; and it will follow that,
according to our Circumstances, the distribution of such connivance must be
made in such a manner, that the greatest part of it may fall on the Protestant
side, or else the Objections will be so strong, and the Inferences so clear,
that the Friends, as well as the Enemies of the Crown, will be sure to take
hold of them.

It will not be sufficient to say that the Papists may be connived at, because
they are good Subjects and that the Protestant Dissenters, must suffer because
they are ill ones; these general Maxims will not convince discerning Men,
neither will any late Instances make them forget what passed at other times in
the World; both sides have had their Turns in being good and ill Subjects. And
therefore it is easy to imagine what suspicions would arise in the present
conjuncture, if such a partial Argument as this should be imposed upon us; the
truth is, this Matter speaks so much of it self; that it is not only
unnecessary, but it may be unmannerly to say any more of it.

Our Trimmer therefore could wish, that since notwithstanding the Laws which
deny Churches to say Mass in; even not only the Exercise, but also the
Ostentation of Popery is as well or better performed in the Chapels of so many
Foreign Ministers, where the English openly resort in spite of Proclamations
and Orders of Council, which are grown to be as harmless things to them, as the
Popes Bulls and Excommunications are to Heretics who are out of his reach; I
say he could wish that by a seasonable as well as an equal piece of Justice,
there might be so much consideration had of the Protestant Dissenters, as that
there might be at sometimes, and at some places, a Veil thrown over an Innocent
and retired Conventicle, and that such an Indulgence might be practiced with
less prejudice to the Church, or diminution to the Laws; it might be done so as
to look rather like a kind Omission to enquire more strictly, than an allowed
Toleration of that which is against the Rule established.

Such a skilful hand as this is very Necessary in our Circumstances, and the
Government by making no sort of Men entirely desperate, does not only secure it
self from Villainous attempts, but lays such a Foundation for healing and
uniting Laws, when ever a Parliament shall meet, that the Seeds of Differences
and Animosities between the several contending sides may (Heaven consenting) be
for ever destroyed.

The Trimmer's Opinion concerning the Papists.
TO speak of Popery leads me into such a Sea of Matter, that it is not easy to
forbear launching into it, being invited by such a fruitful Theme, and by a
variety never to be exhausted; but to confine it to the present Subject, I will
only say a short word of the Religion it self; of its influences here at this
time; and of our Trimmer's Opinion in Relation to our manner of living with
them.

If a Man would speak Maliciously of this Religion, one may say it is like
those Diseases, where as long as one drop of the infection remains, there is
still danger of having the whole Mass of Blood corrupted by it. In Swedeland
there was an absolute cure, and nothing of Popery heard of, till Queen
Christiana, (whether moved by Arguments of this or the other World, may not be
good Manners to enquire) thought fit to change her Religion and Country, and to
live at Rome, where she might find better judges of her Virtues, and less
ungentle Censures of those Princely Liberties, to which she was sometimes
disposed, than she left at Stockholme; where the good breeding is as much
inferior to that of Rome in general, as the Civility of the Religion. The
Cardinals having rescued the Church from those Clownish Methods the Fishermen
had first introduced, and mended that Pattern so effectually, that a Man of
that Age, if he should now come into the World, would not possibly know it.

In Denmark the Reformation was entire, in some States of Germany, as well as
Geneva, the Cure was universal; but in the rest of the World where the
Protestant Religion took place, the Popish humor was too tough to be totally
expelled, and so it was in England, though the Change was made with all the
advantage imaginable to the Reformation, it being Countenanced and introduced
by Legal Authority, and by that means might have been perhaps as perfect as in
any other Place, if the short Reign of Edward the 6th, and the succession of a
Popish Queen had not given such advantage to that Religion, that it has
subsisted ever since under all the hardships that have been put upon it; it has
been a strong Compact Body, and made the more so by these Sufferings; it was
not strong enough to prevail, but it was able, with the help of foreign
support, to carry on an Interest which gave the Crown trouble, and to make a
considerable (not to say dangerous) Figure in the Nation; so much as this could
not have been done without some hopes, nor these hopes kept up without some
reasonable grounds: In Queen Elizabeth's time, the Spanish Zeal for their
Religion, and the Revenge for 88, gave warmth to the Papists here, and above
all the Right of the Queen of Scots to suceeed, was while she lived sufficient
to give them a better prospect of their Affairs: In King James's time their
hopes were supported by the Treaty of the Spanish Match, and his gentleness
toward them, which they were ready to interpret more in their own Favor, than
was either reasonable or became them, so little tenderness they have, even
where it is most due, if the Interest of their Religion comes in competition
with it.

As for the late King, tho he gave the most Glorious Evidence that ever Man did
of his being a Protestant, yet, by the more than ordinary Influence the Queen
was thought to have over him, and it so happening that the greatest part of his
Anger was directed against the Puritans, there was such an advantage to Men
disposed to suspect, that they were ready to interpret it a leaning toward
Popery, without which handle it was Morally impossible, that the ill-affected
part of the Nation could ever have seduced the rest into a Rebellion.

That which helped to confirm many well meaning Men in their Misapprehensions
of the King, was the long and unusual intermission of Parliaments; so that
every year that passad without one, made up a new Argument to increase their
Suspicion, and made them presume that the Papists had a principal hand in
keeping them off: This raised such Heats in Men's Minds, to think that Men who
were obnoxious to the Laws, instead of being punished, should have Credit
enough to serve themselves, even at the price of destroying the Fundamental
Constitution; that it broke but into a Flame, which, before it could be
quenched, had almost reduced the Nation to Ashes.

Amongst the miserable Effects of that unnatural War, none has been more fatal
to us, than the forcing our Princes to breathe in another Air, and to receive
the early impressions of a Foreign Education; the Barbari^y of the English,
toward the King and the Royal Family, might very well tempt him to think the
better of every thing he found abroad, and might naturally produce more
gentleness, at least, toward a Religion by which he was hospitably received,
at the same time that he was thrown off and Persecuted by the Protestants, tho
his own Subjects) to aggravate the Offense. The Queen Mother, (as generally
Ladies do with Age) grew most devout and earnest in her Religion; and besides,
the temporal Rewards of getting larger Subsidies from the French Clergy, she
had Motives of another kind, to persuade her to show her Zeal; and since by the
Roman Dispensatory, a Soul converted to the Church is a Sovereign Remedy, and
lays up a mighty stock of merit; she was solicitous to secure her self in all
Events, and therefore first set upon the Duke of Gloucester, who depended so
much upon her good will, that she might for that reason have been induced to
believe, the Conquest would not be difficult; but it so fell out, that he
either from his own Constancy, or that he had those near him by whom he was
otherways advised, chose rather to run away from her importunity, than by
staying to bear the continual weight of it: It is belie v'd she had better
success with another of her Sons, who, if he was not quite brought off from our
Religion, at least such beginnings were made, as made them very easy to be
finished; his being of a generous and aspiring Nature, and in that respect,
less patient in the drudgery of Arguing, might probably help to recommend a
Church to him, that exempts the Laity from the vexation of enquiring; perhaps
he might (tho by mistake) look upon that Religion as more favorable to the
enlarged Power of Kings, a consideration which might have its weight with a
young Prince in his warm blood, and that was brought up in Arms.

I cannot hinder my self from a small digression, to consider with admiration,
that the old Lady of Rome, with all her wrinkles, should yet have charms, able
to subdue great Princes; so far from handsome, and yet so imperious; so painted,
and yet so pretending; after having abused, deposed, and murdered so many of
her Lovers, she still finds others glad and proud of their new Chains; a thing
so strange, to indifferent Judges, that those who will allow no other Miracles
in the Church of Rome, must needs grant that this is one not to be contested;
she sits in her Shop, and sells at dear Rates her Rattles and her Hobby-Horses,
whilst the deluded World still continues to furnish her with Customers.

But whither am I carried with this Contemplation? it is high time to return to
my Text, and to consider the wonderful manner of the Kings coming home again,
led by the hand of Heaven, and called by the Voice of his own People, who
received him, if possible, with Joys equal to the Blessing of Peace and Union
which his Restoration brought along with it; by this there was an end put to
the hopes some might have abroad, of making use of his less happy
Circumstances, to throw him into foreign Interests and Opinions, which had been
wholly inconsistent with our Religion, our Laws, and all other things that are
dear to us; yet for all this, some of those Tinctures and impressions might so
far remain, as though they were very innocent in him, yet they might have ill
effects here, by softning the Animosity which seems necessary to the Defender
of the Protestant Faith, in opposition to such a powerful and irreconcilable
an Enemy.

You may be sure, that among all the sorts of Men who applied themselves to the
King at his first coming home, for his Protection, the Papists were not the
last, nor, as they fain would have flattered themselves, the least welcome;
having their past Sufferings, as well as their present Professions to recommend
them; and there was something that looked like a particular Consideration of
them, since it so happened, that the Indulgence promised to Dissenters at
Breda, was carried on in such a manner, that the Papists were to divide with
them, and though the Parliament, notwithstanding its Resignation to the Crown in
all things, rejected with scorn and anger a Declaration framed for this
purpose, yet the Birth and steps of it gave such an alarm, that Men's suspicious
once raised, were not easily laid asleep again.

To omit other things, the breach of the Tripple League, and the Dutch War with
its appurtenances, carried Jealousies to the highest pitch imaginable, and fed
the hopes of one Party, and the fears of the Other to such a degree, that some
Critical Revolutions were generally expectad, when the ill success of that War,
and the Sacrifice France thought fit to make of the Papists here, to their own
interest abroad, gave them another Check; and the Act of enjoining the Test to
all in Offices, was thought to be no ill Bargain to the Nation, though bought at
the Price of 1200000 pound, and the Money applied to continue the War against
the Dutch, than which nothing could be more unpopular or less approved.
Notwithstanding the discouragements, Popery is a Plant that may be mowed down,
but the Root will still remain, and in spite of the Laws, it will sprout up and
grow again; especially if it should happen that there should be Men in Power,
who in weeding it out of our Garden, will take care to Cherish and keep it
alive; and though the Law for excluding them from Places of Trust was tolerably
kept as to their outward Form, yet there were many Circumstances, which being
improved by the quick-sighted Malice of ill affected Men, did help to keep up
the World in their suspicions, and to blow up Jealousies to such a height both
in and out of Parliament, that the remembrance of them is very unpleasant, and
the Example so extravagant, that it is to be hoped nothing in our Age like it
will be re-attempted; but to come closer to the Case in question, in this
Condition we stand with the Papists, what shall now be done according to our
Trimmer's Opinion, in order to the better Bearing this grievance, since as I
have said before, there is no hopes of being entirely free from it; Papists we
must have among us, and if their Religion keep them from bringing honey to the
Hive, let the Government try at least by gentle means to take away the Sting
from them. The first Foundation to be laid is, that a distinct Consideration is
to be had of the Popish Clergy, who have such an eternal Interest against all
accommodation, that it is a hopeless thing to propose any thing to them less
than all; their Stomachs have been set for it ever since the Reformation, they
have pinned themselves to a Principle that admits no mean: they believe
Protestants will be damned, and therefore by an extraordinary Effect of
Christian Charity, they would destroy one half of England that the other might
be saved; then for this World, they must be in possession for God Almighty, to
receive his Rents for him, not to account till the Day of Judgment, which is a
good kind of Tenure, and ye cannot well blame the good Men, that will stir up
the Laity to run any hazard in order to the getting them restored. What is it
to the Priest, if the deluded Zealot undoes himself in the Attempt? he sings
Masses as jollily, and with as good a Voice at Rome or St. Omers as ever he
did; is a single Man, and can have no wants but such as may be easily supplyd,
yet that he may not seem altogether insensible, or ungrateful to those that are
his Martyrs, he is ready to assure their Executors, and if they please, will
procure a Grant sub Annulo Piscatoris, that the good Man by being changed, has
got a good Bargain, and saved the singing of some hundred of years, which he
would else have had in Purgatory. There Is no Cure for this Order of Men, no
Expedient to be proposed, so that tho the utmost severity of the Laws against
them, may in some sort be mittigated, yet no Treaty can be made with Men who in
this Case have left themselves no free Will, but are so muffled by Zeal, tied
by Vows, and kept up by such unchangeable Maxims of the Priesthood, that they
are to be left as desperate Patients, and looked upon as Men that will continue
in an Eternal State of Hostility, till the Nation is entirely subdued to them.
It is then only the Lay Papists that are capable of being treated with, and we
are to examine of what temper they are, and what Arguments are the most likely
to prevail upon them, and how far it is advisable for the Government to be
Indulgent to them; the Lay Papists generally keep their Religion, rather
because they will not break Company with those of their Party, than out of any
settled Zeal that has Root in them; most of them do by the Mediation of the
Priests Marry amongst one another, to keep up an ignorant Position by hearing
only one side; others by a mistake look upon it as the Escutcheons of the more
Ancient Religion of the two; and as some Men of a good Pedigree, will despise
meaner Men, though never so much superior to them by Nature, so these undervalue
Reformation as an Upstart, and think there is more Honor in supporting an old
Error, than in embracing what seems to them to be a new Truth; the Laws have
made them Men of Pleasure, by excluding them from Public Business, and it
happens well they are so, since they will the more easily be persuaded by
Arguments of Ease and Convenience ^o them; they have not put off the (...) ^n
general, nor the Englishman in particular, those who in the late (...) against
them went into other Countries, tho they had all the Advantage that might
recommend them to a good Reception, yet in a little time they chose to steal
over again, and live here with hazard, rather than abroad with security. There
is a Smell in our Native Earth, better than all the Perfumes in the East; there
is something in a Mother, tho never so Angry, that the Children will more
Naturally trust Her, than the Studied Civilities of Strangers, let them be
never so Hospitable; therefore it is not advisable, nor agreeing with the Rules
of Governing Prudence, to provoke Men by hardships to forget that Nature, which
else is sure to be of our side.

When these Men by fair Usage are put again into their right Senses, they will
have quite differing Reflections from those which Rigor and Persecution had
raised in them: A Lay Papist will first consider his Abby-Lands which
notwithstanding whatever ha^ or can be alleged, must sink considerably in the
Value, the moment tha^ Popery prevails; and it being a disputable Matter,
whether Zeal might not in a little time get the better (...) the Law in that
case; a considering Man will admit that as an Argument to persuade him, to be
content with things as they are, rather than run this or any other hazard by
Change, in which perhaps he may have no other Advantage, than that his new
humble Confessor may he raised to a Bishopric, and from thence look down
superciliously upon his Patron, or which is worse, run to take Possession for
God Almighty of his Abbey, in such a manner as the usurping Landlord (as he will
then be called) shall hardly be admitted to be so much as a Tenant to his own
Lands, lest his Title should prejudge that of the Church, which will then be
the Language; he will think what disadvantage it is to be looked upon as a
separate Creature, depending upon a Foreign Interest and Authority, and for
that reason, exposed to the Jealousy and Suspicion of his Countrymen; he will
reflect what Encumbrance it is to have his House a Pasture for hungry Priests
to graze in, which have such a never-failing Influence upon the Foolish, which
is the greatest part of every Man's Family, that a Man's Dominion, even over
his own Children, is mangled and divided, if not totally undermined by them;
then to be subject to what Arbitrary Taxes the Popish Convocations shall impose
upon them for the carrying on the Common Interest of that Religion, under
Penalty of being markd out for half Heretics by the rest of the Party; to have
no share in Business, no opportunity of showing his own Value to the World; to
live at the best an useless, and by others to be thought a dangerous Member of
the Nation where he is born, is a burden to a generous Mind that cannot be
taken off by all the Pleasure of a lazy unmanly life, or by the nauseous
enjoyment of a dull Plenty, that produces no good for the Mind, which will be
considered in the first place by a Man that has a Soul; when he shall think,
that if his Religion, after his wading through a Sea of Blood, come at last to
prevail, it would infinitely lessen, if not entirely destroy the Glory, Riches,
Strength and Liberty of his own Country. And what a Sacrifice is this to make
to Rome, where they are wise enough to wonder there should be such Fools in the
World, as to venture, struggle, and contend, nay, even die Martyrs for that
which, should it succecd, would prove a Judgment instead of a Blessing to them;
he will conclude that the advantages of throwing some of their Children back
again to God Almighty when they have too many of them, are not equal to the
Inconveniences they may either feel or fear, by continuing their separation
from the Religion established.

Temporal things will have their weight in the World, and tho Zeal may prevail
for a time, and get the better in a Skirmish, yet the War ends generally on the
side of Flesh and Blood, and will do so till Mankind is another thing than it
is at present: And therefore a wise Papist in cold Blood, considering these and
many other Circumstances, which 'twill be worth his pains to see if he can
unmuffle himself from the Mask of Infallibility, will think it reasonable to
set his imprisoned Senses at Liberty, and that he has a right to see with his
own Eyes, hear with his own Ears, and judge by his own Reason; the consequence
of which might probably be, that weighing things in a right Scale, and seeing
them in their true Colors, he would distinguish between the merit of suffering
for a good Cause, and the foolish ostentation of drawing inconveniences upon
himself; and therefore will not be unwilling to be convinced that our
Protestant Creed may make him happy in the other World, and the easier in this.
A few of such wise Proselytes would by their Example draw so many after them,
that the Party would insensibly melt away, and in a little time, without any
angry word, we should come to an Union, that all Good Men would have Reason to
rejoice at; but we are not to presume upon these Conversions, without preparing
Men for them by kind and reconciling Arguments; nothing is so against our
Nature, as to believe those can be in the right who are too hard upon us; there
is a deformity in every thing that does us hurt, it will look scurvily in our
Eye while the smart continues, and a Man must have an extraordinary Measure of
Grace, to think well of a Religion that reduces him and his Family to Misery;
in this respect our Trimmer would consent to the mitigation of such Laws as
were made, (as it is said King Henry VIII. got Queen Elizabeth) in a heat
against Rome: It may be said that even States as well as private Men are
subject to Passion; a just indignation of a villainous Attempt produces at the
same time such Remedies, as perhaps are not without some mixture of Revenge,
and therefore tho time cannot Repeal a Law, it may by a Natural Effect soften
the Execution of it; there is less danger to Rouse a Lion when at Rest, than to
awake Laws that were intended to have their time of Sleeping, nay more than
that, in some cases their Natural periods of Life, dying of themselves without
the Solemnity of being revoked, any otherwise than by the common consent of
Mankind, who do cease to Execute, when the Reasons in great Measure fail that
first Created and Justified the Rigor of such unusual Penalties.

Our Trimmer is not eager to pick out some places in History against this or
any other Party; quite contrary, is very sollicitous to find out any thing that
may be healing, and tend to an Agreement; but to prescribe the means of this
Gentleness so as to make it effectual, must come from the only place that can
furnish Remedies for this Cure, viz. a Parliament; in the mean time, it is to
be wished there may be such a mutual calmness of Mind, as that the Protestants
might not be so jealous, as still to smell the Match that was to blow up the
King, and both Houses in the Gunpowder Treason, or to start at every appearance
of Popery, as if it were just taking Possession. On the other side, let not the
Papists suffer themselves to be led by any hopes, tho never so flattering, to a
Confidence or Ostentation which must provoke Men to be less kind to them; let
them use Modesty on their sides, and the Protestants Indulgence on theirs; and
by this means there will be an overlooking of all Venial Faults, a tacit
connivanee at all things that do not carry Scandal with them, and would amount
to a kind of Natural Dispensation with the the severe Laws, since there would
be no more Accusers to be found, when the occasions of Anger and Animosity are
once removed; let the Papists in the mean time remember, that there is a
respect due from all lesser numbers to greater, a deference to be paid by an
Opinion that is Exploded, to one that is Established; such a Thought well
digested will have an influence upon their Behavior, and produce such a Temper
as must win the most eager Adversaries out of their ill Humor to them, and
give them a Title to all the Favor that may be consistent with the Public
Peace and Security.

The Trimmer's Opinion in Relation to things abroad.
THE World is so composed, that it is hard, if not impossible, for a Nation not
to be a great deal involved in the fate of their Neighbors, and tho by the
felicity of our Situation, we are more Independent than any other People, yet
we have in all Ages been concerned for our own sakes in the Revolutions abroad.
There was a time when England was the over-ballancing Power of Christendom, and
that either by Inheritance or Conquest, the better part of France received Laws
from us; after that we being reduced into our own Limits, France and Spain
became the Rivals for the Universal Monarchy, and our third Power, tho in it
self less than either of the other, happened to be Superior to any of them, by
that choice we had of throwing the Scales on that side to which we gave our
Friendship. I do not know whether this Figure did not make us as great as our
former Conquest, to be a perpetual Umpire of two great contending Powers, who
gave us all their Courtship, and offered all their Incense at our Altar, whilst
the Fate of either Prince seemed to depend upon the Oracles we delivered; for
the King of England to sit on his Throne, as in the Supreme Court of Justice,
to which the two great Monarchs appeal, pleading their Cause, and expecting
their Sentence. declaring which side was in the right, or at least if we
pleased which side should have the better of it, was a piece of Greatness which
was peculiar to us, and no wonder if we endeavor to preserve it, as we did for
a considerable time, it being our Safety, as well as Glory, to maintain it; but
by a Fatality upon our Councils, or by the refined Policy of this latter Age,
we have thought fit to use industry to destroy this mighty Power, which we have
so long enjoyed; and that equality between the Two Monarchs, which we might for
ever have preserved, has been chiefly broken by us, whose Interest it was above
all others to maintain it; when one of them, like the overflowing of the Sea,
had gained more upon the other than our convenience, or indeed our safety,
would allow; instead of mending the Banks, or making new ones, we our selves
with our own hands helped to cut them, to invite and make way for a farther
Inundation. France and Spain have had their several turns in making use of our
Mistakes, and we have been formerly as deaf to the Instances of the then weaker
part of the World to help them against the House of Austria, as we can now be
to the Earnestness of Spain, that we would assist them against the Power of
France. Gondamar was as saucy, and as powerful too in King James his Court, as
any French Ambassador can have been at any time since, when men talked as wrong
then on the Spanish side, and made their Court by it, as well as any can have
done since by talking as much for the French; so that from that time, instead
of weighing in a wiseBalance the power of either Crown, it looks as if we had
learnt only to weigh the Pensions, and take the heaviest.

It would be tedious, as well as unwelcome, to recapitulate all our wrong
steps, so that I will go no farther than the King's Restoration, at which time
the Balance was on the side of France, and that by the means of Cromwell, who
for a separate Interest of his own had sacrificed that of the Nation, by
joining with the stronger side, to suppress the Power of Spain, which he ought
to have supported. Such a Method was natural enough to an Usurper, and showed
he was not the Lawful Father of the People, by his having so little care of
them; and the Example coming from that hand, one would think should, for that
Reason, be less likely to be followed. But to go on, home comes the King,
followed with Courtships from all Nations abroad, of which some did it not only
to make them forget how familiarly they had used him when he was in other
Circumstances, but to bespeak the Friendship of a Prince, who, besides his
other Greatness, was yet more considerable by being re-established by the love
of his people. France had an Interest either to dispose us to so much good
will, or at least to put us into such a Condition, that we might give no
Opposition to their Designs; and Flanders being a perpetual Object in their
Eye, a lasting Beauty for which they have an incurable passion, and not being
kind enough to consent to them, they meditated to commit a Rape upon her, which
they thought would not be easy to do, whilst England and Holland were agreed
to rescue her, whenever they should hear her cry out for help to them; to this
end they put in practice Seasonable and Artificial Whispers, to widen things
between us, and the States. Amboyna and the Fishery must be talked of here; the
freedom of the Seas, and the preservation of Trade must be insinuated there;
and there being combustible matter on both sides, in a little time it took
Fire, which gave those that kindled it, sufficient cause to smile and hug
themselves, to see us both fall into the Net they had laid for us. And it is
observable and of good example to us, if we will take it, That their Design
being to set us together at Cuffs to weaken us, they kept themselves Lookers on
till our Victories began to break the Balance; then the King of France, like a
wise Prince, was resolved to support the beaten side, and would no more let the
Power of the Sea, than we ought to suffer the Monarchy of Europe, to fall into
one hand: In pursuance to this, he took part with the Dutch, and in a little
time made himself Umpire of the Peace between us; some time after, upon
pretense of his Queen's Title to part of Flanders, by Right of Devolution, he
falls into it with a mighty Force, for which the Spaniard was so little
prepared, that he made a very swift Progress, and had such a Torrent of
undisputed Victory, that England and Holland, tho the Wounds they had given one
another were yet green, being struck with the apprehension of so near a danger
to them, thought it necessary, for their own defense, to make up a sudden
League, into which Sweden was taken to interpose for a Peace between the two
Crowns.

This had so good an effect, that France was stopped in its Career, and the Peace
of Aix le Chapelle was a little after concluded. 'Twas a forced putt; and tho
France wisely dissembled their inward dissatisfaction, yet from the very moment
they resolved to unty the Triple knot, whatever it cost them; for his Christian
Majesty, after his Conquering Meals, ever rises with a stomach, and he liked
the Pattern so well, that it gave him a longing desire to have the whole Piece.
Amongst the other means used for the attaining this end, the sending over the
Duchess of Orleans, was not the least powerful; she was a very welcome Guest
here, and her own Charms and Dexterity joined with other Advantages, that might
help her persuasions, gave her such an Ascendant, that she could hardly fail of
success. One of the Preliminaries of her Treaty, tho a trivial thing in it
self, yet was considerable in the consequence, as very small circumstances
often are in relation to the Government of the World. About this time a general
Humor, in opposition to France, had made us throw off their Fashion, and put
on Vests, that we might look more like a distinct People, and not be under the
servility of imitation, which ever pays a greater deference to the Original,
than is consistent with the Equality all Independent Nations should pretend to;
France did not like this small beginning of ill Humors, at least of Emulation,
and wisely considering that it is a natural Introduction first to make the
World their Apes, that they may be afterward their Slaves. It was thought that
one of the Instructions Madam brought along with her, was to laugh us out of
these Vests, which she performed so effectually, that in a moment, like so many
Footmen who had quitted their Masters Livery, we all took it again, and
returned to our old Service; so that the very time of doing it gave a very
critical Advantage to France, since it looked like an Evidence of our returning
to their Interest, as well as to their Fashion, and would give such a distrust
of us to our new Allies, that it might facilitate the dissolution of the knot,
which tied them so within their bounds, that they were very impatient till they
were freed from the restraint.

But the Lady had a more extended Commission than this, and without doubt we
double-laid the Foundation of a new strict Alliance, quite contrary to the
other, in which we had been so lately engaged. And of this there were such
early appearances, that the World began to look upon us as falling into
Apostasy from the common Interest. Notwithstanding all this, France did not
neglect at the same time to give good words to the Dutch, and even to feed them
with hopes of supporting them against us, when on a sudden, that never to be
forgotten Declaration of War against them comes out, only to vindicate his own
Glory, and to revenge the Injuries done to his Brother in England, by which he
became our Second in this Duel; so humble can this Prince be, when at the same
time he does more Honor than we deserve, he lays a greater share of the blame
upon our Shoulders, than did naturally belong to us; the particulars of that
War, our part in it while we staid in, and when we were out of breath, our
leaving the French to make an end of it, are things too well known to make it
necessary, and too unwelcome in themselves to incite me to repeat them; only
the wisdom of France is in this to be observed, That when we had made a
separate Peace, which left them single to oppose the united Force of the
Confederates, they were so far from being angry, that they would not show so
much as the least coldness, hoping to get as much by our Mediation for a Peace,
as they would have expected from our Assistance in the War, our Circumstances
at that time considered. This seasonable piece of Indulgence in not reproaching
us, but rather allowing those Necessities of State which we gave for our
Excuse, was such an engaging Method, that it went a great way to keep us still
in their Chains, when, to the Eye of the World, we had absolutely broke loose
from them: And what passed afterward at Nimoguen, tho the King's Neutrality
gave him the outward Figure of a Mediator, it appeared that his Interposition
was extremely suspected of Partiality by the Confederates, who upon that Ground
did both at and before the Conclusion of that Treaty, treat his Ministers there
with a great deal of neglect. In this Peace, as well as that in the Pirenean
and Aix le Chapelle, the King of France, at the Moment of making it, had the
thought of breaking it; for a very little time after he broached his
Pretensions upon Alost, which were things that if they had been offered by a
less formidable hand, would have been smiled at; but ill Arguments being
seconded by good Armies, carry such a power with them, that naked sense is a
very unequal Adversary. It was thought that these aerie Claims were chiefly
raised with the prospect of getting Luxemburg for the Equivalent; and this
Opinion was confirmed by the blocking it up afterward, pretending to the
Country of Chimay, that it might be entirely surrounded by the French
Dominions, and it was so pressed that it might have fallen in a little time, if
the King of France had not sent Orders to his Troops to retire, and his
Christian Generosity which was assigned for the reason of it, made the World
smile, since it is seen how differently his devout Zeal works in Hungary: that
specious Reason was in many respects illtim'd, and France it self gave it so
faintly, that at the very time it looked out of Countenance; the true ground of
his Retiring is worth our observation; for at the instance of the Confederates,
Offices were done, and Memorials given, but all ineffectual till the word
Parliament was put into them; that powerful word had such an effect, that even
at that distance it raised the Siege, which may convince us of what efficacy
the King of England's words are, when he will give them their full weight, and
threaten with his Parliament; it is then that he appears that great Figure we
ought to represent him in our Minds, the Nation his Body, he the Head, and
joined with that Harmony, that every word he pronounces is the Word of a
Kingdom: Such words, as appears by this Example, are as effectual as Fleets and
Armies, because they can create them, and without this his word sounds abroad
like a faint Whisper, that is either not heard, or (which is worse) not minded.
But tho France had made this step of forced Compliance, it did not mean to
leave off the pursuit of their pretensions; and therefore immediately proposed
the Arbitration to the King; but it appeared, that notwithstanding his Merit
toward the Confederates, in saving Luxenburgh, the remembrances of what had
passed before, had left such an ill taste in their Mouths, that they could not
Relish our being put into a Condition to dispose of their Interests, and
therefore declin d it by insisting upon a general Treaty, to which France has
ever since continued to be averse; our great earnestness also to persuade the
Confederates to consent to it, was so unusual, and so suspicious a method, that
it might naturally make them believe, that France spoke to them by our Mouth,
and for that Reason, if there has been no other, might hinder the accepting it;
and so little care has been taken to cure this, or other Jealousies the
Confederates may have entertained, that quite contrary, their Ministers here
every day take fresh Alarms, from what they observe in small, as well as in
greater Circumstances; and they being apt both to take and improve
apprehensions of this kind, draw such Inferences from them, as make them
entirely despair of us.

Thus we now stand, far from being Innocent Spectators of our Neighbors Ruin,
and by a fatal mistake forgetting what a Certain Forerunner it is to our own;
and now it is time our Trimmer should tell something of his Opinion, upon this
present State of things abroad; he first professes to have no Biass, either for
or against France, and that his thoughts are wholly directed by the Interest of
his own Country; he allows, and has read that Spain used the same Methods, when
it was in its height, as France does now, and therefore it is not Partiality
that moves him; but the just fear which all reasonable Men must be possessed
with, of an overgrowing Power; Ambition is a devouring Beast, when it has
swallowed one Province, instead of being cloyed, it has so much the greater
Stomach to another, and being fed, becomes still the more hungry; so that for
the Confederates to expect a security from any thing but their own united
strength, is a most miserable fallacy; and if they cannot resist the
Encroachments of France by their Arms, it is in vain for them to dream of any
other means of preservation; it would have the better grace, besides the saving
so much Blood and Ruin, to give up all at once; make a Present of themselves,
to appease this haughty Monarch, rather than be whispered, flattered, or
cozened out of their liberty. Nothing is so soft as the first applications of a
greater Prince, to engage a weaker, but that smiling Countenance is but a
Vizard, it is not the true Face; for as soon as their turn is served, the
Courtship flies to some other Prince or State, where the same part is to be
acted over again, leaves the old mistaken Friend, to Neglect and Contempt, and
like an insolent Lover to a Cast off Mistress, Reproaches her with that Infamy,
of which he himself was the Author. Sweden, Bavaria, Palatine, etc. may by
their Fresh Examples, teach other Princes what they are reasonably to expect,
and what Snakes are hid under the Flowers the Court of France so liberally
throws upon them, whilst they can be useful. The various Methods and deep
Intrigues, with the differing Notes in several Countries, do not only give
suspicion, but assurance that every thing is put in Practice, by which
Universal Monarchy may be obtained. Who can reconcile the withdrawing of his
Troops from Luxenburg, in consideration of the War in Hungary, which was not
then declared, and presently after encouraging the Turk to take Vienna, and
consequently to destroy the Empire? Or who can think that the Persecution of
the Poor Protestants of France, will be accepted of God, as an Atonement for
hazarding the loss of the whole Christian Faith? Can he be thought in earnest,
when he seemed to be afraid of the Spaniards, and for that reason must have
Luxenburg, and that he cannot be safe from Germany, unless he is in possession
of Strasburg? All Injustice and Violence must in it self be grievous, but the
aggravations of supporting 'em by false Arguments, and insulting Reasons, has
something in it yet more provoking, than the Injuries themselves; and the World
has ground enough to apprehend, from such a Method of arguing, that even their
Senses are to be subdued as well as their Liberties. Then the variety of
Arguments used by France in several Countries is very observable: In England
and Denmark, nothing insisted on but the Greatness and Authority of the Crown;
on the other side, the Great Men in Poland are commended, who differ in Opinion
with the King, and they argue like Friends to the Privilege of the Diet,
against the separate Power of the Crown: In Sweden they are troubled that the
King should have changed something there of late, by his single Authority, from
the ancient and settled Authority and Constitutions: at Ratisbone, the most
Christian Majesty takes the Liberties of all the Electors, and free States,
into his immediate protection, and tells them the Emperor is a dangerous Man,
an aspiring Hero, that would infallibly devour them, if he was not at hand to
resist him on their behalf; but above all in Holland, he has the most obliging
tenderness for the Commonwealth, and is in such disquiets, lest it should be
invaded by the Prince of Orange, that they can do no less in gratitude, than
undo themselves when he bids them, to show how sensible they are of his
excessive good Nature; yet in spite of all these Contradictions, there are in
the World such refined Statesmen, as will upon their Credit affirm the
following Paradoxes to be real truth; first that France alone is sincere and
keeps its Faith, and consequently that it is the only Friend we can rely upon;
that the King of France, of all Men living, has the least mind to be a
Conqueror; that he is a sleepy, tame Creature, void of all Ambition, a poor
kind of a Man, that has no farther thoughts than to be quiet; that he is
charmed by his Friendship to us, that it is impossible he should ever do us
hurt, and therefore tho Flanders was lost, it would not in the least concern
us; that he would fain help the Crown of England to be absolute, which would be
to take pains to put it into a condition to oppose him, as it is, and must be
our Interest, as long as he continues in such an overballancing Power and
Greatness.

Such a Creed as this, if once received, might prepare our belief for greater
things, and as he that taught Men to eat a Dagger, began first with a Penknife;
so if we can be prevailed with to digest the smaller Mistakes, we may at last
make our stomachs strong enough for that of Transubstantiation. Our Trimmer
cannot easily be converted out of his senses by these State Sophisters, and yet
he has no such peevish Obstinacy as to reject all Correspondence with France,
because we ought to be apprehensive of the too great power of it; he would not
have the Kings Friendship to the Confederates extended to the involving him in
any unreasonable or dangerous Engagements, neither would he have him lay aside
the consideration of his better establishment at home, out of his excessive
Zeal to secure his Allies abroad; but sure there might be a Mean between these
two opposite Extremes, and it may be wished that our Friendship with France
should at least be so bounded, that it may consist with the humor as well as
the interest of England. There is no Woman but has the fears of contracting too
near an intimacy with a much greater Beauty, because it exposes her too often
to a Comparison that is not advantageous to her; and sure it may become a
Prince to be as jealous of his Dignity, as a Lady can be of her good looks, and
to be as much out of Countenance, to be thought an humble Companion to so much
a greater Power; to be always seen in an ill Light, to be so darkened by the
brightness of a greater Star, is somewhat mortifying; and when England might
ride Admiral at the head of the Confederates, to look like the Kitching-Yatch
to the Grand Louis, is but a scurvy Figure for us to make in the Map of
Christendom; it would rise up in our Trimmer's stomach, if ever (which God
forbid) the power of calling and intermitting Parliaments here, should be
transferred to the Crown of France, and that all the opportunities of our own
settlements at home should give way to their Projects abroad; and that our
Interest should be so far sacrificed to our Compliance, that all the
Omnipotence of France can never make us full amends for it. In the mean time,
he shrinks at the dismal prospect he can by no means drive away from his
thoughts, that when France has gatherd all the fruit arising from our Mistakes,
and that we can bear no more with them, they will cut down the Tree and throw
it into the fire; for all this while, some Superfine Statesmen, to comfort us,
would fain persuade the World that this or that accident may save us, and for
all that is or ought to be dear to us, would have us to rely wholly upon
Chance, not considering that Fortune is Wisdoms Creature, and that God Almighty
loves to be on the Wisest as well as the Strongest side; therefore this is such
a miserable shift, such a shameful Evasion, that they would be laughed to death
for it, if the ruining Consequence of this Mistake did not more dispose Men to
rage, and a detestation of it.

Our Trimmer is far from Idolatry in other things, in one thing only he comes
near it, his Country is in some degree his Idol; he does not Worship the Sun,
because it is not peculiar to us, it rambles about the World, and is less kind
to us than others; but for the Earth of England, tho perhaps inferior to that
of many places abroad, to him there is Divinity in it, and he would rather dye,
than see a piece of English Glass trampled down by a Foreign Trespasser: he
thinks there are a great many of his mind, for all Plants are apt to taste of
the Soil in which they grow, and we that grow here, have a Root that produces
in us a Stalk of English Juice, which is not to be changed by grafting or
foreign infusion; and I do not know whether any thing less will prevail, than
the Modern Experiment, by which the Blood of one Creature is transinitted into
another; according to which, before the French can be let into our Bodies,
every drop of ourown must be drawn out of them.

Our Trimmer cannot but lament, that by a Sacrifice too great for one Nation to
another, we should be like a rich Mine, made useless only for want of being
wrought, and that the Life and Vigor which should move us against our Enemies
is miserably applied to tear our own Bowels; that being made by our happy
situation, not only safer, but if we please greater too, than other Countries
which far exceed us in extent; that having Courage by Nature, Learning by
Industry, and Riches by Trade, we should corrupt all these Advantages, so as to
make them insignificant, and by a fatality which seems peculiar to us, misplace
our active rage one against another, whilst we are turned into Statues on that
side where lies our greatest danger; to be unconcerned not only at our
Neighbors ruin but our own, and let our Island lie like a great Hulk in the
Sea, without Rudder or Sail, all the Men cast away in her, or as if we were all
Children in a great Cradle, and rockt asleep to a foreign Tune.

I say when our Trimmer represents to his Mind, our Roses blasted and
discolourd, whilst the Lillies Triumph and grow Insolent, upon the Comparison;
when he considers our own once flourishing Laurel, now withered and dying, and
nothing left us but a remembrance of a better part in History, than we shall
make in the next Age; which will be no more to us than an Escutcheon hung upon
our Door when we are dead; when he foresees from hence, growing Infamy from
abroad, confusion at home, and all this without the possibility of a Cure, in
respect of the voluntary fetters good Men put upon themselves by their
Allegiance without a good measure of preventing Grace, he would be tempted to
go out of the World like a Roman Philosopher, rather than endure the burden of
Life under such a discouraging Prospect. But Mistakes, as all other things,
have their Periods, and many times the nearest way to Cure, is not to oppose
them, but stay till they are crushed with their own weight: for Nature will not
allow any thing to continue long that is violent; violence is a wound, and as a
wound, must be curable in a little time, or else it is Mortal; but a Nation
comes near to be Immortal, therefore the wound will one time or another be
cured, tho perhaps by such rough Methods, if too long forborne, as may even make
the best Remedies we can prepare, to be at the same time a Melancholy
Contemplation to us; there is but one thing (God Almighties Providence
excepted) to support a Man from sinking under these afflicting thoughts, and
that is the hopes we draw singly from the King himself, without the mixture of
any other consideration.

Tho the Nation was lavish of their Kindness to him at his first coming, yet
there remains still a stock of Warmth in Men's Hearts for him.

Besides the good Influences of his happy Planet are not yet all spent, and tho
the Stars of Men past their youth are generally declining, and have less Force,
like the Eyes of decaying Beauties, yet by a Blessing peculiar to himself, we
may yet hope to be saved by his Autumnal Fortune: He has something about him
that will draw down a healing Miracle for his and our Deliverance; a Prince
which seems fitted for such an offending Age, in which Men's Crimes have been so
general, that the not forgiving his People has been the destroying of them,
whose Gentleness gives him a natural Dominion that has no bounds, with such a
noble mixture of Greatness and Condescension, an engaging Look, that disarms
Men of their ill Humors, and their Resentments; something in him that wants
a Name, and can be no more defined than it can be resisted; a Gift of Heaven,
of its last finishing, where it will be peculiarly kind; the only Prince in the
World that dares be familiar, or that has right to triumph over those forms
which were first invented to give awe to those who could not judge, and to hide
Defects from those that could; a Prince that has exhausted himself by his
Liberality, and endangered himself by his Mercy; who out-shines by his own
Light and natural Virtues all the varnish of studied Acquisitions; his Faults
are like Shades to a good Picture, or like Allay to Gold, to make it the more
useful, he may have some, but for any Man to see them through so many
reconciling Virtues, is a Sacrilegious piece of of ill nature, of which no
generous Mind can be guilty; a Prince that deserves to be loved for his own
sake, even without the help of a Comparison; our Love, our Duty, and our
Danger, all join to cement our Obedience to him; in short, whatever he can do,
it is no more possible for us to be angry with him, than with a Bank that
secures us from the raging Sea, the kind Shade that hides us from the scorching
Sun, the welcome Hand that reaches us a Reprieve, or with the Guardian-Angel,
that rescues our Souls from the devouring Jaws of wretched Eternity.

CONCLUSION.
TO Conclude, our Trimmer is so fully satisfied of the Truth of these
Principles, by which he is directed, in reference to the Public, that he will
neither be Hectored and Threatened, Laughed, nor Drunk cut of them; and instead
of being converted by the Arguments of his Adversaries to their Opinions, he is
very much confirmed in his own by them; he professes solemnly that were it in
his Power to choose, he would rather have his Ambition bounded by the Commands
of a Great and Wise Master, than let it range with a Popular License, tho
crowned with success; yet he cannot commit such a Sin against the glorious
thing called Liberty, nor let his Soul stoop so much below it self, as to be
content without repining to have his Reason wholly subdued, or the Privilege
of Acting like a sensible Creature, torn from him by the imperious Dictates of
unlimited Authority, in what hand soever it happens to be placed. What is there
in this that is so Criminal, as to deserve the Penalty of that most singular
Apothegme, A Trimmer is worse than a Rebel? What do angry Men ail to rail so
against Moderation, does it not look as if they were going to some very scurvy
Extreme, that is too strong to be digested by the more considering part of
Mankind? These Arbitrary Methods, besides the injustice of them, are (God be
thanked) very unskilful too, for they fright the Birds, by talking so loud,
from coming into the Nets that are laid for them; and when Men agree to rifle a
House, they seldom give warning, or blow a Trumpet; but there are some small
Statesmen, who are so full charged with their own Expectations, that they
cannot contain.

And kind Heaven by sending such a seasonable Curse upon their undertakings,
has made their ignorance an Antidote against their Malice; some of these cannot
treat peaceably, yielding will not satisfy them, they will have Men by storm;
there are others, that must have Plots, to make their Service more necessary,
and have an Interest to keep them alive, since they are to live upon them; and
persuade the King to retrench his own Greatness, so as to shrink into the head
of a Party, which is the betraying him into such an Unprincely mistake, and to
such a wilful diminution of himself, that they are the last Enemies he ought to
allow himself to forgive; such Men, if they could, would prevail with the Sun
to shine only upon them and their Friends, and to leave all the rest of the
World in the dark; this is a very unusual Monopoly, and may come within the
Equity of the Law, which makes it Treason to Imprison the King, when such
unfitting bounds are put to his Favor, and he confined to the narrow limits of
a particular set of Men, that would enclose him; these Honest and only Loyal
Gentlemen, if they may be allowed to bear Witness for themselves, make a King
their Engine, and degrade him into a property at the very time that their
Flattery would make him believe they paid Divine Worship to him; besides these
there is a flying Squadron on both sides, that are afraid the World should
agree, small dabblers in Conjuring, that raise angry Apparitions to keep Men
from being reconciled, like Wasps that fly up and down, buz and sting to keep
Men unquiet; but these Insects are commonly short-lived Creatures, and no doubt
in a little time Mankind will be rid of them; they were Giants at least who
fought once against Heaven, but for such Pigmies as these to contend against
it, is such a provoking Folly, that the insolent Bunglers ought to be laughed
and hist out of the World for it; they should consider there is a Soul in that
great body of the People, which may for a time be drowzy and unactive, but when
the Leviathan is roused, it moves like an angry Creature, and will neither be
convinced nor resisted: the People can never agree to show their united Powers,
till they are extremely tempted and provoked to it, so that to apply
Cupping-Glasses to a great Beast naturally disposed to sleep, and to force the
Tame thing whether it will or no to be Valiant, must be learnt out of some
other Book than Machiavil, who would never have prescribed such a proposterous
Method. It is to be remembered, that if Princes have Law and Authority on their
sides, the People on theirs may have Nature, which is a formidable Adversary;
Duty, Justice, Religion, nay, even Humane Prudence too, bids the People suffer
any thing rather than resist; but uncorrected Nature, where e're it feels the
smart will run to the nearest Remedy, Men's Passions in this Case are to be
considered as well as their Duty, let it be never so strongly enforced, for if
their Passions are provoked, they being as much a part of us as our Limbs, they
lead Men into a short way of Arguing, that admits no distinction, and from the
foundation of Self-Defence, they will draw Inferences, that will have miserable
effects upon the quiet of a Government.

Our Trimmer therefore dreads a general discontent, because he thinks it
differs from a Rebellion, only as a Spotted Fever does from the Plague, the
same Species under a lower degree of Malignity; it works several ways,
sometimes like a slow Poison that has its Effects at a great distance from the
time it was given, sometimes like dry Flax prepared to catch at the first Fire,
or like Seed in the Ground ready to sprout upon the first Shower; in every
shape it is fatal, and our Trimmer thinks no pains or precaution can be so great
as to prevent it.

In short he thinks himself in the right, grounding his Opinion upon that
Truth, which equally hates to be under the Oppressions of wrangling Sophistry
of the one hand, or the short dictates of mistaken Authority on the other.

Our Trimmer adores the Goddess Truth, though in all Ages she has been scurvily
used, as well as those that Worshipped her; it is of late become such a ruining
Virtue, that Mankind seems to be agreed to commend and avoid it; yet the want
of Practice which Repeals the other Laws, has no influence upon the Law of
Truth, because it has root in Heaven, and an Intrinfick value in it self, that
can never be impaired; she shows her Greatness in this, that her Enemies even
when they are successful are ashamed to own it; nothing but Power full of Truth
has the prerogative of Triumphing, not only after Victories, but in spite of
them, and to put Conquest her self out of Countenance; she may be kept under
and suppressed, but her Dignity still remains with her, even when she is in
Chains; Falsehood with all her Impudence, has not enough to speak ill of her
before her Face, such Majesty she carries about her, that her most prosperous
Enemies are fain to whisper their Treason; all the Power upon Earth can never
extinguish her, she has lived in all Ages; and let the Mistaken Zeal of
prevailing Authority, Christen any opposition to it, with what Name they
please, she makes it not only an ugly and unmannerly, but a dangerous thing to
persist; she has lived very retired indeed, nay sometime so buried, that only
some few of the discerning part of Mankind could have a Glimpse of her; with
all that she has Eternity in her, she knows not how to dye, and from the
darkest Clouds that shade and cover her, she breaks from time to time with
Triumph for her Friends, and Terror to her Enemies.

Our Trimmer therefore inspired by this Divine Virtue, thinks fit to conclude
with these Assertions, That our Climate is a Trimmer, between that part of the
World where men are Roasted, and the other where they are Frozen; That our
Church is a Trimmer, between the Phrenzy of Pratonick Visions, and the
Lethargick Ignorance of Popish Dreams; That our Laws are Trimmers, between the
Excess of unbounded Power, and the Extravagance of Liberty not enough
restrained; That true Virtue has ever been thought a Trimmer, and to have its
dwelling in the middle between the two Extremes; That even God Almighty himself
is divided between his two great Attributes, his Mercy and his Justice.

In such Company, our Trimmer is not ashamed of his Name, and willingly leaves
to the bold Champions of either Extreme, the Honor of contending with no less
Adversaries, than Nature, Religion, Liberty, Prudence, Humanity, and Common
Sense.

FINIS.
THE Lady's New-Year's-Gift: OR, ADVICE TO A DAUGHTER
Dear Daughter,
I Find, that even our most pleasing. Thoughts will be unquiet; they will be in
motion; and the Mind can have no rest whilst it is possessed by a darling
Passion. You are at present the chief Object of my Care, as well as of my
Kindness, which sometimes throws me into Visions of your being happy in the
World, that are better suited to my partial Wishes, than to my reasonable Hopes
for you. At other times, when my Fears prevail, I shrink as if I was struck, at
the Prospect of Danger, to which a young Woman must be exposed. By how much the
more. Lively, so much the more Liable you are to be hurt; as the finest Plants
are the soonest nipped by the Frost. Whilst you are playing full of Innocence,
the spiteful World will bite, except you are guarded by your Caution. Want of
Care therefore, my dear Child, is never to be excused; since, as to this World,
it has the same effect as want of Virtue. Such an early sprouting Wit
requires so much the more to be sheltred by some Rules, like something strewn
on tender Flowers to preserve them from being blasted. You must take it well to
be pruned by so kind a Hand as that of a Father. There may be some bitterness
in mere Obedience: The natural Love of Liberty may help to make the Commands of
a Parent harder to go down: Some inward resistance there will be, where Power
and not Choice makes us move. But when a Father lays aside his Authority,
and persuadeth only by his Kindness, you will never answer it to Good Nature,
if it has not weight with you.

A great part of what is said in the following Discourse may be above the
present growth of your Understanding; but that becoming every day taller, will
in a little time reach up to it, so as to make it easy to you. I am willing to
begin with you before your Mind is quite formed, that being the time in which
it is most capable of receiving a Color that will last when it is mixed with
it. Few things are well learnt, but by early Precepts: Those well infused, make
them Natural; and we are never sure of retaining what is valuable, till by a
continued Habit we have made it a Piece of us.

Whether my skill can draw the Picture of a fine Woman, may be a question: but
it can be none, That I have drawn that of a kind Father: If you will take an
exact Copy, I will so far presume upon my workmanship as to undertake you shall
not make an ill Figure. Give me so much Credit as to try, and I am sure that
neither your Wishes nor mine shall be disappointed by it.

RELIGION.
THe first thing to be considered, is Religion. It must be the chief Object of
your Thoughts, since it would be a vain thing to direct your Behavior in the
World, and forget that which you are to have toward him who made it. In a
strict sense, it is the only thing necessary: you must take it into your Mind,
and from thence throw it into your Heart, where you are to embrace it so close
as never to lose the Possession of it. But then it is necessary to distinguish
between the Reality and the Pretense.

Religion does not consist in believing the Legend of the Nursery, where
Children with their Milk are fed with the Tales of Witches, Hobgoblings,
Prophecies, and Miracles. We suck in so greedily these early Mistakes, that our
riper Understanding has much ado to cleanse our Minds from this kind of Trash:
The Stories are so entertaining, that we do not only believe them, but relate
them; which makes the discovery of the Truth somewhat grievous, when it makes
us lose such a Field of Impertinence, where we might have diverted our selves,
besides the throwing some shame upon us for having ever received them. This is
making the World a Jest, and imputing to God Almighty, That the Province he
assigns to the Devil, is to play at Blind-mans-buff, and show Tricks with
Mankind; and is so far from being Religion, that it is not Sense, and has
right only to be called that kind of Devotion, of which Ignorance is the
undoubted Mother, without competition or dispute. These Mistakes are therefore
to be left off with your Hangingsleeves; and you ought to be as much out of
countenance to be found with them about you, as to be seen playing with Babies,
at an Age when other things are expected from you.

The next thing to be observed to you, is, That Religion does as little consist
in loud Answers and devout Convulsions at Church, or Praying in an
extraordinary manner. Some Ladies are so extreme stirring at Church, that one
would swear the Worm in their Conscience made them so unquiet. Others will have
such a Divided Face between a Devout Goggle and an Inviting Glance, that the
unnatural Mixture makes even the best Looks to be at that time ridiculous.
These affected Appearances are ever suspected, like very strong Perfumes, which
are generally thought no very good Symptoms in those that make use of them. Let
your earnestness therefore be reserved for your Closet, where you may have God
Almighty to your self: In Public be still and calm, neither undecently
Careless, nor Affected in the other Extreme.

It is not true Devotion, to put on an angry Zeal against those who may be of a
differing Persuasion. Partiality to our selves makes us often mistake it for a
Duty, to fall hard upon others in that case; and being pushed on by
Self-conceit, we strike without mercy believing that the Wounds we give are
Meritorious, and that we are fighting God Almighty's Quarrel; when the truth
is, we are only setting out our selves. Our Devotion too often breaks out
into that Shape which most agrees with our particular Temper. The Choleric
grow into a hardened Severity against all who dissent from them; snatch at all
the Texts of Scripture that suit with their Complexion; and because God's Wrath
was some time kindled, they conclude, That Anger is a Divine Virtue; and are so
far from imagining their ill natured Zeal requires an Apology, that they value
themselves upon it, and triumph in it. Others, whose Nature is more Credulous
than ordinary, admit no Bounds or Measure to it; they grow as proud of
extending their Faith, as Princes are of enlarging their Dominions; not
considering, that our Faith, like our Stomach, is capable of being
over-charg'd; and that as the last is destroyed by taking in more than it can
digest, so our Reason may be extinguished by oppressing it with the weight of
too many strange things; especially if we are forbidden to chew what we are
commanded to swallow. The Melancholy and the Sullen are apt to place a great
part of their Religion in dejected or ill-humour'd Looks, putting on an
unsociable Face, and declaiming against the Innocent Entertainments of Life,
with as much sharpness as they could bestow upon the greatest Crimes. This
generally is only a Vizard, there is seldom any thing real in it. No other
thing is the better for being Sour; and it would be hard that Religion should
be so, which is the best of things. In the mean time it may be said with truth,
That this surly kind of Devotion has perhaps done little less hurt in the
World, by frighting, than the most scandalous Examples have done by infecting
it.

Having told you, in these few Instances, to which many more might be added,
what is not true Religion; it is time to describe to you, what is so. The
ordinary Definitions of it are no more like it, than the common Sign-posts are
like the Princes they would represent. The unskilful Dawbers in all Ages have
generally laid on such ill Colors, and drawn such harsh Lines, that the Beauty
of it is not easily to be discerned: They have put in all the forbidding
Features that can be thought of; and in the first place, have made it an
irreconcilable Enemy to Nature; when, in reality, they are not only Friends but
Twins, born together at the same time; and it is doing violence to them both,
to go about to have them separated. Nothing is so kind and so inviting as true
and unsophisticated Religion: Instead of imposing unnecessary Burdens upon our
Nature, it eases us of the greater weight of our Passions and Mistakes:
Instead of subduing us with Rigor, it redeemeth us from the Slavery we are in
to our selves, who are the most severe Masters, whilst we are under the
Usurpation of our Appetites let loose and not restrained.

Religion is a chearsul thing, so far from being always at Cuffs with Good
Humor, that it is inseparably united to it. Nothing unpleasant belongs to it,
though the Spiritual Cooks have done their unskilful part to give an ill Relish
to it. A wise Epicure would be Religious for the sake of Pleasure; Good Sense
is the Foundation of both; and he is a Bungler who aims at true Luxury, but
where they are joined.

Religion is exalted Reason, refined and sifted from the grosser parts of it:
It dwells in the upper Region of the Mind, where there are fewest Clouds or
Mists to darken or offend it: It is both the Foundation and the Crown of all
Virtues: It is Morality improved and raised to its height, by being carried
nearer Heaven, the only place where Perfection resideth. It cleanses the
Understanding, and brusheth off the Earth that hangs about our Souls. It does
not want the Hopes and the Terrors which are made use of to support it; neither
ought it to descend to the borrowing any Argument out of it self, since there
we may find every thing that should invite us. If we were to be hired to
Religion, it is able to out-bid the corrupted World, with all it can offer to
us, being so much the Richer of the two, in every thing where Reason is
admitted to be a Judge of the Value.

Since this is so, it is worth your pains to make Religion your choice, and not
make use of it only as a Refuge. There are Ladies, who finding by the too
visible decay of their good. Looks, that they can shine no more by that Light,
put on the Varnish of an affected Devotion, to keep up some kind of Figure in
the World. They take Sanctuary in the Church, when they are pursued by growing
Contempt, which will not be stopped, but follows them to the Altar. Such late
penitence is only a disguise for the tormenting grief of being no more
handsome. That is the killing thought which draws the sighs and tears, that
appear outwardly to be applied to a beter end.

There are many who have an Aguish Devotion, Hot and Cold Fits, long
Intermissions, and violent Raptures. This uneverness is by all means to be
avoided. Let your method be a steady course of good Life, that may run like a
smooth Stream, and be a perpetual Spring to furnish to the continued Exercise
of Virtue. Your Devotion may be earnest, but it must be unconstrained; and like
other Duties, you must make it your Pleasure too, or else it will have very
little efficacy. By this Rule you may best judge of your own Heart. Whilst
those Duties are Joys, it is an Evidence of their being sincere; but when they
are a Penance, it is a sign that your Nature makes some resistance; and whilst
that lasts, you can never be entirely secure of your self.

If you are often unquiet, and too nearly touched by the cross Accidents of
Life, your Devotion is not of the right Standard; there is too much Allay in
it. That which is right and unmixt, takes away the Sting of every thing that
would trouble you: It is like a healing Balm, that extinguisheth the sharpness
of the Blood; so this softeneth and dissolveth the Anguish of the Mind. A
devout Mind has the Privilege of being free from Passions, as some Climates
are from all venomous kind of Creatures. It will raise you above the little
Vexations to which others for want of it, will be exposed, and bring you to a
Temper, not of stupid Indifference, but of such a wise Resignation, that you
may live in the World, so as it may hang about you like a loose Garment, and
not tied too close to you.

Take heed of running into that common Error, of applying God's Judgments upon
particular Occasions. Our Weights and Measures are not competent to make the
Distribution either of his Mercy or his Justice: He has thrown a Veilover
these things, which makes it not only an Impertinence, but a kind of Sacrilege,
for us to give Sentence in them without his Commission.

As to your particular Faith, keep to the Religion that is grown up with you,
both as it is the best in it self, and that the reason of staying in it upon
that Ground is somewhat stronger for your Sex, than it will perhaps be allowed
to be for ours; in respect that the Voluminous enquiries into the Truth, by
Reading, are less expected from you. The Best of Books will be direction enough
to you not to change; and whilst you are fixed and sufficiently confirmed in
your own Mind, you will do best to keep vain Doubts and Scruples at such a
distance, that they may give you no disquiet.

Let me recommend to you a Method of being rightly informed, which can never
fail: It is in short this. Get Understanding, and practice Virtue. And if you
are so Blessed as to have those for your Share, it is not surer that there is a
God, than it is, that by him all Necessary Truths will be revealed to you.

HUSBAND.
THAT which challenges the place in your Thoughts, is, how to live with a
Husband. And though that is so large a Word, that few Rules can be fixed to it
which are unchangeable, the Methods being as various as the several Tempers of
Men to which they must be suited; yet I cannot omit some General Observations,
which, with the help of your own may the better direct you in the part of your
Life upon which your Happiness most depends.

It is one of the Disadvantages belonging to your Sex, that young Women are
seldom permitted to make their own Choice; their Friends Care and Experience
are thought safer Guides to them, than their own Fancies; and their Modesty
often forbids them to refuse when their Parents recommend, though their
inward Consent may not entirely go along with it. In this case there remains
nothing for them to do, but to endeavor to make that easy which falls to
their Lot, and by a wise use of every thing they may dislike in a Husband, turn
that by degrees to be very supportable, which, if neglected, might in time
beget an Aversion.

You must first lay it down for a Foundation in general, That there is
Inequality in the Sexes, and that for the better Economy of the World, the
Men, who were to be the Lawgivers, had the larger share of Reason bestowed
upon them; by which means your Sex is the better prepared for the Compliance
that is necessary for the better performance of those Duties which seem to be
most properly assigned to it. This looks a little uncourtly at the first
appearance; but upon Examination it will be found, that Nature is so far from
beng unjust to you, that she is partial on our side. She has made you such
large Amends by other Advantages, for the seeming Injustice of the first
Distribution, that the Right of Complaining is come over to our Sex. You have
it in your power not only to free your selves, but to sudbue your Masters, and
without violence throw both their Natural and Legal Authority at your Feet. We
are made of differing Tempers, that our Defects may the better be mutually
supplied: Your Sex wants our Reason for your Conduct, and our Strength for
your Protection: Ours wants your Gentleness to soften, and to entertain us.
The first part of our Life is a good deal subjected to you in the Nursery,
where you Reign without Competition, and by that means have the advantage of
giving the first Impressions. Afterward you have stronger Influences, which,
well managed, have more force in your behalf, than all our Privileges and
Jurisdictions can pretend to have against you. You have more strength in your
Looks, than we have in our Laws, and more power by your Tears, than we have by
our Arguments.

It is true, that the Laws of Marriage, run in a harsher style toward your
Sex. Obey is an ungenteel word, and less easy to be digested, by making such
an unkind distinction in the Words of the Contract, and so very unsuitable to
the excess of Good Manners, which generally goes before it. Besides, the
universality of the Rule seems to be a Grievance, and it appears
reasonable, that there might be an Exemption for extraordinary Women, from
ordinary Rules, to take away the just Exception that lies against the false
measure of general Equality.

It may be alleged by the Counsel retained by your Sex, that as there is in
all other Laws, an Appeal from the Letter to the Equity, in Cases that require
it: It is as reasonable, that some Court of a larger Jurisdiction might be
erected, where some Wives might resort and plead specially. And in such
instances, where Nature is so kind, as to raise them above the level of their
own Sex, they might have Relief, and obtain a Mitigation in their own
particular, of a Sentence which was given generally against Woman kind. The
causes of Separation are now so very course, that few are confident enough to
buy their Liberty at the price of having their Modesty so exposed. And for
disparity of Minds, which above all other things requires a Remedy, the Laws
have made no provision; so little refined are numbers of Men, by whom they are
compiled. This and a great deal more might be said to give a color to the
Complaint.

But the Answer to it, in short, is, That the Institution of Marriage is too
sacred to admit a Liberty of objecting to it; That the supposition of yours
being the weaker Sex, having without all doubt a good Foundation, makes it
reasonable to subject it to the Masculine Dominion; That no Rule can be so
perfect, as not to admit some Exceptions; But the Law presumes there would be
so few found in this Case, who would have a sufficient Right to such a
Privilege, that it is safer some Injustice should be connived at in a very few
Instances, than to break into an Establishment, upon which the Order of Humane
Society does so much depend.

You are therefore to make your best of what is settled by Law and Custom, and
not vainly imagine, that it will be changed for your sake. But that you may not
be discouraged, as if you lay under the weight of an incurable Grievance, you
are to know, that by a wise and dexterous Conduct, it will be in your power to
relieve your self from any thing that looks like a disadvantage in it. For
your better direction, I will give a hint of the most ordinary Causes of
Dissatisfaction between Man and Wife, that may be able by such a Warning to
live so upon your Guard, that when you shall be married, you may know how to
cure your Husband's Mistakes, and to prevent your own.

First then, you are to consider, you live in a time which has rendered some
kind of Frailties so habitual, that they lay claim to large Grains of
Allowance. The World in this is somewhat unequal, and our Sex seems to play
the Tyrant in distinguishing partially for our selves, by making that in the
utmost degree Criminal in the Woman, which in a Man passes under a much
gentler Censure. The Root and the Excuse of this Injustice is the Preservation
of Families from any Mixture which may bring a Blemish to them: And whilst the
Point of Honor continues to be so placed, it seems unavoidable to give your
Sex, the greater share of the Penalty. But if in this it lies under any
Disadvantage, you are more than recompensed, by having the Honor of Families
in your keeping. The Consideration so great a Trust must give you, makes full
amends; and this Power the World has lodged in you, can hardly fail to
restrain the Severity of an ill Husband, and to improve the Kindness and Esteem
of a good one. This being so, remember, That next to the danger of committing
the Fault your self, the greatest is that of seeing it in your Husband. Do not
seem to look or hear that way: If he is a Man of Sense, he will reclaim
himself; the Folly of it, is of it self sufficient to cure him: if he is not
so, he will be provoked, but not reformed. To expostulate in these Cases,
looks like declaring War, and preparing Reprisals; which to a thinking
Husband would be a dangerous Reflection. Besides, it is so course a Reason which
will be assigned for a Lady's too great Warmth upon such an occasion, that
Modesty no less than Prudence ought to restrain her; since such an undecent
Complaint makes a Wife much more ridiculous, than the Injury that provokes her
to it. But it is yet worse, and more unskilful, to blaze it in the World,
expecting it should rise up in Arms to take her part: Whereas she will find, it
can have no other Effect, than that she will be served up in all Companies, as
the reigning Jest at that time; and will continue to be the common
Entertainment, till she is rescued by some newer Folly that comes upon the
Stage, and drives her away from it. The Impertinence of such Methods is so
plain, that it does not deserve the pains of being laid open. Be assured, that
in these Cases your Discretion and Silence will be the most prevailing Reproof.
An affected Ignorance, which is seldom a Virtue, is a great one here: And when
your Husband sees how unwilling you are to be uneasy, there is no stronger
Argument to persuade him not to be unjust to you. Besides, it will naturally
make him more yielding in other things: And whether it be to cover or redeem
his Offense, you may have the good Effects of it whilst it lasts, and all
that while have the most reasonable Ground that can be, of presuming, such a
Behavior will at last entirely convert him. There is nothing so glorious to a
Wife, as a Victory so gained: A Man so reclaimed, is for ever after subjected
to her Virtue; and her bearing for a time, is more than rewarded by a Triumph
that will continue as long as her Life.

The next thing I will suppose, is, That your Husband may love Wine more than
is convenient. It will be granted, That though there are Vices of a deeper dye,
there are none that have greater Deformity than this, when it is not
restrained: But with all this, the same Custom which is the more to be lamented
for its being so general, should make it less uneasy to every one in
particular who is to suffer by the Effects of it: So that in the first place,
it will be no new thing if you should have a Drunkard for your Husband; and
there is by too frequent Examples evidence enough, that such a thing may
happen, and yet a Wife may live too without being miserable. Self-love
dictateth aggravating words to every thing we feel; Ruin and Misery are the
Terms we apply to whatever we do not like, forgetting the Mixture allotted to
us by the Condition of Human Life, by which it is not intended we should be
quite exempt from trouble. It is fair, if we can escape such a degree of it as
would oppress us, and enjoy so much of the pleasant part as may lessen the ill
taste of such things as are unwelcome to us. Every thing has two Sides, and
for our own ease we ought to direct our Thoughts to that which may be least
liable to exception. To fall upon the worst side of a Drunkard, gives so
unpleasant a prospect, that it is not possible to dwell upon it. Let us pass
then to the more favorable part, as far as a Wife is concerned in it.

I am tempted to say (if the Irregularity of the Expression could in strictness
be justified) That a Wife is to thank God her Husband has Faults. Mark the
seeming Paradox my Dear, for your own Instruction, it being intended no
further. A Husband without Faults is a dangerous Observer; he has an Eye so
piercing, and sees every thing so plain, that it is exposed to his full
Censure. And though I will not doubt but that your Virtue will disappoint the
sharpest Enquiries; yet few Women can bear the having all they say or do
represented in the clear Glass of an Understanding without Faults. Nothing
softneth the Arrogance of our Nature, like a Mixture of some Frailties. It is
by them we are best told, that we must not strike too hard upon others, because
we our selves do so often deserve Blows: They pull our Rage by the Sleeve, and
whisper Gentleness to us in our Censures, even when they are rightly applied.
The Faults and Passions of Husbands bring them down to you, and make them
content to live upon less unequal Terms, than Faultless Men would be willing to
stoop to; so haughty is Mankind till humbled by common Weaknesses and Defects,
which in our corrupted State contribute more toward the reconciling us to one
another, than all the Precepts of the Philosophers and Divines. So that where
the Errors of our Nature make amends for the Disadvantages of yours it is more
your part to make use of the Benefit, than to quarrel at the Fault.

Thus in case a Drunken Husband should fall to your share, if you will be wise
and patient, his Wine shall be of your side; it will throw a Veil over your
Mistakes, and will set cut and improve every thing you do, that he is pleased
with. Others will like him less, and by that means he may perhaps like you the
more. When after having dined too well, he is received at home without a Storm,
or so much as a reproaching Look, the Wine will naturally work out all in
Kindness, which a Wife must encourage, let it be wrapped up in never so much
Impertinence. On the other side it would boil up into Rage, if the mistaken
Wife should treat him roughly, like a certain thing called a kind Shrew, than
which the World, with all its Plenty, cannot show a more Senseless, ill-bred,
forbidding Creature. Consider, that where the Man will give such frequent
Intermissions of the use of his Reason, the Wife insensibly gets a Right of
Governing in the Vacancy, and that raises her Character and Credit in the
Family, to a higher pitch than perhaps could be done under a sober Husband, who
never puts himself into an Incapacity of holding the Reins. If these are not
entire Consolations, at least they are Remedies to some Degree. They cannot
make Drunkenness a Virtue, nor a Husband given to it a Felicity; but you will
do your self no ill office in the endeavoring, by these means, to make the
best of such a Lot, in case it should happen to be yours, and by the help of a
wise Observation, to make that very supportable, which would otherwise be a
Load that would oppress you.

The next Case I will put is that your Husband may be Choleric or
Ill-humour'd. To this it may be said, That passionate Men generally make amends
at the Foot of the Account. Such a Man, if he is angry one day without any
Sense, will the next day be as kind without any Reason. So that by marking how
the Wheels of such a Man's Head are used to move, you may easily bring over all
his Passion to your Party. Instead of being struck down by his Thunder, you
shall direct it where and upon whom you shall think it best applied. Thus are
the strongest Poisons turned to the best Remedies; but then there must be Art
in it, and a skilful Hand, else the least bungling makes in mortal. There is a
great deal of nice Care requisite to deal with a Man of this Complexion. Choler
proceeds from Pride, and makes a Man so partial to himself that he swells
against Contradiction; and thinks he is lessened if he is opposed. You must
in this Case take heed of increasing the Storm by an unwary Word, or kindling
the Fire whilst the Wind is in a Corner which may blow it in your Face: You are
dexterously to yield every thing till he begins to cool, and then by slow
degrees you may rise and gain upon him: Your Gentleness well timed, will, like
a Charm, dispel his Anger ill placed; a kind Smile will reclaim, when a shrill
pettish Answer would provoke him; rather than fail upon such occasions, when
other Remedies are too weak, a little Flattery may be admitted, which by being
necessary, will cease to be Criminal.

If Ill-Humours and Sullenness, and not open and sudden Heat is his Disease,
there is a way of treating that too, so as to make it a Grievance to be
endured. In order to it, you are first to know, that naturally good Sense has
a mixture of surly in it: and there being so much Folly in the World, and for
the most part so trumphant, it gives frequent Temptations to raise the Spleen
of Men who think right. Therefore that which may generally be called
Ill-Humour, is not always a Fault; it becomes one when either it is wrong
applied, or that it is continued too long, when it is not so: For this Reason
you must not too hastily fix an ill name upon that which may perhaps not
deserve it; and though the Case should be, that your Husband might too sowerly
resent any thing he disliketh, it may so happen, that more Blame shall belong
to your Mistake, than to his Ill-Humour. If a Husband behaveth himself
sometimes with an Indifference that a Wife may think offensive, she is in the
wrong to put the worst sense upon it, if by any Means it will admit a better.
Some Wives will call it Ill-humour if their Husbands change their Style from
that which they used whilst they made their first Addresses to them: Others
will allow no Intermission or Abatement in the Expressions of Kindness to them,
not enough distinguishing Times, and forgetting that it is impossible for Men
to keep themselves up all their Lives to the height of some extravagant
Moments. A Man may at some times be less careful in little things; without any
cold or disobliging Reason for it; as a Wise may be too expecting in smaller
matters, without drawing upon herself the inference of being unkind. And if
your Husband should be really sullen, and have such frequent Fits, as might
take away the excuse of it, it concerns you to have an Eye prepared to
discern the first Appearances of Cloudy Weather, and to watch when the Fit
goes off, which seldom lasts long if it is let alone. But whilst the Mind is
sore, every thing galleth it, and that makes it necessary to let the Black
Humor begin to spend it self, before you come in and venture to undertake it.

If in the Lottery of the World you should draw a Covetous Husband, I confess
it will not make you proud of your good Luck; yet even such a one may be
endured too, though there are few Passions more untractable than that of
Avarice. You must first take care that your Definition of Avarice may not be a
Mistake. You are to examine every Circumstance of your Husband's Fortune, and
weigh the Reason of every thing you expect from him before you have right to
pronounce that sentence. The Complaint is now so general against all Husbands,
that it gives great suspicion of its being often ill-grounded; it is
impossible they should all deserve that Censure, and therefore it is certain,
that it is many times misapplied. He that spares in every thing is an
inexcusable Niggard; he that spares in nothing is as inexcusable a Madman. The
mean is, to spare in what is least necessary, to lay out more liberally in what
is most required in our several circumstances. Yet this will not always
satisfy. There are Wives who are impatient of the Rules of Economy, and are
apt to call their Husband's Kindness in question, if any other measure is put
to their expense than that of their own Fancy. Be sure to avoid this dangerous
Error, such a partiality to your Self, which is so offensive to an
understanding Man, that he will very ill bear a Wife's giving her self such an
injurious preference to all the Family, and whatever belongs to it.

But to admit the worst, and that your Husband is really a Close-handed Wretch,
you must in this, as in other Cases, endeavor to make it less afflicting to
you; and first you must observe seasonable hours of speaking. When you offer
any thing in opposition to this reigning Humor, a third hand and a wise
Friend, may often prevail more than you will be allowed to do in your own
Cause. Sometimes you are deuterously to go along with him in things, where you
see that the niggardly part of his Mind is most predominant, by which you will
have the better opportunity of persuading him in things where he may be more
indifferent. Our Passions are very unequal, and are apt to be raised or
lessened, according as they work upon different Objects; they are not to be
stopped or restrained in those things where our Mind is more particularly
engaged. In other matters they are more tractable, and will sometimes give
Reason a hearing, and admit a fair Dispute. More than that, there are few Men,
even in this instance of Avarice, so entirely abandoned to it, that at some
hours, and upon some occasions, will not forget their natures, and for that
time turn Prodigal. The same Man who will grudge himself what is necessary, let
his Pride be raised and he shall be profuse; at another time his Anger shall
have the same effect; a fit of Vanity, Ambition, and sometimes of Kindness,
shall open and enlarge his narrow Mind; a Dose of Wine will work upon this
tough humor, and for the time dissolve it. Your business must be, if this Case
happens, to watch these critical moments, and not let one of them slip
without making your advantage of it: and a Wife may be said to want skill, if
by these means she is not able to secure her self in a good measure against the
Inconveniences this scurvy quality in a Husband might bring upon her, except he
should be such an incurable Monster; as I hope will never fall to your share.

The last supposition I will make, is, That your Husband should be weak and
incompetent to make use of the Privileges that belong to him. It will be
yielded, that such a one leaves room for a great many Objections. But God,
Almighty seldom sends a Grievance without a Remedy, or at least such a
Mitigation as takes away a great part of the sting, and the smart of it. To
make such a Misfortune^ less heavy, you are first to bring to your Observation,
That a Wife very often makes better Figure, for her Husband's making no great
one: And there seems to be little reason, why the same Lady that chooses a
Waiting Woman with worse Looks, may not be content with a Husband with less
Wit; the Argument being equal from the advantage of the Comparison. If you will
be more ashamed in some Cases, of such a Husband, you will be less afraid than
you would perhaps be of a wise one. His Unseasonable Weakness may no doubt
sometimes grieve you, but then set against this, that it gives you the
Dominion, if you will make the right use of it. It is next to his being dead,
in which Case the Wife has right to Administer; therefore be sure, if you have
such an Idiot, that none, except your self, may have the benefit of the
forfeiture; Such a Fool is a dangerous Beast, if others have the keeping of
him; and you must be very undexterous if when your Husband shall resolve to be
an Ass, you do not take care he may be your Ass. But you must go skilfully
about it, and above all things, take heed of distinguishing in public what
kind of Husband he is: Your inward thoughts must not hinder the outward payment
of the consideration that is due to him: Your slighting him in Company, besides
that it would, to a discerning By stander, give too great encouragement for the
making nearer applications to you, is in it self such an undecent way of
assuming, that it may provoke the tame Creature to break loose, and to show his
Dominion for his Credit, which he was content to forget for his Ease. In short,
the surest and the most approved method will be to do like a wise Minister to
an easy Prince; first give him the Orders you afterward receive from him.

With all this, that which you are to pray for; is a Wise Husband, one that by
knowing how to be a Master, for that very reason will not let you feel the
weight of it; one whose Authority is so softened by his Kindness, that it
gives you ease without abridging your Liberty; one that will return so much
tenderness for your Just Esteem of him, that you will never want power, though
you will seldom care to use it. Such a Husband is as much above all the other
Kinds of them, as a rational subjection to a Prince, great in himself, is to be
preferred before the disquiet and uneasiness of Unlimited Liberty.

Before I leave this Head, I must add a little concerning your Behavior to
your Husband's Friends, which requires the most refined part of your
Understanding to acquit your self well of it. You are to study how to live with
them with more care than you are to apply to any other part of your Life;
especially at first, that you may not stumble at the first setting out. The
Family into which you are grafted will generally be apt to expect, that like a
Stranger in a Foreign Country, you should conform to their Methods, and not
bring in a new Model by your own Authority. The Friends in such a Case are
tempted to rise up in Arms as against an unlawful Invasion, so that you are
with the utmost Caution to avoid the least appearances of any thing of this
Kind. And that you may with less difficulty afterward give your Directions, be
sure at first to receive them from your Husband's Friends. Gain them to you by
early applying to them, and they will be so satisfied, that as nothing is more
thankful than Pride, when it is complied with, they will strive which of them
shall most recommend you; and when they have helped you to take Root in your
Husband's good Opinion, you will have less dependence upon theirs, though you
must not neglect any reasonable means of preserving it. You are to consider,
that a Man governed by his Friends, is very easily inflamed by them; and that
one who is not so, will yet for his own sake expect to have them considered. It
is easily improved to a point of Honor in a Husband, not to have his Relations
neglected; and nothing is more dangerous, than to raise an Objection, which is
grounded upon Pride: It is the most stubborn and lasting Passion we are subject
to, and where it is the first cause of the War, it is very hard to make a
secure Peace. Your Caution in this is of the last importance to you.

And that you may the better succeed in it, carry a strict Eye upon the
Impertinence of your Servants; take heed that their Ill-humour may not engage
you to take Exceptions, or their too much assuming in small matters, raise
Consequences which may bring you under great Disadvantage. Remember that in the
case of a Royal Bride, those about her are generally so far suspected to bring
in a Foreign Interest, that in most Countries they are insensibly reduced to a
very small number, and those of so low a Figure, that it does not admit the
being Jealous of them. In little and in the Proportion, this may be the Case of
every New married Woman, and therefore it may be more advisable for you, to
gain the Servants you find in a Family than to tie your self too fast to those
you carry into it.

You are not to overlook these small Reflections, because they may appear low
and inconsiderable; for it may be said, that as the greatest streams are made
up of the small drops at the head of the Springs from whence they are derived,
so the greater circumstances of your Life, will be in some degree directed by
these seeming trifles, which having the advantage of being the first acts of
it, have a greater effect than singly in their own nature they could pretend to.

I will conclude this Article with my Advice, That you would, as much as Nature
will give you leave, endeavor to forget the great Indulgence you have found at
home. After such a gentle Discipline as you have been under, every thing you
dislike will seem the harsher to you. The tenderness we have had for you, My
Dear, is of another nature, peculiar to kind Parents, and differing from that
which you will meet with first in any Family into which you shall be
transplanted; and yet they may be very kind too, and afford no justifiable
reason to you to complain. You must not be frighted with the first Appearances
of a differing Scene; for when you are used to it, you may like the House you
go to, better than that you left; and your Husband's Kindness will have so much
advantage of ours, that we shall yield up all Competition, and as well as we
love you, be very well contented to Surrender to such a Rival.

HOUSE, FAMILY, and CHILDREN.
YOU must lay before you, My Dear, there are degrees of Care to recommend your
self to the World in the several parts of your Life. In many things, though the
doing them well may raise your Credit and Esteem, yet the omission of them
would draw no immediate reproach upon you: In others, where your duty is more
particularly applied, the neglect of them is amongst those Faults which are not
forgiven, and will bring you under a Censure, which will be much a heavier
thing than the trouble you would avoid. Of this kind is the Government of your
House, Family, and Children, which since it is the Province allotted to your
Sex, and that the discharging it well, will for that reason be expected from
you, if you either desert it out of Laziness, or manage it ill for want of
skill, instead of a Help you will be an Encumbrance to the Family where you are
placed.

I must tell you, that no respect is lasting, but that which is produced by our
being in some degree useful to those that pay it. Where that fails, the
Homage and the Reverence go along with it, and fly to others where something
may be expected in exchange for them. And upon this principle the respects even
of the Children and the Servants will not stay with one that does not think
them worth their Care, and the old Housekeeper shall make a better Figure in
the Family, than the Lady with all her fine Clothes, if she wilfully
relinquishes her Title to the Government. Therefore, take heed of carrying your
good Breeding to such a height, as to be good for nothing, and to be proud of
it. Some think it has a great Air to be above troubling their thoughts with
such ordinary things as their House and Family; others dare not admit Cares for
fear they should hasten Wrinkles? mistaken Pride makes some think they must
keep themselves up, and not descend to these Duties, which do not seem enough
refined for great Ladies to be employed in; forgetting all this while, that it
is more than the greatest Princes can do, at once to preserve respect, and to
neglect their Business. No Age ever erected Altars to insignificant Gods; they
had all some quality applied to them to draw worship from Mankind; this makes
it the more unreasonable for a Lady to expect to be considered, and at the same
time resolve not to deserve it. Good looks alone will not do; they are not such
a lasting Tenure, as to be relied upon; and if they should stay longer than
they usually do, it will by no means be safe to depend upon them: For when time
has abated the violence of the first liking, and that the Napp is a little
worn off, though still a good degree of kindness may remain, Men recover their
sight which before might be dazell'd, and allow themselves to object as well as
to admire.

In such a Case, when a Husband sees an empty airy thing sail up and down the
House to no kind of purpose, and look as if she came thither only to make a
Visit. When he finds that after her Emptiness has been extreme busy about
some very senseless thing, she eats her Breakfast half an hour before Dinner,
to be at greater liberty to afflict the Company with her Discourse; then
calls for her Coach, that she may trouble her Acquaintance, who are already
cloyed with her: And having some proper Dialogues ready to display her Foolish
Eloquence at the top of the Stairs, she sets out like a Ship out of the
Harbor, laden with trifles and comes back with them: at her return she
repeateth to her faithful Waiting Woman, the Triumphs of that day's
Impertinence; then wrapped up in Flattery and clean Linen, goes to Bed so
satisfied, that it throws her into pleasant Dreams of her own Felicity. Such
a one is seldom serious but with her Tailor; her Children and Family may now
and then have a random thought, but she never takes aim but at something very
Impertinent. I say, when a Husband, whose Province is without Doors, and to
whom the Economy of the House would be in some degree Indecent, finds no
Order nor Quiet in his Family, meets with Complaints of all kinds-springing
from this Root; The Mistaken Lady, who thinks to make amends for all this, by
having a well-chosen Petty Coat, will at last be convinced of her Error, and
with grief be forced to undergo the Penalties that belong to those who are
wilfully Insignificant. When this scurvy hour comes upon her, she first
grows Angry; then when the time of it is past, would perhaps grow wiser, not
remembering that we can no more have Wisdom than Grace, whenever we think fit to
call for it. There are Times and Periods fixed for both; and when they are too
long neglected, the Punishment is, that they are Irrecoverable, and nothing
remains but an useless Grief for the Folly of having thrown them out of our
power. You are to think what a mean Figure a Woman makes, when she is so
degraded by her own Fault; whereas there is nothing in those Duties which are
expected from you, that can be a lessening to you except your want of Conduct
makes it so. You may love your Children without living in the Nursery, and you
may have a competent and discreet care of them, without letting it break out
upon the Company, or exposing your self by turning your Discourse that way,
which is a kind of Laying Children to the Parish, and it can hardly be done any
where, that those who hear it will be so forgiving, as not to think they are
overcharged with them. A Woman's tenderness to her Children is one of the least
deceitful Evidences of the Virtue; but yet the way of expressing it, must be
subject to the Rules of good Breeding: And though a Woman of Quality ought not
to be less kind to them, than Mothers of the Meanest Rank are to theirs, yet
she may distinguish her self in the manner, and avoid the course Methods, which
in Women of a lower size might be more excusable. You must begin early to make
them love you, that they may obey you. This Mixture is no where more necessary
than in Children And I must tell you, that you are not to expect Returns of
Kindness from yours, if ever you have any, without Grains of Allowance; and yet
it is not so much a defect in their good Nature, as a shortness of Thought in
them. Their first Insufficiency makes them lean so entirely upon their Parents
for what is necessary, that the habit of it makes them continue the same
Expectations for what is unreasonable; and as often as they are denied, so
often they think they are injured: and whilst their Desires are strong, and
their Reasons yet in the Cradle, their Anger looks no farther than the thing
they long for and cannot have; And to be displeased for their own good, is a
Maxim they are very slow to understand: So that you may conclude, the first
Thoughts of your Children will have no small Mixture of Mutiny; which being so
natural, you must not be angry, except you would increase it. You must deny
them as feldom as you can, and when there is no avoiding it, you must do it
gently; you must flatter away their ill Humor, and take the next Opportunity
of pleasing them in some other thing, before they either ask or look for it:
This will strengthen your Authority, by making it soft to them; and confirm
their Obedience, by making it their Interest You are to have as strict a Guard
upon your self amongst your Children, as if you were amongst your Enemies. They
are apt to make wrong Inferences, to take Encouragement from half Words, and
misapply what you may say or do, so as either to lessen their Duty, or to
extend their Liberty farther than is convenient. Let them be more in awe of
your Kindness than of your Power. And above all, take heed of supporting a
Favorite Child in its Impertinence, which will give Right to the rest of
claiming the same Privilege. If you have a divided Number, leave the Boys to
the Father's more peculiar Care, that you may with the greater Justice pretend
to a more immediate Jurisdiction over those of your own Sex. You are to live so
with them, that they may never choose to avoid you, except when they have
offended; and then let them tremble, that they may distinguish: But their
Penance must not continue so long as to grow too sour upon their Stomachs,
that it may not harden in stead of correcting them: The kind and severe Part
must have their several turns seasonably applied; but your Indulgence is to
have the broader mixture, that Love, rather than Fear, may be the Root of their
Obedience.

Your Servants are in the next place to be considered; and you must remember
not to fall into the mistake of thinking, that because they receive Wages, and
are so much Inferior to you, therefore they are below your Care to know how to
manage them. It would be as good Reason for a Master Workman to despise the
Wheels of his Engines, because they are made of Wood. These are the Wheels of
your Family; and let your Directions be never so faultless, yet if these
Engines stop or move wrong, the whole Order of your House is either at a stand,
or discomposed. Besides, the Inequality which is between you, must not make you
forget, that Nature makes no such distinction, but that Servants may be looked
upon as humble Friends, and that Returns of Kindness and good Usage are as much
due to such of them as deserve it, as their Service is due to us when we
require it. A foolish haughtiness in the Style of speaking, or in the manner of
commanding them, is in it self very undecent; besides that it begets an
Aversion in them, of which the least ill Effect to be expected, is, that they
will be slow and careless in all that is enjoined them: And you will find it
true by your Experience, that you will be so much the more obeyed as you are
less Imperious. Be not too hasty in giving your Orders, nor too angry when they
are not altogether observed; much less are you to be loud, and too much
disturbed: An evenness in distinguishing when they do well or ill, is that
which will make your Family move by a Rule, and without Noise, and will the
better set out your Skill in conducting it with Ease and Silence, that it may
be like a well disciplined Army; which knows how to anticipate the Orders
that are fit to be given them. You are never to neglect the Duty of the present
Hour, to do another thing, which though it may be better in it self, is not to
be unseasonably preferred. Allot well chosen Hours for the Inspection of your
Family, which may be so distinguished from the rest of your Time, that the
necessary Cares may come in their proper Place, without any Influence upon your
good Humor, or Interruption to other things. By these Methods you will put
your self in possession of being valued by your Servants, and then their
Obedience will naturally follow.

I must not forget one of the greatest Articles belonging to a Family, which is
the Expense. It must not be such, as by failing either in the Time or measure
of it, may rather draw Censure than gain Applause. If it was well examined,
there is more Money given to be laughed at, than for any one thing in the
World, though the Purchasers do not think so. A wellstated Rule is like the
Line, when that is once passed we are under another Pole; so the first straying
from a Rule, is a step toward making that which was before a Virtue, to change
its Nature, and to grow either into a Vice, or at least an Impernence. The Art
of laying out Money wisely, is not attained to without a great deal of thought;
and it is yet more difficult in the Case of a Wife, who is accountable to her
Husband for her mistakes in it. It is not only his Money, his Credit too is at
Stake, if what lies under the Wife's Care is managed, either with undecent
Thrift, or too loose Profusion. You are therefore to keep the Mean between
these two Extremes, and it being hardly possible to hold the Balance exactly
even, let it rather incline toward the Liberal side as more suitable to your
Quality, and less subject to Reproach. Of the two a little Money misspent is
sooner recovered, than the Credit which is lost by having it unhandsomely
saved; and a Wise Husband will less forgive a shameful piece of Parcimony, than
a little Extravagance, if it be not too often repeated. His Mind in this must
be your chief Direction; and his Temper, when once known, will in great measure
justify your part in the management, if he is pleased with it.

In your Clothes avoid too much Gaudy; do not value your self upon an
Imbroidered Gown; and remember, that a reasonable Word, or an obliging Look,
will gain you more respect; than all your fine Trappings. This is not said to
restrain you from a decent Compliance with the World, provided you take the
wiser, and not the foolisher part of your Sex for your Pattern. Some
distinctions are to be allowed, whilst they are well suited to your Quality and
Fortune, and in the distribution of the Expense, it seems to me that a full
Attendance, and well chosen Ornaments for your House, will make you a better
Figure, than too much glittering in what you wear, which may with more ease be
imitated by those that are below you. Yet this must not tempt you to starve
every thing but your own Appartment; or in order to more abundance there, give
just cause to the least Servant you have, to complain of the Want of what is
necessary. Above all, fix it in your thoughts, as an unchangeable Maxim, That
nothing is truly fine but what is fit, and that just so much as is proper for
your Circumstances of their several kinds, is much finer than all you can add
to it. When you once break through these bounds, you launch into a wide Sea of
Extravagance. Every thing will become necessary, because you have a mind to it;
and you have a mind to it, not because it is fit for you, but because some body
else has it. This Lady's Logic sets Reason upon its Head, by carrying the
Rule from things to Persons, and appealing from what is right to every Fool
that is in the wrong. The word necessary is miserably applied, it disordereth
Families, and overturneth Governments by being so abused. Remember that
Children and Fools want every thing because they want Wit to distinguish: and
therefore there is no stronger Evidence of a Crazy Understanding, than the
making too large a Catalogue of things necessary, when in truth there are so
very few things that have a right to be placed in it. Try every thing first in
your Judgment, before you allow it a place in your Desire; else your Husband
may think it as necessary for him to deny, as it is for you to have whatever is
unreasonable; and if you shall too often give him that advantage, the habit of
refusing may perhaps reach to things that are not unfit for you.

There are unthinking Ladies, who do not enough consider, how little their own
Figure agrees with the fine things they are so proud of. Others when they have
them will hardly allow them to be visible; they cannot be seen without Light,
and that is many times so saucy and so prying, that like a too forward Gallant
it is to be forbid the Chamber. Some, when you are ushered into their Dark
Ruelle, it is with such solemnity, that a Man would swear there was something
in it, till the Unskillful Lady breaks silence, and begins a Chat, which
discovers it is a Puppet-play with Magnificent Scenes. Many esteem things
rather as they are hard to be gotten, than that they are worth getting: This
looks as if they had an Interest to pursue that Maxim, because a great part
of their own value depends upon it. Truth in these Cases would be often
unmannerly, and might derogate from the Prerogative, great Ladies would assume
to themselves, of being distinct Creatures from those of their Sex, which are
inferior, and of less difficult access.

In other things too, your Condition must give the rule to you, and therefore
it is not a Wife's part to aim at more than a bounded Liberality; the farther
extent of that Quality (otherwise to be commended) belongs to the Husband,
who has better means for it. Generosity wrong placed becomes a Vice. It is no
more a Virtue when it grows into an Inconvenience, Virtues must be enlarged
or restrained according to differing Circumstances. A Princely Mind will undo a
private Family: Therefore things must be suited, or else they will not deserve
to be Commended, let them in themselves be never so valuable: And the
Expectations of the World are best answered when we acquit our selves in that
manner which seems to be prescribed to our several Conditions, without
usurping upon those Duties, which do not so particularly belong to us.

I will close the consideration of this Article of Expense, with this short
word. Do not fetter your self with such a Restraint in it as may make you
Remarkable; but remember that Virtue is the greatest Ornament, and good Sense
the best Equipage.

BEHAVIOVR and CONVERSATION.
IT is time now to lead you out of your House into the World. A Dangerous step;
where your Virtue alone will not secure you except it is attended with a great
deal of Prudence. You must have both for your Guard, and not stir without them.
The Enemy is abroad, and you are sure to be taken, if you are found straggling.
Your Behavior is therefore to incline strongly toward the Reserved part; your
Character is to be immoveably fixed upon that Bottom, not excluding a mixture
of greater freedom, as far as it may be innocent and well-timed. The
Extravagancies of the Age have made Caution more necessary; and by the same
reason that the too great License of ill Men has by Consequence in many things
restrained the Lawful Liberty of those who did not abuse it, the unjustifiable
Freedoms of some of your Sex have involved the rest in the Penalty of being
reduced. And though this cannot so alter the Nature of things, as to make that
Criminal, which in it self is Indifferent; yet if it makes it dangerous, that
alone is sufficient to justify the Restraint. A close behavior is t^^ ^^ttest
to receive Virtue for its constant Guest, because there, and there only, it can
be secure. Proper Reserves are the Outworks, and must never be deserted by
those who intend to keep the Place; they keep off the possibilities not only of
being taken, but of being attempted; and if a Woman sees Danger tho at never
so remote a Distance, she is for that time to shorten her Line of Liberty. She
who will allow her self to go to the utmost Extent of every thing that is
Lawful, is so very near going farther, that those who lie at watch, will begin
to count upon her.

Mankind, from the double temptation of Vanity and Desire, is apt to turn every
thing a Woman does to the hopesul side; and there are sew who dare make an
impudent Application, till they discern something which they are willing to
take for an Encouragement. It is safer therefore to prevent such Forwardness,
than to go about to cure it. It gathers Strength by the first allowances, and
claims a Right from having been at any time suffered with Impunity. Therefore
nothing is with more care to be avoided, than such a kind of Civility as may be
mistaken for Invitation; and it will not be enough for you to keep your self
free from any criminal Engagements; for if you do that which either raises
Hopes or creates Discourse, there is a Spot thrown upon your Good Name; and
those kind of Stains are the harder to be taken out, being dropped upon you by
the Man's Vanity, as well as by the Woman's Malice.

Most Men are in one sense Platonic Lovers, though they are not willing to own
that Character. They are so far Philosophers, as to allow, that the greatest
part of Pleasure lies in the Mind; and in pursuance of that Maxim, there are
few who do not place the Felicity more in the Opinion of the World, of their
being prosperous Lovers, than in the Blessing it self, how much soever they
appear to value it. This being so, you must be very cautious not to gratify
these Cameleons at the price of bringing a Cloud upon your Reputation, which
may be deeply wounded, tho your Conscience is unconcerned.

Your own Sex too will not fail to help the least Appearance that gives a
Handle to be ill-turned. The best of them will not be displeased to improve
their own Value, by laying others under a Disadvantage, when there is a fair
Occasion given for it. It distinguishes them still the more: their own Credit
is more exalted, and, like a Picture set off with Shades, shines more when a
Lady, either less Innocent, or less Discreet is set near, to make them appear
so much the brighter. If these lend their Breath to blast such as are so unwary
as to give them this Advantage, you may be sure there will be a stronger Gale
from those, who, besides Malice or Emulation, have an Interest too, to strike
hard upon a Virtuous Woman. It seems to them, that their Load of Infamy is
lessened, by throwing part of it upon others: So that they will not only
improve when it lies in their way, but take pains to find out the least
mistake an Innocent Woman commits, in Revenge of the Injury she does in
leading a Life which is a Reproach to them. With these you must be extreme
wary, and neither provoke them to be angry, nor invite them to be Intimate.

To the Men you are to have a Behavior which may secure you, without offending
them. No ill-bred affected Shyness, nor a Roughness, unsuitable to your Sex,
and unnecessary to your Virtue; but a way of Living that may prevent all course
Railleries or unmannerly Freedoms; Looks that forbid without Rudeness, and
oblige without Invitation, or leaving room for the saucy Inferences Men's
Vanity suggesteth to them upon the least Encouragements. This is so very nice,
that it must engage you to have a perpetual Watch upon your Eyes, and to
remember, that one careless Glance gives more advantage than a hundred Words
not enough considered; the Language of the Eyes being very much the most
significant, and the most observed.

Your Civility, which is always to be preserved, must not be carried to a
Compliance, which may betray you into irrecoverable Mistakes. This French
ambiguous word Complaisance has led your Sex into more blame, than all other
things put together. It carries them by degrees into a certain thing called a
good kind of Woman, an easy Idle Creature, that does neither Good nor Ill but
by chance, has no Choice, but leaves that to the Company she keeps. Time,
which by degrees adds to the signification of Words, has made her, according
to the Modern Style, little better than one who thinks it a Rudeness to deny
when civilly required, either her Service in Person, or her friendly
Assistance, to those who would have a meeting, or want a Confident. She is a
certain thing always at hand, an easy Companion, who has ever great
Compassion for distressed Lovers: She censureth nothing but Rigor, and is never
without a Plaster for a wounded Reputation, in which chiefly lies her Skill
in Surgery; She seldom has the Propriety of any particular Gallant, but
lives upon Brokage, and waits for the Scraps her Friends are content to
leave her.

There is another Character not quite so Criminal, yet not less Ridiculous;
which is that of a good-humored Woman, one who thinks she must always be in
a Laugh, or a broad Smile, because Goodhumour is an obliging Quality; thinks
it less ill manners to talk Impertinently, than to be silent in Company. When
such a prating Engine rides Admiral, and carries the Lantern, in a Circle of
Fools, a cheerful Coxcomb coming in for a Recruit, the Chattering of Monkeys is
a better noise than such a Concert of senceless Merriment. If she is applauded
in it, she is so encouraged, that, like a Ballad singer, who if commended,
breaks his Lungs, she lets her self loose, and overfloweth upon the
Company. She conceives that Mirth is to have no intermission, and therefore
she will carry it about with her, though it be to a Funeral; and if a Man
should put a familiar Question, she does not know very well how to be angry,
for then she would be no more that pretty thing called a Good humored Woman.
This necessity of appearing at all times to be so infinitely pleased is a
grievous mistake; since in a handsome Woman that Invitation is unnecessary; and
in one who is not so, ridiculous. It is not intended by this, that you should
forswear Laughing; but remember, that Fools being always painted in that
posture, it may fright those who are wise from doing it too frequently, and
going too near a Copy which is so little inviting, and much more from doing it
loud, which is an unnatural Sound and looks so much like another Sex, that
few things are more offensive. That boisterous kind of Jollity is as contrary
to Wit and Good Manners, as it is to Modesty and Virtue. Besides, it is a
course kind of quality, that throws a Woman into a lower Form, and degradeth
her from the Rank of those who are more refined. Some Ladies speak loud and
make a noise to be the more minded, which looks as if they beat their Drums
for Volunteers, and if by misfortune none come in to them, they may, not
without reason, be a good deal out of Countenance.

There is one shing, yet more to be avoided, which is the Example of those who
intend nothing farther than the Vanity of Conquest, and think themselves secure
of not having their Honor tainted by it. Some are apt to believe their Virtue
is too Obscure, and not enough known, except it is exposed to a broader Light,
and set out to its best advantage, by some public Trials. These are dangerous
experiments, and generally fail, being built upon so weak a foundation, as that
of a too great Confidence in our selves. It is as safe to play with Fire, as to
dally with Gallantry. Love is a Passion that has Friends in the Garrison, and
for that reason must by a Woman be kept at such a distance, that she may not be
within the danger of doing the most usual thing in the World, which is
conspiring against her Self: Else the humble Gallant, who is only admitted as a
Trophy, very often becomes the Conqueror; he puts on the style of victory,
and from an Admirer grows into a Master, for so he may be called from the
moment he is in Possession. The first Resolutions of stopping at good Opinion
and Esteem, grow weaker by degrees against the Charms of Courtship skilfully
applied. A Lady is apt to think a Man speaks so much reason whilst he is
Commending her, that she has much ado to believe him in the wrong when he is
making Love to her: And when besides the natural Inducements your Sex has to
be merciful, she is bribed by well chosen Flattery, the poor Creature is in
danger of being caught like a Bird listening to the Whistle of one that has a
Snare for it. Conquest is so tempting a thing, that it often makes Women
mistake Men's Submissions; which with all their fair Appearance, have generally
less Respect than Art in them. You are to remember, that Men who say extreme
fine things, many times say them most for their own sakes; and that the vain
Gallant is often as well pleased with his own Compliments, as he could be with
the kindest answer. Where there is not that Ostentation you are to suspect
there is Design. And as strong perfumes are seldom used but where they are
necessary to smother an unwelcome scent; so Excessive good Words leave room to
believe they are strewed to cover something, which is to gain admittance under
a Disguise. You must therefore be upon your Guard, and consider, that of the
two, Respect is more dangerous than Anger. It puts even the best Understandings
out of their place for the time, till their second thoughts restore them; it
steals upon us insensibly, throws down our Defenses, and makes it too late
to resist, after we have given it that advantage. Whereas railing goes away in
sound; it has so much noise in it, that by giving warning it bespeaketh
Caution. Respect is a slow and a sure Poison, and like Poison swells us
within our selves. Where it prevails too much, it grows to be a kind of
Apoplexy in the Mind, turns it quite round, and after it has once seized
the understanding, becomes mortal to it. For these reasons, the safest way is
to treat it like a sly Enemy, and to be perpetually upon the watch against it.

I will add one Advice to conclude this head, which is that you will let every
seven years make some alteration in you toward the Graver side, and not be
like the Girls of Fifty, who resolve to be always Young, whatever Time with his
Iron Teeth has determined to the contrary. Unnatural things carry a Deformity
in them never to be Disguised; the Liveliness of Youth in a riper Age, looks
like a new patch upon an old Gown; so that a Gay Matron, a cheerful old Fool
may be reasonably put into the List of the Tamer kind of Monsters. There is a
certain Creature called a Grave Hobbyhorse, a kind of a she Numps, that
pretends to be pulled to a Play, and must needs go to Bartholomew Fair, to
look after the young Folks, whom she only seems to make her care, in reality
she takes them for her excuse. Such an old Butterfly is of all Creatures, the
most ridiculous, and the soonest found out. It is good to be early in your
Caution, to avoid any thing that comes within distance of such despicable
Patterns, and not like some Ladies, who defer their Conversion, till they have
been so long in possession of being laughed at, that the World does not know
how to change their style, even when they are reclaimed from that which gave
the first occasion for it.

The advantages of being reserved are too many to be set down, I will only say,
that it is a Guard to a good Woman, and a Disguise to an ill one. It is of so
much use to both, that those ought to use it as an Artifice, who refuse to
practice it as a Virtue.

FRIENDSHIPS.
I Must in a particular manner recommend to you a strict Care in the Choice of
your Friendships. Perhaps the best are not without their Objections, but
however, be sure that yours may not stray from the Rules which the wiser part
of the World has set to them. The Leagues Offensive and Defensive, seldom hold
in Politics, and much less in Friendships. The violent Intimacies, when once
broken, of which they scarce ever fail, make such a Noise; the Bag of Secrets
untied, they fly about like Birds let loose from a Cage, and become the
Entertainment of the Town. Besides, these great Dearnesses by degrees grow
Injurious to the rest of your Acquaintance, and throw them off from you. There
is such an Offensive Distinction when the Dear Friend comes into the Room,
that it is flinging Stones at the Company, who are not apt to forgive it.

Do not lay out your Friendship too lavishly at first, since it will, like
other things, be so much the sooner spent; neither let it be of too sudden a
growth; for as the Plants which shoot up too fast are not of that continuance,
as those which take more time for it; so too swift a Progress in pouring out
your Kindness, is a certain Sign that by the Course of Nature it will not be
long-lived. You will be responsible to the World, if you pitch upon such
Friends as at the time are under the weight of any Criminal Objection. In that
case you will bring your self under the disadvantages of their Character, and
must bear your part of it. Choosing implies Approving; and if you fix upon a
Lady for your Friend against whom the World shall have given Judgment, it is not
so well natured as to believe you are altogether averse to her way of living,
since it does not discourage you from Admitting her into your Kindness. And
Resemblance of Inclinations being thought none of the least Inducements to
Friendship, you will be looked upon at least as a Well-wisher if not a Partner
with her in her Faults. If you can forgive them in another, it may be presumed
you will not be less gentle to your self; and therefore you must not take it
ill, if you are reckoned a Croupiere, and condemned to pay an equal Share with
such a Friend of the Reputation she has lost.

If it happens that your Friend should fall from the State of Innocence after
your Kindness was engaged to her, you may be slow in your belief in the
beginning of the Discovery: But as soon as you are convinced by a Rational
Evidence, you must, without breaking too roughly, make a far and a quick
Retreat from such a Mistaken Acquaintance: Else by moving too slowly from one
that is so tainted, the Contagion may reach you so far as to give you part of
the Scandal, though not of the Guilt. This Matter is so nice, that as you must
not be too hasty to join in the Censure upon your Friend when she is accused,
so you are not on the other side to defend her with too much warmth; for if she
should happen to deserve the Report of Common Fame, besides the Vexation that
belongs to such a mistake, you will draw an ill appearance upon your self,
and it will be thought you pleaded for her not without some Consideration of
your self. The Anger which must be put on to vindicate the Reputation of an
injured Friend, may incline the Company to suspect you would not be so zealous,
if there was not a possibility that the Case might be your own. For this reason
you are not to carry your dearness so far, as absolutely to lose your Sight
where your Friend is concerned. Because Malice is too quick sighted, it does
not follow, that Friendship must be blind: There is to be a Mean between these
two Extremes, else your Excess of Good Nature may betray you into a very
ridiculous Figure, and by degrees who may be preferred to such Offices as you
will not be proud of. Your Ignorance may lessen the Guilt, but will improve the
Jest upon you, who shall be kindly sollicitous to procure a Meeting, and
innocently contribute to the ills you would avoid: Whilst the Contriving
Lovers, when they are alone, shall make you the Subject of their Mirth, and
perhaps (with respect to the Goddess of Love be it spoken) it is not the worst
part of their Entertainment, at least it is the most lasting, to laugh at the
believing Friend, who was so easily deluded.

Let the good Sense of your Friends be a chief Ingredient in your Choice of
them; else ret your Reputation be never so clear, it may be clouded by their
Impertinence. It is like our Houses being in the Power of a Drunken or a
Careless Neighbor; only so much worse, as that there will be no Insurance here
to make you amends, as there is in the Case of Fire.

To conclude this Paragraph; If Formality is to be allowed in any Instance, it
is to be put on to resist the Invasion of such forward Women as shall press
themselves into your Friendship, where if admitted, they will either be a Snare
or an Encumbrance.

CENSVRE.
I will come next to the Consideration, how you are to manage your Censure; in
which both Care and skill will be a good deal required. To distinguish is not
only natural but necessary; and the Effect of it is, That we cannot avoid
giving Judgment in our Minds, either to absolve or to condemn as the Case
requires. The Difficult is, to know when and where it is fit to proclaim the
Sentence. An Aversion to what is Criminal, a Contempt of what is ridiculous,
are the inseparable Companions of Understanding and Virtue; but the letting
them go farther than our own Thoughts, has so much danger in it, that though
it is neither possible nor fit to suppress them entirely, yet it is necessary
they should be kept under very great Restraints. An unlimited Liberty of this
kind is little less than sending a Herald and proclaiming War to the World,
which is an angry Beast when so provoked. The Contest will be unequal, though
you are never so much in the right; and if you begin against such an Adversary,
it will tear you in pieces, with this Justification, That it is done in its own
defense. You must therefore take heed of Laughing, except in Company that is
very sure. It is throwing Snow-balls against Bullets; and it is the
disadvantage of a Woman, that the Malice of the World will help the Brutality
of those who will throw a slovenly Untruth upon her. You are for this Reason to
suppress your Impatience for Fools; who besides that they are too strong a
Party to be unnecessarily provoked, are of all others, the most dangerous in
this Case. A Blockhead in his Rage will return a dull Jest that will lie heavy,
though there is not a Grain of Wit in it. Others will do it with more Art, and
you must not think your self secure because your Reputation may perhaps be out
of the reach of Ill will; for if it finds that part guarded, it will seek one
which is more exposed. It flies, like a corrupt Humor in the Body, to the
weakest Part. If you have a tender Side, the World will be sure to find it, and
to put the worst Color upon all you say or do, give an Aggravation to every
thing that may lessen you, and a spiteful turn to every thing that might
recommend you. Anger lays open those Defects which Friendship would not see,
and Civility might be willing to forget. Malice needs no such Invitation to
encourage it, neither are any Pains more superfluous than those we take to be
ill spoken of. If Envy, which never dies, and seldom sleeps, is content
sometimes to be in a Slumber, it is very unskilful to make a noise to awake it.

Besides, your Wit will be misapplied if it is wholly directed to discern the
Faults of others, when it is so necessary to be often used to mend and prevent
your own. The sending our Thoughts too much abroad, has the same Effect, as
when a Family never stays at home; Neglect and Disorder naturally follows;
as it must do within our selves, if we do not frequently turn our Eyes inwards,
to see what is amiss with us, where it is a, sign we have an unwelcome
Prospect, when we do not care to look upon it, but rather seek our Consolations
in the Faults of those we converse with.

Avoid being the first in fixing a hard Censure, let it be confirmed by the
general Voice, before you give into it; Neither are you then to give Sentence
like a Magistrate, or as if you had a special Authority to bestow a good or ill
Name at your discretion. Do not dwell too long upon a weak Side, touch and go
away; take pleasure to stay longer where you can commend, like Bees that fix
only upon those Herbs out of which they may extract the Juice of which their
Honey is composed. A Virtue stuck with Bristles is too rough for this Age; it
must be adorned with some Flowers, or else it will be unwillingly entertained;
so that even where it may be fit to strike, do it like a Lady, gently; and
assure your self, that where you care to do it, you will wound others more, and
hurt your self less, by soft Strokes, than by being harsh or violent.

The Triumph of Wit is to make your good Nature subdue your Censure; to be
quick in seeing Faults, and slow in exposing them. You are to consider, that
the invisible thing called a Good Name, is made up of the Breath of Numbers
that speak well of you; so that if by a disobliing Word you silence the
meanest, the Gale will be less strong which is to bear up your Esteem. And
though nothing is so vain as the eager pursuit of empty Applause, yet to be
well thought of, and to be kindly used by the World, is like a Glory about a
Woman's Head; it is a Perfume she carries about with her, and leaves wherever
she goes; it is a Charm against Ill Will. Malice may empty her Quiver, but
cannot wound; the Dirt will not stick, the Jests will not take; Without the
consent of the World a Scandal does not go deep; it is only a slight stroke
upon the injured Party and returns with the greater force upon those that
gave it.

VANITY and AFFECTATION.
I Must with more than ordinary earnestness give you Caution against Vanity, it
being the Fault to which your Sex seems to be the most inclined; and since
Affectation for the most part attends it, I do not know how to divide them. I
will not call them Twins, because more properly Vanity is the Mother, and
Affectation is the Darling Daughter; Vanity is the Sin, and Affectation is the
Punishment; the first may be called the Root of Self-Love, the other the Fruit.
Vanity is never at its full growth till it spreads into Affectation, and then
it is complete.

Not to dwell any longer upon the definition of them, I will pass to the means
and motives to avoid them. In order to it, you are to consider, that the World
challenges the right of distributing Esteem and Applause; so that where any
assume by their single Authority to be their own Carvers, it grows angry, and
never fails to seek Revenge. And if we may measure a Fault by the greatness
of the Penalty, there are few of a higher size than Vanity, as there is scarce
a Punishment which can be heavier than that of being laughed at.

Vanity makes a Woman tainted with it, so top full of her self, that she
spilleth it upon the Company. And because her own thoughts are entirely
employed in Self-Contemplation; she endeavors, by a cruel Mistake, to
confine her Acquaintance to the same narrow Circle of that which only
concerns her Ladyship, forgetting that she is not of half that Importance to
the World, that she is to her self, so mistaken she is in her Value, by being
her own Appraiser. She will fetch such a Compass in Discourse to bring in her
beloved Self, and rather than fail, her fine Petty-Coat, that there can hardly
be a better Scene than such a Trial of ridiculous Ingenuity. It is a Pleasure
to see her Angle for Commendations, and rise so dissatisfied with the Ill-bread
Company, if they will not bite. To observe her throwing her Eyes about to fetch
in Prisoners, and go about Cruizing like a Privateer, and so out of
Countenance, if she return without Booty, is no ill piece of Comedy. She is so
eager to draw respect, that she always misseth it, yet thinks it so much her
due, that when she fails she grows waspish, not considering, that it is
impossible to commit a Rape upon the will; that it must be fairly gained, and
will not be taken by Storm; and that in this Case, the Tax ever rises highest
by a Benevolence. If the World instead of admiring her Imaginary Excellencies,
takes the Liberty to laugh at them, she appealeth from it to her self, for
whom she gives Sentence, and proclaims it in all Companies. On the other
side, if encouraged by a Civil Word, she is so obliging, that she will give
thanks for being laughed at in good Language. She takes a Compliment for a
Demonstration, and sets it up as an Evidence, even against her
Looking-Glass. But the good Lady being all this while in a most profound
Ignorance of her self, forgets that Men would not let her talk upon them,
and throw so many senseless words at their head, if they did not intend to put
her Person to Fine and Ransom, for her Impertinence. Good words of any other
Lady, are so many Stones thrown at her, she can by no means bear them, they
make her so uneasy, that she cannot keep her Seat, but up she rises and goes
home half burst with Anger and Strait-Lacing. If by great chance she says any
thing that has sense in it, she expects such an Excessive rate of
Commendations, that to her thinking the Company ever rises in her Debt. She
looks upon Rules as things made for the common People, and not for Persons of
her Rank; and this Opinion sometimes tempts her to Extend her Prerogative to
the dispencing with the commandments. If by great Fortune she happens, in
spite of her Vanity, to be honest, she is so troublesome with it, that as far
as in her lies, she makes a scurvy thing of it. Her bragging of her Virtue,
looks as if it cost her so much pains to get the better of her Self, that the
Inferences are very ridiculous. Her good Humor is generally applied to the
laughing at good Sense. It would do one good to see how heartily she despises
any thing that is fit for her to do. The greatest part of her Fancy is laid out
in choosing her Gown, as her Discretion is chiefly employed in not paying for
it. She is faithful to the Fashion, to which not only her Opinion, but her
Senses are wholly resigned: so obsequious she is to it, that she would be ready
to be reconciled even to Virtue with all its Faults; if she had her Dancing
Master's Word that it was practsi'd at Court.

To a Woman so composed, when Affectation comes in to improve her Character,
it is then raised to the highest Perfection. She first sets up for a Fine
thing, and for that Reason will distinguish her self, right or wrong, in every
thing she does. She would have it thought that she is made of so much the finer
Clay, and so much more sifted than ordinary, that she has no common Earth
about her. To this end she must neither move nor speak like other Women,
because it would be vulgar; and therefore must have a Language of her own,
since ordinary English is too course for her. The Looking-glass in the Morning
dictateth to her all the Motions of the Day, which by how much the more
studied, are so much the more mistaken. She comes into a Room as if her Limbs
were set on with ill made Screws, which makes the Company fear the pretty
thing should leave some of its artificial Person upon the Floor. She does not
like her self as God Almighty made her, but will have some of her own
Workmanship; which is so far from making her a better thing than a Woman, that
it turns her into a worse Creature than a Monkey. She falls out with
Nature, against which she makes War without admitting a Truce, those Moments
excepted in which her Gallant may reconcile her to it. When she has a mind to
be soft and languishing, there is something so unnatural in that affected
Easiness, that her Frowns could not be by many degrees so forbidden. When she
would appear unreasonably humble, one may see she is so excessively proud, that
there is no enduring it. There is such an impertinent Smile, such a satisfied
Simper, when she faintly disowneth some fulsom Commendation a Man happens to
bestow upon her against his Conscience, that her Thanks for it are more visible
under such a thin Disguise, than they could be if she should print them. If a
handsomer Woman takes any liberty of Dressing out of the ordinary Rules the
mistaken Lady follows, without distinguishing the unequal Pattern, and makes
her self uglier by an example misplaced; either forgetting the Privilege of
good Looks in another, or presuming, without sufficient reason upon her own.
Her Discourse is a senseless Chime of empty Words, a heap of Compliments so
equally applied to differing Persons, that they are neither valued nor
believed. Her Eyes keep pace with her Tongue, and are therefore always in
motion. One may discern that they generally incline to the compassionate side,
and that, notwithstanding her pretense to Virtue, she is gentle to distressed
Lovers, and Ladies that are merciful. She will repeat the tender part of a Play
so feelingly, that the Company may guess, without Injustice, she was not
altogether a disinteressed Spectator. She thinks that Paint and Sin are
concealed by railing at them. Upon the latter she is less hard. and being
divided between the two opposite Prides of her Beauty and her Virtue, she is
often tempted to give broad Hints that some body is dying for her; and of the
two she is less unwilling to let the World think she may be sometimes profaned,
than that she is never worshipped.

Very great Beauty may perhaps so dazzle for a time, that Men may not so clearly
see the Deformity of these Affectations; But when the Brightness goes off, and
that the Lover's Eyes are by that means set at liberty, to see things as they
are, he will naturally return to his Senses and recover the Mistake into which
the Lady's good Looks had at first engaged him. And being once undeceived,
cease to worship that as a Goddess, which he sees it only an artificial
Shrine moved by Wheels and Springs, to delude him. Such Women please only like
the first Opening of a Scene, that has nothing to recommend it but the being
new. They may be compared to Flies, that have pretty shining Wings for two or
three hot Months, but the first cold Weather makes an end of them; so the
latter Season of these fluttering Creatures is dismal: From their nearest
Friends they receive a very faint Respect; from the rest of the World, the
utmost degree of contempt.

Let this Picture supply the place of any other Rules which might be given to
prevent your resemblance to it, The Deformity of it, well considered, is
Instruction enough; from the same reason, that the sight of a Drunkard is a
better Sermon against that Vice, than the best that wasever preached upon that
Subject.

PRIDE.
AFter having said this against Vanity, I do not intend to apply the same
Censure to Pride, well placed, and rightly defined. It is an ambiguous Word;
one kind of it is as much a Virtue, as the other is a Vice: But we are
naturally so apt to choose the worst, that it is become dangerous to commend the
best side of it.

A Woman is not to be proud of her fine Gown; nor when she has less Wit than
her Neighbors, to comfort her self that she has more Lace. Some Ladies put so
much weight upon Ornaments, that if one could see into their Hearts, it would
be found, that even the Thought of Death is made less heavy to them by the
contemplation of their being laid out in State, and honorably attended to the
Grave. One may come a good deal short of such an Extreme, and yet still be
sufficiently Impertinent, by setting a wrong Value upon things, which ought to
be used with more indifference. A Lady must not appear sollicitous to ingross
Respect to her self, but be content with a reasonable Distribution, and allow
it to others, that she may have it returned to her. She is not to be
troublesomly nice, nor distinguish her self by being too delicate, as if
ordinary things were too course for her; this is an unmannerly and an offensive
Pride, and where it is practiced, deserves to be mortified, of which it seldom
fails. She is not to lean too much upon her Quality, much less to despise
those who are below it. Some make Quality and Idol, and then their Reason must
fall down and Worship it. They would have the World think, that no amends can
ever be made for the want of a great Title, or an ancient Coat of Arms: They
imagine, that with these advantages they stand upon the higher Ground, which
makes them look down upon Merit and Virtue, as things inferior to them. This
mistake is not only senseless, but criminal too, in putting a greater Price
upon that which is a piece of good luck, than upon things which are valuable in
themselves. Laughing is not enough for such a Folly; it must be severely
whipped, as it justly deserves. It will be confessed, there are frequent
Temptations given by pert Vpstarts to be angry, and by that to have our
Judgments corrupted in these Cases: But they are to be resisted; and the utmost
that is to be allowed, is, when those of a new Edition will forget themselves,
so as either to brag of their weak side, or to endeavor to hide their Meanness
by their Insolence, to cure them by a little seasonable Raillery, a little
Sharpness well placed, without dwelling too long upon it.

These and many other kinds of Pride are to be avoided.

That which is to be recommended to you, is an Emulation to raise your self to
a Character, by which you may be distinguished; an Eagerness for precedence in
Virtue, and all such other things as may gain you a greater share of the good
opinion of the World. Esteem to Virtue is like a cherishing Air to Plants and
Flowers, which makes them blow and prosper; and for that reason it may be
allowed to be in some degree the Cause as well as the Reward of it. That Pride
which leads to a good End, cannot be a Vice, since it is the beginning of a
Virtue; and to be pleased with just Applause, is so far from a Fault, that it
would be an ill Symptom in a Woman, who should not place the greatest part of
her Satisfaction in it. Humility is no doubt a great Virtue; but it cease to
be so, when it is afraid to scorn an ill thing. Against Vice and Folly it is
becoming your Sex to be haughty; but you must not carry the Contempt of things
to Arrogance toward Persons, and it must be done with fitting Distinctions,
else it may be Inconvenient by being unseasonable. A Pride that raises a
little Anger to be outdone in any thing that is good, will have so good an
Effect, that it is very hard to allow it to be a Fault.

It is no easy matte to carry even between these differing kinds so described;
but remember that it is safer for a Woman to be thought too proud, than too
familiar.

DIVERSIONS.
THE last thing I shall recommend to you, is a wise and a safe method of using
Diversions. To be too eager in the pursuit of Pleasure whilst you are Young, is
dangerous; to catch at it in riper Years, is grasping a shadow; it will not be
held. Besides that by being less natural it grows to be indecent. Diversions
are the most properly applied, to ease and relieve those who are Oppressed, by
being too much employed. Those that are Idle have no need of them, and yet
they, above all others, give themselves up to them. To unbend our Thoughts,
when they are too much stretched by our Cares, is not more natural than it is
necessary, but to turn our whole Life into a Holy day, is not only ridiculous,
but destroys Pleasure instead of promoting it. The Mind like the Body is
tired by being always in one Posture, too serious breaks, and too diverting
looseneth it: It is Variety that gives the Relish; so that Diversions too
frequently repeated, grow first to be indifferent, and at last tedious. Whilst
they are well chosen and well timed, they are never to be blamed; but when they
are used to an Excess, though very Innocent at first, they often grow to be
Criminal, and never fail to be Impertinent.

Some Ladies are bespoken for Merry Meetings, as Bessus was for Duels. They are
engaged in a Circle of Idleness, where they turn round for the whole Year,
without the Interruption of a serious Hour, They know all the Players Names,
and are Intimately acquainted with all the Booths in Bartholomew-Fair. No
Soldier is more Obedient to the sound of his Captain's Trumpet, than they are
to that which summoneth them to a Puppet-Play or a Monster. The Spring that
brings out Flies, and Fools, makes them Inhabitants in Hide-Park; in the
Winter they are an Encumbrance to the Play House, and the Balast of the Drawing
Room. The Streets all this while are so weary of these daily Faces, that Men's
Eyes are over laid with them. The Sight is glutted with fine things, as the
Stomach with sweet ones; and when a fair Lady will give too much of her self to
the World, she grows luscious, and oppresses instead of pleasing. These
Jolly Ladies do so continually seek Diversion, that in a little time they grow
into a Jest, yet are unwilling to remember, that if they were seldomer seen
they would not be so often laughed at. Besides they make themselves Cheap, than
which there cannot be an unkinder word bestowed upon your Sex.

To play sometimes, to entertain Company, or to divert your self, is not to be
disallowed, but to do it so often as to be called a Gamester, is to be avoided,
next to the things that are most Criminal. It has Consequences of several
kinds not to be endured; it will engage you into a habit of Idleness and ill
hours, draw you into ill mixed Company, make you neglect your Civilities
abroad, and your Business at home, and impose into your Acquaintance such as
will do you no Credit.

To deep Play there will be yet greater Objections. It will give Occasion to
the World to ask spiteful Questions. How you dare venture to lose, and what
means you have to pay such great sums? If you pay exactly, it will be enquired
from whence the Money comes? If you owe, and especially to a Man, you must be
so very Civil to him for his forbearance, that it lays a ground of having it
farther improved, if the Gentleman is so disposed; who will be thought no
unfair Creditor, if where the Estate fails he seizes upon the Person.
Besides if a Lady could see her own Face upon an ill Game, at a deep Stake, she
would certainly forswear any thing that could put her looks under such a
Disadvantage.

To Dance sometimes will not be imputed to you as a fault; but remember that
the end of your Learning it, was, that you might the better know how to move
gracefully. It is only an advantage so far. When it goes beyond it, one may
call it excelling in a Mistake, which is no very great Commendation. It is
better for a Woman never to Dance, because she has no skill in it, than to do
it too often, because she does it well. The easiest as well as the safest
Method of doing it, is in private Companies, amongst particular Friends, and
then carelessly, like a Diversion, rather than with Solemnity, as if it was a
business, or had any thing in it to deserve a Month's preparation by serious
Conference with a Dancing Master.

Much more might be said to all these Heads, and many more might be added to
them. But I must restrain my Thoughts, which are full of my Dear Child, and
would overflow into a Volume, which would not be fit for a New Years-Gift. I
will conclude with my warmest Wishes for all that is good to you. That you may
live so as to be an Ornament to your Family, and a Pattern to your Sex. That
you may be blessed with a Husband that may value, and with Children that may
inherit your Virtue; That you may shine in the World by a true Light, and
silence Envy by deserving to be esteemed; That Wit and Virtue may both conspire
to make you a great Figure. When they are separated, the first is so empty, and
the other so faint, that they scarce have right to be commended. May they
therefore meet and never part; let them be your Guardian Angels, and be sure
never to stray out of the distance of their joint protection. May you so raise
your Character, that you may help to make the next Age a better thing, and
leave Posterity in your Debt for the advantage it shall receive by your Example.

Let me conjure you, My Dearest, to comply with this kind Ambition of a Father,
whose Thoughts are so engaged in your behalf, that he reckons your Happiness
to be the greatest part of his own.

FINIS.

