THE Crucified Jesus OR, A full ACCOUNT OF THE Nature, End, Design and Benefits
OF THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SUPPER. With Necessary DIRECTIONS, PRAYERS,
Praises and Meditations, To be used by Persons who come to the HOLY COMMUNION.
By ANTHONY HORNECK, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

The Third Edition, Corrected and Amended.

In the SAVOY, Printed for Samuel Lowndes* overagainst Exeter-Change in the
Strand. 1695.

AGNOSTO EYEPGET TO THE Unknown Benefactor.
SIR,
THE following Discourse being the substance of several Sermons, Preached at
your desire, and encouragement, before the Monthly Sacraments, though I am
ignorant who you are, and what part of the City or Country you live in, yet I
thought it my Duty, to let the Public know, that there is such a Man in the
World, who is desirous to do good, and loves not to be known. This Treatise you
have a proper Title too, not only as one, whose Hearts desire is to see the
Church of England flourish, but as a Benefactor too; and to have Dedicated it
to any other Person, had been injurious to your Character.

You were sensible how backward the generality are to come to the Holy
Communion, how much ground the Church, and Christianity it self, loses by this
stupid negligence of it is pretended Votaries, and how, not a few absent
themselves, for want of understanding the true nature and design of this
Blessed Sacrament, and therefore justly thought, that if, by a previous Monthly
Sermon, Men's Hearts were warmed into consideration of the Use and Necessity of
this Ordinance, the Mists, which hitherto have clouded their Understandings,
would be dispelled, and they become acquainted with their Du^y, which was the
cause of your exciting me to this Public Service.

Your Judgment has not failed you, for since these Religious Exercises have
been among us, abundance of Persons, who before looked upon their coming to the
Holy Table, either as indifferent, or unnecessary, or unseasonable, have,
through the Blessing of God, bethought themselves, considered the Obligations,
that the mighty Work of Redemption lays upon them, and conscientiously applied
themselves to the frequent Use of this Universal Medicine. And all I can tell
you for your encouragement, is this, That as we owe the beginning, and progress
of these Monthly Sermons, to your Zeal and Influence, so you will have a share,
both in the good that is done by them, and in the Rewards of those, who are
thereby brought to a serious sense of the wonderful Love of God in Christ
Jesus. It was a public good you designed by your munificence; and that which
makes the Pious Work the greater, is, that you do not care your left hand
should know what your right hand does.

The Almighty has enriched your Heart with the Noblest Charity, even with that
to the Souls of Men, an Empl^yment which God himself disdains not to travel in;
and what are all the Angels of Heaven, but Ministering Spirits, sent forth to be
helpful unto those that shall be Heirs of Salvation?

Nothing is more pleasing to God, than to be instrumental in bringing many Sons
unto Glory, and though you are no public Orator, yet you help toward Men's
Conversion, and in employing others to rouse them from their Spiritual slumber,
your Self have a hand in their Reformation; And by that means Preach, though
you be not in Orders, yet without offense to the Law, and at the same time
observe the Canons of the Church, and win Souls, without being engaged in the
Sacred Function. Some Critics think, that S. Paul, in his Address to the
Athenians, does not find fault with, but commends them for Erecting an Altar To
the unknown God, and if so, I hope none will blame me for raising this
Monument, To an unknown Benefactor.

Good Works are the sweetest Incense that can be laid upon God's Altar; and
though some, that have concealed their Names, have been discovered by the
Charitable Deeds done by them, yet yours are so ordered, that, though for some
time you have thus generously employed part of your means, to advance this
public Good, yet still you are a stranger to me; and in that, happier than the
Roman Senator, who hiding himself in the time of Proscription, L. Plotius.
his Perfumes betrayed him.

May the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has already touched
your Heart with a sense of his Glory, enrich you with all Spiritual Blessings,
and make you to abound more and more in Faith, in Love, and in all Goodness.
May that Great Shepherd of Souls enlighten your Understanding with greater
brightness, raise your Soul above this transitory World, teach you to despise
the things that are seen, and fill you with earnest longings, after those which
are not seen; that after having served your Generation here, your Immortal part
may be admitted to the Enjoyment and Embraces of the Holy Trinity, the
Festivals of Seraphim, to Mount Sion, to the City of the Living God, to the
innumerable Company of Angels, to the general Assembly of the Firstborn, which
are written in Heaven, to the Spirits of Men made perfect, and to Jesus the
Mediator of the New Testament, whose Blood speaks better things than that of
Abel. So wishes,

SIR, Your Affectionate Friend, And Servant, ANTH. HORNECK.

THE PREFACE.
THE vast number of Books about the Sacrament of the Eucharist, as it shows the
richness of the Subject, so it discovers the Zeal and Industry of good Men, to
uphold the power of Religion in these perilous times, as they are called by the
Apostle of the Gentiles. 2 Timothy 3. 1.
And indeed, if we consider the influence this Ordinance has yet on Men, who
have not altogether sold themselves to do Evil, and are not gone so far, as to
make a mock of Religion; it is no small motive to busy our selves in
recommending and pressing the frequent use of it. I look upon it as a special
Providence of God, that in this Iron Age, wherein Men have made a shift to
baffle all the Rules of Discipline, they have yet some Reverence for this
Ordinance; insomuch, that if we can oblige them to make use of it, we may
entertain great hopes of their future sobriety and seriousness: The generality
shun it, because they are loath to shake hands with their looser lives, and they
are sensible that the use of this Ordinance, and a disorderly Conversation, are
things inconsistent, and incompatible; and therefore, could we persuade them to
come, we might promise our selves a rich and plentiful Harvest, there being
nothing more likely, than the fruitfulness of that Ground, which is watered
with the Blood of Jesus. What I publish here, is in order to make good my
promise in a lesser Piece, called The Fire of the Altar; and when a Man has
once, either rashly, or premeditately, made himself a Debtor to the Public, I
think it is Justice and good Manners, if he be able, to discharge the
Obligation. I do not hereby discourage the Reader, from perusing other Men's
Labors, (He Will possibly think there is no danger) but desire only to promote
and encourage the good he reaps from exacter Compositions. I have, in the
following Discourse, endeavored at once, to inform the Readers Judgment, to
direct his Practice, and to satisfy his Curiosity; the first, by giving a
rational account of the Nature of the Eucharist; the second, by taking notice
of the particular Duties requisite in Communicants; and the third, by adding
some Historical passages about the rise and progress of some Rites, and
Opinions, relating to this Sacrament. I had Thoughts toward the latter end, to
have added a Chapter about Confessing of Sin to a Faithful Minister of God's
Word, before Men receive the Communion; but fearing the Book would swell to an
unconscionable bulk, I was forced to stop where I did. That which made me
desirous to have said something of that Subject, was, because I find by
converse, that some Romish Priests have of late been very busy with several
Members of our Church, and made a mighty stir about this Sacramental
Confession, as if our Church were defective in a Fundamental Point, because we
press no such thing upon our Communicants. But not to mention, that Mountebanks
do what they can to discourage Men from consulting with discreet and rational
Physicians; we do not, indeed, make this Confession of sins to a Minister
absolutely necessary to Salvation, nor do we enjoin it upon pain of Damnation,
because we have no warrant for it in Scripture, which our Church makes the only
Rule of her Faith; but that we do not encourage this Confession, as a thing
very convenient, nay, in some cases necessary, especially, where the Sinners
Conscience is burdened, and oppressed, and labors under doubts, is a malicious
Slander and Calumny. We find nothing in the Apostles Rubric for Celebrating
the Holy Communion, 1 Cor. 11. v. 28.
concerning this Confession. But all that he says, is this, Let a Man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup; which
Christians may certainly do, without Confessing their Sins to a Minister. Yet
where they are gravel'd in this Examination, or find themselves in perplexity
about their Spiritual concerns, Reason requires, that they should come to the
Priest, who is appointed by God, as Director of their Consciences, and where we
find, that their Souls are touched with remorse, and their resolution is great
and magnanimous, to shake off the burden of their Pollutions, and to give
themselves up to the conduct of a better Master, there we are ready to impart
to them that Absolution, which God has bid us pronounce in his Name to their
Comfort, and whereof there is as full, and satisfactory a Form in our Liturgy,
as any Christian can desire. It Is granted, we do not, as in the Roman Church,
join the Merits of the Virgin Mary, and of the Saints, to those of Christ, in
our Absolution, because we dare not, for fear of committing a heinous Sin; but
we Absolve, as far, as we are empowered by the Word of God, and he that leaves
this Fountain, and hews out to himself Cisterns, which can hold no Water, is in
danger of being forsaken by God, and left to his own Delusions, and vain
Imaginations.

THE Crucified Jesus.
CHAP. I.
Of the Name of this Ordinance, and why Distribution and Participation of Bread
and Wine, usual in Christian Assemblies, is called The Lords Supper.
The CONTENTS.
All Societies of Men have certain Badges, whereby they are united among
themselves, and distinguished from others. The Sacraments of the Christian
Church are such Badges. This particularly, where Bread and Wine is Administered,
called The Lords Supper, for four Reasons, Though Celebrated in the Morning,
yet may still be called the Lords Supper. Some Remarks upon its Institution at
Night. Diverse Names given to this Sacrament by the Ancients. An Account how
this Supper differs from Common Suppers. The Necessity of our giving attendance
at this Ordinance. The proper dress of the Soul, which renders it a welcome
Guest at this Sacrament. The Prayer.

I. IT is St. Austin's observation, that Men can never unite in the Bond of
Religion, whether true of false, l. 19. contr. Faust. c. 11.
except they agree in some outward Sign or Badge, as a Character of their
Concord and Combination; To this purpose it was, l. 6. de Bell. Gall
that even the Divides of old, as Caesar tells us, having made their
Sacrifices, the Testimony of their Union, whenever any of their People did
obstinately disobey their orders, the Punishment they inflicted on them, was,
to interdict them the Use and Participation of their Sacrifices; and whoever
fell under this Censure, was counted Criminal and impious; his Company,
Discourse and Conversation, shunned as the Plague; and he deprived of the
Benefit of the Law, and looked upon as infamous and scandalous. Such visible
Badges the Son of God, when he left the Earth, thought (...) to give to the
Christian World, to be Witness of their Union and Communion, viz. Baptism and
the Supper of the Lord; the former, as a Mark of their being admitted into his
Church; the other, to advance and increase that Spiritual Life, of which the
former may be supposed to have sown the Seed, and laid the happy Foundation;
and and though all that come and apply themselves to the use of these
Ordinances, are not therefore true Members of his Church, or lively Stones in
that Spiritual Building yet as these Mysteries, and frequenting of them, are
standing Witnesses of their having addicted themselves and vowed obedience to
Christ's Religion; so they are means, whereby they may not only arrive to a
lively sense of their Duty, but whereby their Union and Communion may be
promoted, and proclaimed to all that are without the Pale of Christian
Congregations. And were the ancient Discipline of the Church revived, and
reduced to its former luster and glory, we may rationally conclude, that to be
deprived of the use of these two especially of the latter, would be more
infamous and grievous, than it was among the Heathen to be excluded from the
participation of their Sacrifices; as the Benefits, of which people are
deprived thereby, are of greater consequence and concernment, than those, which
the Pagans expected from their unreasonable Service.

II. As to the Sacred Rite of Distributing and Participating of Bread and Wine,
universally practiced in the Christian Church, and which is the proper subject
of the ensuing Discourse, the reason why it is called the Lords Supper, is,

1. Because the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, he whose Name is Wonderful,
The Lord Jesus Christ has solemnly instituted, vnd ordained it. It was the
fatal night, when the Jews, prompted by the Prince of Darkness, and blind with
rage and envy, were come out against him, as against a Thief, with Staves and
Spears, to hurry him to Death and to the Cross; just before this amazing
Tragedy began, having eaten the Passover with his Disciples, and by so doing
put an end to the Types and Shadows of the Ceremonial Law, he took Bread and
Wine, and gave it to all the Church then present, and bid them eat and drink of
it, and in so doing, have higher thoughts, and reflect upon all the instances
of his Love to their Immortal Souls, and teach their Successors to do so too.
This Jesus who by wicked hands was Crucified, Acts 2. 36.
and whom God has made both Lord and Christ, was the Master and Author of this
Feast, and from him it justly derives its Name.

2. Because the end of this Eating and Drinking is to Commemorate the Death of
the Lord Jesus. As the end of the Passover, under the Law, was, to remember the
great Deliverance from the Egyptian Bondage; and that of the Feast of
Tabernacles, their being guided through the Wilderness by a Cloud, and their
Ancestors dwelin Booths and Tents: As the Feast of Trumpets was instituted
either by way of Anticipation, that they might remember afterward how the
Walls of Jericho fell, or to refresh their Minds with Isaac's Sacrifice, (an
Emblem of the Messiah's Death;) and the Feast of Weeks, or Pentecost, was
ordained as a Testimony of their Gratitude for a Plentiful Harvest, and to put
them in mind of the Liberty they gained, when God gave them the Law, and entered
into a Covenant with them; and that of Purim to bring into their Memories, how
they were rescued from the cruelty of Haman the Amalekite; and that of the
Dedication, to suggest to them the Rebuilding of the Temple: So the Lord Jesus
enjoined and recommended the keeping of this Feast to his Followers, that they
might remember, how their Master loved them, and made his Death a demonstration
of Love; how he died to make them happy, and denied himself in all the Contents
of Life, to make theirs blessed and glorious for ever; how he submitted to the
Power of the Grave, to purchase their comfortable Resurrection, and fell a
Sacrifice, that they might have hopes of Pardon through his Blood; a
Remembrance so just, that if this Charity deserves not frequent Commemoration,
no Mercy, no Benefit, no Favor, no Providence can deserve it, for this goes
beyond all, that the Word of God calls glorious and beneficial to Mankind.

3. Its the Lord's Supper, because the Lord Jesus is Meat and Drink in this
Feast; Meat indeed, and Drink indeed, as the expression is, John 6. 11. for
though that Chapter speaks not directly of this Supper, yet the Phrases and
modes of speech used there, may very piously be applied to what is represented
by the Elements in this Feast; for the Benefits, Advantages and Emoluments of
Christ's Death, are Food so proper to a Religious Soul, and a gracious Mind
feeds so savourly upon these, that nothing deserves the name of Spiritual Meat
and Drink, so much as these; and indeed, these nourish and feed the Soul, make
her strong and lively; these are her Cordials and Restoratives, and in the
nature of David's Oil, Psalm. 104. 15. which make her Face to shine.

4. It Is the Lords Supper, because the nourishment and strength it affords or
yields, is by the influence of the Lord Jesus. He sends his Spirit into the
Soul, that comes to his Feast hungry and thirsty, and longing after the Riches
of Gods Love, whereby the Soul is inflamed to love him, who bought her at this
dear rate; and that love produces Peaceableness and Gentleness, and Faith, and
Purity, and Sincerity, and Delight in good Works, which are excellent signs of
the Souls growing strong in the use of the Spiritual Food. The Holy Spirit of
Christ destroys the reigning Power of Sin in her, and the government of the
Flesh, for the leaner this grows, and the more the authority of it is
diminished, the better the Soul thrives, and the more vigorous and active it
becomes in all its faculties.

III. Though to call this Feast, The Lord's Supper when it is in most Churches
Celebrated in the Morning, seems to be improper, yet the reason why it still
bears the name, is, Because the same substantial Actions are still observed in
the Celebration of it, that were used by Christ and his Disciples at his first
institution in the night; and not only the same Actions, but the same end and
design is kept on foot, which we find in its first foundation; and whenever it
is celebrated, it is still in imitation of that Supper, and that Supper is still
remembered in it. The reason why Christ in instituting of it, made use of the
night, which gave it the name of a Supper, was, because it was to be
succedaneous to the Passover, which, according to custom, was eaten at night,
as the Deliverance, which the Jews remembered then, was performed by the Angel
at night: and as the Passover represented the Old Covenant or Testament, and
this Feast the New, so it was fit, that the later should be instituted
immediately after the Celebration of the former, that both being set together,
their different signification might more plainly appear, and Men might see,
what Mercies they might expect from the bringing in of a better Covenant. This
being the occasion of Christ Celebrating this Feast at night, and consequently
the reason ceasing with the Typical Passover, the Christian Churches, in
process of time, took the liberty of Celebrating it at all seasons, as they saw
it either necessary or expedient. And though what I have said about the
Passover, is the Principal reason, why Christ made choice of the night for this
Institution, yet, for ought we know, it might be with an intent also to hint to
us, how by this Sacrament, the night of Ignorance which sat heavy on the minds
of most Men, would be dispelled; that by night is sometimes understood the
night of Ignorance in Scripture, is evident from Matthew. 4. 16. Es. 9. 1, 2.
Romans 13. 12. and that by the devout and religious use of this Sacrament, our
Ignorance is in a great measure cured, experience is a sufficient testimony:
Hereby certainly our minds are signally enlightened, and we behold the Wisdom,
Love and Goodness of God, discover the methods and ways of Salvation, get clear
Apprehensions of the Mysteries of our Faith, and see how inconsistent the Works
of Darkness are with this solemn remembrance of the Death of Christ; hereby we
come to feel the Power of God toward them that Believe, and find out the Secret
of the Union, that is betwixt Christ and his true Followers, and learn to know,
that what is said in the Word of God, concerning the tender regard of Christ to
his Church and Friends, is no Fable. Add to all this, that Christ made choice
of the night, possibly to put us in mind of his sudden coming to Judgment,
which is frequently expressed in Scripture by his coming in the night, Mark 13.
35, 36. Luke 12. 38, 39. 1 Thessal. 5, 2. Rev. 3. 3. nor is this an unsuitable
Reflection in this Sacrament to contemplate his coming to judge the World; for
though that coming may strike terror into Men, that put the evil day far from
them, and prepare not for their Lord's coming, yet to a Soul enlightened and
Sanctified, it cannot but afford matter of comfort, to think at such times,
that the same Jesus, who was crucified, will ere long appear in Glory with all
his mighty Angels to give those, that have followed him in the Regeneration,
full possession of the purchased Glory However, at the best, the Celebration of
this Feast at night was but a circumstantial thing, and therefore the Church is
not obliged to keep to it, circumstantial things depending much upon
convenience, or inconveniency, which vary in several Ages; and this was the
reason, that though standing at the eating of the Passover was a commanded
circumstance, Exodus 12. 11. yet the Jewish Church, in after Ages, varied from
it, even by Christ's own Approbation, and turned that posture into leaning, as I
shall have occasion to show more largely in the Chapter about Kneeling at the
Communion. The Church therefore sins not in Celebrating this Feast at any other
time, especially in a circumstance barely related, not commanded. Yet as I said
before, because this Spiritual Feast, kept up in all Churches, is still in
imitation of Christ's Supper, and that Supper is religiously remembered in it,
and the same essential things, together with the scope, drift and design of
all, are still preserved, it is not unfitly called the Lords Supper still; so
that if any man seems to be contentious about the name, We have no such Custom
neither the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 12. 16.

IV. Yet this is no Argument, but that it may also lawfully be called and
expressed by other Names, and this we find the Christian Churches have done
from time to time. Tertullian was the first that called it a Sacrament, taking
the Name from the Oaths the Roman Soldiers took, that they would be true and
faithful to their Emperor, and the rather, because we vow Allegiance and
Fidelity in this Ordinance to the great Master that died for us. Others have
called it an Oblation, because we offer up our humble Prayers and Supplications
to the God and Father of Our Lord Jesus Christ, and our Souls and Bodies too,
when we remember this Beneficial Death. Sometimes it has been called a
Sacrifice, because it is not only a commemoration of the wonderful Sacrifice of
Christ's Death, but we cheerfully offer up the Sacrifice of our Praises for this
inestimable Mercy. The name of Communion occurs frequently in the Writings of
the Ancients, because all sincere Christians are hereby tied in a bond of
mutual Love, participate of the same Bread, are Fellow Members of the Mystical
Body of Christ, and have Communion with Christ their Head, and enjoy all the
same Benefits of his Death and sufferings. The word Eucharist is used as often
as any other, because Thanksgiving and Magnifying the Goodness, Mercy, and
Charity of God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, are a great part of the Service
here. The name Mass which they of the Roman Persuasion, and even the Lutheran
Churches make use of, as it was not known in the Church for the first Four
hundred years after Christ, so the Original of it was this, When the Lords
Supper was to be celebrated after Sermon, the Deacon or some other Officer of
the Church, called to the People, that did not, or were not to receive, in
these words, Ite, missa est, Depart, the Congregation is dismissed. In time,
that which was only a Preliminary circumstance of the Lords Supper, was applied
to the whole Office, and the Service was called Missa, or Mass, a word which
the Romanists make a great stir with, and turn into a perfect Charm, and a
monstrous Sacrifice, to the great disparagement of Christ's Sufferings, and the
Benefits that accrue thereby to true Believers. Some of their Writers make it a
Hebrew word and fetch it from the Old Testament, others derive it from the
Greek, others from the Northern Language; and though it expresses less then any
of those Names we mentioned before, yet has this swallowed up all the rest,
and the more superstitious in the Roman Church are almost afraid to call it by
any other Name; and the Mass is that which both young and Old, both learned and
unlearned among them, have most frequently in their Mouths, though few of the
Vulgar know what it means. I omit here many other Names, appropriated by
Writers to this Mystery; such as Collect, Economy, Liturgy, Dominical, Agenda,
Anaphora, Synaxis, etc. partly because I intend no Critical History, and partly
because by the names I have already spoken of, this Sacrament is usually known
in the Western Churches. That we do so often call it a Mystery, is, because the
things discovered and imitated here, do altogether depend upon Divine
Revelation, and are such as Flesh and Blood understand not, and the Secrets of
which, none but a Person enlightened by the Spirit of God apprehends to any
purpose, and which transcend all the Arcana or hidden points of Heathen
Divinity.

V. The name of the Lords Supper puts us in mind, that this Holy Feast differs
from Common Suppers.

1. In that Common Suppers are for the support of Nature, this for the support
of Grace and Goodness in our Souls. The former are intended for the
strengthening of the Body, this for the corroboration of our Faith, and Hope,
and Love. Our Common Supper represents to us the Ordinary Providence of God,
which opens its hand, and fills the desire of every living thing: This, Gods
extraordinary dispensation, which shows at what cost and charges we are made
the Children of God, and fitted for everlasting habitations. The former gives
us an account of the Blessings of Gods Left, this of the favors of his Right
Hand: The former bids us look into the nether, this into the upper Springs of
the Divine Clemency.

2. In our Common Suppers, our Spirits may unbend, and our Minds and Tongues
take liberty of thinking and speaking of things relating to our necessary
Employments in the World; in this, our thoughts must rise, mount up with Wings
as Eagles, pierce the Clouds, and fix on the Riches of Divine Love, retire from
the World, view God, and his glorious Attributes, and unite with that excellent
object, improve themselves into Contempla^ion, and adore the Mystery of
Redemption. In the former, no other Preparation is required, but what we are to
bring with us to common affairs and businesses, i. e. Gravity and Sobriety; but
in this, the Heart must be prepared, the Soul chafed, the Affections warmed,
prayers offered, Ejaculations press into Gods presence, and Self-examination
dispose the Soul for the visits of the Holy Ghost, that it may be a worthy
Guest at so great a Table, and the rather, because God is in a special manner
present here; for wherever Providence displays its brighter beams of Love,
there God is eminently present; that makes Heaven what it is, because there the
Divine Goodness shines most gloriously. In this Sacrament are set before us
more then ordinary Characters of Gods Love; the Angels of Heaven, says St.
Chrysostom, stand round about the Altar, and while the Minister of the
Ordinance is praising him, that lives for ever and ever, fall down at the same
time rejoicing at the blessings and the Manna, which falls down from Heaven on
the Children of Men; so that here we may cry out, as the Patriarch did of
Bethel, How dreadful is this place!

The Preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. THIS Sacarament being a Feast, prepared by the Greatest Prince for his
Servants, those Servants must needs be inexcusable, that refuse to give their
attendance here. I do not deny, but their may be just excuses and lawful causes
of our absence, such as Sickness, Weakness, Faintness and Distempers, Pains,
Aches and some sudden Accidents and Disasters, which will not suffer us to fix
our thoughts on so reverend an ordinance; but these happening against our Wills,
and importing no wilful neglect, God bears with us, under such circumstances;
but to act, as if we did not hear our Master call, and to suffer the World to
put a stop to our coming; to be so enamoured with our Profits and sensual
Satisfactions, as not to think our selves concerned in the Duty to refuse
approaching, because we are loath to be at the pains of searching our Hears and
trying our ways; to neglect coming, because we are loath to sequester our
Thoughts from sublunary Objects and to part with our Sins; to absent our
selves, because we relish the enjoyments of this life, before this Celestial
Food; this is to slight what God esteems, and to spurn at the greatest Mercy;
this is to thrust away Salvation, as if it were worth nothing, and to
^ndervalue the pains God takes to bring us to himself; and what God must think
of such Scorners, I need not tell you, for your selves may guess, except you
believe God to be a Stone or Stock, how he must resent it; and one would think,
it should cause some sad thoughts within you, if you believe what he says, 1 Samuel 2. 30 They that love me, I will Honor, but they that despise me, shall be
lightly esteemed.

II. When the Church invites us to this Feast, we must suppose that our Lord
himself makes an Address to us, as it is in Matthew. 22. 4. Behold I have
prepared my dinner, my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all things are
ready, come ye to the Marriage. This Holy Ordinance is the Marriage Feast,
which declares our being joined to the Son of God, the King immortal,
invisible, blessed for evermore, Hearken therefore, O daughter, and consider,
forget also thine own People, and thy fathers house, so shall the King greatly
desire thy beauty, for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him. This Feast
requires suitable Garments, not Tyrian Purple, not Persian Silks, not that
outward adorning with broider'd hair, or gold, or pearl, or costly array, but
the ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which in the sight of God is of great
price. A Garment of Sackcloath is a more glorious sight in the eyes of him, who
is the Master of This Feast, then all the bravery of the tinckling Ornaments of
the Daughters of Sion, and a Contrite Heart invites his gracious aspect; and
this the Primitive believers were so sensible of, that before their coming to
this Feast, they humbled their Souls with Fasting, and as course and uncomely
as this Garb appears to sensual Men, yet He that is the lofty and Holy one, who
inhabits Eternity, has declared his liking and approbation of it, For to that
man will I look, that is of an humble a and contrite Spirit, and trembles at my
word, Es. 66. 2. Es. 57. 15. We read of a Garment of Praise too Es. 61. 3. a
Garment, which the Angels of Light are adorned and decked withal, a Garb so
pleasing, that the Eternal Father smiles on them, and it smells sweeter than
that of Esau; God like old Isaac, takes notice of it, and blesses them. St.
Paul understood this, and wore it constantly. Hence it is, that we find him so
liberal in praising the Cross of Christ; with this he seems always transported,
and he seldom talks of Christ without Raptures, an object upon which he though
he could never say enough. Being rapt up into the Third Heaven, he had heard
the melodious voices of the four and twenty Elders, and the new Song, they sung
to the Lamb that was slain; Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the
Seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood
out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, Rev. 5. 9. and he
could not have a better Pattern. And now that we speak of Garments, that make
us welcome Guests at this Table, we must not forget the Garment or Ornament of
good Works, which St. Paul takes notice of, 1 Timothy 2. 10. These are the Shining
Robes our Souls must be ambitious of; these adorn our Profession, charm
spectators, attract followers, and are apt to make People in love with
goodness: and what is more, change us into the same Image with the Author and
Finisher of our Faith, whose province and employment was, going about and doing
good, as we are told Act 10. 38. and consequently this cannot but be a proper
Ornament, to appear in, at this Banquet: And of this nature is the white
Garment, we read of Eccles. 9. 8. or the Garment of Innocence and Purity,
whereby we hate the Garment spotted by the flesh, and keep Consciences void of
offense toward God and toward Man. In these Garbs we may boldly show our selves
at the Table of our Lord, and expect the same welcome, that the Spouse received
in the Canticles, Cant. 4. 10, 11. How fair is thy love, my Sister, my Spouse^
how much better is thy love, than Wine, and the smell of all thine Ointments,
than all Spices! Thy Lips; O my Spouse, drop as the Honeycomb, Honey and Milk
are under thy Tongue, and the smell of thy Garments, is like the smell of
Lebanon.

The PRAYER.
O Holy and merciful Savior, merciful beyond example, who treatest me as thy
Child, have prepared a Table for me, and made my Cup run over! Be thou my
Shepherd, let me want no Grace, no Mercy, no Assistance that is necessary for me
in the prosecuting of mine Eternal Happiness. Dress me with thy Robes, adorn me
with the Ensigns of thy Favor. Let me rejoice at the Supper, thou have
prepared for me. Teach me to entertain thy Call with gladness. Let me see
clearly, what thou have prepared for them that love thee. Thou know my
stubborn and lazy Heart, rouse it from its slumber; melt it by the fire of thy
love; breath upon these dry Bones, and they shall live: Let me not with Esau
prefer a morsel of Bread, eaten in secret, before my Birthright to Eternal
Glory. Let me consider thy Condescension in inviting such a Wretch to sup with
thee. Let not the evil examples, I see before me, be any temptation to me.
Uphold me by thy right hand. Let me dread thine anger, and count it a greater
disgrace to be despised by thee, than to be made the filth and offscouring of
all things. Give me a just esteem of thy favor, let me prefer it before all
the Contents of this present World. Let me feel that thy loving kindness is
better than life; this life will sade away, but thy Mercy endures for ever.
Let Goodness and Mercy follow me all the days of my life, and make me dwell in
thy House for ever. Amen.

CHAP. II.
Of the Mystery of Christ's Instituting this Sacrament, in that very Night in
which he was betrayed.
The CONTENTS,
The Treachery of Judas: His Character, and how That is imitated by Nominal
Christians at this day. Christ betrayed to wicked Men and to Devils; betrayed
partly for filthy Lucre, partly for his unchangeable integrity. The same is
still done by Hypocrites in Religion. This Sacrament instituted that very
Night, when he was betrayed, for three Reasons, The different appearances of
Sin, when Surveyed slightly, and when considered in its designs and Tendencies.
While we detest the Treason of Judas, we are to take heed, we do not become
guilty of the same Crime. The Prayer.

1. THough in the first Chapter I have already hinted the reason, why Christ
made use of the Night, to institute this Holy Sacrament, yet the Evangelists
laying an Emphasis or weight upon his instituting of it, that night, in which
he was betrayed, it is fit we should search into the Mystery of it: But before
we can do this some Circumstances of that Treason must be considered, which
will give light to Christ's design in pitching upon that time, and no other.
The Person that did venture on this height of Impiety, was Judas Iscariot, a a
Man, who by this Treason, has indeed left an Everlasting Name behind him, but
such an one, as all Ages must detest, and talk of with greater Indignation,
than the Heathens did of Herostratus, who, to make himself illustrious by doing
mischief, burnt the famous Temple of Diana: By this Man, the Ever-blessed JESUS
was betrayed; and if you will allow me to give a true Character of him, some of
us in this Glass may see their own treachery and deformity.

1. He was betrayed by one, who made profession of Religion, but was a
Hypocrite; i.e. his Actions contradicted his Profession, professing one thing,
he did another, and seeming to be good, he proved a Devil. Hypocrisy at this
day makes Men Traitors to Christ, even their coming to the Temple of the Lord,
and adhering to their known Sins, their frequenting the Ordinances of God, and
being unconcerned at his Promises and Threatenings; their believing the Articles
of Religion, and acting contrary to the design of them; their sinding fault
with those sins in others, which they have no aversion from in themselve; their
speaking honorably of God with their Lips, and dispensing with affronts, put
upon him in their practices; and what can we call this, but Judas-like to
betray the Son of Man with a Kiss; to say Hail-Master, and deliver him to be
Crucified; to cry Hosanna, and by and by, Away with him; at once to embrace,
and to decide him; to hug, and to contemn him; to how the knee to him, and mock
him; and in imitation to the rude Soldiery, to cloth him with Purple, and to
strike and buffet him.

2. He was betrayed by one, who, by no argument of love or mercy, could be
wrought into a sincere reformation: He had seen the Miracles of his Master;
himself, by his Masters influence, did wonders, and he saw Divinity shine in
him, nor was Christ wanting in warning, Teaching, Instructing, Entreating and
admonishing of him, yet nothing could prevail with him to purge out the Leven
of Malice and wickedness; and is not Christ betrayed this way by thousands at
this day? He that despises you, says he to his Servants and Instruments,
despises me; and then if his calling to Men, by his Ministers, by signal
providence, by Mercies, by Afflictions by their Consciences, by their
Infirmities and Sicknesses, Weaknesses and approaching Death, will not make
them sensible of their Duty; if in despite of his endeavors to keep them from
being undone, they scorn both his Yoke and his Love, what greater treason can
they be guilty of? especially where they make his mercy a shelter for their
sin; are therefore evil, because he is good, and are tempted by his Patience,
to be refractory and obstinate.

II. He was betrayed both to wicked Men and Devils.

1. To Wicked Men, such as the Scribes and Elders of the Jews, his sworn
Enemies, and this way he is still betrayed; for though there be no Scribes, no
Pharisees at this day, yet there are Atheistical and sensual Men, who seeing
Christ's Religion made a Clock for ill Designs and bad Practices, take occasion
from thence to speak evil of it, as David having professed much zeal to God,
and falling afterward into very monstrous sins, made the Enemies of the Lord
Blaspheme and laugh at the advantages, the Jews boasted of above the Doctrines
and Principles of their Neighbour-Idolaters. Indeed to see Men wicked and vain
under a show of Piety, and while they profess to be followers of Jesus, live
directly contrary to the example and precepts of the Holy Jesus, makes that
pretended Devotion ridiculous; and instead of converting Men of loose
Principles, drives them farther off, and tempts them to think all Religion to
be nothing but a Cheat: And though this Inference is unjust and absurd, yet
still these dangerous Inferences will be laid at their door, who either
contradicted the Principles of their Religion, by their actions, or made it a
Stalking horse to ill Designs and Purposes.

2. He was betrayed to Devils too, who seeing him in the hands of bloody and
barbarous Men, left and forsaken, as it were by Heaven and that Divinity, which
dwelt there, took the greater boldness to set upon him by temptations; and as
these foes watch opportunities, and then molest most, when Men are least able
to control their insolence; so seeing the Savior of the World thus seemingly
forsaken, we may suppose they assaulted him with greater fierceness, partly
because his design had been to destroy their Kingdom, and partly because he had
so often dispossessed them of their Habitations: It is therefore the Opinion of
the Learned Men, that in the Garden of Gethsemane, when Christ fell into
trembling fits, the Devil appeared to him in a visible and most dismal shape,
which occasions an Angels descent from above to comfort him; but whether it
were so or no, the Fiend seeing him betrayed, and delivered into the hands of
his own slaves, without all peradventure, triumphed in his misery, and insulted
over him with greater scorn, and in imitation of David's Enemies, cried Aha, So
would he have it; so does the Hypocrite betray Christ to the Devil, who hearing
the painted Christian talk of Mortification and contempt of the World, the two
fundamental points of his Masters Religion, and seeing him act point blank
against them, does not only deride and despise Religion, but casts reproaches
on Christ himself, as if the motives, he was come to give the World, were
impotent and unable to effect that mighty change, the Gospel speaks of, and
which the Son of God used to Glory in, while the World was so happy as to enjoy
his Presence. The Devils rejoice to see Christ thus defeated in his grand
designs of Reformation; and though he is in Glory at this time, yet the
Hypocrites actions raise a Persecution against him, and put the Devils upon new
insolences against his Honor and Majesty; what say they, are these thy
Servants and Disciples; are these the Men that are changed from Glory to Glory?
What do they more than the disciples of Hell? And if the little pleasures of
the World, I hold out to them, can preponderate, and do more with them, than
the Arguments of thy death, and the motives drawn from a Glorious endless life,
where is thy power, or wherein has thy Kingdom the advantage of my Empire?

III. He was betrayed partly for filthy Lucre, partly for his unchangeable
Integrity,

1. For filthy Lucre. The love of Money, the root of all evil, was the cause of
it. The Thirty Pieces of Silver invited the Traitor to this Enterprise: So
powerful is Gold and Silver, that at this day it tempts Men to betray the Son
of God, for we see they care not what becomes of Religion, so their Purses
swell: and are indifferent, whether Gods Honor be maintained or no, so their
Corn, and Wine, and Oil increases: This makes Men venture on the foulest sins,
and draws them into actions, which should not be so much as named among
Christians: This tempts them to oppress, to cheat, to flatter, to dissemble, to
lie, and to forswear themselves, to comply with the sinful humors of Men, and
to debase their Souls to the dirtiest and most disingenuous Actions; yet all
this while, such will be counted Christians and Protestants, and of the true
Religion, against which the Gates of Hell shall not be able to prevail,

2. For his unchangeable Integrity. He would not allow Judas to profess himself
his Disciple, and cherish base and covetous desires; the Lord Jesus, that knew
his heart, we may suppose, bid him either leave his profession, or with his
profession, cleanse the inside of the Cup and Platter; convinced him, that the
love of God and that of the World were incompatible, and did mutually destroy
each other: This the illnatured Disciple could not brook, and because his
Master would not give him leave to enjoy Gods favor, and his own sins
together, he betrayed him. This is the case of Counterfeit Christians at this
day; because Christ will not permit them to blend his Religion with their
delight in vanity, will not allow them to serve God and Mammon; they expose his
Religion to that contempt and scorn, we have mentioned, as if they would be
revenged upon God for being so unkind to them, as not to permit an alliance to
be made betwixt the Temple of God and Idols, betwixt Christ and Belial, betwixt
Light and Darkness.

IV. Why Christ would Institute this Sacrament that very Night, in which he was
betrayed, will appear from these following Reasons.

1. To show, that he delighted not in the death of the Sinner, therefore the
same Night that he was betrayed, he provided a remedy that Sinners might not
die, and whereby the Offenders might be restored to life and happiness, if they
did not wilfully reject it. That Pardon and Deliverance, and freedom from
everlasting Death, is offered, tendered, conveyed and sealed in this Sacrament
to every Sinner, that is unfeignedly resolved to be Friends with God upon his
own terms, is confessed by all the Christian World. It was therefore Instituted
that Night that Judas did betray him, to show, that if even Judas, and all such
Traitors, that should some way or other imitate him in his Actions, either had
come, or should for the future come and throw away their Weapons, their Enmity
and their Arms, quit their Hostility, and humble themselves before their
offended Father, that they shall not miss of Mercy and Forgiveness, than which,
there cannot be a greater sign, that he delights not in their Ruin: That Night,
when he was persecuted, to provide a Refuge for his Persecutors: That Night,
when his Enemies were like to practice Treason, to think on a way how that
Treason might be pardoned: That Night, when they were going to undo themselves,
to provide a Pool, in which they might wash and be clean: This surely spoke his
desire, that they might not die. Wonderful Goodness! He foresaw the Wounds they
would give to their Souls, and before they give themselves those wounds, he
prepares a Plaster to heal them: He saw how fierce and violent the Poison was
they were going to take, and at the same time provides an Antidote: He saw they
were going to starve their Souls, and at the same time orders Meat and Drink to
be made ready to preserve them from expiring.

2. He Instituted it that very Night to admonish us, that when we come to
receive these Holy Elements, we should remember with grief and sorrow, how
often we have betrayed his Glory to his Enemies, and by the heinousness of the
sin, be frighted from attempting the like again; and what can be more
reasonable at such times, than to reflect: Ah Wretch that I am! How like a
Bruit have I lived under the Name of a Christian! I have called my Master,
Lord, and have done mine own Will! I have called him Father, and when he has
bid me work in his Vineyard, have run away! I have professed love to the Lord
Jesus, and been ashamed of him and of his Gospel! I have seemed a devout
Worshipper of him, and been a stranger to self-denial! And when my Profit, Ease
or Credit, have been in danger, how have I left him with the Disciples and
fled! How have I betrayed him by such cowardice! What occasion of reproach have
I given to his Enemies! How have I hardened others in their sins by such
doings! How have I made sensual Men despise that noble Religion, the Son of God
sealed with his dearest Blood! And shall I betray him any longer? Shall I still
deliver him up to be mocked! Shall I dare to do such a barbarous thing again?
No, No, I Will confess Thee before Men, my Dearest Lord, that thou may confess
and own me in the last day before thy Father, and his Holy Angels.

3. He Instituted this Sacrament that Night, to teach us, that we must do good
for evil; Judas betrays him, and that very Night he is contriving, how Judas,
if he would have accepted of the offer, might be saved from Everlasting ruin:
this was his method and course of living in the World, to reward unkindnesses
with tenderness and compassion to the Offenders. The Jews cry Crucify him, and
he prays for them, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do;
Malchus, who came out against him to apprehend him, and as it is probable, was
ruder than the rest, having his Ear cut off, by his miraculous touch, is
restored to his former soundness; Herod seeks to kill him, and at the same time
he purges his Country from Devils and Diseases: This sure could not be done,
but with an intent to show us an example, and except we do as he did, how can
we be said to be his followees! It Is from this great Example, that the Apostle
infers a Duty, Romans 12. 21. Be not overcome with evil, but overcome the evil
with good; and we all know, who it was that told us, that in vain we call our
selves Children of God, except we do good to them that hate us, Matthew. 5. 44,
45.

The Preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. We see here, in what a different shape Sin appears from what it did
before, if the nature, tendency, and design of it be rightly considered. That
which before seemed but a little Cloud or Twilight, upon such a prospect, will
appear Egyptian Darkness. Who of us makes any thing of Hypocrisy? yet have we
proved before, that it is a betraying of the Son of God, especially, if it be
reigning and allowed of. So it is with other sins. The Jews, Malach. 3. 8.
thought their keeping back their Tithes, and depriving the Priests and
Ministers of the Lord of their due, to be a trivial thing, yet God speaks to
them in Thunder, and calls it robbing of the Almighty: Will a Man rob God? Yet
ye have robbed me. Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and Offerings. So
they made nothing of offering the Lame and the Blind, but God calls it
profanation of his Name, Mal. 1. 12. A wise Man therefore, and he that would
not cheat himself in matters of Salvation, must consider what verdict God gives
of such sins, as the World makes little of, and in so doing, will find how
unsafe it is, to venture on such trespasses, and what dangerous things they
are. Indeed, he that examines and ponders, what names God gives to some sins in
Scripture, how he calls Covetousness Idolatry, Ephesians. 5. 5. Disobedience
Witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15. 23. Unbelief under the means of Grace, trampling on, and
treading under foot the Son of God, Heb. 10. 29. Living in a known sin, being
of the Devil, 1 John, 3. 8. Sensuality, Enmity to the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.
18. Apostasy, Crucifying of Christ afresh, Heb. 6. 6. Love of the World,
Adultery, etc. Jam. 4. 4* must needs have other apprehensions of such sins,
than the duller, or more vicious sort of Mankind has; and until we do so, it is
a sign we have no mind to be sincere Converts, till we look upon our Sins
through the Glass of Scripture; till we give our Sins those Names, which He,
that cannot err, does give them; till we begin to call them, what they are
indeed, and our hearts are concerned and troubled about that, which such names
import; our Repentance is but lame and partial, and we obstruct our way to
mercy and forgiveness, and prepare for being miserable in the midst of
flattering hopes and expectations.

II, As we do abhor and detest the Treason of Judas, so let us take heed, we
become not guilty of it our selves. We are not in a capacity of acting that
very Treason, that the ill-natured Disciple did, because Christ is not now on
Earth, and the circumstances of Time, and Place, and Government, do differ; yet
how that Treason may be acted over again by a behavior and conversation
agreeable to that of Judas, has been already showed; and whatever we do, let us
not fall into the snare, into which that unhappy Man did fall: His end, his
despair; the terrors of his mind, the torments of his conscience; the contempt
and scorn of God and Men, he rusht into, are sufficient discouragements from
that Hypocrisy, which drove him on to those Precipices. To maintain invincible
Loyalty to our Great Master, is not only our Duty, but our Interest. To promote
whatever makes for his Honor and Glory, is that which becomes us, not only as
we are his Subjects, but as we are redeemed with his Blood: So great a Mercy
ought to crush every rebellious thought in our Minds. Never had people a more
gracious King; a King, which does not only divide his Estate among his
Subjects, but is resolved to advance them to the highest Dignities they are
capable of. And what, if sometimes he does afflict us? That does not speak him
a Tyrant, but a Father, or Physician rather, who lets us Blood to prevent
Diseases, and lances our Wounds, that they may not fester and kill us. If he
lays Burdens upon us, it is not to oppress our Souls, but our Sins; and if he
make us go through the Fire, it is not that the Flame may consume us, but that
the Smoke may kill the Caterpillars and Locusts, that eat the wholesome Herbs of
our Graces. It is not that he delights in our Groans, but that he is desirous
of our Welfare; and when he scourges us, it is necessity, and our own good,
that puts him upon using that method, not a fondness to exercise his Power and
Authority.

The PRAYER.
O Blessed JESUS! When I look upon thee, and behold thy Beauty and Glory, I
wonder how I have been able to conspire against thee with thine Enemies! How
have I been led away by false appearances, and listened to false rumors, which
sinful Men have spread abroad concerning thee! Thou have been represented to me
as an Enemy to my mirth, and ease, and plenty, and temporal advantages, and I
have believed it, and run blindly with the multitude to crucify thee! I see,
how against Reason, Conscience, Interest, and a thousand Obligations, I have
acted! O forget the Injuries I have offered thee! O remember no more the
Treasons I have been guilty of! Never, never, will I wittingly or wilfully
betray thee again! Let all Guile, and Hypocrisy, and Double-dealings, be put
away from me: Make me an Israelite indeed: Let sincerity and integrity ever
preserve me. Make me willing to forego all interests, so I may but have an
interest in the love of Complaency. Let all enmity, all dissension, all
hostility betwixt us cease. I agree, not only to a Truce, but to an Eternal
Peace. I know, Lord, the danger of breaking the Peace lies on my side, who am
naturally treacherous, fickle and inconstant, but thy Grace can cure that
inconstancy. Lord, stretch forth thy mighty Arm, and hold me up, that I may
never depart from thee, may always love to be with thee, always delight in thy
presence, always rejoice in thy love, and always seek thy honor and glory.
Amen. Amen.

CHAP. III.
Of the Place where the Lord's Supper is to be eaten, the Church, and of
Private Communion.
The CONTENTS.
The Public Church, the fittest Place to receive the Lord's Supper in. This,
proved from the Practice of the Apostles, and the succeeding Christians. The
same proved from Reason, and the end, for which Christ died. Private Communions
first began in times of Persecution. The Danger and Imprudence of those, who,
neglecting to receive it in Public, do not think of it till they come to lie
upon their Deathbeds. What a mercy it is, that we have Public Churches, where
we may serve and worship God, without fear or molestation. Great Gravity and
Devotion required in the Public Worship of God. The Prayer.

I. THat the public Church is the most proper, most warranted, and fittest
place to celebrate and eat the Lord's Supper in; seems to have been the
constant belief of the Christian Church, and they have grounded their Belief on
the Apostles Expostulation with the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11. 20, 22. where
speaking of their coming together into one place, and distinguishing private
Houses from the Church of God, he intimates a known custom in that Age, to meet
in certain Oratories, or places appointed for public Worship, and there
receive the Holy Symbols. That which is commonly objected, of the great
Improbability of public Buildings and Edifices, in times of Persecution, such
as the Apostles, and the Christians, for the first three Centuries, had sad
experience of, seems to carry greater weight than really it does; for though we
speak of places appointed for Public Worship, no Person of common Sense can
imagine, that we mean, they had such stately and magnificent Buildings, as our
Churches are at this day, the Effects of Ease, and Peace, and Plenty: These
came not in, till Constantine procured the Churches Respit, and Freedom from
their former Bondage; yet we may justly enough suppose, that even in those days
of trouble, and calamitous times, they either converted some spacious upper
Room, in a charitable Believer's House, into a Church, or some good Christian
gave, and dedicated his House for that Religious Use; or the Believers, by
common consent, turned it into a Place of public Worship, which is the reason
that the Disciples are said to have met in an (...), or upper Room, Act. 1. 13.
possibly the same which Christ celebrated the Eucharist in; and who knows not,
that mention is sometimes made of a Church in such a Man's House? as Colos. 4.
15. Salute Nymphas, and the Church at his House. Upon which words, Oecumenus
tells us, He was a was a great Man, Oecum in loc. (...).
for he had converted his House into a Church. And though it is said, Act. 2.
46. That the Believers continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and
breaking of Bread from House to House, did eat their Meat with gladness of
heart; yet the Phrase (...), which we render from House to House, as our
Translators take notice in the Margent, may as well be rendered in the House;
and then the meaning will be this, That continuing daily in the Temple, or
frequenting the Temple daily, they broke Bread in the House, i. e. in the House
by the Temple, appropriated to the public Christian Worship, and particularly
in that upper Room by the Temple, where the Apostles and Believers used to
meet; in which place, when they had broken Bread, or received the Eucharist,
they went home to their own Houses, and sat down to their private Meals with
joy and great comfort.

II. The succeeding Churches observed this very Religiously, and therefore
called the Holy Communion (...), or a Convocation, because they judged it meet,
the whole Church should be together when it was administered: For this reason it
was also called (...), Liturgy, which properly imports Public Administration
of an Office, and therefore applied, Romans 15. 27. to public distribution of
Alms, to the Magistrate's executing of his Office, Romans 13. 4, and to the
Office of Teaching and Prophesying in the public Congregation, Acts 13. 2. And
this gave occasion to Cyril of Alexandria to say in an Epistle to Coelosyrius,
That the Eucharist, or Sacred Symbols, ought to be offered no where, but in the
Churches of Believers; and that he, who attempts the contrary, does manifestly
violate the Law of God, meaning the Apostles practice beforementioned, which,
he supposes, amounts to a virtual Command. To this purpose the Council of
Laodicea forbad all Bishops and Priests to celebrate the Communion in private
Houses; Soc. l. 2. c. 33.
and Eustathius the Bishop of Sebastia, as Socrates tells us, among other
reasons, was deposed from his Place and Dignity, for this, because he had given
permission to have the Lord's Supper administered in private Houses, which was,
says the Historian, against the Ecclesiastical Rules: Notwithstanding this, it
was customary at Rome to do so, which makes St. Hierome, in his Book against
Jovinian, find fault with the abuse, and expostulate with them, Why do they not
go to Church to receive Christ's Body and Blood? Are there two Christ's? one in
public, another in private? And indeed, those Christians that insisted upon
this public Administration, had the Jewish Church for their pattern; for it
being taken for granted, that the Lord's Supper was succedaneous to the
Passover, as the Paschal Lamb was to be killed in the Temple, and in public,
so it was fit, that the solemn Remembrance of the Death of that Lamb, which was
to take away the sins of the World, the Antitype of the other, should be
celebrated in public, and in the Congregations of Christians. That the Paschal
Lamb, which every Family among the Jews were obliged to eat of, was killed in
the Temple, is more than probable; for though Philo the Jew seems to take it
for granted, that every Master of a Family had Liberty to kill the Paschal Lamb
at his own House; yet, as judicious Men have observed, Philo being an
Alexandrian, and not having those opportunities of searching into the Jewish
Rites that others had, who lived at Jerusalem, might easily run into a mistake;
the rather, because Josephus and most Jews affirm the contrary, viz. That every
Master of a Family was obliged to bring the Lamb intended to be eaten at the
Celebration of the Passover, to the Temple, to the Priests, who were to kill it
for him. If it had not been so, it is not easy to imagine how the Priests
could have given so exact an account to Cestius of the number of the Jews that
were come up to the Passover at that time, for they gave in an account of 55000
and 600 Persons that had presented themselves at the Feast, which in all
likelihood they knew by the Lambs, the People brought to them to be slain for
their respective Families; and though Jewish Customs lay no Obligations upon
Christians, yet where the Gospel gives a Rule, a Jewish practice, in a case not
much unlike, may serve for confirmation of the Observance.

III. The public eating of the Lord's Supper, does certainly best represent
the end for which Christ died; and that is the Public Good; a Good, which
Caiaphas ignorantly acknowledged and confessed, when he told the Jews, Ye know
nothing at all, nor consider, that it is expedient for us, that one man should
die for the people, and that the whole multitude perish not, Jon. 11. 49. 50.
But St. John is fuller in the explication of this Good, when he asserts, that
his death is a propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the
sins of the whole World, 1 Jon. 2. 2. Many things are by Men pretended to be
done for the Public Good; but what they call Public, is either for the Good
of a Family, or Corporation, or Parish, or City, or a certain Territory, or a
Kingdom: But the Death of Christ spreads its Virtues infinitely wider, not
confining its Benefits to a Province, or a part of the World, but the whole
Race of Mankind was concerned in the Favor, so that nothing was ever done so
truly for the Public Good, as Christ's Suffering and Dying; and whoever
remembers it in public, testifies his esteem and value of it, not only by his
inward sense and admiration of it, but by the very place, in which he does
remember it. The Truth is, Christ was crucified publicly in the face of the
Sun, and before huge multitudes, both of Jews and Proselytes, who were come to
give their attendance at the Passover: Both Jews and Gentiles beheld the
spectacle, and Men of all sorts and conditions crowded to see so dreadful a
show, which was an Item, that the remembrance of it should be in the most
public place, the Church; the rather, because this public remembrance does
best promote Christ's Glory, as multitudes joining together in Confessions, and
Praises, must necessarily advance it more than the Hallelujahs of two or three
in private.

IV. Private Communions, or Communions in places, which were neither Churches
nor public Oratories, owe their first rise to the Churches persecutions: For
when Nero and his successors in the Roman Empire, began to defile the Faith
with Blood; and to be a Christian and a Malefactor, were made convertible
Terms, the Christians were forced to serve God, as they could, and therefore
celebrated the Communion in any place, to which they were driven in the common
Storm, in Mines, in Ships, in Stables, in Prisons, in Caves, and Dens of the
Earth, and where two or three Christians had the convenience of getting a
Bishop or Minister, to consecrate the Elements, they cheerfully remembered
their Crucified Lord and Master, as Dionisius of Alexandria tells us in
Eusebius. And this soon occasioned another Custom, Eusebius. Hist.
which was, to send part of the Consecrated Bread and Wine to Peoples Houses,
Eccl. l. 7. c. 21.
and Cottages in the Country; Justin Martyr is very express in this point. And
hence it came to pass, that the Christians kept the Consecrated Elements by
them, to make use of them, when either sickness seized them, or they found
death approaching; and upon this account the Sacrament was called the Viaticum,
or provision for a Man's Journey into another World, as we learn from Gregory
the Great. Gregor. l. 7.
And because the Holy Bread thus kept for use, Epistol. 62.
was sometimes too big for the sick, or dying Person to swallow, they crumbled
the Bread into the Consecrated Wine, and gave it the sick Person in a Spoon, as
we see in the example of Serapian in Eusebius; L. 6. c. 23.
a thing, which in process of time was thought so necessary for all dying
Christians, that in some places where Superstition thrust out true Devotion, in
case a Person dyed before he had received the Communion, they would thrust, and
force the crumbs of Bread, mingled with Holy Wine, into the Mouths of Persons
already departed, against which profanation the Fathers thought themselves
obliged to Enact very severe Canons; which was done accordingly in the Councils
of Carthage, Antisiodorum, and Constantinople; and Julius Bishop of Rome forbad
putting the Crumbs of Consecrated Bread in Wine, a practice, which in all
probability came first from sending the Consecrated Elements to Persons absent
from the Public, who either could not, or durst not, appear in the public
Oratories; a thing that Origin either foresaw, or knew would be abused, which
makes him inveigh against such presumption: So that as Persecution first
brought in private Communions, so when those Persecutions ceased, the Church
still obliged her Members to receive the Communion in public, according to the
first institution. It is therefore wisely ordered by our Church, that People
shall be exhorted in time of their health, to receive the Eucharist in public,
that they may not be disquieted for the omission of it, when Diseases or
Distempers do suddenly seize upon them; at which times, as the Senses and
Faculties are weak, so Men cannot receive these Mysteries with that Vigor,
Zeal, and Love, that is required in the right use of the Ordinance. And indeed,
where People neglect receiving in public, not thinking of their Duty till
death put them in mind of it, we can promise them but little comfort* He that
has often appeared at the Lord's Table in public, and concludes the scene of
his life with this remembrance, may reap more than ordinary satisfaction from
it, because he perfects that in private, which he so often comfortably made use
of in public; but he whose Eyes were never open to see the necessity of it,
till his dying groans remove his blindness, as he has despised the Church of
God, and neglected the time of his Visitation, so his Comforts can neither be
so great, nor so solid, as his, who has frequently strengthened his Soul in
public with this Cordial: when the powers of the Soul are shaken with a
violent sickness, and the Limbs are weak, the Spirits faint, and the Thoughts
diverted by uneasiness and pain, Alas! How can the Soul fix on the Cross of
Christ? What Sense, what touches of his Love can it have, or what guesses can
it make at its Spiritual growth, and advancement in Holiness? And though,
according to the old Proverb, It Is better late, than never, yet it is to be
feared, such Men come so very late, that if they were to be pictured, they
might justly be drawn, as the Cardinal drew Solomon, hanging betwixt Heaven and
Hell, it being very doubtful which of these two would fall to their share. So
that upon a review of the whole, though private Communions cannot be said to be
altogether unlawful, especially in times of persecution, nor inconvenient to
persons, who have frequently attended this Ordinance in public, when they were
able so in times of Peace and Liberty, and Tranquillity, for Men and Women to
continue strangers to public Receiving, and to satisfy themselves with a
private Communion, upon a Death bed, is a thing so inexcusable, that we cannot,
but with all possible earnestness discourage it, as a thing, that is dishonor
to the Church they live in; a disgrace to the Religion they profess; an
impediment to their comfort, a remora to their joy, an affront to their
Savior, and an uncertain cherisher of their hopes of Salvation.

The Preceding Considerations, reduced to Practice.
I. WHat a mercy is it, that we have Public Churches and Oratories to go to,
without let or hindrance; that we have no Tyrants, nor Foreign Enemies, no
Rods, no Axes, no noise of War, no Armies of Aliens, to fright us from the
Public Ordinances; that we can meet, and remember our Crucified Master,
without fear, without disturbance, without danger; and that, instead of being
discountenanced in the Service, we have all the encouragement that Authority
can give; and our Magistrates are nursing Fathers, which not only allow of our
frequenting the House of God, but also compel us to come in. How did the
excellent David bemoan himself, when through the Malice of Saul, his
Antagonist, he was forced away from the Public Offices of the Church! How much
happier did he think Swallows and Sparrows to be, than himself, which had
liberty to build their Nests, about the roof of the Temple, and there to lay
their Young, Psalm, 84. 1, 2, 3. While he must be content with wishes and
breathings after the Courts of the Lord, and strangers cast it in his Teeth of
often, Where is now thy God! Psalm. 42. 2, 3. We, that have all the external
advantages of Religion, and are even cloyed with the plenty of Spiritual
Provision, cannot imagine the lamentable condition, that persecuted Christians
are in, who are forced to serve the Lord with fear, and to attend his
Ordinances with trembling, who are not permitted to sing the Songs of Zion in a
strange Land, and therefore must hang their Harps upon the Willows, sit weeping
by the Rivers of Babylon, and hear the Enemy roar in the midst of the
Congregations of the Lord. Yet, if the liberty, we enjoy, makes us wanton, and
the plenty God gives us, tempts us to licentiousness; if instead of growing
better, it makes us worse; and the Glory of our Temple proves an occasion of
dishonouring that God, who dwells in them; if our going up to Mount Zion, makes
us proud, and the means of Grace, whereof we have such store, are improved into
quarrels and dissentions; if instead of Glorifying God for this affluence, we
fall out among our selves, and instead of letting our Light shine before Men,
espouse the works of Darkness; if instead of being obedient to the Faith, we
disgrace it by our infidelity, and instead of the power of Godliness, content
our selves with the Form of it; if the Manna we have, does not make us Hunger
and Thirst after Righteousness; and the great Truths God has vouchsafed us, do
not make our Lives great and exemplary, we have reason to fear God will remove
our Candlesticks from us, and send a Famine of the Word; God did so to
Jerusalem, and did so to the Eastern Churches, and we being like them, may
justly expect the same Judgments.

II. The Church is the House of God, keep therefore thy foot, when thou go
to the House of God, Eccles. 5. 1. As Men that walk in danger, look to their
steps, and take care where they set their Foot, so he that enters into the
House of Prayer, had need enter with great cautiousness and watchfulness, for
the comes before a God, who sees his Thoughts, takes notice of his Designs, and
knows the secret recesses of his Soul, observes his Looks, and Postures, and
Behavior, and will at last call him to an account for his carelessness and
irreverence. Were these things seriously thought of, how could the generality
of us come into this House with no greater awe, and with as loose Affections,
as if they were going to a Play? How durst we stare about in Prayer? How could
we let our Thoughts rove and wander, while we seem to be engaged in Devotion?
How could we hear with that indifferency? How could we apply our selves to the
Duties required of us, with that coldness, which is so visible in most
Congregations? How could we turn our Services into mere Formalities, and stand
before the great God unconcerned, and return from his House without a relish of
the Mysteries of Godliness? To see what decency and gravity Men observe in the
Presence of a Prince, and to think, how little regard we have to the Presence
of a Glorious God, in the House, which he is pleased to call his Tabernacle and
Dewlling Place, is enough to make the Holy Angels conclude, that in the midst
of his Temple we are Infidels; to see, how supinely some sit at their Prayers,
as if they were praying to a Stock or Stone; to see how others compose
themselves to sleep, as if the God they come to worship, with Baal, were asleep
too, and they came to honor him with that posture; to see, how some come to
show their Bravery here, and to be seen and taken notice of, and to be admired
by Spectators; to see, how others strive for Places, for Superiority, and the
chief Seats in these Synagogues, and there vent their Pride, their Anger, and
their Malice, where they ought to express their greatest Humility and Charity;
to see how others talk here of their worldly Concerns, or if they do not talk
of them, act and behave themselves as if they thought of nothing else, where
they are to mind only the great concerns of their immortal Souls: to see all
this, what can we infer, but that Men have no Sense of the Tremendous Majesty
on High? No sense of the Mysteries, the very Angels desire to look into? These
things, My Brethren, ought not so to be: When therefore thou go to the
Temple of the Lord, remember the Magnificence of that God, at whose Footstool
thou go to worship: When thou enter'st in at the door of this House, leave
there thy Worldly thoughts and Carnal desires, and come filled with the Spirit
into the Tabernacle of the Lord: Sit, and Stand, and Kneel there, as before the
Searcher of all Hearts; resolve to come away from thence edified, and with
greater store of Spiritual Blessings than thou had before. In praying, fix
thy Thoughts upon Him who hears Prayer; and if thou do, thou can not but
appear in such a posture, as does best express thy inward sense of his
Greatness and Holiness. In hearing, apply the general Admonitions, and
Exhortations, and Reproofs, to thine own Soul. In Reading, make some spiritual
reflection on the Examples, Precepts, Promises, that are before thee. In
singing, mind the Matter more than the Tune, and let thy Heart bear part in the
Exercise. In receiving the Supper of the Lord, let not the outward humble
posture be all the Service thou performest, but fix the eyes of thy
Understanding upon the Cross, and there contemplate the Mercy that flows from
it, and from thence take Fire and Courage to abound in love to God and Man. At
thy going in, beg of God to prepare thy Heart: At thy coming out, beg that thou
may not lose the things, that have been wrought in thee; and this is to keep
thy foot when thou go into the House of God.

The PRAYER.
O Thou, in whose Temple every Man speaks of thine Honor, whose Glory no
mortal Man can sufficiently express, whose Goodness no Tongue is able to
display, whose Holiness transcends all the Perfections we see here below!
Overawe my Spirit, when I go with the multitude to the House of God, with the
voice of Joy and Praise: O let me consider, it is the All-seeing God, in whose
Presence I stand, and that the Holy Angels are sent to observe my Devotion.
Give me sober Thoughts, holy Affections, devout postures, steddiness of Mind,
ardent Desires, modest Looks, a grave Behavior, especially when I am going to
contemplate the precious Sacrifice, offered by the Son of God for the Sins of
the World; let all that is within me turn into holy breathings; represent that
comfortable Object in lively Characters to my Understanding, that I may think
nothing unworthy of my Savior; banish from me all undecent Thoughts, or if
thou do not think fit to free me from Temptations, encourage me however, to
resist them vigorously, that I may discover my Zeal for thy Glory, by my
abhorrency of all Imaginations, that exalt themselves against the Obedience of
Christ Jesus. Amen.

CHAP. IV.
Of Eating the Lord's Supper. The Nature of it, and how it is to be Eaten.
The CONTENTS.
A great difference betwixt coming to the Lord's Supper, and Eating the Lord's
Supper. Several Reasons, why Men come though they do not Eat, as they ought to
do. What Eating the Lord's Supper is, viz. To Eat it with a relish of the
Benefits of Christ's Death, with longings to be conformable to Christ in his
Graces, and to Eat it with unfeigned Resolutions to resist Temptations. Much
depends upon the manner of any Religious Performance. Conversation with God,
with our selves, and with the Holy Angels, a great means to Eat, as we ought to
Eat. The Prayer.

I. THat there are many who come to the Lord's Supper, and yet Eat not the
Lord's Supper, as they ought to do, is evident from Experience, and will appear
more fully in the sequel of this Discourse, when we shall tell you, what it is
to Eat and Drink unworthily. When some of the looser sort of the Corinthian
Christians, 1 Cor. 11. 20. came drunk to this Sacrament, it is certain, they
only eat the Bread of the Lord, but not the Bread, the Lord, as the Fathers
speak; and if Simon Magus Acts 8. 13. came to this Feast, as I am apt to
believe he did, for in those days, they that were baptized were soon after
admitted to the Lord's Supper, as appears from Act. 2. 41, 42. this must
necessarily have been his case; and who can doubt of this Truth, that in the
Age we live in, sees so many come to this Royal Supper, and go away unreformed,
untouched, and unconcerned? than which, there cannot be a greater sign, that
they do not eat the Supper of the Lord, though they approach, and feed upon the
External Elements: And Men may very easily know it, by such Marks as these,

1. If they come without any sense of the designs, Christ had in Instituting
this Sacrament, one of which certainly was, to engage us to the generous
contempt of the World, in imitation of him, who for the Glory set before him;
not only undervalued the Pomp and Grandeur of the World, but endured the Cross,
and despised the shame, as we are told, Heb. 12. 2. And when we see Men, and
women approach the Table of the Lord, with all the Gaudes and Gayeties, their
vain desires prompt them to, like Ranters rather than Penitents: more like soft
Sybarites than frighted Disciples; dressed to allure Men's eyes more, than to
invite the Crucified Jesus into their Souls; like players rather than like
Christians: And when we see, how the very next day after this Feast, if they
stay so long, they quarrel, fight, contend, and fall out about the trifles of
the World; run to Theaters, and Play Houses, and with as great greediness as
ever, pursue the Riches and Glories, and Fashions of the World, how can we
imagine, that such Persons came with the sense of the aforementioned design of
Christ, in instituting this Sacred Feast?

2. If they come without any sense of the love of God, of which, there is so
curious a Picture drawn in this Sacrament, as is enough to make even the most
hard hearted Heathen weep: And what sense of this Love can we suppose to have
been in Men, when after their Receiving, they do not so much as look into a
Bible, to see what Precepts, and Commands of Christ, they mean for the future
to be more observant of? Is it possible such Men had sense of the Love of God
upon their Spirits that day they received the Holy Elements, when the next day
they offend him as boldly as ever, and hug the same sins they entertained
several years before, and are now as little concerned to please God, as they
were some Months ago? and consequently such Persons come to the Lord's Supper,
yet do not eat, as they ought to do; for none eat it truly, but such as eat
with this sense; and where this sense is, it will make the Soul cautious of
offending God.

II. Yet such Guests are very common at this Table, which would make a wise Man
wonder, why they will come at all, when their coming signifies so little, and,
as will appear afterward, does them more harm than good. Yet the Reasons may
easily be guessed at: For,

1. Conviction brings them to it. They are convinced, that coming is a
commanded Duty, not a thing indifferent, and that they may not seem dispisers
and contemners of so great a Law, they come, though they put strange Fire in
their Censers; Conviction has great power even upon unregenerate Men: It made
Felix tremble, Acts 24 25. and Judas throw down the Thirty Pieces of Silver,
the reward of his Treason, in the Temple, Matthew. 27. 4. and Simon embrace
Christian Baptism, Act. 8. 13. And where a Man is teazed and haunted by his
Conscience, he will do something to stop his mouth; and though he does it but
slovenly, yet he will bribe Conscience with this trifle, as we do Children, that
cry for a Jewel, with a Rattle; and in this manner Conviction Works upon some
Men and Women, and that force puts several upon coming to the Lord's Table.

2. Their Office and Employment, obliges them to receive, and that makes not a
few appear at this Table. The Law of the Land excluding Men from public
Offices and Charges, that receive not the Communion; we may very justly
believe, that abundance come to satisfy the Statute more than their
Conscience; and fear of losing or missing of the Office, they are ambitious of,
has a stronger influence upon them, than the fear of losing God's Favor; not
but that a man may Eat the Lord's Supper to his great comfort and edification,
because an Act of Parliament commands it, at his entrance upon an Office; for a
man, who fears God, may make use of any occasion to receive, and consequently
may make his present Office an opportunity of coming to the Sacrament: But I
speak my just fears, that many receive on this account, whom neither Love to
God nor to their own Souls, could have obliged to come, had it not been for
such forcible means, or straits and necessities; so that the Minister of the
Ordinance may thank their Office more than their Religion, that he sees them in
that holy place: And most certainly this is not Eating the Lord's Supper; for
nothing is properly an act of Religion, but what is a free-will-offering, and
flows from an internal love of the Duty. And what is here said of accidental
Employments, is too true of standing Offices of the Church. A Minister, or
Clergyman, may come to the Lord's Supper, and yet not eat the Lord's Supper; he
may celebrate it as a Minister, and yet not eat it as a sincere Christian; he
may eat it, because his Office obliges him to administer it, and yet not eat it
with that sense which becomes a sincere believer: And it is so with lesser
Officers about a Church; Custom may carry them a great way, and for some years
they may never fail to come to this Table, and yet may not eat as they ought;
for they may do it upon the account of their Office only, and because it is
expected of them; but the sense of the end, and of the love of God, may be
wanting, which defect makes it a very lame offering.

3, Such Men however come, and to this they are led by a fancy they are willing
to entertain, that other Men, who come, receive it with no greater sense or
seriousness than they. They consider not, whether this will be a good Plea
another day; but it gives present satisfaction, and this makes them espouse it.
Not to mention, that it is great rashness and presumption in them, to judge of
other Men's hearts, the secrets of which, they are for the most part ignorant
of; and if other men should be no better than they, yet that would be no
excuse, Men being to live by Precepts, not by every Example that is before
them; yet thus Men love to delude themselves, and by that means precipitate
themselves into unspeakable Dangers: For

III. This not eating as they ought, strangely hardens them in Sin. If the
Cross of Christ cannot open their eyes, or make them sensible of their Errors,
few things can be supposed able to do it to their comfort. If the Blood of the
Covenant cannot supple their hearts, other things must be believed to be
ineffectual, because God looks upon this as the most potent remedy to effect
it; nor is this to be understood only of scandalous sins, but all such offenses
which Christ has peremptorily forbid, though the world takes no great notice
of them, such as are aversion from holy Thougts and Discourses, and neglect of
those Gospel Graces the Apostle presses upon such as would not be Christians in
vain. And hence it is, that where Men do not eat the Lord's Supper aright, our
Exhortations to those nobler Duties of Religion are lost upon them, and all the
severe threatenings we rehearse and mention, to rouse them from their Spiritual
slumber, are spoke into the wind, and they continue strangers to that Spiritual
frame, which the Apostle calls, Romans 8. 5. minding the things of the Spirit. By
a Spiritual frame of the heart, I mean a God-like Temper, which is pleased with
any thing that makes for the Glory of God; and as Fire converts all things into
its own substance, spiritualizeth Objects, or makes a spiritual use of them,
and is truly enamoured with the severer Precepts of the Gospel, and looks upon
them as perfective of our natures, and consequently thinks no Commandment
grievous. Hence it is that such Men, who are strangers to this frame, their
Religion turns into mere Formality and Hypocrisy; and however it may look in
their own eyes, in the sight of God it goes for no more than Paint and Varnish,
mere Glowworm light, that shines, but warms not; glitters, but gives no Heat;
blazes, but does not touch the Heart; and, like rotten Wood, seems bright, but
has nothing of Fire in it; and this must necessarily cause very false
Applications of Gospel Promises, which at last produces such Self-deceptions,
that when they come to appear before the Bar of God's Justice, they will not only
wonder at the Cheats they have put upon themselves, but tear their hair, and
smite their breasts, and be ready to kill themselves, to think how they have
murdered their own Souls with kindness, and by fair Words and Speeches,
enticed them into ruin.

IV. From what we have said, it will easily appear, what eating of the Lord's
Supper does import, eating it, I mean in a Scripture Sense.

1. To eat it with a relish of the Benefits of Christ's Death and Passion; even
in our common Meals, we find a great difference betwixt eating and relishing,
betwixt eating with and without an Appetite, betwixt tasting the juice and
delicacy of the Meat, and fancying it to be no better than Chaulk or Ashes: He
that eats the Lord's Supper aright, his Soul must eat as well as his outward
Organs; and as Christ says John 6. 63. The words that I speak unto you, they
are spirit, and they are life; so the Soul that eats, as it should do, the
benefits of Christ's Death, they must be Life and Spirit to her, a perfect
Cordial, true Elixir, real Sweetness, comfortable Balm, and sweeter than Honey
to the Palate. These Benefits are Pardon and Peace, and reconciliation to God,
and Salvation, and the Soul must be affected with them, prize them, value them
practically above the Riches of the World, and count all things dross and dung,
for the excellency of them; and be willing to part rather with Father and
Mother, and Lands and Houses, than with the Comforts of them, and that is to
relish, and then the Soul eats indeed; whereas a person that either thinks not
of these Benefits, or, if he thinks of them, has no actual value for them, so
as to feel in himself how highly he esteems them, and what a mighty veneration
he has for them, though he may be said to eat, yet he does not relish them,
and therefore does not eat aright.

2. It is to eat with secret longings to be conformable to Christ Jesus in his
Humility and Charity, or as the Apostle expresses it, to have the same mind in
us, which was also in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2. 5. And this in another place is
called hungring and thirsting after righteousness, Matthew. 5. 6. and was
represented of old by the secret longings of the Spouse, Cant. 1. 3. Draw me
after thee and I will run. Where there is no such longing to conform to Christ
in these Virtues, a Man does not properly eat the Lord's Supper like a healthy
man, for he digests not, the Food does not turn into good Juice it does not
nourish him, he does not thrive upon it. I call it longing, for the desire
after these Graces, which were so eminent in Christ, must be strong and
vehement, ardent, and grounded upon the Beauty, Loveliness, and Amiableness of
them; such a longing as David expressed for the Lord's House and his Word: As
the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God,
Psalm. 42, 1. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts* My Soul longs,
yea even faints for the courts of the Lord, Psalm. 84. 1, 2. My soul breaks
for the longing that it has unto thy righteous judgments at all times. And
though I grant something of an Hyperbole in those Phrases, yet still they
import, that his desires were strong, hearty and vehement; and such must be the
desires of the Soul in eating the Lord's Supper, to be conformable to her Lord
and Master.

3. It is to eat with unfeigned resolutions, to resist all known temptations to
those particular this we are most prone and inclined to; this shows; that we
eat with an (...) to grow strong, and that this is a true Sacrament to us, or a
Vow, whereby we tie our selves to be faithful to our General, and to fight
against his Enemies. Many a man, that comes to the Lord's Supper, feels some
faint resolutions against Sin in general, but that works upon him no more than
sparks of Fire serve to warm a frozen man; and therefore it is necessary, that,
in eating, a Christian should feel invincible resolutions to subdue those
particular sins he is most apt to fall or rush into, and to which his Calling,
Employment, Converse and Figure in the World, does most solicit and tempt him,
else he beats the Air, and fights with shadows; and if he does not single out
those Enemies that are most apt to do him mischief, resolution to fight against
the powers of Darkness in general gives these unregarded sins, that do him most
hurt, opportunity to live secure, and to keep possession of what they have
already got into their clutches.

The Preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. THE manner of any Religious performance makes it either pleasing or
displeasing to God: This turns the scales; and two acts of Piety which seem to
be the same, many times are not, because the manner of the performance makes a
vast difference in the value. The examples of the Publican and the Pharisee
praying in the Temple, and Abel's and Cain's offering Sacrifices, are notorious
instances of this truth. David pays his Vows, Psalm. 66. 13. So does the Harlot
mentioned in Prove. 7. 14. The former is precious in the sight of God, the later
odious; the reason is, the former proceeded from a sense of gratitude, and a
relish of the Sweetness of God's Service; the other from a base design to
compensate God for the sins the strange Woman lived and delighted in. It is so
in eating the Lord's Supper, and as St. Paul says of the Jews, They are not
all Israel which are of Israel, neither because they are the Seed of Abraham
are they all children, Romans 9. 6, 7. so all that seem to eat of the Lord's
Supper do not therefore eat to the same purpose; some eat as Enemies, others as
Children; some as Strangers, others as Domestics; some as Slaves, others as
Heirs of the Promise. Look to the manner of thy Eating, Christian. Eat like a
person that is sensible he sits down at the Table of the greatest Prince, the
Prince himself being present. Eat like a person sensible, that the King, in
whose presence thou art, is thy best and greatest Friend: Eat like a person
sensible, that thou have deserved to sup with Devils, to feed on Flames, and to
drink the Dregs of the Cup of God's anger. Eat like a person sensible, that
from the condition of a miserable Slave, thou art advanced to the Dignity of a
Child and Son of God. Eat like a person sensible, that no merit, no desert of
thine, nothing but the incomprehensible Goodness of God, has brought thee to
this Honor and Prerogative, and it is impossible thou can eat amiss; for this
sense will oblige thee to eat with joy and trembling, which is the most proper
Devotion for a Creature to express in the presence of his Creator.

II. Conversation is a great means to do things as we ought. He that converses
with men of his own Trade, will learn how to manage it to his advantage. He
that converses with great Persons, learns how to please them. He that converses
with ingenious Workmen, learns to do things to his and other's satisfaction.
The same Rule is to be observed in eating the Lord's Supper; and he cannot but
eat it to God's liking, and his own comfort, that before he eats converses with
himself, and while he is eating, converses with God, and after he has eaten,
converses with the holy Angels.

1. Conversing with our selves before we eat, consists in asking our Hearts,
What have I done? What sins are those, that I am apt to lodge in my Bosom? What
evil desires am I ready to entertain? What disorders, what corruptions find
countenance, or approbation in my Soul? Is it revenge? Is it rendering railing
for railing? Is it frothy discourses? Is it vain Romantic Imaginations? Is it
weariness of God's Service? Is it backwardness to Holy Duties? Is it
unwillingness to to know the Will of God? Is it discontent in the condition I
am in? Is it intemperance in Eating, and Drinking? Is it a desire of
Vainglory? Is it sudden Anger? Is it Impatience, or Worldly sorrow? Is it
Grief and vexation, that I cannot have my Will in such outward things, as my
Appetite desires? Is it Lov^ and Affection to the Vanities of this World? What
dangerous Guests are those? And shall I entertain them? What are these but
Enemies to the Cross? And shall I make much of them? or let them go out and in
without control? Either these Corruptions must be gone, or my Savior will not
stay with me. Shall I with the Jews, refuse my great Redeemers company, and
desire a Barabbas? I am now going to the Cross of Christ, and shall I approach
with these Ensigns of Rebellion in my Soul? Will Christ vouchsafe a favorable
Look to me, where he sees such Satyrs dance? I am going to Mount Calvary, and
shall these menstruous rags be my Attendance? No, no, I will not loose Heaven
for this! I will set my Face against these Foes; I will let them see, that
there is something dearer to me, than their Presence, or Company, even he, who
laid down his life for me. These Briars and Thorns shall not stop my way. Away
ye evil Spirits, you have haunted me long enough; I Will be afraid of you no
longer: I Will take courage, and fight against you; for God is on my side, Why
should I fear in the day of Trouble?

2. Conversing with God, when we Eat, imports contemplating, what God has done
for us in Christ Jesus; how God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself,
not imputing their Trespasses unto them; for in this Contemplation the Soul
addresses her self to God, O my God, what cost and charges have thou been at,
to redeem such a Wretch as I am! How have thou bowed the Heavens! Lord, thou
did make thy self a Curse for me, that I might be advanced to bliss! I see
what a costly thing my Salvation is, since to purchase it, the Son of God did
die! Yet how light do I make of Heaven! O God what moved thee to love me thus?
And shall I think any thing to dear to part with for thy sake? Into what
Labyrinths do I run my self, while I am mine own Keeper* Thou have paid dear
for thy right to rule and govern me! and shall I after all, be loath to be
governed by so Gracious a Master? Here I make an offering of my Heart, if thou will but vouchsafe to accept of it; it is a Present unworthy of thy Greatness
and Majesty, yet thou art pleased to require no other sacrifice: Hence forward
speak, Lord, and thy Servant will hear; and when the Characters of thy Mercy
wear out, or decay in my unconstant Soul, Lord! write them there afresh; write
them with the Blood of Christ, that they may be everlasting, and may be an
Eternal fence to me against the suggestions and persuasions of thine Enemies.

3. Conversing with the Holy Angels, after we have eaten, requires imitation of
them in their Praises and Obedience. Bless the Lord, ye his Angels, that excel
in strength, that do his commandments, hearken to the voice of his word, says
the Psalmist, Psalm. 103. 20. Praise and Obedience are inseparable Virtues, the
one without the other makes dull Music in the Ears of God. Let no Man think,
that because Angels are invisible Spirits, and afar off, there is no conversing
with them: He that does their work, is their Companion, their Brother, and
their Familiar; with such they love to be, such persons they love to visit, and
he that does so may be as confident, they are on his right hand, as if he saw
them, for God has said so, Psalm. 34. 7. and therefore it must be true, whether
our carnal eyes behold them or no. Praising, is not only to offer up a Psalm or
Hymn, after we have eaten, but living in a sense of the love of God; and he
that does so, cannot but be obedient and faithful to him, that has so signally
manifested his mercy in his Misery.

The PRAYER.
O Thon who art the Bread of Life, who can feed Souls, and nourish Spirits
into Immortal Life; who have food, the World knows not of; and by secret
influences, can enrich and enlighten those, that wait at the Pool, for the
stirring of the Waters; O bring my mind in frame! O teach me to eat in this
Sacrament of thy Love, to the satisfying my Soul! Make the food of sin odious
and bitter to me. I have fed too long on that stolen Bread. Open mine Eyes,
that I may see how miserable I am, if I do not relish what thou have set before
me. Thou have given me a Soul and thou would have it thrive. In this
Sacrament is that which shall strengthen my Heart. I want only a mighty hunger,
and thirst, O thou; who have given me an Appetite after the meat which
perishes, give me a Holy greediness, after that which endures to everlasting
life! O let the Benefits of thy death, prove life to my Spirit. Raise it above
this dull and Corruptible Flesh, that it may triumph over its base desires.
Bring thou back my Captivity, and let my Chains fall off. Let the Liberty of
thy Children, which consists in a cheerful going on from virtue, to virtue be
my delight and ornament, so shall the King take pleasure in my Beauty, and my
Soul shall rejoice in Thee for ever. Amen.

CHAP V.
Of the various abuses of this Holy Sacrament.
The CONTENTS.
The most Sacred things in all ages have been abused. Instances drawn from the
brazen Serpent, Gideon's Ephod, and the Love Feasts of the Primitive
Christians. Abuses of Holy things rise from several causes. The Lords Supper
has undergone the same fate. The Holier any thing is, that is abused, the
greater is the Crime. A great abuse of this Holy Sacrament, is to fancy, that
like a spell, it will Charm sin, out of our Souls, without strong endeavors.
The abuses committed in this Sacrament, no just Temptation to neglect the use
of it. The Prayer.

I. THere is nothing so sacred or holy, but has been, and may still be, abused
by sensual Men. Moses, Numb. 21. 8. by God's special Appointment, erects a
fiery Serpent, or a Serpent of Polished Brass, shining bright as Fire, a symbol
of God's Presence and Power to heal the tormented Israelites, who had been
stung by fiery Serpents; insomuch, that if any of the persons, thus stung,
looked upon the Figure, he actually recovered: So remarkable a History,
depending upon this brazen Serpent, it was laid up for a Monument; yet, in
process of time, this became an object of Idolatry, which moved Hezekiah to
break it in pieces, and call it Nehushtan, 2 Kings, 18. 4. The very same
happened to Gideon's Ephod, Judge. 8. 27. a thing innocently enough contrived,
and in all probability piously intended as a standing testimony to future Ages,
what a signal Victory God had given his People over the barbarous Midianites;
yet after his Death, when with his Life his Power and Authority over the
brutish People were gone, they went a whoring after it, i. e. fell to worship
it, an accident which proved the ruin of Gideon's Family, and of thousands
besides in Israel. What could be more innocent than the Love Feasts in the
Primitive Church? Mention is made of them Jud. verse. 12. They were Feasts made
in the Oratories, or places where the Primitive Christians used to assemble for
the Celebration of Divine Worship, and at the charge of such as were well to
pass, or richer than the rest; to these the poorer sort were invited, and sat
down at the Table with the rich, ate with them, and carried the Leavings or
Fragments home; and this being done with great expressions of Love, and managed
with singular Meekness, Charity, and Humility, with brotherly Familiarity, and
with holy Discourses, without Excess or Intemperance, and all sanctified by
Prayers and Psalms and reading the Holy Scriptures, the Apostles both permitted
and encouraged these pious Collations; and after them, their Hearts being thus
impregnated with Charity, they applied themselves to the Use and Celebration of
the Eucharist: That which gave occasion to these Love Feasts, was either
Christ's eating the Passover with his Disciples immediately before the
Communion, or the custom of the Jews, who used to eat and drink together in
some Chamber or Building adjoining to the Temple, when they offered their
Sacrifices, or, which is more probable, from the ancient custom of the
Grecians, who having brought rich Gifts, they intended for their Gods, to the
Temple, converted them into Feasts of Charity, to which the Poor as well as the
Rich sat down, and all ate together, no respect of Persons being observed at
that time; which Practice, not a few Christians, being lately crept out of the
darkness of Heathenism, it is like retained, changing only the Object of their
Worship, and doing that to the Honor of the true God, which the Pagans did to
their false and imaginary Deities. Yet see the abuse of these Feasts of
Charity, 1 Cor. 11. 22. especially in the Church of Corinth, in the days of the
Apostles. For St. Paul being busy abroad, partly in Planting, partly in
Confirming Churches, the richer sort of the Christians at Corinth began to
think it below them to admit the poor to that Familiarity as to eat with them
in these charitable Collations; and therefore, either prompted by their own
Pride, or encouraged by some false Teachers, that had Men's Persons in
admiration because of advantage, would indeed send the Meat and Drink they had
prepared, to those Oratories or places of public worship; but when they came,
they superciliously separated themselves from the Poorer sort, and ate and
drank by themselves, and so freely, that many of them became drunk, and in that
condition had the hellish impudence afterward to come to the holy Sacrament: If
they left any thing at these Feasts, the Poor might take it, and make the best
of it; if not, they were forced to go away hungry, and too often discontented.
So early grew this abuse; and though in Process of time these Feasts were used
after the Eucharist, and in many places in Churchyards, at the celebration of
the Memories of holy Martyrs, at the Dedication of Churches, and at the
Funerals of holy Men and Women; yet nothing could keep out Intemperance, and
Excess, and Disorders; for which reason, the Church at last thought herself
obliged to abolish and put them down, which was done accordingly by the Council
of Laodicea, in the Year of our Lord 364. by the Council of Carthage in the
Year 419. and by the Council of Constantinople in the Year 692.

II. Whence Abuses of Holy things arise, is no hard matter to guess: for,

1. We find them spring from an Itch of Novelty, Men not contented with the
plain and simple Truths, God has vouchsafed to Mankind, are strangely tickled
with new things, which are often called Refinings, or Improvements of old
Truths, under which plausible name they are easily swallowed down. Hence rose
the various Idolatries in the World, that it became as modish to invent new
Gods, as it was, to invent new Fashions in Clothes, and Habits; Adam no doubt
delivered the notion of one Eternal, invisible God, Creator of Heaven and
earth, and the decent worship of him, to his posterity. This notion being
become common and stale, the succeeding Ages thought themselves obliged to
invent something new, and counted it more gay and glorious to worship the
Creator in the Creature; and seeing the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, that they
were the brightest Monuments of God's Power, they easily fell into the Worship
of those Luminaries, till the more brutish among the People adored them as Gods
indeed; and this novelty once broached, one God brought in another, and as Men
were still fond of Novelties, so they went on, and fell a Worshipping deceased
Hero's and Princes, in whom the Image of the Supreme Deity resided, and who had
been famous for some notable exploits, or benefits; and from hence they still
went on, even to the Worshipping of Trees, Herbs, Plants, Beasts, Crocodils,
Fishes, and creeping things, one Age still thinking to outdo the other in new
inventions of objects of Worship, till it came to pass, that those were counted
most Religious, that Worshipped the greatest number of Gods, as the Athenians,
who had more Gods than any one City besides, of which, the Apostle takes
notice, Acts 17. 22, 23.

2. Another cause of these abuses, is, an Opinion, That God is pleased more
with the Externals, than the Internals of Religion, an Opinion, which Men are
very apt to slide into, because they find the Internal Devotion is troublesome,
and requires intention of the Mind, and mortification of the Affections, and
the other is more easily performed. To this Original, the Corruptions that did
overspread the Jewish Church, owe their rise, who in despite of all the
Warnings of the Prophets to the contrary, laid the stress of their Piety on the
strict observations of their Sabbaths, new Moons, Sacrifices, Phylacteries, and
legal Purifications. This gave Mahomet occasion to corrupt Religion; for
knowing what would please the sensual inclinations of Men, he craftily drew
People away from the Internal Worship and Consecration of the Souls and
Affections to the Supreme Being, and taught them to place all Devotion in these
five external Acts of Worship, Saying their Prayers five times a day, keeping
the Mouth Ramasan, giving the hundredth part of their incomes to Pious uses,
Washing before Prayer, and making a Pilgrimage, if possible, to Mecca: And thus
the Church of Rome, at this day, comes to deviate from the true Religion, not
only by adding new Articles, of Faith to the ancient Creeds, but by turning the
whole Worship of God, in a manner, into Ceremonies, and external Services,
Saying so many Ave-Maries, visiting such a Saint's Shrine, Processions,
offering Wax-Candles to the Virgin, Praying by Beads, undergoing Penances, etc.

3. A Third cause of these abuses, is, a mistake of Fancy, and Passion, for
true Religion and Revelation. From hence have come all the barbarous attempts
of Pretenders to the true Religien, against Magistrates, and a well settled
Church and State; From hence have risen all those Enthusiastical conceits, both
in this and former Ages, whereby the Gospel it self has been in danger of
being overthrown; From hence come those rude and undigested Notions of
Hildegard, Bridget, Catharine of Siena, Teresa, St. Francis, and others in
Popery, who by their Dreams and Visions have sought to establish the erroneous
Doctrines of the Roman Church; From hence it was, that the Messaliani of Old
pretended, and made People believe, that upon a Man's Regeneration, or being
purged from Sin, the Devil and his Angels came out of his Mouth in the shape of
Swine. To say no more, in Men, and Women, whose notions of Religion are crude,
and undigested, and who are made up of a strong Fancy, and stronger Passions,
Religion must needs run into Wildfire, and pervert the simplicity of the
Gospel.

4. A Fourth Cause, is suiting Religion to our own Humors, Lusts and Interest.
The Tartars therefore embraced the Mohammedan Religion, and rejected the
Christian, because the former gave greater liberty to the Flesh. This made the
Heathens invent to themselves Deities, that were favorers of their Vices; And
from hence it was, that in the Primitive Church, Basilides, Carpocrates,
Valentinus, the Nicolaitans, and Archonticks, denied the necessity of a Holy
Life, because they loved to wallow, like Swine in the Mire; and in all
probability, upon this ground it was, that Hymeneus and Philetus, as the
Apostle informs us, 2 Timothy 17, 18. affirmed, and gave out, that the
Resurrection was already past, because they were loath to be called to an
account for their evil lives.

5. False Teachers and turbulent Souls, are another cause. Discontented Men,
because they cannot be Great or Rich, or have their Will in the Church, under
whose Government they live, to revenge themselves, many times will poison the
Doctrine, make Proselites, and resolve to become great by doing mischief, since
they cannot be so by lawful means: To such persons we owe the Heresies of
Marcion, of Novatus, of Arius, of the Donatists, and others; and it is no more
than what St. Paul has told us long ago, for, the time will come, when they
will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts, shall heap to
themselves Teachers, having itching Ears, 2 Timothy 4. 3. And to this purpose St.
Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. But there were false Prophets also among the people,
even as there shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in
damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift destruction; And many shall follow their pernicious way, by
reason of whom the Truth shall be evil spoken of, and through covetousness
shall they, with feigned words make Merchandise of you, etc.

III. Nor has the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper fared better, than other
Religious Institutions; for this, in all Ages, has had its share in the abuses
of foolish Men; and while they forgot to fix their Eyes upon the Spiritual
Nature and design of it, have entertained gross and carnal apprehensions
concerning it: The Corinthians very early abated in their esteem and reverence
of it, as appears from the latter part of 1 Cor. 11. The Pepuziani and
Collyridianes, Heretics, suffered their Women to administer this Holy
Sacrament: The Ebionites used Water instead of Wine, in imitation of the
Athenian and Heathenish Sacrifices, which were therefore called (...), Sober
and without Wine: The Montanists, Cataphrygians and Gnostics proceeded to that
tremendous barbarity in this Sacrament, that they took a Child of a year old,
and pricked it with Pins and Needles, and drew a considerable quantity of Blood
from it, which Blood they mingled with the Meal or Flower, of which they made
the Sacramental Bread. The Child, if it dyed after these Torments, was counted
a Martyr; if it survived them, they gave it the respect and veneration of a
Priest; and all these horrid practices came merely from hence, because they
stupidly thought, that real Blood was necessary in this Ordinance. Some other
Villainies they committed, which modesty bids me to conceal. The Artotyritae;
another sort of Heretics, made use of Bread and Cheese in this Sacrament, and
to this they were led by a fancy, that because the first Inhabitants in the
World offered to God the First Fruits of the Earth, and particularly the Milk
of their Sheep and Kine, they were obliged to do so too. The Messaliani made
this Sacrament an indifferent thing, and gave out, that it neither promoted nor
hindered Man's Salvation; an Error which the Quakers have taken up at this day.
Nor were they only professed Heretics that committed these abuses, but the
Popes of Rome, by degrees, brought in abundance of needless Ceremonies, whereby
this Plain and Heavenly Ordinance was very much corrupted. Pope Alexander,
about the Year of Christ 115, ordered, (what was indifferent before,) that Wine
should be mixed with Water in this Sacrament, and that no other Bread should be
used but unleavened Bread; that Holy Water mingled with Salt, should be
consecrated before the Eucharist, that the Communicants, after they had
received, might be sprinkled with it. Sixtus, about the Year 125, ordered, that
no Nun, or Women, should touch the Holy Vessels, or the Cloth of the Communion
Table. Hyginus, about the Year 140, enjoined, that the Sacrament of the
Eucharist should ever be used, and celebrated at the Dedication of Churches.
Soter, about the Year 163, that no Bishop or Priest should taste of any thing,
before the Communion, but abstain from all manner of Food, before they
administered or received. Urban, about the Year 230, ordained, that no other
Vessels should be used at the Communion, but either Golden, or Silver ones; if
the Church were poor, then Pewter should be made use of. Felix, about the Year
277, ordered that the Eucharist should be celebrated no where, but in a
consecrated place. Sylvester, who lived about the Year 324, gave command, that
the Altars on which the Sacrament was celebrated, should be of Stone. Syricius,
about the Year 383, that no married Priest should celebrate or administer the
Eucharist. Innocent, about the Year 410, gave order, that the Names of those
who had given Alms at the Communion, should be rehearsed and proclaimed in the
Church, at the celebration of this Mystery; and that even Infants should be
brought to communicate in this Sacrament. Zosimus his Successor, enjoined, that
the Deacons, while the Sacrament was administering, should have their Hands
covered with a Linen Cloth. Thus Superstition came in by degrees; and while the
People were taught an external Veneration of the Sacrament, they neglected the
fruits of Repentance, which the Worthy receiving, should have produced in them.
There was an ancient Custom in the Christian Church, at the Communion, to
rehearse the Names of Martyrs, and their Glorious Actions, and the Miracles
they had wrought, both alive and dead; from hence by degrees, crept in the
unhappy practice of Invocation of Saints, and Martyrs in the Eucharist; and
this being once allowed of, the Doctrine of Purgatory beginning to spread about
St. Austin's time, and more universally about the time of Gregory the Great,
Men fell into an Opinion, that by the Eucharist, their Names that were gone
into Purgatory, being rehearsed, their Souls might be delivered out of
Purgatory; some thought, that even the Souls of the Damned were in some measure
relieved by this unbloody Sacrifice: And nothing is more common at this day, in
the Church of Rome, than to say Masses for Souls in Purgatory; a Doctrine they
prove from the infirmities, errors, and corrupt opinions of some of the
Fathers, but which, the Scripture does not speak the least syllable of: Into
such abuses has the World run, by deviating from the simplicity of the Gospel.
And that, which must be matter of grief and sorrow to all good Men, is, that
this Sacrament, which was intended as the Bond of Peace, is made the Ball of
Contention, and the Engine of Division, the motive to Hatred, and the fire of
Wrath and Animosities: For this the Lutherans write Invectives against the
Calvinists, and the Papists against both; and that which should have united all
Men's Hearts, makes them hate one another mortally; and no other reason can be
assigned for it, but Men's Pride and Passion, and their other Vices. Who does
not tremble, that reads the History of the Gunpowder-Treason, in which the
Sacrament was, without a Metaphor, made the Covenant of Blood, and the
Conspirators united by it, to be bold and resolute in this Enterprise? Not to
mention other abuses of sensual and carnal Men, too frequent among us, that can
engage themselves in this Ordinance to follow their Master's steps; and
notwithstanding these Engagements, live like Swine and Devils. Nor need we
wonder why God suffers these abuses, for the permits them as he does other
sins, to let Men see at last, that their Condemnation is just. Besides, this
makes those who use this Ordinance in pursuance of the right end of its
Institution, more glorious in God's Eyes, for this has still been the
Privilege of the true Church of God, to flourish like a Lilly among Thorns; and
what the Apostle says of Heresy in general, is most true of these Abuses,
There must be such things in the World, that those which are approved may be
made manifest, 1 Cor. 11. 19.

The Preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. THE holier any thing is that is abused, the greater is the Crime. When
Belshazar, Dan. 5. 1. was resolved to be drunk, had he made himself a Beast by
drinking out of common Cups, though the sin had been great, and against Nature,
yet it might have passed unpunished here, as other Villainies are; but when
nothing would serve his turn, but to drink his Reason and his Wits away out of
the Bowls of the Sanctuary, and to add Profanation of the Vessels of the Lord's
House to all his Crimes, this allarmed the Divine Vengeance immediately; and
rather than not show his Displeasure, God thought himself obliged to be at the
Charge of a Miracle, which caused the fatal Hand upon the Wall, and the King's
Overthrow followed within a few hours after: And if the Abuse of consecrated
Vessels raised so great a Storm, what must the abuse of consecrated Reason, and
Duties, and Mercies do? Sirs, your Reason is a consecrated thing, God has set
it apart for his use, that you should consider and contrive how to get a share
among the Blessed hereafter; if you abuse it, and will let it serve you for no
other end, but to teach you how you may grow rich and great, and fill your
Bellies with hid Treasures, will not God visit for these things? and will not
his Soul be avenged on such Persons? Your signal Mercies and Deliverances are
consecrated things, God has set them apart, to put you in mind of your
Gratitude, to teach you Submission to his Will, and to walk humbly with your
God; if after these you are careless, and live as regardless of your Duty as
you did before, will not God reckon with you one day for such abuses? Should a
poor Man take the Cordial you send him, and fling it upon a Dunghill, how would
you resent it? and can God like it, do you think, to see how like Madmen you
tear off the Clothes he gives you, to cover your Nakedness, to see you live the
reverse of his Designs, to see you fight against him with his Mercies, and as
it was in the Case of the Daughter Jerusalem, Ezech. 16-17. to see you take the
fair Jewels of Gold, and of Silver he has given you, and make to your selves
Images of Men, and commit fornication with them.

II. One great abuse of this Holy Sacrament, is, to fancy, that like a spell,
it will charm sin out of your mortal Bodies, so that you need be at no trouble
to mortify it. The Sacrament indeed confers Grace, but it is objectively, as
it contains very great Motives to a lively Faith, and Hope, and Charity; and it
confers Grace too, as a cause, without which, Grace would not be conveyed,
because God has promised in this Ordinance to be present, and as the Dew of
Hermon, or as the Dew descends on the Mountains of Sion, so here the Lord
commands his Blessing, even life for evermore: But still it does not confer
Grace Physically, as if the mere use of it would make you Favorites of Heaven,
and Children of his Love. It Is Physic indeed, which will work a Cure, but then
the Person that makes use of it must be qualified for it, must be sensible,
that he is sick, and willing to be cured of his Spiritual Diseases, and then
God will look upon him, as a Father, and manifest himself to him; look upon
him, as a kind Physician, and make the Medicine effectual to him; look upon him
as a Friend, and take him into his bosom, and say to him, as it is Es. 49. 8.
In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of Salvation have I
helped thee, and I will preserve thee, and cause thee to inherit the desolate
Heritages.

III. The abuses committed by some in this Sacrament, must not tempt us to
neglect the use of it. If the abuse that others have been guilty of, were a
sufficient excuse to stay away, we might as well argue, that Meat, and Drink,
and Clothes, and Books, and Learning, may not be used, because ill Men have
perverted the harmless design of them. We should count that Man a fool, that
should resolve, because a Man of such a Profession has cheated him, therefore
he will never deal with a Man of that Profession again; or because such a
Person, who pretended to strictness of Religion, has played the knave with him,
therefore he will never trust a Religious Man again: The same absurdity would
he commit, that from the abuse that others have run into, in the Holy
Communion, should resolve to abstain from it; for this would be as much, as to
resolve to be mad, because others are, and have been so. God has furnished us
with Faculties and Powers, to discern the Dross from the Silver, and the Tin
from the purer Metal, and we have his Word, to guide us in distinguishing the
use, from the abuse; and as the temperate Man still drinks Wine, though
thousands in the World still pervert the use of that Creature; so a good
Christian can see no rational discouragement from coming to this Table, though
some have made it their bane, and turned it into their own destruction.

The PRAYER.
O Most Gracious God, who have given us thine Ordinances for our Comfort and
Edification, and directed us how to use them to thy Glory, Give me an
Understanding Heart, and a pure Mind, that they may be a savor of Life unto
Life to me. Let me not touch these Holy things with unclean Hands, but purify
my Soul and cleanse it from that filthiness, which does so easily beset it,
that I may be fit for thy Divine and Glorious Influences. Lord, without thee I
can do nothing; thou art the Vine and I the Branch, convey thy Celestial Juice
into this withered Branch, that I may revive and bring forth much fruit, and
have my Fruit unto Holiness, and the end everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. VI.
Of Receiving the Lord's Supper Fasting, and how far it is Necessary.
The CONTENTS.
It is a thing not absolutely necessary, to receive the Lord's Supper fasting;
Several Reasons to prove the Assertion. Yet, to receive it Fasting, is a thing
very conventent, because it quickens Devotion, and is an Act agreeable to the
mortifying Prospect of Christ's Death, and warranted by the Practice of the
Universal Church. Total Abstinence from Food, that Morning we receive, may be
prejudicial to some Constitutions, which must therefore be indulged to eat
something at Home. Cautions and Rules to be observed in Eating before we
Receive. The Decay of Fasting among Christians of this Age, an Argument of the
Decay of Christianity. To Fasting, before we Receive, must be joined afterward
Abstinence from Sin. The Prayer.

I. THat it is not absolutely necessary to eat the Lord's Supper Fasting, will
appear from the following Arguments.

1. Neither Eating, nor Abstinence do in themselves commend us unto God, for
neither if we Eat, are we the worse, neither if we Eat not, are we the worse,
says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 8. 8. It Is not the Belly God regards so much as the
Heart, and the Frame of the Soul he ever respects more than the Bowels; The
Pharisee, that lays the stress of his Religion upon an empty Stomach, mistakes
the Nature of God as much as the Pythagorean, who fancies God will be pleased
with his choosing one sort of Food before another; Neither the former's
abstaining from Swines-Flesh, nor the other's Aversion from Beans, is an
Offering acceptable to him, especially where they stand single, and have no
other Virtues to bear them company. God being a Spirit, loves to converse with
Spiritual Natures, and such are our Souls; and an humble and broken Spirit
prevails more with him than all outward Ceremonies whatsoever. The Jews, Es.
58. 3. were as much out, when they cried, Wherefore have we fasted, and thou
see not? as those, Luke 13. 26. that said to Christ, Have not we eaten and
drunk in thy presence? One Act of sincere Contrition, is a more pleasing
Spectacle to God, than a thousand external Formalities; and doing his Will, a
more acceptable Sacrifice than a rueful Face, Fasting has no intrinsic
Virtue, the Gracious Aspect God vouchsafes it, is upon the account of something
within, that looks very lovely in his Eyes, and that is a Conscience sprinkled
from dead Works.

2. Christ's Example is a convincing Argument, that to receive it Fasting is
not absolutely necessary. Not only St. Matthew, Matthew. 26. 26. but the other
Evangelists assure us, that while Christ and his Disciples were eating the
Passover, or as soon as they had eaten it, he took Bread, and Blessed it, and
brake, and gave it to his Disciples, and said, take, eat, etc. Had it been a
sin to do so, we may rationally suppose, the first Author of this Sacrament
would have given no encouragement to it by his Example; and though it is true,
that may be sometimes lawful in a Prince, which may be an Error in the Subject;
yet our Great Master laid aside that Piece of State, and appeared in the Form
of a Servant, and became obedient to that Law, he would have his Followers live
up to; He did not prescribe one thing, and do another, but like a watchful
General, put his Hand to that Plough, at which he would have others labor; and
it is evident enough, that while he and the Disciples were eating, or as soon as
they had eated the Passover (and consequently they were not fasting) he bid
them Eat and Drink of the Sacramental Bread and Wine, which accordingly they
did, and we may be confident he would not have led them into an Error.

3. The Apostles afterward we see, were indifferent, whether they gave it to
Men fasting, or to Persons, who had been at a Meal just before, so they were
but studious, of a pure and spotless Conversation, and so much appears from
what we read, Act. 2. 46. After they came from the Temple, i.e. after they came
from the Common Prayer in the Temple, which was at Nine of the Clock in the
Morning, and at Three in the Afternoon they break Bread from House to House,
and giving it in the Afternoon, as well as in the Morning, we may justly
conclude they laid no stress upon Peoples receiving it fasting. However, it is
plain that the Corinthian Christians, by St. Paul's Allowance and Approbation,
administered and received it after their Love Feasts; and while they observed
the Rules of Decency, Sobriety, and Temperance, and Charity, and Seriousness in
those Agapae, or Feasts of Charity, the Apostle found no fault with their
Communicating after them; but when they became luxurious, and grew exorbitant,
and made provision for the Flesh more than the Spirit, he justly changed his
Discourse, and turned his former Gentleness into sharp Reproofs, and
Apostolical Reprehensions; and he had reason, for these Doings would have soon
brought this weighty Ordinance into Contempt, and made Men abhor the Offerings
of the Lord.

II. Notwithstanding all this, to receive it Fasting, is a thing very
convenient.

1. Because it quickens Devotion. That we are not to come to the Table of our
Lord with an indifferency of Mind, or looseness of Fancy, or carelessness of
Affections, none can be ignorant: The sublimest Mystery requires the sublimest
Thoughts, and a Mind as clear from gross and carnal Apprehensions, as Mortality
will let us; but this is not to be done without Fasting, Meat and Drink filling
the Brain with Fumes, and as you have seen a Cloud coming before the Sun,
intercepting, and darkening the brighter Rays of that noble Planet; so the
greasy Steams and Vapors, which feeding before, sends up to the nobler Parts,
must needs, in some measure at least, obscure the Understanding, the Sun in
this Microcosm, and hinder it from spreading and dispersing its kindly Beams
and Influences; and this was the Opinion, not only of the Primitive Believers,
but of the Pythagoreans also, and other Philosophers, whose Great Maxim was,
That the purest Thoughts flow from an empty Stom^ch, or Self-denial in Meat and
Drink. That the ancient Christians fasted so often, the reason certainly was,
to give Wings to their Devotion, and to make their Prayers fly the faster, and
with greater Alacrity to Heaven. This way they found was most proper to plant a
Spiritual Temper in their Souls, and when they would mount up with greater
Cheerfulness above the Clouds, they gave themselves to Fasting and Prayer. And
indeed, in some Constitutions at least, the Soul never acts more like it self,
than when the Body gives it no Divertisement by Eating and Drinking for a time.
The more the Body is fed, the leaner grows the Soul, and the leaner the Body is
kept, the fatter grows the Soul; all which is evidence enough, That to receive
the Holy Communion Fasting, is the way to receive it with the quickest, and
therefore most suitable Devotion.

2. To receive it fasting, is an Act most agreeable to the mortifying Prospect
of Christ's Death and Passion. What? Look upon so dismal an Object with a full
Stomach, or a pampered Body, which is enough to tempt us to say with St. Thomas
in another case, Let us go, that we may dye with him, John 11. 16. He that
comes to this Sacrament, comes to dye with Christ, i. e. to dye to Sin, and
sure no sober Man will think Eating and Drinking to be a proper Preparative for
so serious a Death: How absurd is it not to have all things suitable in a great
Solemnity? In the Communion we come to behold a Fasting Savior, fasting and
abstaining, not only from Common Food that Day he suffered, but fasting from a
Sense of the charming Love of God, and from the Comforts and Communications of
the Divine Nature, which by a Miracle withdrew its Shine and Splendour, and left
him in the Dark; a severer Fast, than if those Three and Thirty Years he lived
in the World, he had eaten nothing, and can we behold this dreadful Fast, and
not appear fasting before the Altar? Besides, do People make a Meal when they
are going to a Feast? A greater Banquet we cannot go to, than that which the
King of Heaven has prepared; and shall we fill our Bellies before we appear
here, and dull our Appetite to the richer Food?

3. To receive the Lord's Supper Fasting, has been the Practice of the
Christian Church for many hundred Years; for when sad Experience taught the
Fathers how unfit the preceding Love Feasts made the Generality for Receiving
Christ in this Ordinance, they thought themselves obliged, not only to separate
those Love Feasts from the Supper of the Lord, but to make strict Orders for
the Celebrating of it in the Morning, and to charge all Persons to receive it
with an empty Stomach; while the heat of Persecution lasted, they were forced
to receive it very early before Day, that they might not meet with Affronts or
Disturbances from the Heathens, if if they had known of the time of their
Meetings; but what Persecution made necessary at first, was made so afterward
by a Law; I mean by a Law Ecclesiastical, and therefore the Third Council of
Carthage decrees expressly, That the Sacrament of the Altar should be taken and
received by none, but such as are Fasting: A thing so religiously observed,
especially by the Eastern Churches, that when some of St. Chrysostom's Enemies
had informed against him, that he had given the Holy Communion to Persons, who
he knew had eaten at Home, before they came to Church; he falls a protesting
and wishing, If he had done such a thing, that his Name may be blotted out of
the Catalogue of Bishops; nay, That Christ may exclude him from his Everlasting
Kingdom. In St. Austin's time, it was become an universal practice to take and
receive it Fasting: And though in Egypt not a few kept to the old Custom of
receiving it after their common Suppers; yet the Disorders, lrreverence, and
Intemperance they fell into by that means, has been defensative sufficient to
wise Men from following them in that preposterous way of Receiving; so that we
may truly say, that this Communicating with an empty Stomach, has been the
Practice of most Christian Churches ever since the Apostles days; and this was
part of their Rules and Canons; and what has been so punctually observed by
most Churches of the World, ought certainly to weigh much with him that
believes the Church to be the Ground and Pillar of Truth, as it is called, 1 Timothy 3. 16.

III. However, since it is possible, that some, by total Abstinence from common
Food that Morning they are to receive, may make themselves unfit to receive
with due Devotion, their Stomachs not being able to bear Emptiness, such must
be allowed to eat something before they Receive, whether they be Ministers of
the Word, who must take pains, and spend their Spirits on such days, and
sometimes are none of the strongest, or other Persons of a weak and sickly
Constitution: But in this case, the following Rules must necessarily be
observed.

1. That we eat no more than what just serves to support Nature against
Fainting: Not only the Law of Self-preservation, but of Religion too, bids us
keep our Bodies serviceable to our Souls. If these Tabernacles of Clay be out
of order, the Soul, which, in this Valley of Tears at least, works by the
Organs of the Body, must needs languish too; and the Pen, which is the Body,
being spoiled or cracked, or weakened, the Scribe, which is the Soul, cannot
write so fair as otherwise it would do. But then there is a great difference
betwixt keeping the Body from fainting, and pampering of it. He that before the
Sacrament eats to Satiety, cannot be supposed to bring very lively Thoughts, or
a profound Sense of the great Mystery with him to the Holy Table; so that the
quantity of Food that is taken before, must be such as leaves the Soul in a good
Posture and Temper to be affected, and touched with the Solemnity and Greatness
of the Ordinance.

2. The Food we take before, must be of the courser sort, that the Mind may be
preserved in a mortified Frame. God, Es. 58. 3. finds fault with the Jews for
allowing themselves in Pleasures while they fasted, to show how unsuitable
Carnal Recreations, though at other times lawful, are on such Humiliation Days.
This may justly be applied to Eating before Men come to the Holy Sacrament:
Pleasant Meat is unsuitable: To find pleasure in Eating and Drinking before,
spoils the Pleasure the Soul should take in this Ordinance. Christ, before he
did eat of the Eucharist, did eat, it is true, but it was Unleavened Bread and
bitter Herbs, which I reckon was as much as Fasting; for such Food cannot be
supposed to be very palatable: And before the Love Feasts, that preceded the
Sacrament, were corrupted, the Christians did eat so moderately, that they
seemed to feed rather upon Discipline, than the Meat that was set before them,
as Tertullian words it.

3. Even that small quantity of courser Food, must be taken with pious
Reflections, and Contemplations of the far nobler Food, which, within a few
Minutes after, we are like to be partakers of. Serpents, they say, whatever
injuries are offered them, still their great care is to preserve their heads:
If it be our duty to be wise as Serpents, it must be our care too to guard our
Heads, our Minds I mean, especially where necessity forces us to eat, before we
come to the Lord's Table, that the serious frame be not overthrown, and that it
may appear, it is not delight in eating, but desire to be the better able to
converse with God, which makes us give our Bodies such necessary Refreshments
as their weakness requires. And if you ask me, What Reflections are most proper
in this case? I need only send you to that Guest, Luc. 14. 15. who sitting at
the Table, said, Blessed is he that shall eat Bread in the Kingdom of God! So
he that upon such occasions gives his Body ordinary Food, may reflect on the
Table in Christ's everlasting Kingdom, where God's Glory will be the Meat, and
the light of his Favor the Drink, and Angels the Musicians, and glorified
Saints the Company, and the Eternal Love of God the Canopy, under which the
vast Armies of Martyrs and Saints will feast, and gather everlasting strength;
strength which no sickness, no illness, and no accidents can ever weaken or
dissolve.

The Preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. WE may take notice here of the strange decay of Christianity, especially
with respect to Fasting; a piece of Devotion, whereby the Primitive Believers
effected very great things: And it is to be feared that the over-tenderness of
Men to their Bodies in this Age, and a fancy that every thing is necessary
which their Appetite craves, is no small hinderance to their eminency in Virtue
and Goodness. It Is granted, that Men may be very vicious, and yet great Fasters
too, as one John Scot in Scotland, in the year 1539. a man of no Learning, See
Archbishop Spotswood's Hist. Book 2. p. 69.
and no good Qualities neither, who was able to abstain thirty or forty days
together from all manner of Meat and Drink; whereof the King willing to make
trial, shut him up in a Room within the Castle of Edinburgh, suffering no
creature to come at him: A little Bread and Water indeed was set before him at
his first coming into the room; but upon examination, it was found that he had
not so much as tasted of it in the space of 32 days. And going afterward to
Rome, the like proof of his fasting was given to Pope Clement VII. and some
time after, preaching against King Henry the Eighth's Divorce at London, he was
shut up in Prison, where he fasted 50 days, yet continued still a dissolute
man. But it is not the bare abstinence that makes a Man a Christian, but the
spending a Fast religiously, and to good ends, works the Miracle of Holiness;
and such were the Fasts of the Primitive Believers, who by such frequent
Mortifications made their Graces tower and climb, and culminate, to the
admiration of the unbelieving World; when they would conquer any Corruption,
when they had a mind to arrive to any excellency in Virtue, when they wanted a
signal spiritual Blessing; nay, when their Friends and Relations, or any
eminent Servant of God, lay sick, they presently applied themselves to this
piece of Mortification, and found great success: And it stands to reason, that
where the Soul gets thus above the Body, slights the Pleasures of the flesh,
determines to converse with God, and entertains herself with the thoughts of
his Greatness and her own Vileness; God, who ever loves an humble Spirit, will
look down and satisfy the longing Soul, and fill the thirsty Soul with
Goodness. Yet,

II. Let Us not think we have discharged our duty, when we have received the
Lord's Supper fasting; that will signify but little, if after receiving we do
not fast from sin. This is the acceptable Lent, and must be observed more
religiously than the Mohammedan does his month Ramasan: This is the Fast which
the Lord has chosen, and except our Abstinence from Food be in order to this
Fast, God regards it no more than the lowing of Oxen, or the bleating of Sheep.
To fast from sin, is both a Preparative for the Lord's Supper, and must be the
consequence of it. This Fast must be the very end of our coming to the holy
Table, and we eat and drink there, that we may be out of love with this
dangerous Meat. Nor is this Fast from sin a thing impossible, if by sin, as we
ought to do, we understand wilful and habitual sin; and the Motives to this
perpetual Fast are very cogent: He that believes that sin is the Food of
Devils, and the Meat of Hell, and the Festival of Fallen Angels, can have no
great Stomach to it. Nothing starves the Soul sooner than sin; and as pleasant
as it may be to the Palate, the Soul suffers extremely by it, and falls into
Palsies and Apoplexies. It makes it not only lean, but miserable too; it shuts
her out from the care and tenderness of a Gracious God, and, in its pernicious
effects, goes beyond the Apples of Sodom; for whereas these, upon touching of
them, fall and shatter only into Ashes, that ends in eternal Fire. The Ears
must be stopped therefore against its Charms, the Eyes shut against its alluring
Dresses; and thus we may wean our selves from any affection to this forbidden
fruit.

The PRAYER.
O My God! Thou art the most Charming Object, and though the sensual World will
not be persuaded to believe it, yet it is because their eyes are blinded. The
enlightened Soul discovers such Beauty in thee, as transcends the fairest
Pictures that mortal hands can make. Thou, who art the Creator of all
Excellencies, must needs be more excellent than all thy Creatures. O how have I
been mistaken in my choice! How greedy have I been after the Meat which
perishes! To fast and abstain from that, I have thought death and misery;
while I could be content to live without thee; and to be deprived of the
Communications of thy Goodness, has not so much as caused the least solicitude
in my Breast. The want of thy favor has troubled me no more than the want of
things which are contrary to my Nature and Constitution. I see now, where my
Happiness lies, and to feed on thee, I perceive, is to feed on that which is
incorruptible. O kiss me with the kisses of thy Lips, and my Soul shall leap
for joy. Make sin odious to me, and make me as averse from it, (...), my nature
is from Poison. Let my desires be after thee alone, and let me feel, that when
I enjoy thee, I have the best Meat and Drink, and that which will nourish me
into everlasting Life: Let nothing satisfy me, but to live for ever; Let that
be my Ambition; Let that be my Resolution; Let that be my Endeavor. My Soul
has been precious in thy sight, thou have not yet condemned me with the World.
Thy patience has long waited for me, while others have been sent into
Darkness, thou have spared me, and suffered me to enjoy the Light of the
Living. I will trespass upon thy Goodness no more, I feel the workings of thy
Spirit in my Soul, I feel desires and propensities to Goodness, I will cherish
them; O help thou me! Let those drops of Goodness in me swell into Floods, and
the ri^ulets of Grace that run through my Soul, into larger streams. Let thy
voice be heard in my Soul, thy convincing, thy converting, thy pardoning, thy
sanctifying voice. At thy Word I will let down the Net; O let me enclose a
multitude of Virtues! Goodness has been meat I have had an aversion from; now
let it become my daily Bread. Teach me the art of Abstinence, persuade me to
abstain from that, which will certainly be my ruin. Give me a Holy greediness
after thy Word; let mine ears delight to hear it, and mine eyes delight to see
it, and my feet delight to walk in the way of it. Lead me to the Rock that is
stronger than I; let me freely-Sacrifice unto thee. Let my great endeavor be,
to please my Redeemer, who has saved my Life from the Nethermost Hell. He bids
me follow him; O blessed Jesu! I will follow thee whithersoever thou go:
Only give me alitority and readiness to make haste after thee, who art the
Captain of my Salvation; To wh^m with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be Honor
and Glory for ever, and ever. Amen.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Elements in this Sacrament; and First of the Bread Christ made use of,
and of the Nature and Design of it.
The CONTENTS.
The Bread, Christ made use of, was, in all probability, unleavened Bread. The
reason why, in the Church of England, we make use of Bread that is leavened.
Wheaten Bread made use of in the first Institution. Substantial Bread necessary
in the Celebration of this Sacrament, not Wafers. Several Reasons why Christ
made use of Bread in the Institution. God makes use of very mean and ordinary
things, to represent great Mysteries by them. Examination necessary, whether we
are strengthened by the Holy Bread in this Sacrament. Several signs and
characters of spiritual strength, laid down. The Prayer.

I. THat Christ made use of Bread in this Sacrament, we have the concurrent
Testimonies of the Evangelists; and considering the circumstances, he then was
under, cannot but conclude, that it was Unleavened Bread he used, because at
that time, when he instituted this Sacrament, no other Bread was to be had, it
being the First day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread, as we are informed by St.
Matthew, Chap. 26. 17. Now the first day of Unleavened Bread, the Disciples
came to Jesus, saying unto him, where will thou, that we prepare for thee to
e^t the Passover? If Christ did eat the Passover of Unleavened Bread, and
instituted the Sacrament of the Eucharist after he had eaten the Passover, it
must necessarily follow, that he used Unleavened Bread in this Institution;
for, from the first day of Unleavened Bread to the last, no Leaven was suffered
to remain in any Jewish House whatsoever: For Seven days shall ye eat
Unleavened Bread, even the first day ye shall put Leaven out of your Houses;
for whosoever eats Leavened Bread from the first day, until the seventh day,
that Soul shall be cut off from Israel, says the Law. 12. 15. And therefore
Christ, who came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, must be supposed, to
have done according to this Law, and consequently, instituting this Sacrament
immediately after the Passover, he could not possibly make use of any other
Bread, but Unleavened, because there was no other to be found in the Houses of
the Israelites at that time. And whereas it is said by some, that Christ did
eat the Passover, before the Jews, and consequently there migh be Leavened
Bread to be had; I answer, That he did indeed eat it before the Jews, but still
the same day that the Jews did eat it, Christ in the beginning of the
Fourteenth Day of Nisan, the Jews about the latter end of it; and if so, no
Leaven could be had; for, from the Fourteenth to the One and Twentieth,
Religion exterminated and banished Leaven from all Men's Habitations. But here
will arise a Question, If Christ made use of Unleavened Bread, Why does the
Church of England use Bread with Leaven in it, in the Holy Sacrament? But the
reason of this is,

1. Because the Primitive Church, and the Christians that succeeded the
Apostles, and who could not but know the sense of the Apostles in this point,
looked upon it as a thing indifferent, whether Leavened or Unleavened Bread
were used in the Sacrament; and therefore, in times of Persecution especially,
they made use of such Bread as they could get, never disputing whether it had
Leaven or no Leaven in it. Indeed, about the Year 1053, there arose a great
Controversy betwixt the Greek and Latin Churches, whether Leavened or
Unleavened Bread ought to be used in the Eucharist; The Greeks standing up for
the Necessity of using Leavened, The Latins for using Unleavened Bread; And the
Greeks proceeded to that Heat in the Dispute, that they asserted, That
Unleavened Bread was no Bread at all: But in this they were so palpably
mistaken, that a Child, which had read the Bible, might discover their wilful
Error, the Scripture calling both the Leavened and Unleavened Composition of
Meal and Water, Vid. Verse. LXX. l. c. (...).
by the Name of Bread, Exodus 29. 2. and Judge. 6. 20. What Michael the Patriarch
of Constantinople objects here, that (...) Bread is derived from a Word,
importing elevation, or lifting up, (...).
and therefore must be such Bread which has received Elevation and Warmth from
Salt and Leaven, is a Fancy and Quibble, rather than an Argument: But this has
been the Custom of the Greeks, ever since they became Strangers to the
Primitive Simplicity of the Gospel, to stand up for little and inconsiderable
Problems of Divinity, as if they were Articles of Faith, and to defend a
Ceremony or Circumstance, as hotly as if the whole Frame of Salvation depended
upon it.

2. We make use of Leavened Bread in the Church of England, because the
Substance or Essence of the Sacrament is not at all prejudiced by it; and in
things merely circumstantial, the Church has not only varied from the first
Customs, but may lawfully vary, as she sees occasion, as will appear more fully
from what we shall hereafter lay down concerning Ceremonies. The reason, why
Christ made use of Unleavened Bread, was because there was no other to be had
at that time; that which he chiefly intended, was Bread, which Feeds and
Nourishes the Body, thereby to represent the spiritual Nourishment of the Soul,
the greater thing intended in this Sacrament; and since Leavened Bread will do
this, as well as Unleavened, we need not be very scrupulous about it; though if
the Church thought fit to alter the Custom, and use Unleavened Bread, I should
be ready to subscribe to it, for no other reason, but because it best
represents the Temper a Christian ought to have at all times* but more
particularly at his approaching to the Lord's Table, viz. Sincerity, and Godly
Simplicity, to which the Apostle alludes, 1 Cor. 5. 8. Therefore let us keep
the Feast, not with the old Leaven, neither with the Leaven of Malice and
Wickedness, but with the Unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth.

II. As it was Unleavened Bread Christ made use of in this Sacrament, so it was
Bread made of Corn, and particularly of that sort, which Bread is usually made
of among us, and that is Wheat; for though the Jews, especially the poorer sort,
used Barley Cakes, and Barley Bread sometimes; and our Savior himself took the
five Barley Loaves and distributed them to the Disciples, and the Disciples to
the Multitude, Joh. 6. 9. Yet in the Passover, wherein they remembered the
greatest Deliverance that ever happened to the Jewish Nation, it is probable,
they made their Unleavened Cakes of the best Corn, i. e. Wheat, the rather,
because in their Meat Offerings and Cakes which they offered to God, they were
commanded to use the finest Wheat Flour, Levit. 2. 12. 45. and as their
Deliverance from Egypt gave them a Title to that Land, one great blessing
whereof was, their being filled with the finest of the Wheat, Psalm. 147. 14 so
its like, they would not in their Passover, in the Bread they used, omit the
commemoration of that Mercy; and the same Bread which Christ made use of in the
Passover, we must suppose, he made use of in the institution of this Sacrament;
This will give us occasion to enquire, whether any other thing Men make use of,
instead of Corn-Bread, may be used in this Holy Sacrament; for it is certain
that in some Countries they have no Corn, and diverse Authors tells us, how much
the Bread differs in the several parts of the habitable World, according to the
nature of the Soil, and temper of the Inhabitants; The Egyptians heretofore
made Bread of Millet, and Milk, and Water, and in some part of the West Indies
at this day, they make Bread of the roots of certain Trees, which they dry, and
powder, and then make up into Paste, or Bread, and so they do in diverse parts
of Africa; And as it may be the lots of many Christians to be cast upon such
places, so the question may justly be asked, Whether in the administration of
the Lord's Supper, being destitute of Bread made of Corn, they may, with a safe
Conscience, make use of any other; And most Divines answer in the affirmative:
For though the Canonists, among the Papists, will allow nothing to be Bread, but
what is made of Corn, yet whatever it is, that nourishes like Bread made of
Corn, is Bread to them, who are so nourished by it: And since the reason of
Christ's making use of Bread in this Sacrament, was to represent the Spiritual
nourishment of our Souls, by application of the benefits of his death, or as we
commonly speak, by his Body and Blood; Why should not any Nation, or People
make use of that in the Sacrament, to represent this Spiritual nourishment,
which serves them instead of Bread, and gives the same nourishment to their
Bodies that ordinary Bread does? especially where Bread of Wheat, or Rye, or
Barley is not to be had: Yet this is not to be applied to other Fruits of the
Earth, such as Pears, and Apples, and Figs, and Melons, etc. as if they, in
case of necessity, might be made use of instead of Bread; for though they
nourish too, yet no Nation makes use of them as their Bread: And since Bread is
not only used by Christ, but by all the Christian Churches in all Ages,
something that has the nature and the name of Bread must still be used in this
Holy Sacrament, and all care imaginable taken, that by making use of something
else, Men run not into Profanation of this Ordinance.

3. As it was unleavened and wheaten Bread, Christ made use of in the
Institution of this Holy Sacrament; so it was also substantial Bread, not a
Wafer, as is now used in the Church of Rome. That Christ used substantial
Bread, no Man ever doubted, that understood, what Bread the Jews made use of in
the Celebration of the Passover, and for a thousand years after Christ, the
Church was wholly ignorant of Wafers. It Is granted, that the Sacramental Bread
was anciently called Host, from the Latin, Hostia, a Sacrifice, because the
Bread represents the Body of Christ, which was offered in Sacrifice for the
sins of the World; (which name of Host the Church of Rome still applies at this
day, to their Wafers in the Mass) but then it was substantial Bread, or a whole
Loaf, they called by that name. How these Wafers first came in, is explained by
Honorius Augustodunensis. Vid. Voss Disp. 19. de Sacris Coen. Dom. Symb.
The report goes, says he, that it was usual in former times for the Ministers
of the Church, when the Sacrament of the Altar was to be Celebrated, to fetch a
quantity of Meal, or Flower from every House or Family, in the place they lived
in, which Custom is yet observed among the Greeks, and of that to make the
Bread, which was to be used at the Lord's Table, and distributed among the
Communicants: But after the Church increased in number, but decreased in
Holiness, it was ordered for the sake of carnal Men, that those, that could,
should communicate either every Lords Day, or every Third Lord's Day, or on the
Festivals of the Year. But the People not coming, and there being no need of so
great a Loaf, as formerly, it was thought good, to use Wafers in the form of a
larger Penny; and that they might not want a Mystery for these new doings, the
People desired, instead of Flower, to offer every Man a Penny; that thereby
they might acknowledge, how their Lord and Master was betrayed for Thirty pieces
of Silver. So far he; And it is probable, that from hence came the
Easter-Offerings, which as yet are usual in most Churches of the Nation. And
since these Wafers are the effects of so great no abuse, which the wickedness
of the times brought into the Church, it can be no great encouragement for
those that would preserve the solemnity of this Mystery, to keep them up, or
plead in vindication of them. It Is true, the Wafers they use this day in the
Church of Rome, are made of Flower and Water: But,

1. There is not that quantity of Flower and Water in them, as is required in
substantial Bread. Neither,

2. Are they wrought, or baked, as common substantial Bread is. Neither,

3. When they are made, are they designed for any thing but to seal Letters
withal: I mean in the ordinary use of them, before the Priest does lay them
upon the Altar, which shows that they are not intended for nourishing Bread,
nor have they the right taste, or smell, or strength of Bread, neither are they
commonly sold for Bread, nor does any Man make use of them for his daily Bread,
thereby to strengthen his Body: So that they do not answer Chrst's design, and
the Analogy that ought to be betwixt the thing signifying, and that which is
signified: i. e. They, being no substantial Bread, cannot exactly represent the
substantial Nourishment of the Soul, and therefore have been most justly
rejected by most Churches, but by that which has made bold with God himself,
with Scripture, and the express Laws of our Savior, and substituted their own
Inventions, and Traditions.

IV. Why Christ made use of Bread in this Holy Sacrament, is next to be
considered. Besides the general Reason I have already mentioned, viz. To
represent the Nourishment he intends our Souls by his Death and Crucifixion, if
we lay hold of it by an active and fruitful Faith, there may these following
Reasons be also given for it.

1. To put us in mind that he was the Person prefigured by the Bread, variously
prepared, and ordered under the Law, and in the Temple, and in the Rituals of
the Jews. The Shewbread was to be before the Lord continually, (...)
Exodus 25. 30. In the Original it is called, The Bread of Faces. The Mystery of
it was to show, that Christ was to be the great Mediator, who should be always
in the Presence of God, behold his Face, and live for ever to intercede for us;
and though other significations may be ascribed to that Rite, yet Christ being
the end of the Law, we must refer all principally to him; and as the Bread in
their Offerings and sacred Ceremonies was variously ordered, so it had various
significations, as the Fathers have observed. Bread, or Corn, while it was yet
in the Ear, represented Christ veiled, and seen darkly under the Law: Bread, or
Corn rather in its Flower, Christ, as he was preached by the Prophets: Bread
formed and perfected, Christ, as he was clad in Flesh: Bread baken in an Oven,
Christ being in the Virgin's Womb: Bread fried in the Pan, Christ in his
Torments and Agonies: Bread toasted, Christ being Crucified. I will not warrant
all these Applications from Scripture; however being pious, and according to
the Analogy of Faith, they ought not to be superciliously rejected.

2. Bread is the Sign of Friendship. It was so not only among the Jews, but the
ancient Pythagoreans too, whose Symbol it was, Take heed of breaking the Loaf,
i. e. Friendship; and that which makes it an Emblem of Amity and Love, is,
because many Corns go together to make one Loaf, and the several parts are
closely compacted, do perfectly agree, and are united, and incorporated one
with the other: Christ therefore made use of Bread, not only to tell us, that
by eating of this Bread, we are made the Friends of Christ, and Christ is made
our Friend, if we eat as becomes the Gospel of Christ; but to hint to us, how
we, that call our selves Christians, should love one another, how dear we ought
to be one to another, and how, like Members of the Mystical Body of Christ, we
ought to be affected with one another Misery; as in the Natural Body, if one
Member be afflicted, all the rest sympathize with it; and if one suffers, all
feel the Smart and Anguish.

3. This was to excite our Hunger after Christ, as the sight of Bread raises
the Appetite of an hungry Man. If Christ be the Bread which came down from
Heaven, as he says himself, John 6. 51. he must needs be the best, the
sweetest, the purest, the cleanest, the wholsomest, the savouriest, and the
most nourishing Bread, and to a Soul sensible of her own Vileness or Danger,
the most delicious Object; such Souls he frequently calls, as knowing, that
their Inclinations, Desires and Breathings to be satisfied with his Favor,
must needs be vigorous and impatient of Repulses. For what makes the Covetous
long after Gold, or the Seaman in a Storm after his desired Haven, the one can
satisfy the greedy Man's Necessities, the other free the Mariner from Fears
and Dangers; Christ alone can satisfy the Necessities of a wounded Soul, and
he is the only Port, in which a Soul, that is weary of Sin, can find Rest and
Ease, and Safety from Danger. Where Men look upon these earnest Desires as
Excesses of Devotion, or Effects of a Distempered Brain, it is a sign they were
never sensible of the Terror of Sin, nor did the Roaring Lion ever fright their
Souls by Suggestions of Despair, nor did they ever see themselves undone and
miserable, else their Hearts, and their Flesh would cry out for the living God;
Ask a Man that is sinking in the Sea, what makes him cry for a Deliverer: Ask
him that is fallen among Thieves, what makes him long after some good Christian
to rescue him. Did Men feel the Load of Sin, and were their Souls sensible of
what they say in the Communion Service, that the Burden is intolerable, they
would need no Prompter to Cry with David, O God, thou art my God, early will I
seek thee: My Flesh longs for thee in a dry and thirsty Land, where no Water
is, Psalm. 63. 1.

4. Christ used Bread here, that whenever we look upon it, we might remember
our Duty of Dealing our Bread to the Hungry; By this Phrase our Kindness and
Liberality to the Poor, is expressed in Scripture, Es. 58. 7. Indeed if we
reflect in this Sacrament, that we our selves are Beggars, and expect Alms from
our gracious Master, we have great reason to do by the Poor and Needy, as we
would have God do by our miserable Souls; when we come to this Table, how
justly might he say to us, as Christ to the Woman of Canaan, It Is not meet to
take the Childrens Bread, and give it unto Dogs; for how often have we with the
Dog returned to the Vomit, but he deals not with us after our Sins; He bids us
open our Mouths wide and he will fill them, not with Quails and Manna, but
with that which outlasts both these, and then how natural is the Inference,
Has my God fed me, a poor Worm, this Day with the richest Bread, and shall I
let his poor Members starve? Has he in compassion to my starved Soul, enriched
it with his Love this day, and shall not I express my Love to those who are in
want of common and ordinary Food?

The Preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. THIS puts us in mind of the Apostles saying, 1 Cor. 1. 27. God has chosen
the foolish things of the World to confound the Wise, and has chosen the weak
things of the World to confound those that are mighty; Behold, when Christ
institutes the Ordinances of the Eucharist, the greatest Feast, the richest
Banquet that ever was seen or frequented by Mortal Men; he ransacks not the Sea
for Rarities, nor bids his Servants kill and slay the Fowls of the Air, or the
Cattle upon a Thousand Hills; but Bread, plain, common, ordinary Bread, he
causes to be set upon the Table, and by that expresses the sublime^t Mystery of
our Religion. God is not for outward Pomp, nor did he ever matter external
Magnificence; but by plain and simple Things, he has done the greatest
Miracles. These were not wrought by Men clad in royal Robes, but by Persons who
wore hairy Garments, and had Leathern Girdles about their Loins; by Men that
wandered about in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, in Caves and Dens of the Earth, of
whom the World was not worthy; by Men whom the World looked upon as mad, and
had seldom any Recourse to, but when Necessity forced them, and they knew not
how to make shift without them. By the most contemptible Things, he has
wrought the greatest Deliverances. Indeed, Nothing declares his Power or
Majesty so much, as when he makes use of the meanest Things, to effect those
which are greatest. By Lice, and Frogs, and Caterpillars, he destroys the Land
of Egypt; and by Three Hundred undisciplined Men, he defeats the vast Army of
Midianites. When he brings the First-Begotten into the World, and bids all the
Angels of Heaven worship him, all this State and Grandeur is performed in a
Stable, in a Manger, in a Cradle: And as God, by the plainest and simplest
Things, loves to bring Things of the greatest Consequence to pass, so he is for
the plainest Devotion too. The Pharisee's Sounding a Trumpet when he gives
Alms, makes no pleasing Music in Heaven; but the poor Widow, that, without
making a Show, throws in her Two Mites, even all her Living, into the Treasury,
is the acceptable Votary. Therefore grieve not, Christian, because thou can
not bring a Thousand Rivers of Oil, or Ten Thousand Rams, into the Temple of
God: Bring but an humble Heart, and he will take more notice of it, than of all
the Pomp and Retinue of Bernice and Agrippa.

II. Since the Bread in this Holy Sacrament is to represent our spiritual
Nourishment, it must needs be worth our enquiring whether we find that
spiritual Strength and Nourishment in our Souls which is promised and commanded
in this Ordinance. And there can be no better Sign of our thriving upon this
spiritual Food, than if,

1. Our Corruptions do signally abate: As in the Body; if the ill Humors begin
to be qualified, and the Sharpness of the Blood be taken off, and the Pains and
Aches decay, it is a Sign the Body advances in Health, and Strength returns. It
is so in the Soul; if our Envy, or Pride, or watchful Temper, or our Laziness
in God's Service, or our Indifferency in Devotion, or our Backwardness to
Duties, etc. decays, and dwindles away, it is a certain Sign our Souls begin to
be in an excellent Temper; for these are the Worms that hinder our Trees from
growing, which if they faint and die away, the Trees are like to come to their
full Growth and Height, and the Fruit of them to perfect Maturity.

2. If our Delight in the Things of God does increase, our Delight in the
Ordinances of God, our Delight in Meditation, our Delight in speaking and
thinking of God, our Delight in Obedience, our Delight in doing good, and being
helpful to others; it is as great a Sign the Soul thrives upon this spiritual
Food, as it is in the Body, when a Man begins to look with a cheerful
Countenance, and the muddy Complexion clears up, and the once sickly Person
goes about his Business with Alacrity.

3. If we loath any thing that is offensive to our Blessed Redeemer. As an
healthy Stomach does loath any thing that is prejudicial to the Body, so the
Soul is then in a good plight, when that which is contrary to the Interest of
the Cross becomes odious to her; when it goes against her to do that which must
needs be displeasing to him that died for her; when it is a Grief to her to see
the Sensualities Men wallow in, and to hear God dishonored, and his Name
profaned, is to her as if a Sword were run into her; as it was to David, Psalm.
42. 10.

4. If we do not content our selves with such Things in Matters of Religion as
the Vulgar are satisfied withal, but set the Examples of the greatest Saints
before us, resolving to come up to their Excellency, and Zeal, and Love: If we
do so, our very Enemies must be Witnesses that we thrive and grow strong upon
this spiritual Diet, and make Preparation for Eating and Drinking with Christ,
at his Table, in his Kingdom, Luc. 22. 29, 30.

The PRAYER.
SWeet Jesu! Who art Life to my Soul, Balm to my Spirit, and in the greatest
Misery can give E^se; I have fed too long upon bitter Herbs: Sin, that has
been sweet to my Taste, has proved very bitter to me in the End; and what
Fruit had I then of those Things, whereof I am now ashamed? No Fruit, but
Poison, and Darkness, and Aversion from Goodness. I have been led away by my
sensual Appetite, looked up to the evil Tree, beheld the Fruit, that it was
fair, but without Consideration of the dangerous Effects of it, and have eaten
of it. This has made my Soul look pale and wan; lovely, indeed, in the Eyes of
Devils, but deformed and homely in thy Sight. I see I must change my Food; else
I perish. And, O my Lord! What shall I feed on, that I may recover Strength?
Thy Table affords the wholsomest Meat and Drink. Vouchsafe me a gracious Look,
and bid me come. Pass by my former Aversion from these Delicates. Bid me sit
down, and feed on Thee. Thou, Lord I am the River of Paradise, from whence
Living Waters flow. Oh, let this Stream enrich my Soul, that I may be like a
Tree planted by the Rivers of Water, which may bring forth Fruit in due Season;
no such Fruit as once it was, black, and shrievel'd, and withered; but which
may be amiable in the Eyes of God and Man: Fruit, whereby thy Glory may be
advanced; Fruit, whereby others that see and know me may reap Benefit; Fruit,
wherein my Soul may rejoice; Fruit, which may end in Peace, in Peace of
Conscience, in Everlasting Peace. Henceforward, when I remember thee, O dearest
Savior! let me find such Vigor and Nourishment within, that I may look like
Thee, altogether lovely: Favor is deceitful, and Beauty is vain; but to be
like Thee, is Glory, and Life, and Bliss, and Happiness. I therefore eat at thy
Table, that I may be like Thee. Oh, speak thy Blessing upon that Meat, and it
will change me into thy Image, from Glory to Glory, even by the Spirit of our
God. Amen. Come, Lord Jesu! Come quickly.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Consecration, and what Consecration Christ used. Of his Thanksgiving before
he broke the Bread, and our Imitation of him in that Particular.
The CONTENTS.
Of the Word Consecration, what it imports, and what Things were consecrated in
Ancient Times. Consecration anciently performed with Prayer and Thanksgiving.
The Virtue of Consecration, wherein it consists. Consecration of the Elements
in this Ordinance performed sometimes only by the Lord's Prayer. The Church of
Rome deviates from that Rule. Christ placed Consecration in Giving of Thanks.
Several Particulars, we may suppose, Christ gave Thanks for, mentioned. What
Christ intended by Thanksgiving, with respect to our Instruction, specified.
Praise and Thanksgiving essential in this Ordinance. The Way to arrive to holy
Thoughts. Why this Sacrament is by the Ancient Church called Eucharist. The
Prayer.

I. THE Word Consecration answers to the Hebrew (...) Cadd^sh, and (...)
Chanach, and to the Greek (...) and (...), i. e. to set a thing apart for holy
Uses; and in this respect, it is the same with Dedication; though Critics make
some difference betwixt Consecration and Dedication; meaning, that in the
former, Things profane and vulgar are set apart for an holy Use in general; in
the later, vowed and assigned to a certain God, a thing common among the
Heathens, while they continued in Idolatry: In the Old Testament, Consecration
was used about Persons, Things, Times and Places.

1. Persons; Which is the Reason why Aaron and his Sons are said to be
consecrated to God, i. e. set apart and ordained to minister in the public
Service and Worship of God, Exodus 28. 3. And upon this Account, Moses, Exodus
32. 29. bids the Levites consecrate themselves; i. e. set themselves apart to
revenge God's Quarrel against the Idolaters of the Golden Calf, and to give
themselves to that peculiar and extraordinary Service, and express their Zeal
for God's Glory, beyond all other People.

2. Things; And these are said to be consecrated, when they are set apart to be
used in an holy Place, for religious Purposes; as the Silver and Gold, and
Vessels of Brass and Iron, the Israelites should find in Jericho, are commanded
to be consecrated to the Lord, Josh. 6. 19. i. e. They shall be brought into
the Tabernacle, or place of public Worship, and there used in Divine Service,
and no where else.

3. Times and Days; Of this sort were the Festivals of the Jews, which were set
apart for public Meetings, to worship God, and to perform the Duties
requisite, and the Offices of the public Liturgy, Ezra 3. 5.

4. Places; And such we find often set apart for God's public and private
Worship, as Jacob did Bethel, Genesis 28. 18, 19, 22. And Solomon and the Children
of Israel dedicated the House of the Lord, 1 King. 8. 63. i. e. They did
solemnly set that House, which Solomon had built, apart, for celebrating the
public Worship of God in that place.

II. Nor is the Conseration of a Thing, a bare Setting it apart for an holy
Use; but it imports also to do this with suitable Rites and Ceremonies;
particularly, with Prayer and Praises: Which external Performance may influence
the Senses of Spectators, and cause greater Veneration and Reverence. So the
Temple of Solomon was consecrated with Thanksgivings, and Supplications, and
offering Sacrifices, 1 Kings 8. 22, 62, 63. And the Seventy Elders, Numb. 11.
17. were consecrated by Imposition of Hands, as Ministers are ordained at this
day; and Mai^onides adds, with a solemn Song, or Hymn, and these words, I lay
my Hands upon thee, and be thou therefore ordained to this Office, or Dignity,
or Employment. Aaron's Sons were in like manner consecrated, by being anointed
with Holy Oil, the Ingredients of which we have exactly set down, Exodus 30. 30,
34, 35. And this Way of Consecrating, we find imitated and transcribed by the
Heathen Nations, who did run out into strange Superstitions, and extravagant
Ceremonies, in their Consecrations of Things; as Dan. 2. 5. where
Nebuchadnezzar's Golden Image being to be consecrated, all Persons, great and
low, are ordered to appear at the Sound of the Cornet, Flute, Harp, Sackbut,
Psaltery, Dulcimer, and all kinds of Music etc. And these exorbitant
Ceremonies in Consecrations of Things are very much kept up in the Roman
Church; which seems to have transcribed Heathenism into Christianity. Indeed,
Prayer and Thanksgiving were the most ancient Concomitants of Consecration: And
these Constantine used at the Dedication of Constantinople, having sent for
this purpose to the Fathers of the Nicene Council, to assist at the Solemnity:
And having built a stately Church at Jerusalem, and adorned it with Gold,
Silver and Precious Stones, the Bishops, assembled in the Council of Tire, were
called in, by Supplications and Psalms, to consecrate the Building; or, to set
it apart for a standing Place of Public Devotion.

III. All the Virtue that can be supposed to be in Consecration, may be reduced
to these three Particulars.

1. The Thing consecrated puts us in mind of something great, sublime and
magnificent; such as God is, or something which is nearly related to him: And
so much we may guess from the Consecration of Aaron and his Sons; the History
of which we have set down at large, Exodus 29. There was scarce a Ceremony used
about them in their Consecration, but was and may be referred to some higher
Thing. They were to be washed with Water, which was to put them in mind of the
Purity and Innocence that was to attend their Lives and Profession. Their rich
Coat they were to wear, suggested to them their Fruitfulness in all good Works.
The Breast Plate and Ephod that were put upon them, signified their Spiritual
Knowledge and Sincerity. The curious Girdle about them, was an Emblem of that
Truth and Veracity they were to study. The Bonnets upon their Heads represented
the Graces of God's Spirit they were to be adorned with. The Mitre and the
Crown upon Aaron's Head, prefigured the Royal Priesthood of the Son of God,
which was to appear in the World. The Anointing Oil that was to be poured out
upon him and his Sons, told them that they must be Spiritual Men, and mind the
Things of the Spirit; and that in their Consecration, they were to lay their
Hands upon the Head of the Bullock and the Ram that were to be offered, showed,
that though they were exalted above other Men, yet they were sinful Men, had
need of Confession, and Deprecation of God's Judgments due to them for their
Sins: For in laying their Hands upon those Beasts, they laid, as it were, their
Sins upon them, and that Death and Misery themselves have deserved. And the
same may be said of the Elements of Bread and Wine, when they are consecrated
in the Eucharist: The Consecration puts us in mind of higher Things than Bread
and Wine, and suggests to us something more noble, and more glorious, which we
are to fix our Thoughts upon.

2. Consecration directs to a greater Esteem and Veneration of the Consecrated
Thing: Not an Esteem which proceeds to Adoration; for that would make it
Idolatry; but such an Esteem, whereby we raise our Thoughts, and have no such
mean and low Conceits about the Thing, as before we had, when it was not yet
set apart for an holy Use, but look upon it as representative of something more
valuable: And therefore Belshazzar and his Nobles incurred the Displeasure of
God, because they looked upon the Vessels of the Sanctuary as common Utensils,
Dan. 5. 1, 2, 3. And thus it is in the Holy Sacrament: After Consecration, the
Elements require an higher Esteem than before; they being now no more common
Bread and Wine, but representative of the highest and most spiritual Food
imaginable.

3. Consecration commands a very serious Use of the Consecrated Thing; and, at
the same time, forbids all Lightness, Frothiness, Inattentiveness, and Careless
Thoughts. And this seems to be a Principle of all Civilized Nations in the
World; who have, in all Ages, required greater Devotion in the Temple, than in
the Marketplace. And the ancient Idolaters, that worshipped their Gods in
Groves, intimated no less, since those Groves caused a kind of Darkness; which
Darkness, they thought, might overawe the Worshipper into greater Seriousness
and Devotion. And the same may be applied to the Eucharist: The Elements being
consecrated, the Consecration ought to infuse very serious Thoughts into our
Minds; call them away from the World, and meaner Objects, and prompt us to
devout Ejaculations, to a severe Attention, and to a suitable Admiration of the
Bounty, Wisdom and Goodness of God, who appears to us in this Sacrament, with
all the Charms that make Souls in love with Holiness: And all this is but
suitable to the End of our coming to this Sacrament; which is, to consecrate
our selves to God, in Christ Jesus; and that is not to be done, without a very
serious Use of this Ordinance, in which we acknowledge with the deepest
Humility, that our Souls and Bodies, and all the Gifts and Graces we have, are
the Effects of his Bounty; and declare our unfeigned Purposes to speak, and
act, and think as he would have us, and dedicate our selves to his Service;
professing that we will use the Blessings he has given us, to his Glory, and
the Good of his People; will resign our selves to his Providence, and be
content with the Lot and Portion he shall think fit to assign us; and be
thankful for Afflictions too, as well as for Prosperity, they being both his
Gifts and Blessings; and say, and confess, under the various Dispensations we
shall meet withal, Lord! not as I will, but as thou will. And who can forget
himself so much, as to think that all this may be done without a serious
Behavior?

IV. The Church of Rome, at this Day, makes strange Work with Consecration of
the Elements in the Supper of the Lord. And though they are told by one of
their own Popes, Vide Platin. in Sixth. 1. and Greg. M. l, 7. Ep. 63.
Gregory the Great, that the Apostles consecrated only with saying the Lord's
Prayer, yet they boldly, according to their Custom, place Consecration in the
Priests muttering these Words, Hoc est Corpus meum, hic est Sanguis meus: This
is my Body, This is my Blood, over the Bread and Wine: Which Words, partly by
their own secret Virtue, and partly by virtue of the Priest's Office,
immediately upon their being secretly pronounced, change the Bread and Wine
into the substantial Body and Blood of Christ; whereof we shall have Occasion
to speak more largely in the Sequel. And this is their Consecration, contrary
to the Sense of the Primitive Church, which was of Opinion that Consecration
was performed by Prayer and Praises. And though some think that Christ used a
peculiar Form of Consecration, which is either lost, or the Church did not
think necessary to preserve; yet that Fancy is altogether needless, since we
are told by the inspired Writers, that Christ gave Thanks: In which he either
observed the usual Form used in the Passover, Blessed be God, who has created
the Fruit of the Earth; and Blessed be God, who has created the Fruit of the
Vine: Or, Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, King of the World, who bring
forth Bread out of the Earth; and Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, King of the
World, who createst tbe Fruit of the Vine: Or some other; though it is more
probable that he did not vary from the common Practice of the Jews in this
Particular. And what is this, but Consecrating the Elements, and Sanctifying of
them? For every Creature of God is good, and not to be refused; for it is
sanctified by the Word of God, and by Prayer, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4. 4,
5. The Greek Church at this Day lays the Stress of Consecration upon the Prayer
of the Holy Ghost, as they call it; whereby the Holy Spirit of God is invited
to come down, and make a Change in the Bread and Wine. In our Church we join
Prayer and Praises, and the Words of Institution; which is the safest Way, and
such as no rational Person can find fault with, though the Words of Institution
are sufficient in this Case, which we discover in our Practice, when the first
Consecrated Bread and Wine are spent, and the Number of the Communicants
require a new Consecration.

V. Though the Gospel tells us only in general, that Christ gave Thanks, yet we
cannot but suppose, that they were particular Things he praised the Divine
Bounty for; and it is very rational to conclude, that he gave Thanks:

1. For the Providence of God, which watches over Mankind, and brings forth
Fruit out of the Earth, to satisfy the Desire and natural Appetite of Man.
God, the Creator of all Things, provides Food and Sustenance for all his
Creatures. He causes the Grass to grow for the Cattle: He sends the Springs
into the Valleys, which run among the Hills; they give Drink to every Beast of
the Field; the Wild Asses quench their Thirst, the Lions receive their Prey
from him: He it is, that has appointed Toads and Snakes to be proper Meat for
the Stork, and Flies for the Nourishment of Spiders; for some Birds of the Air
he has designed Variety of Seeds, and Worms of the Earth for others: He
provides Leaves for Caterpillars, and those Insects for the Use of other
Animals; and the young Ravens that make a noise, and upon that Account are said
to cry to him, are fed and maintained by his Power: He prevents the Crocodile
from doing excessive Mischief, by making the Ichneumon his Enemy; and the
lesser Fishes prove a Prey to the greater, by his Order. In all these Things
the Divine Providence displays it self; and because the rest of the Creatures
are not endowed with Reason to celebrate God for his Bounty, he has placed Man
in the Earth, and enriched him with an Angelical Soul, to be the Trumpet of his
Glory, and to take notice of God's feeding his Creatures of all sorts and
sizes, and particularly the Children of Men; and when he sees Bread before him,
the Staff of Humane Life, to admire the Wisdom, Power and Goodness of the
Almighty. And upon this Account it was, that Christ, as Man and Mediator, gave
Thanks; and when he took Bread, blessed the Author of it, who had made it
agreeable to Man's Nature, and gave it Strength to nourish him; sent the Former
and the Later Rain to nourish the Seed in the Ground, and gave his Sunshine to
warm and ripen the Corn into Perfection.

2. It was not God's Providence alone that he gave Thanks for, but for the more
indearing Expressions of God's Love to Mankind too. And this we need not wonder
at, when we read how at other Times he magnified his Father's Goodness to
sincere Believers; particularly, Matthew. 11. 25. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of
Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the Wise and Prudent,
and have revealed them unto Babes. No Man ever saw the immense Charity and
Goodness of God to the lapsed Progeny of Adam, in those lively Characters that
he did: We can only speak of it with stammering Tongues, and give some faint
Descriptions of it; but He felt it. The Sense of that Love overspread his
Soul, and he saw the Height, and Depth, and Breadth, and Length of it: He
beheld the Miracles of this Love in all the amazing Circumstances, and what it
was for God to give a Son to redeem a Servant, to expose a Lamb to buy a Wolf,
and to let an innocent Sheep be led to the Slaughter to ransom Swine. He saw
how that Compassion extended it self; and what it was for the Word to be made
Flesh, and to run about to seek the lost Sheep, and when he had found it, to
rejoice over it, and call his Friends, the Angels, together, saying, Rejoice
with me, for I have found him that was lost. He saw what it was for God to
humble himself, and take upon him the Nature of Man, a Thing infinitely below
him, and to advance it above all Heavens, above Angels, Powers, Ceraphim and
Cherubim, and place it at the Right Hand of God. He saw what it was for
Infinite Majesty to fall in love with Misery; and for him that was adored by
all the Host of Heaven, to make himself of no Reputation, on purpose to
magnify his Mercy in the greatest Misery. He saw the happy Strife and
Contention that was betwixt God's Justice and Mercy: He saw how these Twins
struggled in the Womb of Eternity, and Mercy got the better, and triumphed over
the Almighty's Rods and Axes: He saw the Beginning, Progress, Order and Beauty
of that Love: He could measure the vast Distance betwixt Heaven and Earth,
betwixt God and Man, betwixt the Judge and the Malefactor, betwixt Infinite
Purity and extreme Wretchedness, betwixt Righteousness and Sin, betwixt perfect
Innocence and perfect Misery. And what a Paradox it must be to the holy Angels,
to see that Light, which lights every Man that comes into the World, submit to
the Darkness of the Grave, that some of Adam's Posterity might be Partakers of
the Inheritance of the Saints in Light! This he saw; and, as a Man, who was to
show his Church an Example, he gave Thanks.

VI. Christ's Actions, as they were intended for our Instruction, so we cannot
think that his Giving of Thanks was only to express his own Devotion, as
Mediator; but that it was designed to teach us,

1. Never to sit down at our common or ordinary Meals, without praising God for
the Blessings his bountiful Hand has vouchsafed unto us. This, it seems, is so
necessary, that the Holy Ghost reckons those Men among the Workers of Iniquity,
that sit down to Meat, and praise not the Creator for the Provision he has
made for them, Psalm. 14. 4. Have the Workers of Iniquity no Knowledge, who eat
Bread, and call not upon the Lord? We render the Words, As they eat Bread; our
Translators thinking the Expression to be a Similitude to express the
Greediness of Persecutors, who make a Prey of God's Servants; but the Particle
As being left out in the Original, the Words denote another Sin of those Men
that do eat Bread, (...)
and call not upon the Lord at their Eating. It Is true, the Duty seems to be
observed by most People; and there are few so profane, as not to say Grace at
their Meals; but it is for the most part done so slovenly, and so carelessly,
without any Sense of the Greatness of the Duty, and of the Goodness of God,
that it is made a mere Formality; which is as bad as the total Omission of it.
The Giving of Thanks before and after Meals must be performed with a Sense of
our Unworthiness, and God's Charity: This is to be thought and taken notice of,
as much as the Meat that is set before us; and Admiration of God's Compassion
in feeding us will add to the Relish of the Victuals set upon the Table; and
that is to eat to the Glory of God, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10. 32.

2. It was also to teach us Gratitude to our Benefactors here on Earth. Though
Men are but the Instruments whereby the Almighty's Blessings are conveyed to
us, yet there is a Gratitude due to them, and such Gratitude as is expressed in
kind Offices, and Readiness to assist and help them when they stand in need of
our Services. But then this Gratitude must not be stretched to assisting of
them in their Sins, or complying with them in their Viciousness and
Debaucheries, or flattering them in their sickly Passions. Man must not be
pleased, to the Dishonor of God: And where Dust and Ashes is loved more than
he, he protests we are not worthy of him. But to pray for them, to honor them,
to study and embrace all lawful Opportunities to express our Respect and Esteem
of them, to requite their Kindnesses with equal Civilities, or spiritual
Advice, and Counsel, and Consolation, is to act like Persons prompted by
Christ's Example to be thankful.

3. It was more particularly to direct us in our Praises and Thanksgivings when
we come to the Table of our dearest Lord? Here certainly, if any where, our
Hearts ought to be fixed, and ready to sing, and give Praise;

1. For putting us in a Way of being pardoned, and happy for ever. We were all
concerned in Adam's Fall, had all forfeited our Right to God's Favor, and the
Happiness we might have expected at his Hands: God might have locked up the
Gate of Mercy, and made the Access to it impossible: Having desperately turned
our Backs upon him, he might have let the Rebels sink deeper and deeper, till
they had come into the bottomless Gulf of Eternal Misery; and, no doubt, all
the Host of Heaven would have applauded his Justice. And for him, who was
clothed with Majesty and Honor, unexpectedly, and of his own accord, to turn
the Stream, and to promise a Savior; and, instead of making a Way to his
Anger, show Men a Way to his Bosom; and in the midst of all this Confusion and
Perplexity, to proclaim the acceptable Year to the poor Prisoners: How can this
be thought of in the holy Sacrament, without Praise and Admiration?

2, For revealing this wonderful Love to us: A Favor, Thousands of Heathens
and Infidels enjoy not at this Day; nay, are wholly ignorant of: A Love which
is a Mystery, that puzzles the Understandings of the wisest Men. How God
intends to deal with Heathens and Mahometant, is hard to determine; only in
general we are told, that those who have sinned without Law, shall be judged
without Law, Romans 2. 12. Nor can we assign a just and satisfactory Reason, why
he makes not these Nations Partakers of the glad Tidings of the Gospel; much
less, why he continues these Revelations to the Christian World, though corrupt
and debauched to a Prodigy: But this we know, That if any Thing in the World
deserves our Praises, this, that we have such a Treasure communicated to us,
deserves it; and more especially in this Sacrament, where this Mystery of
Reconciliation is a most proper Object of our Meditation.

3. For passing by the Apostate Spirits, and offering the Mercy of
Reconciliation to the Children of Men. The evil Angels sinned as well as we;
yet the Son of God took not upon him the Nature of Angels, ^ut took the Seed of
Abraham. It Is true, there was more to be said for Adam's Fall, than that of
Lucifer: That Son of the Morning was all Spirit, and Understanding; and Man had
a Body of Earth about him, which, though not troublesome in Paradise, yet was
the apter to receive Impressions of Sin from external Objects. The rebellious
Angels were the first that made a Breach betwixt God and the Creature, and Man
was seduced by them; yet still these Spirits, as bright as they were, were
Creatures; and as Creatures, mutable; and as mutable, subject to falling; and
falling, might expect Mercy and Compassion from an All-merciful Master; yet in
the great Work of Redemption, no Regard is had to them, but to Man only; and he
alone, with his Race and Posterity, is put in a Possibility of being saved and
pardoned; a Mercy fit to be remembered in this Sacrament, but not to be
remembered without Thanksgiving and Praises.

4. For the Opportunity we have of remembering Christ's Death in the holy
Sacrament: That we have Liberty to meet in the House of God, to behold his
Power and Glory, to speak of his Love and Compassion, and to come to his Table,
and to come of often, and so freely, without Disturbance or Molestation,
without Fear of Danger from the Tabernacles of Edom, or from the Ishmaelites,
from Moab, or the Hagarens. Though these are Things which seem to be no great
matter to an Eye that looks on Things superficially, yet to a Person that knows
how in the Greek Church the holy Sacrament is consecrated but once a Year; how
in Heathenish Countries, where Ministers of the Word are scarce, this Ordinance
is used but seldom; and how great an Hindrance to Goodness the celebrating it
but rarely is; how apt the Inward Man, in such Cases, is to faint, and
languish, and grow sick for want of it, will think himself obliged to open his
Heart and Mouth in Praises at this holy Table, and adore the Divine Bounty,
which has given him Will, and Strength, and Opportunity to come to this
comfortable Ordinance.

5. For feeling our Hearts affected with the Mystery of Reconciliation, or
finding in our selves those happy Qualifications which make us worthy Receivers
at this Table. To feel in our Hearts a lively Faith; a Faith which, with Moses,
sees him that is invisible; a Faith that overcomes the World; a Faith that
purifies the Heart; a Faith that, with Abraham, moves us to sacrifice and offer
that to God which is most dear to us; a Faith that makes us patient under
Reproaches and Injuries; a Faith that is fruitful in good Works. To find in our
selves an Hope that makes not ashamed; an Hope that makes us wait for the
Kingdom of God, as the Husbandman waits for the Fruit of the Earth; an Hope
that upholds our Hearts in Afflictions; an Hope that makes us look upon that
within the Vail, into the Sanctuary of Heaven, and counts the Troubles of this
present Life not worthy to be compared with the Glory which ere long shall be
revealed in us. To find in our selves an holy Charity, which believes the best
of our Neighbors, and thinks no Evil, except there be very great Cause for it;
a Charity which suppresses Revenge and Malice; and not only suppresses it for
the present, but labors to destroy it too; a Charity which moves us to
Kindness and Compassion, not only verbal, but actual; a Charity which makes us
tenderhearted, forgiving one another, and forbearing one another. To find all
this in some measure, must needs fill our Hearts with strong Desires and
Endeavors to be thankful.

VII. This Praise and Thanksgiving cannot but be essential to this holy
Sacrament, not a mere Ornamental Thing, without which the blessed Effects may
be perceived and felt. For,

1. Is it possible to behold God's bleeding Love, and not cry Praise the Lord,
O Jerusalem; Praise thy God, O Zion? Is it possible to see the surprising
Humiliation of the Son of God, and not to say, Bless the Lord, O my Soul* and
all that is within me bless his holy Name? Is it possible to see God offer
himself for his Enemies, and not to s^ng, Lord! what is Man, that thou so
regardest him? and the Sons and Daughters of Men, that thou have such Respect
to them? Is it possible to see Innocence nailed to the fatal Cross, not for any
Sins of its own, but for our Transgressions, and not to break forth into
Admiration, with St. John, Behold what manner of Love the Father has shown to
us, that we should be called the Sons of God? The Heart must be of Stone that
can survey these Wonders, and be silent, or dumb to joyful Praises.

2. What Comfort or Consolation can be supposed to flow into the Soul without
it? Praise is the Gate of Mercy: The Soul that praises the Divine Love much,
will have a greater Sense of his Love, and feel the Power of it, and feel how
it melts the Heart, supples the Spirit, softens the Inward Man, and makes it
fit for the Impress of the Image of the Son of God. As the Jews say of the
Spirit of Prophesse, That it rests on valiant and cheerful Men; so it may be
said of the Divine Love, Where the Soul is much and often engaged in Praises of
it, there it loves to dwell, there it is ready to build Tabernacles, and take
up its Residence.

The Preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. EVen the meanest Capacities from hence learn the Way to arrive to holy
Thoughts, viz. by making the most ordinary Blessings Occasions of Praise and
Thanksgiving. Nothing is more common than Bread, yet for this the Son of Man
gave Thanks; and in doing so, bid us imitate his Practice when the like
familiar Mercies come before us, or present themselves to our View. About the
Time of the Council at Constance, two Cardinals, as they were traveling upon
the Road, not far from the City, saw a poor Shepherd weeping; and thinking that
some sad Accident might have befallen him, either his Dog lost, or some of his
Sheep stolen, had the Curiosity to ask him the Reason of his Tears: who
answered, I am looking here upon a Toad, and cannot but weep to think what an
ungrateful Beast I have been to my God, to whom I never before in all my Life
gave Thanks that he ^e did not make me so homely and so odious a Creature. The
Truth is, you and I can hardly walk the Street, but we meet with Men either
ragged, or lame, or maimed, or blind, or dumb, or some other way deformed, and
extremely miserable: Can we look on such Objects, and not think with our
selves, what a Favor and Mercy it was in our great and gracious God, not to
plunge us into that wretched State, but to give us Necessaries and
Conveniences, a right Shape, and Soundness of Limbs, etc. These, it is true,
are but very ordinary Blessings, yet if we consider how many Thousands want
them, and that God, who can do all Things, and whose Hand is to be seen in all
Things, might as easily have reduced us to such a miserable Condition as he
has done others, and that it is nothing but his Infinite Goodness and Wisdom
that has made this Distinction; this cannot but quicken our Understandings:
And if so, none of us can complain, that we have no Faculty of furnishing our
Minds with holy Thoughts. To this purpose, certainly, was our Reason given us,
that we might look on such Mercies with spiritual Reflections and Praises; and
these Praises are holy Thoughts. Nay, the Task is very easy; and there is
nothing lies more in our power, than, by taking a View of such Blessings, to
think, This God has done, this is part of his Charity, this is a Character of
his Bounty: What am I, and what is my Father's House, that God has brought me
thus far! And as it is easy, so it is profitable too; for this will fill our
Minds with humble Thoughts, and teach us to have a low Opinion of our selves;
it being impossible to think our selves very unworthy of God's Favors, and not
to despise our selves.

II. I told you in the first Chapter of this Discourse, that the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper among the Ancients was frequently called the Eucharist: Here
we see the Reason of it; for as the Word Eucharist imports Praise, so
Thanksgiving is one of the principal Actions and Offices in this Sacrament. The
Church of Rome will have it called a Sacrifice, because in the Primitive Church
it went by that Name: We deny it not, but then they meant by it a Sacrifice of
Praise; and this Sacrifice we exhort every one of you to offer, when you
remember your Great Master's Funeral: Give Thanks for that Death, when you are
preparing your selves for this spiritual Feast; Give Thanks when you feed at
this holy Table; Give Thanks when you depart from that Banqueting House; Give
Thanks unto the Lamb that was slain, bless him for his Wounds, bless him for
his Cross, bless him for his Bloody Sweat, bless him for all his Sighs and
Groans, bless him for his Merits, for through these your Souls must triumph
over Hell, and Sin, and Devils. But then, take heed of praising him at Church,
and affronting him at home: These Praises must be uniform, and equal, and
constant; not that you are obliged in all Places to speak of his Glory,
whatever Business you have; or that you must do nothing but sing Psalms to him,
wherever you are; but your upright and Christian Behavior in all Places is a
Glorification of his Mercy: For you are a chosen Generation, a Royal
Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, that ye should show forth the
Praises of him who has called you out of Darkness, into his mavelous Light,
1 Pet. 2. 9.

The PRAYER.
O Thou who inhabitest the Praises of Israel, our Fathers trusted in thee; they
trusted, and thou did deliver them; they cried unto thee, and they were
delivered; they trusted in thee, and were not confounded: Praise waits for thee
in Sion. Thou deservest my devoutest Praises, my most hearty Thanks, my loudest
Celebrations: Can I think of what thou have done for me, and be loath to praise
thee? What should I do but praise thee? All that I see within me, or about me,
is Mercy; my Meat, my Drink, my Clothes, are Mercies. But, Oh! what a Mercy is
that Spiritual Food thou set before me at thy Table! Oh, let my Mouth be
filled with thy Praise all the Day long! I am sensible not only of the
Necessity, but the Comeliness of it too. It sets a Luster on my Soul, it is an
Ornament to my better Part, it makes me glorious in thy Sight. Oh, teach me the
Art of praising thee! Let me but love thee, and I cannot but praise thee: My
Love will dictate Words, and suggest Meditations, and I shall speak of all thy
wondrous Works. Let this be my greatest Delight, my greatest Joy, my greatest
Pleasure, that I may praise thee at last with all the Saints and Angels, to
Eternal Ages, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. IX.
Of Breaking the Bread, and the Mysteries of it.
The CONTENTS.
The Action of Breaking Bread, borrowed from the Jews; used by Christ, to put us
in mind of his Crucifixion; Of the broken State of Mankind; Of his going to
break down the Partition. Wall betwixt the Jews and Gentiles; Of the Communion
of the Body of Christ; Of our Coming to his Table with Broken, Contrite Hearts;
Of his Readiness to comfort the Bruised and Broken Spirit; Of the Virtue and
Power of his Death, in breaking the Force of God's Wrath against us; Of the
Miracle that was to happen at his Death in the Earth and Rocks, etc. And of the
strange Divisions that would rise about this Sacrament. The Action of Breaking
the Holy-Bread does not interfere with the Canon in the Rule of the Passover,
that not a Bone of the Lamb should be broken. The Church of Rome is to blame
for not Breaking the Bread. Christ, as well as the Disciples, received the
Communion. Reflections to be made by Christians when they see the Bread broken.
The Prayer.

I. AMong the Jews, as no Man durst eat Bread without consecrating it by
Thanksgiving, so no Man gave Thanks for the Bread, but he broke part of it, did
eat of it, and gave of it to the rest that were with him at the Table; and the
Master of the House, if present, was usually the Person that did all this, gave
Thanks, and dealt the Bread about: To this End the Loaves among the Jews were
made with diverse Cuts or Incisions, that when they were brought to Table, they
might be broken with greater Ease by the Head of the Family, and distributed to
those that did eat with him. Among the ancient Romans it was otherwise; for
though they had Cuts and Divisions upon their Loaves, yet those Cuts were but
four in all, in the Shape of a Cross, to the End that when they came to reach
it to their Guests, they might easily break it into four Parts: Which was the
Reason why they called the Portion that fell to one Man's Share Quadra, or the
fourth Part of a Loaf. If Christ imitated any Custom in Breaking of Bread, it is
most probable he followed that of the Jews; from whose manner of living he used
not to vary, if their Actions and Customs had nothing of Sin in them; showing
thereby how loath we should be, Quieta movere, to change or alter Things in a
Church or Nation, which, through a long Succession of Time, have been received,
provided there be nothing of Immodesty, Superstition, or Indecency, or
Irregularity in it. The Unleavened Cakes of the Jews, they use at this Day in
the Celebration of their Passover, are, in all probability, Relics of that
ancient Way among their Countrymen of ordering their Loaves, and making them
with many Cuts and Divisions in them, whereby the Master of the House took
occasion to break off a just and convenient Piece for each Member of his
Family. But though Christ, in breaking the Sacramental Bread, might borrow that
Right and Action from the Jews, yet we must not suppofe, that therefore he had
no farther Design in it, but rather sanctified it into a Mystery, as he did the
Washing of the Feet received among the Jews, Joh. 13. 14, 15.

II. As Breaking the Sacramental Bread was an Action designed to represent
several Things of great Importance, so the Things thereby represented may
justly be supposed, and piously believed, to be the following.

1. An Emblem it was of that barbarous Fact the Jews were like, in a few
Minutes after, to commit against his Sacred Person, viz. Breaking his Sacred
Body by the Torments of a painful Crucifixion: This Body of his, spotless as
the Sun, harmonious as the Strings of a well-tuned Lute, the miraculous Product
of the Holy Ghost, purer than Virgins Wax, big with the richest and choicest
Blood, subject to no inordinate Desire, was in a few Hours like to be the Scorn
of Soldiers, the Sport of Scribes, and the Laughing Stock of supercilious
Pharisees; within a few Minutes, this Body was to be lashed, buffeted, beaten,
wrench'd, and stretched out upon the Cross: Here his Flesh was to be torn with
Nails, the Skin to be broken, the Veins, those precious Springs, to be opened;
and he that was fairer than the Children of Men, was soon after to be without
Form or Comeliness, a Man of Sorrows, rejected and despised of Men, to be
handled like a Slave, treated like a Malefactor, crucified like a Thief, and
used like the worst of Mankind: Therefore he broke the Bread, to represent this
inhumane Attempt. Such Pains did our blessed Master take with his Disciples, to
prevent their being surprised with his Passion: He had frequently given them
notice of it, armed them against the fatal Hour, and not only in general told
them he was to suffer, but here in this Action describes the very manner of it;
and in Breaking of the Bread, hints to them, how that noble, that curious, that
excellent Frame would be disordered, broken and destroyed.

2. He broke the Bread, to show that Man, for whom he was to suffer, was in a
broken, forlorn and undone Condition, a Condition which required an Almighty
Savior to put under his Shoulder, to rescue the miserable Creature from the
Thraldom of Damnation. Mankind was indeed in a very broken State at that time,
not only with respect to the various Divisions that were among the Jews, and in
other Parts of the World, but with respect to their Sins, Errors and
Corruptions. Idolatry had not only overspread the habitable World, but was
come to a prodigious Height; many Sins, which even the Law of Nature
condemned, were become Virtues: And to that Impiety Mankind arose, that not a
few of their Vices were consecrated into Deities; insomuch that to be lewd, was
Religion; and Deified Vices had their Votaries. Among the Jews, who were
Keepers of the Oracles of God, the Great Seal of the King of Heaven; though
they went not a whoring after Idols, yet the Religion that remained among them
was turned into mere Formality, and Outward Show: The Moral Law, that Eternal
Standard of Truth and Goodness, was in a manner trampled under Foot: The
Traditions of the Elders enervated its Force, and the false Glosses of the
Pharisees made the Divine Commands of no Effect. In a Word, the Pillars of
Religion were every where broken, the very Foundation was undermined, and both
Jews and Gentiles were intoxicated; the former with Hypocrisy, the other with
Profaneness. How desperate both their Conditions were, the Apostle shows at
large, Romans Chap. 1. and 2. and more succinctly, Romans 3. 9, 10, 11, -- 19.
There is none righteous, no not one; there is none that understands, there is
none that seeks after God, etc. Christ broke the Bread therefore, to show how
necessary it was for him to be broken on the Cross, to redintegrate and make
whole the broken and forlorn State of Mankind; which makes him say afterward,
This is my Body, which is broken FOR YOU.

3. He broke the Bread, to show that he it was who was to break down the
Partition Wall that separated the Jews and Gentiles. Till the Son of God was
crucified for the Sins of the World, there was so great an Antipathy betwext
the Jews and Gentiles, that the Hatred was thought Duty, and the Enmity,
Religion; and as the Heathen looked upon the Jews as the vilest of Mankind, so
the Jews were even with them, and looked upon them as abominable; and to eat
and drink with a Gentile, was counted a Crime; and to make any Expressions of
Kindness or Favor, Impiety: To show him the right Way in a Journey, or to lead
him to a Spring of Water in case he were a-thirst, or to lie with him, or to
contract Marriage with any of them, was as detestable as to eat Swines Flesh.
And it was a Maxim in the Jewish Divinity, That the Holy Ghost could not rest
upon an Heathen: Which made the Jews, Act. 11. 2, 3. fall out with Peter,
because he went unto Men uncircumcised, and did eat with them, and preach the
Gospel to them. Christ, by his Death and Resurrection, was to destroy that
Enmity, and to make the Lamb lie down with the Wolf, and the Lion with the
Calf; according to the Prophecy of Esaias, Chap. 11. 6. And so it came to pass,
after his Resurrection, and the Effusion of the Holy Ghost, Peter opened the
Door of Salvation to the Gentiles, and the Holy Ghost came down on the
Uncircumcised, as well as on the Seed of Abraham; and both Nations became one
Flock, one Company, and one People, under the great Shepherd of the Sheep,
Christ Jesus; and they who before hated one another mortally, now fell into one
another's Embraces, and saluted one another with an holy Kiss. Upon which
Account, the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2. 14, -- 18. Christ is our Peace, who has
made both one, and broken down the Middle-Wall of Partition between us, having
abolished in his Flesh the Enmity, even the Law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances, for to make in himself, of twain, one new Man; so making Peace. He
broke the Bread therefore, to signify this glorious and charitable Act.

4. The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ,
says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 16. And this we may justly believe to have been our
Master's Design in this Action, for the Apostle received it of the Lord; and
what Christ had taught him, he communicated to his Hearers: And this Breaking
both shows and commands our Union and Communion. Though he broke the Loaf into
several Pieces, to give to the respective Communicants, yet those Pieces were
still Parts of that Loaf; and this was to show how near and dear we Christians
are, and ought to be, to one another: This speaks us Fellow members, and how
tender we ought to be of one another's Welfare, as one Member is of the Safety
of another. So that, though we are many Members, yet we all make one Loaf, one
great Body, whereof Christ is the Head, 1 Cor. 12. 27. And this makes all
Rancor, Malice, Envy, Hatred, Pride and Ill Nature, absurd, odious, abominable
and intolerable among Christians, not only at the holy Sacrament, but in their
Conversation too: For, how strange, how surprising would it be, to see one
Piece of Bread quarrel with the other of the same Loaf? And would to God it
might be as surprising, to see one Christian fall out with the other.

5. He broke the Bread, to hint to us, with what Hearts we ought to come to the
Table of our Lord, and to the Altar of the Cross; even with humble, broken,
contrite Hearts. Such Hearts we might get, if it were not for our Pride: It was
therefore prohibited in the Old Law, to use Leaven in God's Sacrifices and
Offerings; Leaven was the Emblem of Pride, which makes us unfit to appear
before the humble Jesus: I am broken with their whorish Heart, which has
departed from me, says God, Ezech. 9. 6. This was literally fulfilled in
Christ: And shall not we share in the Depth of that Sorrow? Shall we see him
bow his Head under the Weight of our Offenses, and shall not the Burden appear
heavy and insupportable to our Spirits? Shall we see the innocent Lamb weep for
our Stubbornness, and be unconcerned at the Spectacle?

6. He broke the Bread, to let us see how ready he is to comfort the Contrite
and Broken Heart. Christian, as great as the Agonies were, thy Sins did put him
to; as great as the Torments were, he felt upon thy Account; as bitter as the
Death was, he suffered and tasted for thee; yet if thy Soul relents, and if
that which made him die becomes loathsome and abominable in thy Sight, if a
deep Sense of thy Unworthiness fills the Channels of thy Heart, if the Fountain
of thy Head runs with Water, if thine Eyes gush out in Tears, if the Weight of
thy Sins presses thy Soul into an holy Self-abhorrency, if his Passion can
fright thy Sins into a languishing Condition, abate their Courage, and break
their sturdy Necks, and his broken Body proves a Motive strong enough, and
obliges thee to break loose from the Government of Hell; behold, those very
Wounds thou made shall be thy Balsam; and the Blood thy Sins did spill,
shall turn into Oil, to supple thy broken Bones; with that precious Liquor thy
Soul shall be washed, and that which was his Death, shall be thy Life and
Antidote; with that Offering of himself, once made, he will expiate thy Filth,
and perfume thy Services, render them acceptable to God, give thee a Right to
Heaven, comfort thee in all thy Tribulations, and call to thy Soul, Be of good
cheer, thy Sins are forgiven thee.

7. He broke the Bread, to let us know that his Death would break the Wrath of
God, allay his Anger, pacify his Justice, and satisfy for the Affront his
Holiness had suffered from the Sins of Men, and make way for the Penitent's
Admission to God's Bosom. This is St. Bernard's Observation; and the Mystery is
rational, for by his Death he broke the Power of him who had the Power of
Death, Heb. 2. 14. This was the Devil, who got that Power by Man's Apostasy,
which provoked the Almighty's Wrath, and moved him to permit the Enemy to
exercise that Power over Mankind; who was therefore not only the Cause of
Adam's Death, but of all the Deaths that followed that; for which Cause Christ
called him a Murderer from the Beginning, Joh. 8. 44. And the Jews style him
the Angel of Death; and if any extraordinary Judgments were inflicted on Men at
any time, he was still the Executioner. Besides all this, he had Power given
him to fright Men with Death, either violent or natural, and the dreadful
Consequences of it; of all which, Man's Apostasy was the Cause. This Power
given him by the Justice and Wrath of God, against the Sins of Man, was broken
by the Death of Jesus, who thereby gave all true Believers Power and Courage to
undervalue these Fears and Terrors, to look upon them as Bugbears, and Things
to fright Slaves withal, since this wonderful Death brings Life, and Pardon,
and Salvation to their Souls, and makes their own Death a Passage to the full
Possession of the Joys to come.

8. He broke the Bread, prophetically to foretell what Miracles would happen
at his Death, how the Veil of the Temple would rend, the Rocks break, and the
Graves burst their Bonds, and open; even then, when Men's Hearts would be
harder than Flints, more impenetrable than Stones, more insensible than
Adamants, less tractable than the Earth, more rigid than the Grave, and less
relenting than inanimate Creatures.

9. He broke the Bread: Why may not we think that hereby he signified the
Breaches and Divisions that, through the Passions and various Interests of Men,
would happen in future Ages in the Church, upon the Account of this Sacrament?
What Strife, what Bitterness, what Contentions has this Ordinance occasioned
betwixt the Eastern and Western Churches; and in the Western, betwixt the
Papists and Protestants; and among the Protestants, betwixt the Lutherans and
those that call themselves of the Reformed Religion? Upon which Account, I
cannot but think of the bitter Language that both Luther and his Followers have
given to the Zwinglians and Calvinists, that differed from them in Opinion
about the Supper of the Lord. Nor did the Fury stop here, but in many Places
where any of the Zwinglians were, they were turned out, imprisoned, harrassed,
expelled, driven into Exile, and forced away to Sea in a severe Winter, in
Frost and Snow, when the Winds blew hard, and the Weather was exceeding
tempestuous; and all, because they would not abjure these Six Propositions: 1.
That these Words, Take, eat, this is my Body; and, Take, drink, this is my
Blood, must not be understood literally, but typically and figuratively. 2.
That the Elements in the Lord's Supper are only Signs and Symbols; and that
Christ's Body is as far removed from the Bread in the Sacrament, as Heaven is
from Earth. 3. That Christ is present in this Sacrament by his Virtue and
Power, and not with his Body; as the Sun, with his Light and Operation, assists
and refreshes the Creatures of God in this lower World. 4. That the Bread in
the Sacrament is the Emblem and Figure of Christ's Body, and signifies and
represents only. 5. That Christ's Body is eaten only by Faith mounting up into
Heaven, not with the Mouth. 6. That only true Believers do properly eat
Christ's Body; but wicked Men, who have no lively Faith, receive nothing but
the bare Bread and Wine. Those that would not abjure these Doctrines, were used
like Heretics, Fanatics and Vagabonds: By their usage, one would have taken
them to have been guilty of Sacrilege, Murder, Robbery, Sedition, Rebellion,
etc. but the chief Crime, it seems, was, because having imbibed Zwinglius and
Calvin's Doctrine about the Eucharist, they could not conform to the Lutheran
Persuasion in that Point. Wonderful Barbarity! which one would scarce have
expected from Heathens, much less from Christians, and Fellow-Protestants, who,
together with them, protested against the Corruptions of the Church of Rome.
Into such an unseemly Behavior do Men precipitate themselves, when they let
loose the Reins of their Passions; instead of becoming Repairers of Breaches,
they make them wider; and render that Wound incurable, which, if wise,
impartial and charitable Men had the handling of, might be healed up with great
Facility.

III. It was, indeed, a Rule in the Rubric of the Passover, Exodus 12. 46. That
a Bone of the Paschal Lamb should not be broken; but that Type does not
interfere with Christ's Breaking the Sacramental Bread: For, though the Paschal
Lamb represented the Lamb of God, which was to die for the Sins of the World,
yet that particular Rite had relation only to that Providence in the Scene of
Christ's Passion; in which, Care was taken that his Legs should not be broken,
as those of Malefactors commonly were, as St. John expressly explains it, Joh.
19. 21. And this shows the wonderful Exactness of Providence, that both
foretold and fulfilled that Particular in our great Redeemer's Funeral: And
though he was numbered with the Transgressors, yet, in many Things, his Usage
was different from theirs, to let the World see that a special Dispensation
attended him, and that, in the midst of all his Misery, an unknown Hand
restrained the unruly Wills of Men, and made them, against their Intent and
Design, correspond with God's Prescience and Determination. This was so minute
a Circumstance, that one would have thought it deserved no Cognizance or
Prediction: But, as inconsiderable as it appears to vulgar Eyes, God knew it
was of Consequence; and hereby he taught future Ages, at once to admire the
Treasures of his Wisdom, and his Care of his only begotten Son; who, though he
condescended to die so ignominious a Death, yet was to enjoy this Privilege
above other Malefactors, that even Infidels might see he was no common
Creature. So that this Rite in the Passover must be stretched no farther than
it was at first intended; and if so, it clashes not with Christ's Breaking the
Bread for other Designs and Purposes.

The Preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. SInce Christ broke the Bread, and the Act is so significant, the Church of
Rome is certainly in the wrong, who neglects this Breaking, and gives the Wafer
whole. But we need not wonder at their Neglect of this Practice in their
Rituals, who have made bold with the one half of the Sacrament, and deprived
the Laity of an Essential Part of it, viz. The Cup; whereof we shall have
occasion to speak more largely in the Sequel. Men who are resolved to establish
their Errors, into which Ignorance first led them, must be bold and daring;
and, since the Word of God does contradict them, invent and erect an Authority
equal with that of God, and set up an Infallible Chair, to bear the World in
hand, that they can do nothing that is unlawful; and while Oral Tradition, that
Nose of Wax, which you may turn and set which way you list, is pretended, there
is no Doctrine so absurd, but may be watered from that impure Spring: And who
can question it, when the Laity are kept ignorant of the Word of the Living
God, and the Scriptures as much forbidden as the Tree of Life was to Adam, lest
he should eat thereof, and live.

II. As Christ broke the Bread, so it is justly supposed that he did eat of it
himself; for this was the Custom among the Jews, for the Master of the Family,
who broke the Bread, to eat of it himself: And though he had no need of it, and
the Mercy intended by this Sacrament was intended altogether for the Benefit of
his Disciples and Followers, yet as he was baptized to show a good Example, and
that he might be in all Things like unto his Brethren, so he did eat of the
Sacramental Bread, thereby to encourage all Christians to come and participate
of that blessed Symbol. And we may add, he did it, to show, that those that did
eat worthily had Communion with him, and that he would be in them, and they in
him; as those who are admitted to eat of the same Meat the Prince himself eats
of, are supposed to be his Favorites. But if Christ did eat of the consecrated
Bread himself, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, that Idol of the Church of
Rome, falls to the Ground: For from hence it will follow, that Christ did eat
and devour himself; which as it is absurd, so it wants very little of being
ridiculous.

III. See here what Reflections thou art to make when thou see the holy Bread
broken before thine Eyes in this Sacrament. This thou must not look upon as an
empty Ceremony, but thy Soul must flee away to Gethsemane, walk about Golgotha,
take a Turn on the Mount of Olives, and stand still a while on Moriah, and
behold how the innocent Isaac is bound upon the Altar, how the Son of God hangs
on the infamous Tree, a Spectacle to Angels, and to Men: And here the
Tremendous Object must arrest thy Thoughts, and infuse such Reflections; See
here, my Sins, what Work ye have made, what Injury ye have done: The Son of the
Living God could not be quiet for you in Heaven; ye pulled him down from the
Mansions of Glory; ye afflicted, persecuted, broke him here on Earth, and left
him not till ye had killed and murdered him. How shall I be revenged upon you?
How shall I testify my Concernedness at the Sufferings of the Lord Jesus? How
shall I convince the holy Angels that stand about me, that I condole with him?
Pride and Desire of Vainglory, thou shall die; Envy and Malice, thou shall
live no longer in my Soul; Wrath and Anger, thou shall be dispatched;
Hypocrisy and Covetousness, thou shall be broke to pieces; Intemperance and
Luxury, thou shall breath thy last: I Will harbor no Murderers in my Bosom, no
such Traitors shall lodge in my House. O Blessed Master! Shall I see thy Head
broke with Thorns, and not cry out, O that my Head were Water, and mine Eyes a
Fountain of Tears! Shall I see thy Face broke with Grief, and not blush at my
daring Sins that broke it thus? Break, stubborn Heart! Break, my perverse and
ungovernable Will! Break, my headstrong Passions! O Jesu, break these
Cockatrices Eggs, and let all the Poison evaporate; then, then, thy Servant
shall be whole.

IV. Hear this, thou broken, thou contrite Penitent: Hear this, thou distressed
Soul, that art broken with a Sense of Sin, who feel the Burden heavy, and
bowest under it: Behold the Rock that was broken for thee; and of the Waters
that flow from it, drink; yea, drink abundantly: This Water is cordial, thou
need not be afraid of Intemperance here. Hide thy self in the Holes, in the
Clests of this Rock; hither flee for Refuge: When Devils haunt thee, when
Temptations follow thee, when Despair, like the Avenger of Blood, is at thy
Heels, run into this City of Refuge, save thy self in this Zoar; here fear no
Storm, no Waves, no Tempest; here all traveling and weary Souls find Rest;
here Devils have no Power, for they are conquered, their Dominion is taken
away, their Empire broken; here is Balm of Gilead; here lives the Physician,
whose Blood is for the healing of the Nations; here fix, though the Earth be
moved; here shelter thy self from the Wrath to come. Christ, the same
Yesterday, to Day, and for ever, will open Rivers in High Places, and Fountains
in the midst of Valleys: When the Poor and Needy seek for Water, and there is
none, He, Prince of Peace, will hear them; He, the mighty God, will will not
forsake them; He will plant in the Wilderness the Cedar, the Myrtle, and the
Oyl-Tree; He will set in the Desert the Fir Tree, and the Pine, and the
Box-tree together, that they may see, and know, and consider, and understand
together, that the Hand of the Lord has done this, and the Holy One of Israel
has created it, Ezekiel. 41. 16, 17.

The PRAYER.
O Blessed and Crucified Savior! How often have I broke with thee! How often
have I broke loose from thee! How often have I broke the Silken Strings whereby
thou have sought to tie my Soul! How justly might thou turn thy Face away
from me! How justly might thou look upon me as unworthy to be called any
more to this Spiritual Feast! But remember, Lord! Remember I am Dust, remember
my Frailty, and do not shut up thy Tender Mercies in Displeasure. O call after
this Prodigal, and bring him home again to his Father's House: Make lively
Impressions of thy Crucifixion upon my Mind: Let the Torments of thy broken
Body fright me from all known Sin: Whenever I am tempted to any Thing that is
evil, cry in mine Ears, or possess me with this Thought, That that very Sin did
help to break thee on the Cross! A lively Apprehension of this will keep my
Soul undefiled; this will break and crush my former Delight in Vanity; this
will embitter my Sensual Pleasures; this will make me weary of running after
other Gods; this will humble my Soul; this will subdue the vain Imaginations,
whereby I have been wont to flatter my self into Misery. O give me a View of
the Riches that are to be found in thy broken Body, that I may run no longer
after broken Cisterns and may rely no longer on broken Reeds. O let my Soul
feed on thy broken Body by Contemplation: Thou did not count thy Life dear
for my sake, O let me be touched with these Thoughts, that I may despise Death
and Torments for thy sake, and may, with all Saints and Martyrs, behold thy
Face at last in Eternal Glory. O Jesu! Great Storehouse of Delight! Who have
the Keys of David! Spread open thine Arms of Mercy, and receive this poor
miserable Creature: Behold, this straying Sheep, beset with Multitudes of
Wolves, runs to the good Shepherd: Protect me from the fiery Darts of the
Enemy; embrace me, as a tender Mother does her sickly Child, with Bowels of
Mercy. Kill in me the base Desires of the Flesh; and whatever evil Inclinations
thou spiest in me, root them up. Extinguish in me the impure Flames of Lust.
Give me an excellent Spirit, a Spirit active in the Practice and Exercise of
Virtue. Raise the Powers of my Soul by thy Love, that I may love thee with all
my Heart, that I may praise thee, that I may honor thee, and think nothing
tedious or troublesome that may promote thy Glory. Repair this shattered
Tabernacle, and vouchsafe to dwell in it: I have wilfully ruined it by my Sins,
O make it whole again. Remove the Poison, which has infected all my Faculties.
Destroy the Serpent's Seed, that lurks in the secret Corners of my Heart. If
Adam could not preserve his Integrity in the State of Innocence, how shall I
preserve mine in this State of Corruption, without thy special Grace and
Assistance? Thy Grace is the Treasure I want, thou have promised it, I beg it;
O let me not go without it. O Jesu! Thou did love me when I was thine Enemy,
O hate me not now that I am made thy Friend. When I was lost, thou did redeem
me with thy Blood; now that I am found, O wash me with that Blood: O let me not
perish now, when Heaven is bought, and an endless Bliss is purchased for me.
Now that the Handwriting against me is blotted out, let me not run into new
Dangers, nor forfeit that Blessing which is so graciously tendered to me. It is
the real Desire of my Soul to serve thee; and O that I might do it with
Cheerfulness, with Alacrity, with Fervency, and with Constancy! The Preparation
of the Heart is of thee, thou give the Will; O give me Strength to do what I
desire. What can I do of my self? I am naturally defiled, Original Sin sticks
to me, Proneness to Evil follows me; thou must stop the Current; nothing but
thy self can dry up this Fountain of Corruption; it is thy Work: And whatever
Good is in me, from thee it comes, from thy Grace it does proceed. Let the same
Mercy uphold me, that has hitherto guided me; and guide me so through the
Briars and Thorns of Temptations, that I may not only be more than a Conqueror
through him that loved me, but may at last receive the Crown and Recompense of
such as overcome. Amen, Amen.

CHAP. X.
Of Taking the Consecrated Bread with our Hands, and the Mystery of it.
The CONTENTS.
In the Primitive Church, the Eucharist was always taken with the Hand: This
Simplicity, in progress of Time, abandoned; and, as the Veneration of External
Symbols advanced, the Bread received in certain Vessels, and sometimes upon
Linen Cloth. The Superstition of the Church of Rome of putting the Bread into
the Mouth of the Communicant laid open, and the Vanity of it shown. The Mystery
of Taking the Eucharist with our Hands, set down in three Particulars, viz. To
put us in mind, with what Alacrity we are to accept of the Mercy offered us, to
testify our appropriating of that Mercy to our selves, and to hold it fast
when we have received it. Of God's Liberality, in bidding us take the best Gift
he has to bestow. The Impiety of those that take Christ for their Redeemer,
and continue disobedient, discovered. The Prayer.

I. IT IS certain that Christ said, Take and eat; which the Primitive Church
understood of taking the consecrated Elements with the Hand. And to this
purpose says Tertullian, We receive the Eucharist from none, but from the
Hands of the President or Minister of the Ordinance. It was for this Reason,
that in the ancient Liturgies, the Deacons cried to the People, or
Communicants, Extend your Hands: And upon this Account it was, that St. Ambrose
expostulating with Theodosius, about the barbarous Slaughter he had been guilty
of, tells him, How can you stretch forth your Hands, from which, as yet,
innocent Blood drops down? How can you, with such Hands, receive the Body of
the Lord? Nor do even the Papists themselves, who will not suffer the
Lay-Communicant to touch the Wafer with his Hand, but put it into his Mouth,
deny it. Whether every one in the Ancient Church did take the consecrated
Elements with his own, from the Priest's or Deacon's Hand; or whether they took
it out of the Dish, into which the sacred Bread was broken, with their own
Hands, is not very material to determine: Though whatever Passages there may be
in Clemen^ of Alexandria, and St. Cyprian, which seem to import, that the
Communicants did take the broken Bread out of the Dish; yet most of the
Ancients do agree, that the consecrated Elements were taken from the Hands of
Ecclesiastical Persons: And though, among the Jews, the Master of the Family,
that broke the Bread, did not always give it into the Hands of every Guest; but
having broken it, laid it upon the Table, and every one took a Piece; yet the
Practice of the Christian Church, for Six Hundred Years at least, after Christ,
sufficiently shows how the holy Apostles took it; whom, we may suppose, the
first Churches did imitate: And as the Disciples took it from Christ's Hands,
so the Communicants afterward took it from the Apostles and their Successors
Hands; which Practice continues this Day in most Churches of the Protestants,
that call themselves Reformed: I say, in most; for in some, and particularly,
those of the United Provinces, the Communicants take it out of the Dish, after
it is broken by the Minister. It was Ignorance and Superstition that brought in
a contrary Custom: And from hence rose that Canon in the Council of
Antisiodorum; celebrated about the Year after Christ, 613. Can. 36.
That Women must not take the Eucharist with their bare Hands, but in a Linen
Cloth, which they called Dominicale. Soon after, as Folly and Superstition
increased, some began to take the consecrated Bread in little Vessels of Gold,
or of some other Metal; against whom the Sixth Council of Constantinople, about
the Year of our Lord, Can. 101.
676. made a Canon, and forbad them to do so for the future; but to put their
Hands cross-wise, and so to receive it. The Pretense in receiving the holy
Bread in some Thing, besides their bare Hands, was, that they might not defile
the Body of Christ with their Hands; as if touching it with baser Things than
their own Hands, would be more acceptable to God: For, as Solomon tells us, a
living Dog is better than a dead Lion; so we may with far greater Reason say,
That a living Hand is infinitely better than all the dead Things which are
made, either of Gold, or Silver, or Brass, or any other Mineral. But though
these Abuses crept in so early, yet the Custom of receiving the holy Bread with
their Hands continued in abundance of Churches, till the latter end of the
Ninth Century; by which Time it began to be customary in the Western Church to
put the Eucharist into the Mouths of the Communicants, as it is practiced this
Day in the Roman Church, as also among the Lutheran Protestants. It is
confessed, that a Canon was made in a Council of Roan, about the Year of our
Lord, 685. That the Eucharist should for the future, by the Priest, L'Arroque'
s History of the Eucharist, Part 1. O. 13.
be put into the Mouth of the Communicant, whether Woman, or Layman: Yet there
are sufficient Testimonies extant, that assure us, that this Canon was not
observed every where, till about the latter end of the Ninth Century. In a
Word, As Superstition grew, and the Doctrine of Transubstantiation began to
prevail, so this ancient Rite of taking the Eucharist with the Hand, was
abolished; and the Priests of the Church of Rome would not so much as suffer
Laymen to touch the Sacramental Bread with the Tip of their Fingers,
pretending that it was only given by Christ into the Hands of Priests; an
Absurdity so great, that by the same Rule it would follow, that the Laity must
be totally excluded from the Sacrament, because, at the first Institution, it
was received by none but Priests. Nay, to that height of Folly did Men arise
by degrees, not only Papists, but many also that professed the Purity of the
Gospel, that it was counted a great Profanation of the Eucharist, if the People
did any way touch the sacred Bread; and therefore great Care was, and is still,
taken, even at this Day, that the Bread be put exactly upon the Tongue of the
Communicant, that he may not touch it so much as with his Teeth; So that under
a pretense of Religion, Men are made to forbear that, which true Religion
commands to be done. And what an Injury is it to the People, to hinder them
from touching and taking the holy Bread in their Hands, when Christ laid down
his Life for them, as well as for the Priests? Did the Priests receive greater
Benefit by Christ's Death, than the People? Or, were some peculiar Advantages
consigned to them by his Death, over and above what is intended for the Laity?
If this could be proved, there might be some Color for this Pretense: But when
all equally share in his Mercies, why should not all take the Bread in their
Hands, whereby they remember the Benefits of his Death? Are the Priest's Hands
holier or cleaner than the People's? Would to God they were so, not only in
this Sacrament, but in all Things! But, after all, what can be more weak, or
silly, than to imagine that the holy Bread is defiled more by the Hands and
Teeth, than by the Tongue, or Bowels, or Stomach, which receive it? Is not the
Tongue a Member of the Body, as well as the Hand? Or, are the Bowels, into
which the Bread is received, purer than the Hand? If it be said, that by the
Hands great Sins are usually committed, I would fain know whether greater Sins
are not daily committed with the Tongue, than with the Hand? So impertinent is
this Plea, that it deserves no Argument, or Answer. In the Greek Church, Jac.
Goar. in Not. ad Miss. Chrysostom. p.m. 150.
the Custom of taking the holy Bread with the Hand, was kept up for many
Hundred Years, till of late they have got a way of mingling the holy Wine with
the Bread in a Spoon, whence the Communicants do take it.

II. As we are commanded to take the holy Bread with our Hands, which makes it
no indifferent Thing, so we cannot suppose that Christ would command it,
without intending some Mystery in that Action; and if it be lawful to guess, we
may piously believe, that by that Taking, he intended these following Things.

1. It puts us in mind, with what Alacrity we should accept of the unspeakable
Gift, viz. The Mercy of Reconciliation, by the Death of Christ Jesus: As we
readily stretch forth our Hands to receive a Present that is pleasing to us, so
ought we to accept of what a merciful God does so freely and so frankly bestow
upon us. Accept of it! You will say, Who can be supposed to refuse it? Will a
Malefactor scruple to accept of his Prince's Pardon? Or, If a King put a
Treasure into a poor Prisoner's Hands, will he scorn it, or withdraw his Hand?
It Is true, Men are willing enough to accept of a Savior, so they may have him
upon their own Terms: If he will give them leave to do what they please, and
then save them, they are most ready to take, and to embrace him. But that is
not the Acceptance I mean: For such an Acceptance implies a Contradiction, as
being contrary to the whole Design of that Reconciliation: For by his Death, he
was to destroy the Works of the Devil; and therefore to accept of him, and to
cleave to those Works he came to destroy, is to set Christ at variance with
himself. He that accepts of this Gift, must express that Acceptance, not only
by his Hand, but his Heart too, and conform also to the Design of that Gift.
For, Is Christ divided? Shall I accept of a part, and not of the whole? Shall I
receive him as a Savior, and not as a Guide and Ruler too? Shall I stretch
forth my Hand, to put his Scepter of Grace and Mercy to my Lips, and break the
Scepter when I have done? This is impious, and unreasonable.

2. We take the holy Bread with our H^nds, to testify our Approbation of that
Gift, and that we take it to our own Use and Benefit; as he that takes Food in
his Hand, does it to feed his own Body, and to strengthen himself. And, indeed,
Christ is willing, that the Soul that comes to this holy Table should say,
Christ is mine, for me he suffered, for me he died, for my sake he left Heaven,
and confined himself to a Cradle, to a Stable, to a Manger: For me he was
nailed to the Cross, for me that precious Sacrifice was offered, and I share in
all the Benefits of his Death, as well as my Brother, my Sister, my Friend, and
my Neighbor: The Estate he purchased belongs to me, I have a Right to it, as
well as St. Paul and St. Peter, as well as Zachaeus and Mary Magdalene: And
there is no Dispute of it, where the Communicant brings with him Mary
Magdalene's Tears, St. Peter's Repentance, St. Paul's Admiration of God's Love,
and Zachaeus's Charity, he may be as confident that Christ gives himself to
him, as if he heard Christ saying to him with an audible Voice, in the
Prophet's Language, Fear not, I have redeemed thee, thou art mine: He may
justly believe, he hears Christ saying to him, Here, Christian, take that which
is thine own, even my self, that Pardon, that Salvation, that Peace, that Joy,
that Spirit, that Comfort, which my Death has purchased, and my Cross has
gained. I am thy Portion, and all that I have is thine; I am thy Shield, and
thy exceeding great Reward: Be not afraid to apply these mighty Blessings to my
Soul; for as great, as wonderful, as rich, as magnificent as they are, and as
poor, as mean, as wretched, and as naked as thou art, take them, and wear them,
tie them as a Crown about thy Head: Look upon the bright, the everlasting
Mansions of Bliss and Happiness; look upon all that Saints and Angels do enjoy,
and please thy self with the Thoughts of it; for all is thine.

3. We are commanded to take the holy Bread with our Hands, to let us know,
that having accepted of this Gift, and appropriated it to our selves, we are to
hold it fast, and not to let it go again. Then we let Christ go, when we grow
cold in our Love to him, and to his distressed Members, or to our Brethren in
general. Love stays that Bridegroom of our Souls, Love preserves his gracious
Presence, Love chains him to our Hearts. It was an excellent Resolution of the
Spiritual Spouse, and that Spouse are we, Cant. 3. 3, 4. The Watchmen that go
^^ut the City, found me; to whom I said, Saw ye him whom my Soul loves? It was
but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my Soul loves. I
held him, and would not let him go, until I had brought him into my Mother's
House, and into the Chamber of her that conceived me. This must be the
Resolution of every Soul that is tender of spiritual Comfort. The Way to hold
him fast, is, to kiss him with our Thoughts, to embrace him with our Minds, to
cleave to him with our Affections, to cling to him with our Will, and to caress
him with our Obedience: If he would go away from us, these are the Charms that
hold him: And the Soul that, with David, has Courage to say, and sincerely
intends what it says, Psalm. 18. 1. I will love thee, O Lord, my Strength, my
Rock, my Fortress, my Deliverer, my Buckler, and the Horn of my Salvation, and
my high Tower, may expect as gracious an Answer. The same we read of, Psalm. 91.
14, 15, 16. Because he has set his Love upon me, therefore I will deliver him:
I will set him on high, because he has known my Name: He shall call upon me,
and I will answer him; I will be with him in Trouble, I will deliver him, and
honor him: With long Life I satisfy him, and show him my Salvation.

The Preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. HERE we may take a View of the immense Bounty of our Master, to his Church
and People. Our Savior pathetically describes it, Mar. 12. 1. -- 7. For,
according to the different Conditions of his Church, he sent various Servants,
to check them, to admonish them, to warn them, to represent to them the Joys
and Torments of another World; and though not a few of these Servants were
persecuted, stoned, killed, abused, and some met with cruel Mockings, with
Bonds and Imprisonments, yet that did not discourage him; and having therefore
yet one Son, his Well-beloved, he sent him also last unto them, saying, They
will reverence my Son: And this Son he bids us take; and with him, all Things
that can make us truly happy. And though it is true, the covetous and sensual
Man would have taken it more kindly, if God had bid him take Chests of Gold,
and Talents of Silver, rich Houses, and richer Lands; yet had those Gifts been
very mean, and unworthy of his Wisdom and Holiness. His Gift, like himself,
must be spiritual and great; and in bidding us take his Son, with all the
Benefits of his Death, he bids us take the most inestimable Mercy, and that
which must make us rich, and great, and glorious, to Eternal Ages. If he had
bid us take the World, and the Fullness thereof, there had been no great
Self-denial in that Offer: But to offer the Son of his Love, and to bid us take
him as our own, whereby we enjoy all his Wealth and Treasures, the Self-denial
is so great, that the Sacred Writers know not how to express it, and therefore
use such Words as may serve to feed our Admiration; So God loved the World,
that he gave his only begotten Son: And the Word so, implies so vast an Ocean
of Love, that the Understandings both of Angels and Men, may lose themselves in
the Contemplation or Survey of it.

II. Here I cannot but reflect on the Rudeness of some that take him indeed,
but it is as the Soldiers at his Passion took him, by Force and Violence. There
are Thousands that will take him for their Savior, whether he will or no:
Though he has protested that he will say to those who would not do the Will of
his Father which is in Heaven, I know you not, depart from me, ye Workers of
Iniquity; yet these very Persons will lay hold on him, and will be saved by
him, in despite of him; and therefore do not only assemble with other
Christians, under the Cross, at the holy Table, and there pretend to take him
to their Comfort, as well as the best of them; but on their Deathbeds too,
after they have abused him by their carnal and sensual Lives, lived like his
Enemies, lean upon him, depend upon him, lay hold on his Merits, support
themselves with his Sufferings, and stay themselves on him, as if they were
resolved he should not shake them off: This is a Rudeness that admits of no
Excuse. Not but that he is ready enough to refresh those that lay hold on him
as they should do; but where Men's Hearts remain unsanctified, unholy,
unresolved to walk in the Light, as he was in the Light, unaffected with the
Love of God, untouched with a Sense of Sin; there to hope, and be confident
they shall be saved by his Merits, is to make Christ a Patron of their Sins,
and an Encourager of Hypocrisy, and to charge him with a Lie, as if, contrary
to what he has so often affirmed, asserted, repeated and confirmed by Miracles
too, not those that have followed him in the Regeneration, but those whose
Hearts and Lives were never changed, shall sit upon Thrones when the Son of Man
shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory, Mat. 19. 28.

III. From hence it is evident, that to take Christ for our highest and
chiefest Good, a Man must believe there is something to be got by him, which
the World cannot give, and beyond all that the World can afford: And this
Belief must not be slight or superficial, but a Belief that considers the
Consequence and Importance of this Truth; not a Belief of Speculation, but a
Belief that rouzes the Soul from her Slumber. A Man that does not heartily
believe that the greatest, the best, the choicest Satisfaction flows from the
Possession of this Treasure, will never labor, or toil, or put himself to
Trouble to get Possession of it. So that, if ever we take the Lord Jesus
according to the Rules laid down in the preceding Discourse, so as to accept of
him upon his Terms, to appropriate him to our selves, and to hold him fast, we
must sit down, and in cool Blood consider, whether that Bliss and Happiness is
to be found in him, which the Scripture speaks of; and to weigh that Happiness,
how far it transcends all other Felicities and Comforts of this World; end not
to rest, till we are fully persuaded of the Truth and Reality of it: And this
Persuasion will, in a manner, force and compel us to take him so, as, with the
Merchant in the Gospel, to sell all we have, for that inestimable Pearl.

The PRAYER.
O Jesu! My All, my Sun, my Light, and the Glory of my Soul! Who have taken
upon thee the Form of a Servant, that I might be taken into the Number of the
Kings and Princes of the other World! I have too long entertained my self with
the Pleasures and Vanities of the World, and the uncertain Shadows and Images
of Carnal Satisfactions. I see, I see, there is that in thee, which
counter-balances and out-weighs all that the World can call rich, and
excellent, and beautiful: They that enjoy thee, walk in Light, and the Darkness
trouble them not. O take my Soul, and reform it; Take my Will, and rectify it;
Take my Understanding, and eradiate it with thy Beams; Take my Affections, and
inflame them. O let me not take Shadows any longer for Realities: Take me into
thy School, and teach me; Teach me, how I may be thy Disciple; Teach me, how I
may be satisfied with thee alone; Teach me, how I shall take thee for my Head,
my Governor, and the Regent of my Soul. Take care of this poor miserable
Sinner; Take thou the Government of my Heart: It is thine, thou have bought,
thou have redeemed it, thou have paid the Ransom. Take me Captive by thy Love:
Free me from the Prison of my Corruptions, that I may be fit to be taken into
the Number of such as have washed their Robes, and made them white in the Blood
of the Lamb, and stand for ever before the Throne of God, and serve him Night
and Day in his Temple. Amen.

CHAP. XI.
Of these Words, This is my Body, whether they import a Transubstantion, or
Consubstantiation; and how the Bread is Christ's Body; and how Christ's Body
may, and is to be eaten.
The CONTENTS.
Transubstantiation a new and monstrous Doctrine. The Fate that attended
Berengarius, for denying it. The Impossibility of it shown in several
Particulars. Consubstantiation, an Opinion as groundless as the former. The
History of it. The Arguments the Lutheran Churches make use of, confuted. The
true Sense of these Words, THIS IS MY BODY, What it is to eat Christ's Body.
Many Rhetorical Expressions in the Fathers, concerning this holy Sacrament,
which are not to be taken literally. The same Expressions made use of still,
but to be understood according to the Analogy of Faith. The same Way that Man
was lost, the same Way he must recover. The crucified Body of Christ,
represented in this Sacrament, a Motive to many excellent Duties. The Prayer.

I. THIS IS MY BODY: What Stirs and Differences these few Words have caused in
the Christian World, especially, since the Eighth Century, is unknown to none
that is versed in Ecclesiastical History: The Modern Church of Rome, as they
place Consecration in these Words, so, to establish Transubstantiation, they
take Sanctuary at this Expression. Transubstantiation, a Word not known till
the Year of our Lord 1112, when Stephen Bishop of Autun first invented it, and
afterward confirmed by Pope Innocent III. in the Lateran Council, in the Year
1215, is at this Day the Darling Doctrine of the Church of Rome: A Word, first
brought in by Passion and Ignorance, defended afterward with blind Zeal, and
at last established, and turned into an Article of Faith, by the packed Council
of Trent: A Word, which long ago would have been banished and rejected, but
that it happened to be owned by Men who will rather hazard all, than
acknowledge themselves in an Error: A Word, which that corrupted Church at
this Day fights for; and anathematizes, curses and damns to the Pit of Hell all
that dissent from their Sense and Meaning in that barbarous Expression. What
they mean by Transubstantiation, is sufficiently known; viz. A Conversion or
Change of the whole Substance of Bread in this Sacrament, into the Substance of
Christ's Natural Body, immediately upon the Priest's speaking these Words, Hoc
vero nihil aliud est, nce aliter nominari, aut haberi potest quam magica
incantatio, Hosp. Hist. Sacrament. Part. 2. p. 103.
This is my Body; as soon as the last Syllable am in the Latin Words, Hoc enim
est Corpus meum, is pronounced by the Priest. If any be desirous of a full
Account of this monstrous Doctrine, the best Way to know i^, is to view the
Recantation Pope Nicholas forced Berengarius to subscribe, in the Year of our
Lord 1059. which was this: I Berengarius, an unworthy Deacon of the Church of
St. Maurice of Anjou, knowing the True and Apostolic Faith, do renounce and
abjure all Heresi^s; and that particularly for which I have hitherto been
infamous, and which teaches, That the Bread and Wine which are set upon the
Altar, are only a Sacrament after Consecration, or a Representation, and not
the very Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ; and that they cannot
sensually, but only in a Sacramental or Representative Way, be handled by the
Priest, and broken and bruised by the Teeth of the Faithful. But I do consent
to the Holy Roman Church, and to the Apostolic See; and profess with my Lips
and Heart, that I hold that Faith concerning the Sacrament of the Lord's Table,
which our Lord, and Pope Nicholas, and this Holy Synod, have, by Evangelical
and Apostolical Authority, commanded to be held, and prescribed to me, viz.
That the Bread and Wine which are place upon the Altar, after Consecration, are
not only a Sacrament, but the very Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ; and
are sensually, and not only Sacramentally, but in truth, handled by the Hands
of the Priest, and broken and bruised by the Teeth of the Faithful. And
hereunto I swear by the Holy and Individual Trinity, and by these Holy Gospels.
This was the gross and absurd Doctrine of the Church of Rome in that Age; so
absurd, that even their Champions who came after were afraid of it, being
sensible that Christ's glorified Body could not be handled, and bruised, and
ground with the Teeth. Which made the Glossator in Gratian, reciting this
Recantation, Distinct. 2. de. Consecr. Can. 74.
adds, If you do not take these Words in a sound Sense, you will fall into
greater Heresy than Berengarius. Yet the Gentlemen of this Church are past
blushing; and though there be nothing more inconsistent with the common
Principles of Mankind, than this Transubstantiation, yet they are resolved to
maintain that with Noise and Clamor, which they cannot do with Reason and
Argument; and though, as they explain this Doctrine, it be rather an
Annihilation of the Bread, or Substitution of Christ's Body, than a
Transubstantiation, yet a Transubstantion it must be: And that the Vulgar may
not stumble at it, abundance of Miracles are invented, to support it: How St.
Anthony of Padua's Horse forsook his Oats, to do Obeisance to the Body of
Christ, or the Wafer, after it was Transubstantiated: And how others have seen
the Wafer bleed, when by Jews and Infidels it has been pricked: And how others
have seen a Child appear to them, instead of the Wafer: How, upon St. Gregory's
Prayers, the Wafer has been changed into substantial Bloody Flesh: How a
Protestant denying Transubstantiation, and saying, that a Spider deserves as
much Reverence and Adoration as the Wafer in the Sacrament, they being both
God's Creatures, an huge black Spider immediately spun her self down from the
Ceiling, into his Mouth, etc. And these Miracles Bellarmine brings for Proofs
and Arguments. Lib. 3. de Euch. cap. 8.
But to examine the Doandrine it self, how impossible it is, that these Words
should infer such a Conversion, is evident from hence:

1. Because no Reason can be given, why these Words, This is my Body, should
infer such a Change, any more than the Words, Take, eat; For the one, as well
as the other, were spoken by Christ at the same Time, and in one Breath.

2. It Is impossible that these Words should infer any such Change of the Bread
into real and substantial Flesh: For it would follow, that Christ had spoken
what was false, and the Disciples, that were present, and to whom he spoke
these Words, might have easily convinced themselves of the contrary. That
before Christ's Ascension into Heaven, they had no very Metaphysical
Understandings, nor very quick Apprehensions, any one may guess, that has but
read the Evangelical History. They that had been present at so many Miracles
Christ wrought, and convinced themselves of the Reality of them by their
Senses, that if there had a Miracle been wrought in this Sacrament, they would,
without Dispute, have examined it by their Senses; and having seen no real
Conversion or Change of the Bread before them into his Natural Body, would have
disputed Christ's Assertion, and given him an Account of the Reason of their
Unbelief: For they had seen the Miracle of his changing Water into Wine, and
convinced themselves by their Taste and Eyesight, that there was a real Change
wrought; and therefore, if such a miraculous Change had been wrought here, and
they could not have perceived it by any of their Senses, can any Man imagine
they would have been silent, and not contradicted it? There cannot be a greater
Miracle, than to change Bread into Flesh: And if the Bread, which was before
the Disciples, upon the Table, had been changed into Christ's Body, and they
had perceived no such Thing by any of their Senses, they would have been amazed
more than the Virgin Mary, at the Message the Angel brought her, of conceiving
without the Knowledge of a Man. They saw Christ sitting at the Table, they saw
the Bread in his Hand, they saw the Bread after Consecration, they saw his Body
and that Bread were different Things, they did not see him vanish out of their
Sight; Christ continued to be as he was, and so did the Bread; and therefore
could not but take these Words to be spoken in a spiritual Sense. There was
never any Miracle wrought, but what was intended to convince the Senses of Men;
and they could either taste, or see, or smell, or feel, or hear it: Nay, the
Design of a Miracle is clearly lost, if it convinces not the Senses; for the
Design is, to surprise, or rather to persuade Men into Belief, by their seeing
that, which they cannot but conclude, is wrought by the Finger of God. Except
the Senses are convinced, the Miracle is wrought in vain: And that so great a
Miracle, as changing Bread into Christ's Natural Body, should be wrought, and
no Creature be able to perceive it by their Senses, is a Thing so absurd, that
it destroys the Nature of a Miracle. Thomas, one of the Twelve, who was so
difficult in believing Christ's being risen, that he would not give Credit to
Eyewitnesses, and his Fellow-Disciples, that had seen him, except he put his
Finger in the very Marks of his Nails, and thrust his Hand into his Side; how
would he have believed this Transubstantiation, if he had not seen the least
Appearance of it, or seen the Bread continue Bread, and Christ continue sitting
at the Table, as he had done before? Not to mention, that if we must not
believe our Senses, what Assurance have we of our Religion, the Stress whereof
must be laid upon Christ's Resurrection, and the Apostles and others seeing him
risen, after he had been dead? And how can any Man be sure there are such Words
in the Bible, as, This is my Body, if he may not believe his Eyesight?

3. This is my Body, differs very much from This is Transubstantiated, or
Changed into my Body, or Let it be changed into my Body: This is my Body,
speaks, what is already in Being; not what may, or shall be effective of
something else. To be, and to be changed into a Thing, are quite different
Expressions: And he that says, a Thing is, or has a Being, cannot be therefore
supposed necessarily to say, that it is changed, or transubstantiated, or shall
be so; for a Thing may be several Ways, besides being changed. That, of which
Christ affirms, that it is his Body, was the Bread he took in his Hand, or that
which he broke; and that may be said to be his Body several Ways, without being
changed or transubstantiated into his Body: Which very Thing has made the
wiser and more judicious Papists confess, that these Words do not necessarily
infer a Transubstantiation, without the Decree, Order and Explication of the
Church; upon which they chiefly build their Doctrine and Assertion. And how
ridiculous this Explication of their Church is, any common Capacity may
perceive, that does but understand Grammar, and the ordinary Way of speaking in
all Countries and Languages whatsoever: For, What can be more common, than to
say, Such a Man is a Fox, and Such a Person is a Lion, and Such a Neighbor is
a Beast, and Such a Boy is a Tiger? But does any Man of common Sense infer from
thence, that such a Person is transubstantiated into a Fox, or Lion, or Tiger?
It Is true, God can do all Things; but his Power is one Thing, and his Will
another; and to believe he will do that which he has no where said, or
promised to do, is notorious Presumption: And though we are not presently to
reject a Thing, because our Reason cannot comprehend it; yet it is fit that
what we cannot comprehend with our Reason, we should be sufficiently assured
of, that God has revealed it: Such as is the Mystery of the Trinity, the
Incarnation of our Lord, and the future Resurrection, etc. And if we had but as
good Ground for Transubstantiation, as we have for these Mysteries; not only
God's express Revelation, but the constant Doctrine of the Church, no wise Man
would dispute it. Transubstantiation is a Thing, which neither the Scripture,
nor the Primitive Church, did ever acknowledge: And there being nothing in the
Word of God to establish it, and being, besides, contrary to all Sense and
Reason, we must be first given up to believe a Lie, as some (...), it seems,
are, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. before we can give (...) unto it. It were endless to
repeat here all the Contradictions and Absurdities that this Doctrine may be
charged with; for Mice and Vermin will eat the consecrated Wafer, if it lies
in their Way: It destroys not only the Nature of Christ's Body, but a principal
Article of our Belief too; which says, That Christ is ascended, and sits at
the Right Hand of God; whom the Heavens must receive, until the Time of the
Restitution of all Things, Act. 3. 21. Not to mention, that the Apostle calls
the Bread in the Sacrament, even after Consecration, Bread still, 1 Cor. 11.
And that this Doctrine crosses the Nature of a Sacrament, and is confuted by
Christ's saying, Do this in remembrance of me; which supposes that he is absent
as to his Body, which was crucified, etc. Nor will that Place, Joh. is. 55. My
Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed, do any great Service to our
Adversaries in this Controversy: For if it be Meat indeed, how does that infer
that the Bread must needs be transubstantiated into his Flesh, since his Flesh
may be Meat indeed several Ways? For, to all true Believers, that take Comfort
in his Death, and are released from Sin, and the Snares of the Devil, by his
Flesh that was nailed to the Cross, he may be truly said to be Meat indeed, and
Drink indeed, because their Souls are comforted by the Remembrance of it, and
preserved to Eternal Life; and though he be only spiritual Meat to them, yet he
is so indeed, and really, and in a very good Sense: As we say of a comfortable
Word, spoken to a troubled Conscience, That that Word is Meat and Drink to it
indeed, and does it more Good than all the Meat and Drink in the World would
have done: And that all that Discourse, John 6. is to be understood of
Spiritual Meat and Drink, whereby the Soul receives comfort and refreshment,
Christ himself has declared, Joh. 6 63.

II. As these words, This is my Body, do not infer a Transubstantiation, so
neither do they import a Consubstantiation, a word as hard as the former, and
which has been taken up by the Lutheran Protestants, to express their Opinion,
that Christ's Glorified Body is in, with, and under the Element of the Bread in
the Holy Sacrament, or hid under it; a Doctrine which they ground upon the
Ubiquity of Christ's Body, or being every where and in all places; which
Privilege, they fancy, was communicated to Christ's Human Nature, by its being
joined with the Divine* a thing so irrational, that hereby they confound the
Divine Nature with the Human: And to say, that Christ had a Body, which, as all
other Bodies, must have Dimensions, height and, breadth, and depth, and
length, and yet to make that Body every where present, is a conclusion so weak,
that I am apt to believe, that if it had not been pitched upon by Luther in a
heat or passion, he would never have embraced it. For indeed, this was the
infirmity of that excellent Man, who, though otherwise very much mortified in his
desires after the Riches, Honors and Glories of the World, yet could not
endure to be contradicted, nor yield to another Man's Opinion, though much
sounder, because himself was not the first inventer of it. And by what I can
see from History, this was one great reason, why he differed from Zwinglius in
the point of the Holy Sacrament, and embraced Consubstantiation, which implies,
as is said already, that the Body of Christ is hid under the substance of the
Bread; a Point that transported him into very great passion, which made him
afterward, upon his Deathbed deplore, That he had been too hot in his
Controversy. He that gave the first hint of this Opinion, was John Gerson,
Chancellor of Paris, who about the time of the Council of Constance, not being
able to digest the absolute Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and finding that
Assertion to be full of Blasphemy and Idolatry, found out this expedient, as he
thought, That Christ, as he was a Creature, and had a Body finite, could not be
at one and the same time in diverse places, yet being united to the Divine
Nature in one Person, the Human Nature, by that conjunction had obtained, and
did obtain that Prerogative, that in the Lords Supper only, and at no time
else, it had the privilege to be in many places at once. About 150 years after
him, one James Faber of Stapula, enlarged this Privilege of Christ's Human
Nature, and what Gerson had restrained only to the Sacrament, he extended to
the whole World, and made Christ's Human Nature, as extensive, as his Divinity:
Luther afterward, exceeding fond of this Opinion, established it in the
Churches of Saxony, insomuch, that he aver^'d Christ's Body was as much in a
Baker's Shop as in the Eucharist; only in the Shop, he did not desire to be
taken and worshipped, because he had not tied himself to a Shop by any word of
Promise: Nay, that his Body was in the very Rope, wherewith Judas hanged
himself, and went through doors that were locked, and through the very Stone,
that was laid upon his Sepulcher. A strange fancy! For certainly Christ's Body
was Crucified at Jerusalem, and not in all places of the World; and when he
fate at Table with his Disciples, he did not sit at the same time at Rome, or
in the East Indies. How near this Doctrine approaches to the errors of the
Marcionites and Manichaeans of old, who taught, that Christ had no real or
substantial Body, but only a Bodily Shape; and that when he was felt, and found
to have Flesh and Bones, it was only by special Dispensation; how near this
Doctrine, I say, approaches these Errors, condemned by the Ancient Church, I
will not determine. It cannot be denied, that Luther was not always the same,
and sometimes he seemed to deny, what he asserted before; But still those among
the Lutherans, that are for this Ubiquity, make him the Great Patron of their
Doctrine. And though some of them give out, that they do not assert the
Ubiquity of Christ's Body so much, as his Omnipresence, yet it will be a hard
matter to show, how Ubiquity and Omnipresence differ. Some pretend that the
forementioned expressions were not Luther's expressions, but foisted in by
some, that would fain take Sanctuary at his Books, for the defense of their
Opinions; But the composers of the History of the Augsburg Confession, are
ashamed of this Conceit; and the Elector of Saxony, when in the Year 1574. he
came to examine the thing, found, that it was only an idle report, and that in
the Edition of Luther's Works, there was no variation used from his own words
and expressions: And if Luther writes in some places against this Ubiquity of
Christ's Body, it is an argument that he ought not to be believed in other
Books, where he asserts it. Thus came in Consubstantiation, and this Opinion
the Lutheran Churches do at this time follow, and maintain very eagerly; And
though in all other Points, they differ very little from the Protestants of the
Reformation, for with us they protest against Popish Invocation of Saints,
Religious Worship of Images, Human Satisfactions, Indulgences, Purgatory,
Worship of Relics, Prayers in an unknown Tongue, Merit of Works,
Transubstantiation, Adoration of the Sacrament, Sacrifice of the Mass, Monarchy
of the Pope, pretenses of Infallibility, and blind Obedience to the decisions
of Councils, etc. Yet this Point they do so stiffly, and so uncharitably
maintain, that the greatest part of them refuse communion with us upon this
account, which, as it is an error, so we believe it is no fundamental one,
especially, since all this while they are against Transubstantiation, and
Adoration of the Sacrament; and though in the point of their Consubstantiation,
they ground themselves much upon that saying of Christ, Matthew. 28. 20. Lo! I am
with you always, even into the end of the World: Yet this is easily answered:
For,

1. From hence it does not follow, that he will always vouchsafe them his
Bodily Presence: for he was after this received into Heaven, and therefore
could not be present with his Body at that time.

2. What he promises here, he made good, when he sent the Holy Ghost, or the
Spirit of Truth upon them; Which Spirit, though not as to his miraculous Gifts,
yet as to his saving Graces, is with all true Believers to the end of the
World. So that,

3. His being always with them, must be understood of his Power, and Virtue,
and Influence, which would be with them, and with the Churches, they should
Plant unto the end of the World, as the Sun is in Heaven, and with his Virtue
and Influence cherishes this lower World. And thus far we agree with them, that
Christ is present in the Holy Sacrament by his Power, and Influence, and
Gracious Assistances, which sincere Believers feel in their worthy Receiving;
But from hence, it can never be made out, that his Body therefore is hid under
the Bread in the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist.

III. In what sense the Bread in this Sacrament, is the Body of Christ, we may
easily guess, if we explain Scripture by Scripture, and compare this expression
with others, not unlike it.

1. This is my Body; Suffragatur nobis (...) analogia, Hebraismus, actio
circumstantia, nihil non. Oeconimo Epist. ad Melancth.
i.e. This is a significant Emblem, or Sign, or Figure of my Body: Or this
Bread, thus broken, represents my Body, that shall be Crucified for the Sins of
the World. Thus not only Rabanus Maurus, Erigena, Bruno, Berengarius, and other
wise Men understood it in the Ninth and Eleventh Centuries, but most of the
Fathers, that lived before Pas^^sius, or before 800 Years after Christ. So
that, This is my Body, is as much, as this Bread is representative of my Body;
As Bread is proper Food for your Bodies, so my Crucified Body is proper Food
for your precious and immortal Souls: As Bread strengthens your Bodies, so
shall the Comforts and Benefits of my Crucified Body support and fortify your
inward Man: As Bread nourishes your mortal Bodies, so shall the Love, and
Charity expressed in my giving my Body to be Crucified for your Sins, nourish
your better part, and a sense of that Love cause a reciprocal Love and Charity
in your Souls: As Bread unites with your Bodies, and turns into the substance
of your Bodies; So my Crucified Body, or Faith in me, who give my self for you,
shall be a means of my being one with you, and of your being one with me. And
this interpretation is conformable to the sense of parallel places; I am the
door of the sheep, says our Savior, Joh. 10. 9. i.e. As the Door opens, and
being opened, the Sheep are let into the Fold, so I am he, by whose Light and
Influence Men are admitted into the number of God's Children, or by my Gospel
they get admittance to God's mavelous Light; by this they are let into the
knowledge of the greatest Mysteries; and by believing in me, Men have access to
the greatest Felicity. So Joh. 15. 1. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the
Husbandman, i. e. As the Vine has Branches, so I have Disciples; As the
Branches are nourished by the Vine, so are my Disciples by me; As the Vine
yields an excellent Juice, so my Blood is for the healing of Men's Souls; or
what a Vine is to Men on Earth, the same am I to my living Members; and what an
Husbandman does to his Vineyard, the same does my Father to the Branches, that
shoot forth from me, or to my Followers.

2. This is my Body, i. e, This Bread is my Body, as the roasted Lamb is the
great Festival of the Jews, was the Passover, i. e. The Memorial of it. This
Sacrament of the Lords Supper being instituted immediately after the
celebration of the Passover, as has been often hinted, the Disciples of our
Lord being acquainted with that way of speaking, could not wonder at Christ's
expression, for thus the Jews used to say of the Paschal Lamb, This is the
Passover, as we may read, Exodus 12. 11. And there was not any so rude among
them, but understood by this phrase, that by eating that Lamb, they were to
remember the Angels passing by the Houses of the Israelites in Egypt, to save
them from Destruction. This Sense they imbibed with their Mothers Milk: and
when the Father instructed his Children, he told them, that by these words,
This Lamb is the Passover, was meant nothing else, but this Lamb is the
Memorial, or puts us in mind of the Passover; for so God had himself explained
it, Exodus 12. 26, 27. So that our Savior in saying of the Bread, he broke,
This is my Body, brought in no new way of speaking, but what the Disciples, and
all the Jews were already sufficiently acquainted with in Sacramental
Discourses, which makes Christ add immediately, to show that he meant no more
by it, but a Memorial, Do this in remembrance of me: i. e. As the Lamb put the
Jews in mind of the destroying Angel's passing over their Houses, so the Bread
in this Ordinance puts you in mind of my Body, that shall be nailed to the Tree
of the Cross for the Life of the World, and tells you, how by that Sacrifice
offered for your Souls, ye shall escape the Everlasting Wrath of God, and the
burning Lake, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, as they did the
Destruction prepared for Pharaoh, and his People.

3. That Christ's Church is often called his Body, none can be ignorant, that
peruses these passages, Col. 1. 18. Ephesians. 5. 23 Ephesians. 4. 12. 1 Cor. 10. 16. 1
Cor. 12. 27. And though that Sense we have already alledg^d, be the principal
thing aimed at in these words, This is my Body, yet to show how little need
there is, to have recourse either to Transubstantiation or Consubstantiation,
rather than run into such absurdities, we might very well say, that the Bread
is an Emblem, or Adumbration of Christ's Body, i. e. of Christ's Church: For as
that Bread is made up of many Particles, so Christ's Church of many Members;
and as those various Crumbs are closely united to the other, so the various
Members ought to be linked together in Love and Charity, according to the Royal
Law, given by our Master, Joh. 13. 34. A new Commandment I give unto you, that
ye love one another. But this we add, to show rather, what little temptation
there is, to run our selves into inextricable difficulties in the explication
of these words, than to express the immediate intent of this expression. All
Churches agree in it, That Christ's Crucified Body is meant here, only the
difference is, how the Bread is Christ's Body, and how Christ's Body is present
in the Sacrament; we say, it is there spiritually, as the Bread is a Symbol, a
Figure, a Sign, a Representation, and a Memorial of Christ's Body, which was
offered for the Sins of the World; and this Interpretation is so easy, so
intelligible, so agreeable to Sacramental expressions, and to the Analogy of
Faith, that one would think it should be impossible for Men to contradict it,
except they were resolved to defend an Opinion, right or wrong, merely because
it is their interest to do so. The Romanists indeed have of late years
endeavored very much to persuade the World, that the Greek Church in the
Levant, is of their Opinion in the Sacrament; but not to mention the rudeness
and ignorance of those poor Churches, which scarce understand the Principles of
their own Faith, if the Protestants had but taken the same pains with the
Modern Greeks, that the Popish Missioners do, i. e. bribed and paid them for
their assent, and consent to their Faith, they would have been Protestants in
this Article of the Sacrament, as some of them are Papists at this present.
Cyril, who was Patriarch of Constantinople, in the year 1622, wherever he
imbibed his Doctrine, certainly was not for Transubstantiation; and though by
the endeavors of the Jesuits, he was afterward strangled, yet that does not
make him an Heretic: And though several Synods have been held by the Greeks of
late years, which have established Transubstantiation: yet it is sufficiently
known, that it has been by instigation of those of the Roman Communion, who
spare no cost, that they may bring them to say, as they do. However, such
Greeks, as are not yet corrupted by the Roman Emissaries, are so far from
believing Transubstantiation, that they know not what it is, and, as a late
ingenious Travellr has observed, Sir George Wheeler's Voyage, l. 2. p. 128.
wonder any Man should think them such Beasts, as to believe such an Absurdity.
But what does it signify, whether the Modern Greeks, who are sunk into gross
Ignorance and Barbarism, be of our Opinion, or no? It Is sufficient, that the
ancient Greek Church is, and has been, of the same Belief with us. The
Churches of the Levant at this Day, as Learning is become a very scarce
Commodity among them, so their Opinion in a controverted Point, is of no great
Consequence: Where they can give Proof of an uninterrupted Succession of their
Doctrine, it may be of importance; else not. The Church of the Aethiopians, or
Habessines, as they have for many Centuries continued in the honest Simplicity
of their Doctrine, so their Testimony in this Point of the Eucharist may be of
some use; and by what appears, they seem to join with us in this Sacrament:
For, though they pray in their Liturgy, That the Holy Ghost may descend, and
come, and shine upon the Bread, that it may become the Body of Christ; and that
the Taste of the Cup may be changed, and become the Blood of Christ; In
Ludolph. Hist. Aethiop. l. 3. c. 5.
yet, by what one of their own Priests confessed, they believe no other Change,
but a mysterious or representative one, or a Change of the use of the Bread,
whereby from common it becomes sacred: And so much appears from the Exposition
they give of the Words used by Christ; for they say expressly, This Bread is my
Body, and This Cup is my Blood.

IV. From what has been said, it is easy to conclude, what it is to eat
Christ's Body in this holy Sacrament.

1. It is to contemplate Christ's crucified Body, and the Cause and Reasons of
that Crucifixion; to view all this with our warmest Thoughts; to make serious
Reflections on his Death and Agonies, and the Bitterness of his Passion. It
being spoken to our Souls, not to our Bodies, to take and eat this Body, the
Soul has no other Way to feed upon it, but by a pathetick Consideration of the
Particulars of that Death, and the End and Design of God in it, and the
Comforts and the Benefits that thereby redound to Mankind; and such a
Consideration as affects our Souls, touches them to the quick, and puts them on
serious Enquiries into our wretched State, and makes them break forth into
Flames of Love; so that, though Christ's Body was crucified above Sixteen
Hundred Years agone, yet a pious Soul can eat it at this Day, swallow the
Charity which appears in it with her Thoughts, consider who it is that is so
wonderfully concerned for her Safety, look upon him whom her Sins have pierced,
and take a View of that Man of Sorrows who was bruised for her Iniquities, and
wounded for her Transgressions; and admire the Miracles that are to be seen in
all this.

2. To eat Christ's Body, is, to apply the Benefits of his Death and Passion to
our Souls, and to rejoice in them as our greatest Treasure. As he that eats
with his Bodily Organs, applies the Food he takes with his Hands, to his Mouth
and Body, and converts it into Blood and Substance; so the pious Soul is
pleased with this Spiritual Meat, is refreshed by it, and applies the Benefits
of that crucified Body to her self; and with the Thoughts of Peace, and Pardon,
and Salvation, which are the Blessings that drop from that Tree, arms her self
against the Assaults of the Devil, and the Terrors of Death; and believing,
without wavering, that those Mercies were purchased for her in particular, and
that she has a Right and Title to them, stands up in the evil Day, and in the
midst of Temptations, boldly cries with the Apostle, Who is he that condemns?
It is Christ that died, Romans 8. 34.

3. To make this crucified Body a Persuasive and Motive to Holiness and
Obedience: To conclude from thence, that if he gave himself for us, to redeem
us from all Iniquity, then we must not frustrate his Expectation, nor cling to
that Iniquity which he came to free us from: And if he died to purify unto
himself a peculiar People, zealous for good Works, then we must not defile our
selves after that, nor wallow in the Mire any more with the Swine; but cleanse
our Minds from carnal, covetous and lustful Thoughts, our Wills from
Perversenes and Stubbornness, our Affections from Fondness of this present
World, and our Hands from Uncleanness. His zealous Love to us, must make us
zealous for his Glory; to him we must consecrate our selves, and to be holy, as
he is holy, must be the Business of our Lives; and so to love him, as to keep
his Commandments, must henceforward be looked upon as our bounden Duty. He
truly eats this crucified Body, upon whom this Crucifixion has that Power, as
to crucify in him his known Lusts and Passions, and to engage him to purify
himself from all Filthiness, both of Soul and Body.

The Preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. IN all Writings, both Ancient and Modern, about this holy Sacrament, there
are various Rhetorical Expressions used, which we must not understand
literally, but as Flowers strowed upon the Hearse of our Blessed Redeemer, and
as Ornaments of Speech, to represent the Greatness of the Mystery. There is
nothing more common among the Fathers, than to call the Bread and Wine in the
Lord's Supper, the Body and Blood of Christ; and the Cup, the Vessel in which
Christ's Blood is contained: And many times Christ is said to stand at the
Altar, and all the holy Angels waiting at the Table; that Christ offers his
Body to be bruised by the People's Teeth, and dies them red with his Blood;
that the Elements are changed, and become the Body and Blood of the Lord Jesus;
and that after Prayer and Thanksgiving, they are no more what they were before;
and a Thousand such Expressions besides: From which the Church of Rome
presently infers, that they believed a Transubstantiation, or a Conversion of
the Elements into the Substance of Christ's Body and Blood; than which, nothing
can be more absurd: For if a Man compare these Saying of the Ancients, with
other Passages in their Writings, it plainly appears, that they meant no more
than that the Elements are representative of all this, and that the Expressions
they use are nothing but Rhetorical Flourishes, to raise the People's
Affections, and to render their Devotions brisk, lively, servent, affectionate
and vigorous. We do the same at this Day, when we tell you, that you come to
feast with Christ, that in this Sacrament he is crucified before you Eyes, that
you may see his Blood run down, that you hear him groan under the Burden of
your Sins, that you see here his Body hanging on the Cross, that you are to
stand under the Tree, and catch the precious Gore, as Balsam for your Souls:
All which is true, in a spiritual Sense, and we do it to make you more
attentive; and set this Passion out in such lively Characters, that your Souls
may be touched and enlivened; and as Things represented in brighter Colors
strike the Senses more, so we speak of these Things, as if they were visible
and perceptible to the outward Eyes, that your Souls may more cheerfully feed
on the Kernel that lies in those Shells, and with greater Life embrace the
glorious Benefits which come to you by that precious Sacrifice.

II. By the same Way that Man was lost, by the same Way he must recover. He was
undone by eating: He must be made whole again by eating. By eating he died: By
eating he must come to Life again. That Day thou eatest of this Tree, thou
shall surely die, says God: And the same says God of this holy Sacrament;
That Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely live. The Fruit in Paradise
became a Savor of Death unto Death unto him: The holy Bread in this Sacrament
becomes a Savor of Life unto Life unto him. That Eating brought him into
Slavery: This gives him a Title to the glorious Liberty of God's Children. In
eating that Fruit, he thought to be like God, and made himself worse than the
Beasts that perish: By eating of this Bread, he is enabled to become like unto
the Son of God, by being changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory. That
Eating made him sick: This is Health to his Navel, and Maerrow to his Bones,
Prove. 3. 8. That brought the Plague: This delivers from it. That filled him
with Wounds, and Bruises, and putrefying Sores: This makes his Flesh come
again, like unto the Flesh of a little Child. In a Word, By eating, God's
Favor was forfeited: By eating, it is regained: Let Israel rejoice in him that
made him, let the Children of Zion be joyful in their King; for the Lord takes
pleasure in his People, he will beautify the Meek with Salvation. Let the
Saints be joyful in Glory, let them sing aloud upon their Beds, let them praise
the Name of the Lord; for his Name alone is excellent, his Glory is above the
Earth and Heaven.

III. See here, how rich a Meal God the Father prepares for our Souls, even the
crucified Body of his Son. Shall we look upon that Celestial Food with dull and
careless Thoughts? Can we behold this costly Bread, and forbear crying out,
Lord! for ever give us that Bread? Christian, if thou meanest to be saved by
the crucified Body of thy Lord, thou must needs eat of it: Not only thy Mouth
must eat the Sacramental Bread, and chew it; but thy Soul must ascend, and
employ her self in eating of the crucified Body, represented by that Bread. Thy
Soul, thy Mind, thy Will, thy Affections must have the greatest Share in eating
at this Table. Thy Body has little to do here; that is only the Chariot, that
brings thy Soul to this Banquet: Thy Soul not being engaged and busy here, in
Thinking, Admiration, Resolution, Love and Joy, the Cringes and Bowings of thy
Body will be insignificant. The End of our common Eating, is Assimilation; and
in our ordinary Meals we therefore eat Food agreeable to our Bodies, that it
may be united to our Substance, mingle with our Blood, and become one with our
Bodies: So here our Souls must feed on the crucified Body of the Lord Jesus,
that we may become one with him. All Creatures may be said to be one with
Christ, as he is God, as he is their Creator; in which respect he fills Heaven
and Earth with his Presence, and is not far from every one of us; and in him we
live, and breath, and have our Being: Nay, in a more particular manner every
Professor of Christianity may be said to be one with him, as he professes the
same Religion which Christ taught his Disciples: But this is not the Union
aimed at in this Sacrament; nor can the Union which respects our Profession
only, give any great Comfort to a Christian. The Union designed by this
Sacrament, is effected by the Spirit of Christ Jesus; and the Soul that
unfeignedly see^ here on the crucified Body of her Master, gets the same Spirit
that dwelt in her crucified Lord; which produces the same Graces in her, that
shined in that great Shepherd of Souls; and the same Mind, the same Temper, the
same Disposition, in substance at least, though not in the same Degree, is
effected and produced in her by this Spirit; as we see, Rem. 8. 11. Phil. 2. 5.
And this is that Union every true Communicant is to aim at, and from hence
flows a Communion with Christ in all his Privileges and Glories, whereby the
Soul is raised up together with Christ, and made to sit together with him in
Heavenly Places, though not by way of actual Enjoyment as yet, but by getting a
Right and Title to those Privileges; as the Apostle informs us, Ephesians. 2. 6. By
feeding on this crucified Body, the Soul is nourished, and gathers Strength
against her spiritual Enemies, becomes bold in Temptations, resolute in
Dangers, courageous in spiritual Enterprises. The Soul that comes to feed on
this crucified Body, and comes not with this Intent, comes in vain; comes only
to stare upon the Cross, but not to be refreshed by it: The Soul that after the
Sacrament, yields wilfully to the same Temptations it did before, is ensnared
by the same sinful Pleasure that ruined it before, is led Captive by the same
Lusts that entangled her before, certainly feeds not on the crucified Body of
the Lord Jesus, because the Contemplation of that Crucifixion works no suitable
Effects; which if it did, the Soul would unfeignedly destroy the Body of Sin,
according to the Apostle's Rule, Romans 6. 6. and offer up her Body a living
Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, as it is said, Romans 12. 1. Make the Body
obedient to Reason, and Sense to Faith, and the Flesh to the Spirit, and it
would keep under the Body, and bring it into Subjection, as St. Paul did, 1
Cor. 9. 27. i. e. it would deny the Body those Satisfactions, which are
manifest Hindrances to the Things of the Spirit; it would force it to
Temperance, to Hardships, to Industry and Laboriousness in God's Service; it
would strive and take care that the Body might become a Temple of the Holy
Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19. (...) what the Soul does in this Ordinance, would leave
such a Sense upon us, as would not only enable, but constrain us to glorify
God, both in Body and Soul, as the Scripture requires, 1 Cor. 6. 20. These are
the blessed Effects of eating the crucified Body of the Lord Jesus: And the
Soul that feeds on that Body, will find these happy Consequences; it will not
go away empty from this Meal; and though for the present it does not see all
these Effects, yet there is that Impression made on her by this Eating, that
these Effects will afterward discover themselves in her Life and Conversation.

The PRAYER.
O My God! What Care do thou take of my immortal Soul, that it may not
starve! Thou have made large Provision for my Body in the Earth, in the Air,
and in the Water: The Earth brings forth Herbs, and Roots, and Cattle to feed
it: The Air affords Fowl and Feathered Creatures to nourish it: The Water
provides Fish for it: But none of all these can satisfy my Soul, that must
have a spiritual Diet; and rather than it shall want, thou have given thine own
Son to be her Food! O mysterious Love! Can I, after tbis, have low and mean
Thoughts of thy Goodness! O sweetest Jesu! if my Soul feeds not on thee, if
must die, and be separated from thy glorious Presence for ever: If it feeds on
thee, it is made for ever. Oh! be thou my most beloved, and most delightful
Food. Thy crucified Body alone can keep my Soul from fainting: Thy Death must
yield me Life: Thy Sufferings must give me Joy: Thy Agonies must afford me
Comfort: Thy Torments must work mine Ease: Thy Nails and Thorns must be my Bed
of Roses: Nothing else can give my Soul Rest. When the Snares of Death and Hell
encompass me, I will lay hold on these Horns of the Altar; here I shall be
safe, safer than in the Arms of Angels: Thou that diedst for me, live for
ever to intercede for me; and having such an Advocate, I may come boldly to the
Throne of Grace. O let me not survey this glorious Provision, made for my Soul,
with carnal Eyes! O let me ponder seriously, not with flying and transient, but
with steady and fixed Thoughts, how thou have favored, how thou have loved,
how thou have dignified this miserable Soul of mine, that I may rejoice in thee
for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. XII.
Of remembering Christ in this Sacrament, or doing what we do here, in
remembrance of him
The CONTENTS.
The Death of Christ Jesus, the principal thing to be remembered in this
Sacrament. What kind of Death it was, shown in four Particulars. How this Death
is to be remembered: The Benefits of this Remembrance laid down. Though the
Death of Christ be the principal thing, that is to be remembered in this
Sacrament, yet that puts no stop to other Remembrances. Christ's Example makes
it lawful to preserve the memory of any signal Mercy or Providence we meet
with. Those that do not remember Christ's Death in this Sacrament, do very much
forget themselves. The remembrance of his Death, a Motive to forget the World,
and the Vanities of it. This Remembrance, the best Defensative against Sin. The
Prayer.

I. AS these words, Do this in remembrance of me, do necessarily import the
Bread in this Sacrament, to be a Memorial of Christ's Crucified Body, or that
which is to put us in mind of it, and consequently suppose, that Christ's real
Body is absent; so how Christ is to be remembered here, must needs be worth our
serious enquiry: What Christ calls Doing in remembrance of him, the Apostle,
the best Interpreter of his words, styles, Showing forth his Death, 1 Cor. 11.
26. So that his Death is the thing, that is to be remembered here by all the
Communicants: And that this Death is worth our serious remembrance, will easily
appear, if we consider, what Death, the Death of Christ Jesus was: For,

1. It was the Death of God: According to the Quality of the Person dying, so
his Death is more or less surprising; hence the Death of a King makes a greater
noise in the World, than that of a Peasant. The Death remembered here, is the
Death of the King of Kings; and though, as God, he could not dye, yet it may
truly be said, that he that was God, did die, not in his Godhead, but in his
Humanity; not as dwelling in a Light inaccessible, but as dwelling in a
Tabernacle of Flesh. Plutarch relates, that he had heard his Master Epitherses
tells this Story, De Defect. Orat.
How in the Emperor Tiberius's time, under whom Christ suffered, intending to
Sail into Italy, he went aboard of a Ship, laden with many Goods and
Passengers: One Evening, coming near certain Islands called the Echinades, the
Wind slackening, and the Ship being becalmed, with a slow pace they arrived at
last at the Isle of Paxae. Several of the Seamen and Passengers sitting up that
Night and drinking, on a sudden from off the Island came a Voice, calling to
Thamus, the Master of the Ship, thrice, When you are come as far as the
Palodes, proclaim, that the Great PAN is dead. The Master and his Company,
doubtful what to do, whether they should do according to the import of the
Voice, or no, resolved at last, if the Wind favored them, to pass by the
Palodes, and say nothing; but if they were becalmed about that place, then to
cry as they were directed. So sailing on, and coming to the place, they found
themselves strangely becalmed, whereupon, Thamus called aloud, That the Great
PAN was dead; which words he had no sooner spoken, but great Howlings, and
Sighings, and Lamentations were heard. By PAN, the Heathens meant the God of
the Universe, or him that ruled, governed and influenced all; and it is
probable, this Voice had relation to Christ Jesus, who suffered about that time
at Jerusalem; and that upon the news of this Death, Howlings were heard, it is
very likely this noise was made by Fiends and Devils, whom the Death of the Son
of God, filling all in all, put into those excesses of consternation and
sorrow. And lest any Man should object, That the Furies of Hell had no reason
to mourn at his Death, but might rejoice rather, that their great Antagonist
was gone; it must be noted, That they feared the Power and Virtue of that
Death, such Virtue, as in a short time would make all the Powers of Darkness
tremble, and destroy their Empire. When Abner, Readiness General, was carried to
his Grave, King David followed the Hearse, and said, Know ye not, that there is
a Prince, and a great Man fallen this day in Israel, 2 Samuel 3. 38. If such a
death as Abner's deserved to be taken notice of, what must we think of the
Death of the Lord Jesus? Not a Great Man only, but one, of whom it was said,
Thou Lord, in the beginning have laid the foundation of the Earth, and the
Heavens are the work of thy Hands, Heb. 1. 10. How justly is this death
remembered by his Followers! And what a mixture of Passions, Amazement as well
as Gladness, Trembling as well as rejoicing, ought it to cause in all Christian
Hearts, to think that our God died for us! A Captain has his like; a General
his Fellow; a Prince may be paralleled with others; a King may meet with others
of his Rank and Quality; but God has no equal.

2. It was the Death of a Person, higher than the highest, for his Enemies:
Regulus, Codrus, Mutius, and among the Jews, Moses had courage to die for their
Country, and the good of the People they were related to; but still they were
their Friends; but here a Person adored by Angels, worshipped by all the Host
of Heaven, the Comfort of Paradise, the Joy of Seraphim, the Terror of Devils,
the Lord of Life, the Eternal Son of God, the Brightness of his Father's Glory,
and the express Image of his Person, dies for Men, for Men miserable and
wretched, for Men that were Sinners, for Men that were proper Objects of his
Justice, for Men that were haters of God, acted like Enemies, had affronted
their Maker, Crucified their Redeemer, came out against him, as against a
Thief, who took pleasure in trampling on his Laws, rejoiced in their
Disobedience, had made a Covenant with Hell, conspired against him, who had
given them their Being, laughed on the brink of Destruction, were Heirs of
Hell, and had no other Inheritance but Damnation; for such, this wonderful
Person dies, and this makes his death miraculous and astonishing, Romans 5. 8.

3. It Is Death, that Nature and all the Elements were confounded at, and Heaven
and Earth seemed to be at strife, which of them should be most concerned at it;
insomuch, that we are told of Dionysius the Areopagite, the Person mentioned,
Acts 17. 34. when he was yet under the Clouds of Paganism, that beholding the
stupendous Eclipse of the Sun, which happened about the time, that the Savior
of the World died, brake forth into this memorable saying, That certainly
either Nature was going to be dissolved, or the God of Nature suffered. If ever
Nature endured a Convulsion-Fit, it did now: The Sun disdained to look upon the
barbarity of the Murder, and hid his Face, that he might not see his Creator
die: The Earth trembled, as if it were ashamed to see Men stupid at the
dreadful Spectacle: The Rocks broke, as if they would testify against the
Sinners, that could stand under the Cross without broken Hearts: The Vail of
the Temple was rent, as if it would chide the Wretches, that could see the
Messiah suffer, without rending their Clothes, and what is more, tearing
themselves for the crime they had been guilty of: The Graves burst their Bands,
as if they were concerned to see Men hardened against all impressions of
Compassion: The Angels, we may, without danger of Heresy, believe, stopped in
the midst of their Hallelujahs; and if ever there was sadness in Heaven, we may
suppose it was at this time: The upper and the nether World seemed to go into
Mourning, because their Lord and Master gave up the Ghost: Thus much we are
told by the inspired Writer, Matthew. 27. 51, 52. And this makes the Death of
Christ Jesus surprising, beyond comparison; and surely such a Death ought to be
remembered.

4. It is a Death, whereby the Person suffering merited Eternal Life, not only
for himself, but all his Followers too: A mighty Blessing, but such, as was a
just reward of so deep an Humiliation! It was for this Death, that the
Everlasting Father exalted Christ's Humane Nature above Powers, Angels,
Principalities and Spiritual Creatures; and in doing so, declared, what those,
whose Nature he had assumed, if they did follow him in the Regeneration, might
come to, after Death, viz. Eternal Life and Glory: And what greater Blessing
can be thought of, to enjoy all Blessings at once, and to all Eternity? To see
God, and to be ravished with his Sight for ever; to enjoy Riches, Honor,
Glory, Power, Dominion, Pleasure, Recreation, Houses, Lands, in a most eminent
manner; or to enjoy that, which is beyond all these, in inexpressible degrees,
and without interruption, without ceasing, without disturbance, without envy,
without fear, without danger of losing it, What can be greater? What can be
more satisfactory? What can be more comfortable? This the Son of God has
purchased by his Death. That Death is the Messenger of all these Glories. In
that Death all these Treasures are amassed, and heaped, and piled up together,
and then it must be worth remembering; nay, it is impossible not to remember it,
where all this is believed.

II. How this Death is to be remembered at the Table of the Lord, will deserve
our next consideration: And most certainly a slight, transient Remembrance,
such as we pay to our friends and acquaintance, which are absent, at our common
Meals, or at other times, as we have occasion to discourse of them, is not
sufficient here; for that is not at all agreeable to the Greatness and
Profitableness of this wondeful Death. It must be such a remembrance, as,

1. Refreshes our Memories with that mavelous Love, that shines in this
Death. This Love must be called to mind; even the Love of God, the Love that
moved him to the Kindnesses, we see, and taste, and feel, and have experience
of: The Love that moved him to give us a Savior, the Love that moved him to
take pity of us, when we lay in our Blood, when we lay in Darkness, and in the
shadow of Death. Love, Love, Love, must here be the Motto, the Watchword, and
the dear Expression: And as the Martyr in Eusebius, being asked diverse
Questions about his Name, Kindred, Relations, Family, Country, Parents, etc.
still answered, That he was a Christian; so if here we should be asked, what we
think, what we speak, what we mind, what we come for, what we design, what our
business is, or what we delight in, Love must be the Answer to all these
Questions, Love must be the burden of our Song, even the Love of the Holy
Trinity; a Love, in which our Life, our Happiness, and all our Hopes are wrapped
up; a Love, which nothing above and nothing below, can give us any tolerable
Image of: There is nothing among all the Angels in Heaven, nothing in the Sun,
or Moon, or Stars, nothing among Men, or Beasts, or Roots, or Herbs, or Stons,
or Minerals, that can be said to be truly like it; all comparisons are feeble,
all resemblances faint; no Language can reach it, no Rhetoric express it, no
Oratory describe it, no Pencil draw it; it surpases our Reason, transcends the
brightest Understanding, puzzels the very Angels in Heaven, and perplexes the
Spirits of Light and Glory. It is all Sea, all Ocean, all Light; it has no
Bounds, no Shores, no Limits, and the greatest that ever was said of it, or can
be said of it, is St. John's Expression, 1 John 4. 16. God is Love, Love it
self, all Love, all Charity, all Goodness; and nothing, but such perfection,
could have loved such poor pitiful Worms as we are: God looks upon our giving a
cup of cold Water to a Righteous Man, as an Act of Love; O then what an Act of
Love must it be in him, to give us himself, to give us the dearest thing he
had, even his own Son! Jesus wept over Lazarus, Joh. 11. 35, 36. and the Jews
said, See how he loved him! But these Tears were but drops of Water; Here the
Lord Jesus is seen to weep drops of Blood for us; O then see, how he loved us!
We were blinder than Bartimaeus, lamer than Mephibosheth, fuller of Sores than
Lazarus, poorer than Job, no, Comeliness, no Beauty, no Form, no Excellency
appeared in us. Adam's Fall had disfigurred us, defaced us, ruined us; in this
lamentable condition God loved us, and gave his Son to die for us; and shall
not this Love be remembered in his Death?

2. This remembrance requires calling to mind our Sins, which were the cause of
that Death. It Is true, the Love of God was the impulsive cause, but our Sins
were the instrumental cause; these brought him to the Cross, and whoever
remembers his Death, must necessarily remember that, whereby this Death was
effected and procured; this was our Sin and the Infection that attended it: But
then, if I remember my Sins in the remembrance of his Death, how can I remember
them without detestation? How can I remember them without abhorrency? How can I
remember them without arming my Soul with resolution and arguments, to fight
against them? Can I look on my neglects, and not charge them with this Death?
Can I remember my Love to the World, and not accuse it of having had a hand in
buffeting and reproaching of him? Can I think of my Pride and Wrath, and not
bid them look on the Wounds they made in that Holy Flesh? Can I reflect on my
wantonness and lustful Thoughts, Desires, Words, and Gestures, and Actions, and
not be angry with them for having struck Nails into his Hands and Feet? And
what is said of these particular Sins, must be applied to the rest, that we are
either guilty of, or most inclined to; they must be so remembered, as to be
represented to our Minds in their odious shapes, as having been accessory to
his Death; and if this be done, we cannot but proclaim War against them, and
maintain that War all our days.

3. With this, there must needs be remembered the mighty Redemption, procured
and accomplished by this Death, even our Redemption from Slavery; a Slavery so
much the worse, because we were not sensible of it; and so much more grievous,
by how much it was Spiritual. Our Bodies indeed were not laid in Iron, nor with
the Israelites, forced to make Brick without Straw: There were no Taskmasters
set over us, to beat, and would, and bruise us; we were not chained to
Triumphal Chariots, nor forced to work in Mines and Galleys, but it was far
worse, our Souls, which were the far better part of us, were led Captive by the
worst of Tyrants; the Law we were governed by, was the Law of Sin; the Prison
we were doomed to, was Eternal Darkness; the Burdens, which were laid upon us,
were intolerable, and we were under the Power of an Usurper, whose Smiles were
Deaths, whose Favors were Punishments, and whose Kindnesses were Destruction
and Ruin; under him we labored and toiled in vain, and when at night, after
our Travel, we looked for Wages, we could expect nothing but Fire and Flames:
We read of Dracula the Transylvanian, that having one day invited all the
Beggars and poor Men he could light of, to a splendid Dinner or Entertainment,
after they had filled their Bellies, he set Fire to the Hall where they were,
and burnt them all: The same Fare we must have expected of that Tyrannical
Master, under whose Bondage we groaned, but from this Slavery the Son of God,
by dying for us, redeemed and rescued us: A Mercy, which as it deserves to be
remembered above all the deliverances that ever happened to us, so where can the
remembrance be more proper, than in the Sacrament of his Death and Passion?

4. In vain is all this remembered, if we do not remember to imitate this
Savior in his Self-denying Acts; for therefore all this Mercy and Love, and
Charity, is represented to us in this Sacrament, that it may be an Obligation
upon us to deport our selves in the World after his Example: So that, as he
prayed for his Enemies, so must we; as he blessed them that cursed him, so must
we; as he freely forgave the Men that wronged him, so must we; as he died for
the Truth, so must we; as he defended it to the last, without wavering, so must
we; as he would not suffer any outward Respects to discourage him from
Conscientiousness, so neither must we; as he, before his Foes, witnessed a good
Confession, so must we; as he did Good for Evil, so must we; as he showed Pity
to Men in distress, though they had affronted and done him an Injury, so must
we; as he bore his Cross contentedly, so must we; as he despised the World, so
must we. He that remembers not his Death, so as to endeavor to be like him,
forgets the End of his Redemption, and dishonours the Cross, on which his
Satisfaction was wrought: For the Honor due to the Cross of Christ, is not,
with the Church of Rome, to pray to a piece of Wood, called the Cross of
Christ, Hail Christ's Cross, our only Hope, in this most blessed Passion-Week!
Increase the Goodness of the Good, and Pardon to the Guilty give; but to live
in the World as the Lord Jesus did, who was crucified for us; and by living so,
to adorn the Doctrine of the Cross of Christ Jesus; that is to admire and
reverence his Cross.

III. From such a Remembrance flow more than ordinary Advantages; for Things
are useful, according as they are managed; and consequently, if the Remembrance
here required, be used according to the Rules laid down, these following
Benefits will certainly ensue upon it. For,

1. Hereby our Love to God is kindled and renewed: Love kindles Love, as Fire
kindles Fire; and therefore God appears in this Sacrament, as he did to Moses
in the Bush, all in Flames of Love, that those Flames may warm our Breasts:
And, O happy Soul, that feels those Flames warm and heat all that is within
her! When Love takes possession of the Soul, or rather, when the Love of God,
represented in the Sacrament, raises Love in the holy soul, then the Soul
becomes the Seat of Wisdom, the Tabernacle of Holiness, the Chamber of the
Celestial Bridegroom, a spiritual Heaven, a Field which the Lord has blessed,
a Spouse dearly beloved, a Garden of Pleasure, the Marriage-house, a Paradise
of Virtue, into which the Lord descends, not to find out the Malefactor, and to
discover his Nakedness; but to betroth to himself the beloved Virgin,
languishing with Love waiting for her Beloved, and longing for the Bridegroom's
Coming: And where this Divine Love takes place, there the Love of the World
expires; for, as St. Austin speaks, He cannot love that which is Eternal, that
does not cease to love that which is Temporal. And from this Love arise those
happy Breathings, O Fountain of Love! Idiot. de Am. div. cap.4.
Nothing is sweeter than thy Love, nothing more pleasant, nothing more
beneficial. Thy Love is not troublesome: Where thy Love is, there is true
Pleasure. It is contented with it self, it knows no Bounds, it watches
Opportunities to vent it self, it triumphs in its own Cell, and captivates all
the Faculties! Thy Love, O Lord, gives Liberty, drives out Fear, tramples upon
Humane Merits: It gives Rest to the Weary, Strength to the Weak, Joy to the
Mourners: It feels no Weariness, it feeds the Hungry, and keeps the Faint from
sinking.

2. Hereby our Consciences are purged from Dead Works. This, as it is ascribed
expressly to the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, Heb. 9. 14. so it must be
attributed to the true Remembrance of that Blood in this Everlasting Sacrament.
Such a Remembrance cleanses the Heart, purifies the Soul, makes the Dross of
Sin vanish, and the Impurity, the Mind was oppressed withal, wear away. Such a
Remembrance, like the Gift of Prophecy, Jer. 20. 9. is as a burning Fire shut
up in the Bones, which consumes the Hay, and Straw, and Stubble, that annoyed
the House of God: For, the Beauty of God's Love makes Sin appear black and
ugly, and causes a Loathing of it. Hereby Holiness is advanced, and Grace
begins to flourish; and the Rubbish being removed, the Winter of Iniquity gone,
the Frost in the Soul dissolved, the Flowers of the glorious Spring appear.
This Remembrance chaseth Lust and Luxury; and therefore those in whom it has
these Effects, are said to wash their Robes, and make them white in the Blood
of the Lamb, Rev. 7. 14.

3. Hereby Christ is invited to dwell in us: The House being thus cleansed and
swept, the Noble Guest is invited to make his Abode there. This Remembrance is
attractive; and where the Soul is thus affected with the Remembrance of
Christ's Death, he comes and inhabits that beautiful Palace; for such a Person
seems resolved to keep his Word: And to him the Promise runs, If a Man love me,
he will keep my Words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him,
and make our Abode with him, John 14. 23. A wonderful Favor, this! To have him
dwelling in us, who is the Light of the World, the Light of Heaven, the Light
of Angels, and the Sun of Righteousness: And from hence flows the joyful
Exclamation of the Apostle, Gal. 2. 20. Nevertheless I live; yet not I, but
Christ lives in me; and the Life I now live, I live by Faith in the Son of God,
who loved me, and gave himself for me: For this Faith enlightens the Soul,
gives it clear Apprehensions of Christ's Love, makes her active and lively, and
teaches her to overcome the World, 1 John 5. 4.

4. This Remembrance is making Approaches to Heaven and Eternal Happiness:
Every fresh Remembrance is another Step to Paradise. What an Encouragement is
this to come to the holy Sacrament! Every time we thus remember the Death of
Christ, we get nearer to the Throne on which the victorious Son of God sits,
triumphing over Hell and Devils: For the oftener he is remembered thus, the more
our Souls are elevated, and become more spiritual in their Aspirations; and the
farther we proceed in Grace, the nearer we come to Glory. Heaven, in Scripture,
is compared to an Hill, and is the Mount where God is seen: Every time we come
to the Table of our Lord, and remember him thus, we climb higher, and mount up
with Wings, as Eagles, till at last we reach the Top, where there is a perfect
Calm, no Air, no Wind, no Tempest, no infectious Breath, to disturb the
Conquerors.

IV. But though the Death of Christ be the chief Object of our Remembrance at
this holy Table, yet that is no Argument, but that we may lawfully remember
some other Things relating to his Person, or Greatness, or Holiness;
particularly,

1. His Divine Life, before he was Incarnate: A Life, which no mortal Tongue
can describe: A Life, in the Explication of which, the blessed Cheruhims
themselves must fall short: A Life, known to none, but to him who knows all,
who has Life in himself, and is the Life, and the Father of the Spirits of all
Flesh. How truly might he say to the Jews, Joh. 8. 58. Before Abraham was, I
am! He was, indeed, from all Eternity, lived in the Bosom of the Everlasting
Father, and his Life was most pure, some holy, most peaceable, most pleasant,
most glorious: A Life of infinite Content, of infinite Satisfaction, of
infinite Joy, and of infinite Love: A Life spent in Eternal Love of the great
Fountain of Divinity, the express Image of which he was: A Life employed in
kind Thoughts to poor Mortals, and in Divine Contrivances how their Misery
might be retriv'd, their Bands loosened, their Dangers overcome, their Enemies
vanquished, and their Souls advanced to Celestial Mansions: A Life undisturbed
by the Noise of Wars, unacquainted with Tumults, free from all Annoyances,
unmolested by the Disorders of a giddy and confused World: A Life of Eternal
Calmness, which no Waves, no Billows, no Wind, no Storms, no Tempests could
discompose: A Life of perfect Serenity, and immense Sweetness: A Life employed
in the Eternal and Incomprehensible Enjoyment of his own Perfections, and which
the inspired King gives us a very lofty Description of, Prove. 1. This life
Christ lived, before he was pleased to visit this benighted World with his
healing Beams; and it concerns us to remember this Life, that from that
Consideration, his Humiliation, in coming to dwell among us, may appear in
livelier Colors.

2. To this may be added, His laborious Life here on Earth, after he was
Incarnate: A Life despicable from his Infancy, contemptible from his Cradle: A
Life of Poverty, a Life of great Misery, of Distress, and a Thousand
Inconveniences: A Life he lived, to let us know, that the meanest and most
miserable outward Condition is no Let or Impediment to our being beloved and
esteemed in Heaven: A Life he lived, to show with what Patience and Courage we
are to bear the Troubles that a merciful God lays or sends upon us: A Life he
lived, to declare to his Disciples, that through many Afflictions they are to
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and are not to promise themselves great Ease
and Rest here, but are to look for a Recompense in the Resurrection of the
Just: A Life employed in doing good, to show, that we are not to be idle here,
but to busy our selves in that Work which will give the greatest Satisfaction,
even working out our own Salvation with Fear and Trembling: A Life he lived for
our sakes, to facilitate our Access to Pardon, and the Throne of Mercy: A Life
he lived, to make our Lives comfortable; and the Remembrance of this Life must
needs inhaunce our Esteem of his unparalleled Goodness, who could and would
deny himself, both in the Glory of his Divinity, and the Comforts of this
present Life, for our Good, and the Welfare of our Souls.

The Preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. CHrist's Example makes it lawful to set up Monuments of Mercies, and to
preserve the Memory of any signal Deliverance or Providence, either by External
Symbols, or by keeping Anniversaries, and Days of Devotion. Indeed, this was a
very ancient Practice, countenanced by God, and warranted by his Approbation.
It was from hence, that Moses preserved a Pot of Manna, to put
After-Generations in mind how God had fed his People in the Wilderness; And
Moses said, This is the thing which the Lord commands; Fill an Omer of it, to
be kept for your Generations, that they may see the Bread wherewith I have fed
you in the Wilderness, when I brought you forth out of the Land of Egypt, Exodus
16. 32. It was from hence, that Aaron's Rod budding, blossoming, and bearing
Fruit, was kept in the Ark, to tell Posterity, how miraculously the Priestood
was established in the Line of Aaron, and for a Token against the Rebels, as
the Holy Ghost speaks, Numb. 17. 10. It was from hence, that Joshua commanded
Twelve Stones to be taken out of the River Jordan; That this, says he, may be a
Sign among you, that when your Children ask their Fathers in time to come,
saying, What mean you by these Stones? Then ye shall answer them, That the
Waters of Jordan were cut off before the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, when
it passed over Jordan: And these Stones shall be for a Memorial unto the
Children of Israel for ever, Josh. 4. 6, 7. In imitation of these Precedents,
the Jewish Church afterward, of their own Accord, unanimously agreed to keep an
Anniversary, to remember their Deliverance from the Rage of Haman, Esth. 9. 17.
Both Eusebius and Sozomen tells us of a Statue which the Woman, Eusebius. Hist.
lib. 7. c. 17.
who was cured by our Savior of her Bloody Issue, Sozom. Hist. 1. 5. c. 20.
erected to his Honor at Caesarea; which lasted a considerable time, till
Julian the Apostate pulled it down, and erected his own in the room of it.
After such Examples, who can think it unlawful for a private Christian to keep
either a Fast, or a Day of Thanksgiving, when either some signal Affliction
has befallen him, or some remarkable Mercy has happened to him, and to spend
that Day in Exercises of Devotion; whereby he may either work his Soul into
greater Detestation of his his Sins, or into greater Admiration of God's
Goodness? Such Exercises the Divine Clemency accepts of, approves of them, and
blesses them with new Favors; repeals the Judgments threatened, and confirms
the Soul in her holy Zeal, and makes those Devotions Occasions of opening the
Windows of Heaven, to shower down larger Benedictions upon her.

II. It must follow from hence, that those who do not come to remember Christ's
Death in this Sacrament, do strangely forget themselves: How great is their
Number! What vast Multitudes of Men and Women live in this Neglect! O ye, that
are sensible of their Sin and Blindness, when you meet with any of them, tell
them, they forget that they are Christians, they forget that their Lord and
Master has peremptorily commanded them to come, and remember him in this
Feast; and that consequently they are disobedient, perverse, stubborn, wilful;
and if they obey him not, are no Servants, no Children of his: For, If he be
their Master, where is his Fear? If he be their Father, where is his Honor?
Tell them, they forget the Danger they run into, and neglect the Means whereby
their Souls must be snatched from the Devil's Power, and shun the Remedy that
must give Health to their Souls; and therefore are guilty of the highest
Contempt, and set up their carnal, shallow, brutish Reason, againt the
Infinite Wisdom of God. Tell them, they forget they have Souls to be saved, and
how long it is before a Soul be wrought into a total Conformity to Christ; and
that therefore they had need begin betimes, and tie and engage their Souls to
God, under the Cross of Christ, and do it often, and force themselves into an
holy Life. Oh, tell them, how they will repent, when it is too late, of their
Neglect of so great Salvation. Tell them, Christ will not remember them in the
last Day, but prosess to them, I know you not, because they were not sprinkled
with his Blood, and had not the Character of Christians on their Souls; which
will infallibly drive them into Desparation.

III. See here, my Friends, what an Obligation the Remembrance of Christ's
Death lays upon us all, to forget the World, and to mind the greater Concerns
above. Christ died to the World; his Life, his Death, and all his Actions,
showed his Contempt of this present World. He regarded not the Vanities, the
Lusts, the Recreations, the Slanders, the Reproaches, the Censures of the
World; but for the Glory set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the
Shame. Can we remember his Death in this Sacrament, and think that he did all
this, only for us to admire his Actions, without transcribing all this on our
own Lives? Surely, we may live in the World, and yet not be of the World; we
may sojourn in the World, yet not be greedy after the World; we may mind our
Work in the World, and yet not make the World our highest Good; we may converse
with Men of the World, and yet not set our Hearts upon the World; we may be
industrious in the World, and yet not suffer the World to ingross our
Affections; we may provide for our Families in the World, and yet not conform
to the World; we may eat and drink in the World, and yet not participate of the
Sins of the World; we may trade and traffic in the World, and yet not have the
Spirit of the World; we may suffer Afflictions in the World, and yet be far
from the Sorrow of the World; we may prudently contrive Things in the World,
and yet be Strangers to the Wisdom of the World: In a Word, Our living in the
World is no hindrance to our arriving to an holy Contempt of it: And though
there be some Difficulty in this Task, yet the Necessity of the Work, and the
Reward in the World to come, and Christ's Example, and the Apostles Practice,
and God's Readiness to assist, and the All Sufficiency of Grace, are
Persuasives and Encouragements strong enough to prevail with any Soul that is
not bent upon her own Ruin.

IV. The best Defensative against Sin at any time, is, the Remembrance of
Christ's Sufferings. Not only at the Sacrament, but wherever we are, this
Remembrance is an excellent Shield in the Day of Battle. Art thou walking, art
thou standing, art thou sitting, art thou going out, or coming in? Set a
Bleeding Savior before thee: When Sinners entice thee, think of thy Savior's
Wounds: When thou art tempted to overreach or defraud thy Neighbor in any
Matter, think of the bitter Cup thy Master drank off: When any Lust, any vain
Desire rises in thy Mind, think of thy dear Redeemer's Groans: When thy Flesh
grows weary of a Duty, remember who suffered on the Cross: When thou art
tempted to be indifferent in Religion, and saint in thy Mind, look upon him who
made his Soul an Offering for thy Sin: When thou art loath to overcome, think of
him who, by his Death, overcame him that had the Power of Death: When impatient
Thoughts assault thy Mind, think of the Lamb that before his Shearers was dumb;
and sure, under this sad Scene, thou will not dare to sin. And there is this
Advantage in such a Remembrance, that there is a Book of Remembrance written
before the Lord, for them that speak often to one another, and think of his
Name; insomuch that he will remember them in that Day, when he makes up his
Jewels, Mal. 3. 16.

V. To remember Christ's Death in this Sacrament with greater Life and Sense,
it is very necessary to remember him often at other times: And that is the
Reason why Christ calls himself by many familiar Names; and the Holy Ghost
gives him Titles and Epithets taken from Things we daily see, that we might not
look on those Things, from which he takes those Denominations, without
remembering him. To this End, he is called a Door, Joh. 10. 9. that we might not
go in or out, but think, O thou who art the Gate of Mercy, by whom whoever
enters, will find Mercy; open thy Bosom to my wounded Spirit, and let me find
Rest in thy All Sufficiency, and the Merits of thy Passion. For this Reason he
is called a Sun, Mal. 4. 2. that we might not view that splendid Luminary,
without thinking, O thou glorious Light, that did shine to those that sit in
Darkness; shine into my Soul, dispel the Clouds that darken my Understanding,
and warm my Heart, that it may long for thy Salvation. Hence it is, that he is
styled the Morning Star, that whenever we take notice of that Son of the
Morning, of that Harbinger of the Day, we might reflect, O thou who tellest the
Number of the Stars, and call them all by their Names; rise, rise unto me,
and irradiate my Inward Man, that I may delight in Virtue. Be thou my Guide,
lead me to thy Kingdom, keep me from going astray, and preserve me, that I may
be thine for ever. It is from hence that he is called Alpha and Omega, Rev. 1.
8. which are Letters of the Alphabet, that we might not look upon Letters in a
Book, without thinking, Lord, be thou the First and the Last in all my Actions:
Let me begin with thee, and end with thee: Be thou my Book; let me read the
Characters of thy Love, and rejoice in thee for ever. For this Cause he is
styled a Shepherd, that whenever we cast our Eye upon a Man of that Employment,
we may beg of Christ to feed us with his Spirit: And a Lamb, that whenever we
see one, we may entreat him to cloth us with his Innocence: And a Sower, that
whenever we see the Husbandman throwing Seed into the Ground, we may beseech
him to manure the Ground of our Hearts, that we may be neither barren nor
unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. And he that thus
remembers him, in Season, and out of Season, will, without dispute, be the
better able to remember him in this Sacrament: And to such a Soul, David's
Saying may justly be applied, The Righteous shall be had in Everlasting
Remembrance; surely he shall not be moved for ever, Psalm. 112. 6.

The PRAYER.
O Blessed Redeemer, who did remember me when I had forgetten thee, and
thoughtest of me when I did not regard thee! When I lay buried in the common
Mass of Corruption, thou did not disdain to think on this forlorn Creature!
Thou did pity me, thou saw my Misery, and it grieved thee at thy Heart:
Thy Bowels yearn'd over me, and thou did spread thy Mantle over me! O happy
Remembrance! I had been lost if thou had not looked upon me, I had been
undone if thou had not cast thine Eye upon me; yet how loath have I been to
think of thee! What an Aversion have I had from remembering thee! How have I
shifted off all serious Reflections on thy Love! I have more delighted in
Trifles, than in thee! How sweet have the Thoughts of my Corn, and Wine, and
Oil been to me; and how tedious, how irksome all Contemplation of tbee! When
thou have sometimes put me in mind of thy Sufferings, how have I suffered
Worldly Thoughts to drive thee out of my Mind! How justly might thou turn
thy Eyes away, and hide thy Face from me! O Sweet, O Glorious Object! Appear in
thy Beauty, appear in thy Glory to my Mind; that I may be thoroughly convinced
that nothing deserves my Thoughts so much as thy self. I am resolved to
remember thee with greater Delight and Constancy: Help thou me. Should not I
remember thee, who have in a manner forgotten thy self, to remember me! I can
remember a Temporal Deliverance; and shall not the Deliverance of my Soul,
procured by thy Death, be remembered by me! I can remember a Disaster, which
has some Years agone befallen me; and shall not I remember the infinite
Misery, from which thou came to rescue me! I will think of thee in the
Night-Watches, I will think of thee when I lie down, when I awake, when I rise
again. In the great Ordinance of thy Supper, I will in a most solemn manner
think of thee. Teach me to remember thee here with Joy, with Pleasure, with
Comfort to my Soul. Here let my Thoughts of thee be sweet. Whenever I think on
thy Cross, let me remember how by thy Charity I was freed from the Curse of
God. Thou becamest a Curse for me: Ought not this Mercy to be remembered for
ever! Write it in my Mind, engrave it upon my Heart, let this Remembrance be
easy to me. Chase away all Unwillingness, all Backwardness to this Duty, from
my Soul. Oh, let it become natural, and make this Remembrance profitable to me,
that my Inward Man may be renewed by it Day by Day, and abound in Love; and the
longer I live, the more conformable I may be to thee, sweet Jesu; to whom, with
the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all Honor and Glory, for ever, and ever.
Amen.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the other Element or Part of this holy Sacrament, viz. the Wine, and the
Cup Christ made use of in the Institution of the Eucharist.
The CONTENTS.
Red Wine, in all probability, made use of by Christ, in the Institution of
this Sacrament: As also, Wine mixed with Water. Too great a Stress laid upon
this Mixture by the Roman and Eastern Churches. The Cup Christ used in this
Sacrament, pretended by the Romanists to be in their Possession. The Cups made
use of by the Ancient Churches, what Matter or Substance they were of,
examined. On the Sacramental Cup, anciently was engraven the Figure of a
Shepherd and a Lamb. The Cup, in process of Time, changed into Silver Pipes.
Christ gave the Cup to the Disciples, as well as the Bread, for weighty
Reasons; to show, that the Bread and the Cup are of the same Worth; and that
those who receive the one, should receive the other also. The Abuse of the
Church of Rome, in denying the Cup to the Laity, laid open. Their Reasons and
Arguments answered. Why Christ made use of Wine in this Sacrament, discovered
in five Particulars. The Reasons why he made use of a Cup, and no other Vessel.
An Enquiry made, why Christ took the Cup, after he had done with the Cup in the
Passover. The Cup in this Sacrament, contrary in its Effects to Circe's Cup
among the Heathens. None fit to drink of this Cup, but Men of Valor and
Courage. This Cup very comfortable to all distressed Spirits. The Prayer.

I. THough it be not very material to know what Wine it was, Christ made use of
in the Institution of this Sacrament, what Color it was of, or whether it was
pure and unmixed; yet we have Reason to believe that it was Red Wine, and Wine
mixed with Water. Red, because this was the usual Wine among the Jews, and
therefore called The Blood of the Grape, Genesis 49. 11. And when the Royal
Prophet would express God's Vengeance upon the Wicked and Incorrigible by Wine,
he says, The Wine is red, Psalm. 75. 8. And this sort of Wine did best
represent the Blood of Christ, which was to be spilt for the Sins of the World,
and to make a considerable Figure in this Sacrament. And to this purpose is
that famous Prophecy, Esaias 63. 1, 2, 3. Who is this that comes from Edom, with
died Garments from Bozra? Wherefore art thou red in thy Apparel, and thy
Garments like him that treads in the Wine-Fat? Which Words, as, by the Consent
of Interpreters, they relate to Christ's Death, and bearing the Burden of
God's Anger for our Transgressions, so they at once express the Blood of
Christ, and the Color of the Wine that was most in use among the Jews; and
consequently, it is very likely that Christ made use of Red Wine in this
Ordinance. And as it was Red, so it is probable it was Wine mixed with Water,
this also being customary in that Country, as we see, Prove. 9. 2. in which our
Blessed Master lived during his Abode in the World. The Evangelists, indeed,
mention no such Thing; but, in general, only tell us, that it was the Fruit of
the Vine, Christ and his Disciples drank of: And this sufficiently justifies
the use of pure Wine in our Churches, when the Eucharist is celebrated: And
though the Jews are very peremptory in asserting, that it was the Practice of
their Forefathers, in the Passover, as well as at other Times, to mingle Water
with their Wine, which is the only Thing that makes it likely that Christ did
not vary in the Institution of this Sacrament, from the Custom of using mixed
Wine; yet since the Book of God, whereby we are to be governed, is silent as to
this Mixture, it follows, at least, that the Christian Churches are left to
their liberty to use either pure or mixed Wine in this Sacrament. The Roman
Church, at this Day, makes it a piece of Religion to use Wine mingled with
Water in the Cup the Priest drinks of in the Celebration of the Mass. The
Eastern Churches keep up the same Custom. The Armenian Christians heretofore
used pure Wine, but they were censured for doing so in the Sixth Council in
Trullo. And it is a very strange Uncharitableness in Theophilact, to curse
these Armenian Christians for this Omission: Let them be confounded, says he,
because they mingle not Water with their Wine in the Mystery of the Eucharist.
The Greeks, who are strangely superstitious, do warm their Water before they
mingle it with the Wine, thereby to represent the warm Blood and Water that
flowed from Christ's Side after his Death: And, indeed, this was the great
Reason why the Churches of old did use Wine and Water in this Sacrament, Zonar.
ad Can. 32. Conc. in Trulio.
thereby to put the Congregation in mind of that Blood and Water which ran out
when the profane Soldier ran his Spear into Christ's Side; though some think,
that the Mystery of it was to express the two Sacraments, Christ had bequeathed
to his Church and Followers. Epiphan. Haer. 46. and August. Haer. 64 Philastr.
Haer. 77.
There were a sort of Heretics in the Ancient Church, who made use of Water
only in the Eucharist, as thinking the Use of Wine unlawful, and an Invention
of the Powers of Darkness: But the Church condemned them, as profane; and
thought them unfit for her Communion. And yet, were it so, that Christians
lived in a Country, or Place, where they are in no possibility of getting Wine,
it is not to be doubted, but that any other Liquor, which Men commonly drink,
and refresh their fainting Spirits with, may lawfully be made use of, as a
Symbol, or outward Sign of that inward spiritual Grace, which we apprehend to
be in the Blood of the Ever-blessed JESUS. At this Day, in the Churches of
Aethiopia, Ludolph. Histor. Aeth. l. 3. c. 6.
where Wine is scarce, the Priests, in the Eucharist, make use of a Liquor,
made of Water and the Stones of Raisins, bruised and infused in it; and yet,
even to this Liquor they add more Water, to observe the Custom
beforementioned. The same Liquor is used by the Cophites in Egypt, and by the
Christians of St. Thomas in the Indies. And we read of others, who, for want of
Wine, have kept a Linen Cloth by them, dipped in Wine, and dried; and when they
had Occasion to celebrate the Lord's Supper, have wetted that Cloth, and made
use of the Liquor thus expressed, instead of Wine: A Custom condemned, indeed,
by Pope Julius; who, in case of Necessity, permitted a Bunch of Grapes to be
bruised, and mingled with Water. But how can a certain Law be prescribed to
People that have neither Grapes nor Wine; as it happens in many Countries far
distant from the Sea?

II. As to the Cup, out of which Christ and his Disciples drank the Sacramental
Wine, some have been so curious, as to enquire, not only into the Matter, but
also the Form or Shape of it. The more superstitious Sort in the Church of
Rome, contend, that this Cup was of Silver; and not a few among them believe,
at least pretend, they have the very Cup Christ used in the first Institution
of this Sacrament: But the Mischief is, that this Cup is to be seen in diverse
Places; at Rome, at Valentia, at Doway, at Lions, and in Helvetia: So that
either none of all these Pretenders have it; or if one have the right, the rest
must be Impostures; or if all have it, it must, since that time, be
miraculously multiplied; which, I think, may as well be believed as
Transubstantiation. The Evangelists did not think it worth while to mention any
thing about it; and whether the Cup, he used, was of Earth, or Tin, or Silver,
or Gold, or Stone, or Wood, tends not much to Edification. St. Chrysostom says
appositely, Though the Cup the Apostles received, and drank of, was not of
Gold, yet tremendous it was, and full of Majesty and Splendor, because it was
full of the Holy Ghost. It Is very probable, that in the more innocent Ages of
the Church, when Simplicity and Godly Sincerity flourished, Christians were
contented with Wooden Cups, as they are at this Day in the Church of Aethiopia:
These were afterward changed into Glass; and as in progress of Time, Plenty,
and the People's Liberality increased, and the Church fell to imitate the
Grandeur of Courts; Cups of Silver and Gold, and sometimes decked with Precious
Stones, were made use of: Which occasioned that witty Saying of Boniface the
Martyr, when one asked him whether it was proper to make use of Wooden Vessels
in the Sacrament; his Reply was, Heretofore the Church had Golden Ministers,
and Wooden Chalices; but now we see Golden Chalices, and Wooden Priests;
because the Time he lived in was very barren of virtuous and learned Men.
Platin. in Zephyrin. 1.
We are told by some Historians, that Pope Zephyrinus was the first that
brought in Chalices of Glass, about the Year of our Lord, 198. whereas before
they had been all of Wood. And to this purpose St. Jerome, some time after,
tells us of Exuperius, the famous Bishop of Toulouse, that he used to carry the
Consecrated Bread in a Wicker Basket, and the Holy Wine in a Vial of Glass; yet
they began very early, especially in the greater Cities, to bring in Pomp and
Grandeur about the Vessels used in the holy Communion; as, at Rome,
Constantinople, Alexandria, and in other wealthy and populous Places; which
made Julian the Apostate, seeing the rich Communion-Vessels, say scoffingly,
How splendidly is the Son of Mary served? In a word, It Is like, as soon as the
Church began to enjoy Quiet and Ease, under Constantine's Reign, Prosperity
being impatient of mean and plain Usages, Men began to change the Primitive
Simplicity into more stately ways of Administration of this Sacrament: Not that
there is any hurt in using Silver or Golden Cups in this Sacrament, but so much
I thought sit to mention, to show, that as the Gospel takes notice of no such
thing, as the Matter the Cup was made of, so there is no Stress to be laid upon
it; and a peaceable Christian is, in this Case, to follow the Usages of the
Church he lives in, and to look chiefly to the spiritual Frame of his Heart;
for if that be as it should be, it is indifferent what Matter the Cup is made
of in the Administration of this Ordinance. As to the Figure, Form or Shape of
the Cup Christ made use of, Tradition says, It was a Cup with two Handles,
holding a Quart of Wine. It Is true, the Jews, in their Passover, made use of
such a Measure, which was therefore called Robiit, (...)
or a Fourth Part; and Christ might possibly accommodate himself to that
Custom, the rather because it was a Cup that all the Disciples drank of,
according to Christ's Order, Drink ye all of it; yet this is still conjectural
only, and therefore the Christian Churches are in this Case left to their
Prudence and Discretion. Tertullian tells us, (and he lived about the Beginning
of the Third Century,) that in his Days there was engraven on the sacred
Chalice the Figure of a Shepherd, carrying a Lamb upon his Shoulders; an Emblem
either of the Parable, Luke 15. 4, 5. or of the Son of God, who walked through
the Wilderness of this World, to seek those which were lost; and having found
them, brought them back to the Fold again, and to his Father's House. But see
how soon an innocent Custom draws on more dangerous Practices: In process of
time, the holy Cup in the Sacrament began to be adorned with various Images and
Inscriptions: Such was the Cup which Remigius, Archbishop of Rhemes, who died
in the Year 535. bequeathed to his Church, with this Inscription, Out of this
Cup the People drink Life and Happiness, through the Blood of Christ Jesus. As
Superstition afterward increased, instead of Silver Cups the People made use
of, the Monks invented little Silver Pipes, through which the People were to
suck the holy Wine out of the Cup the Priest made use of; which is the Reason
why, in the Rules of the Carthusian Monks, this, among the rest, was one, That
they shall have nothing of Silver in their Colleges, save only a Silver
Chalice, and Silver Pipes, through which the Laymen are to suck the Blood of
Christ. These Things are hinted here, to show how necessary it is to keep up to
the Primitive Institution of this Sacrament; for if once Men presume to deviate
from that Simplicity, they know not where to stop, and they will be tempted to
hancker after new Devices and Inventions every Day.

III. That Christ gave the Cup to his Disciples, as well as the Bread, is
evident from the Institution. And the Reasons were these:

1. To show, that this part of the Sacrament is of the same worth and value
with the other, and that we are to esteem the sacred Cup as highly as we do the
Bread; for as the former represented his broken Body, so this, his spilt and
flowing Blood: Nay, if there be any Preeminence in the one above the other, it
must be ascribed to the Cup, or the Blood of Christ, represented by the Wine in
the Cup; for upon the Blood of the Son of God the weight of Redemption lies,
according to what the Apostle tells us, Heb. 9. 11, 12. But Christ being become
an High Priest of good Things to come, by a greater and more perfect
Tabernacle, not made with Hands; that is, not of this Building, neither by the
Blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own Blood he entered in once into the
Holy Place, having obtained Eternal Redemption for us: And, Without shedding of
Blood, there is no Remission; as it is, Verse. 22. And this shows how miserably
the poor People are deluded in the Modern Church of Rome, in that they are
denied the Cup in this Ordinance; for hereby they are deprived of that which
should afford them the greatest Comfort, and assure them of the Remission of
their Sins: For, if the great Stress of Redemption must be laid on the Blood of
Christ, and they are deprived of that part of the Sacrament which properly and
immediately represents his Blood, which was shed for the Remission of their
Sins, it must necessarily follow, that they are intolerably cheated: And what
Assurance can they have from this Sacrament, that their Sins are, or will be
pardoned, when they receive not that which must assure them of it? So that the
Laity in that Church are left in a most uncomfortable Condition. Nor will it
avail much to say, that the People believe that they receive the Blood in the
Bread; for it is not Fancy or Imagination that will do any good here. Christ,
certainly, did not think so, which made him appoint a distinct Symbol for his
Blood; and, but that they are not to believe their own Senses in that Church,
their Eyes and Tongues might convince them, that they do not remember the
shedding of Christ's Blood for the Remission of their Sins, by drinking of the
Wine designed for that purpose: For,

2. Christ, in giving the Cup to his Disciples, as well as the Bread, intimated
thereby, that those who received the one, should receive the other also. This
has been the Sense of the Christian Church for many Hundred Years after
Christ: The Greek, from the Apostles Days, to this Hour, has inferred, and
does infer so much; and even the Latin Church, for above a Thousand Years,
Georg Cassand. Consult Art. 22.
was of the same Opinion. It Is true, in the Church of Rome, the Priest drinks
of the consecrated Cup, as well as eats the consecrated Wafer: But what have
the poor Sheep, the Laymen done, that they must be excluded from the Cup? The
Apostles, it is granted, were Priests; but they received not the holy Sacrament
as Priests, but as Believers: Christ, at that time was the Priest that
administered the holy Symbols to them; and Children can tell, that, according to
this way of arguing, the People ought not to receive the holy Bread, because
the Apostles were Priests when they received it. However, to do even an Enemy
right, the Church of Rome is ingenuous enough in their maintaining of this
Sacrilege; for the Council of Constance expressly tells us, That though Christ
gave the Sacrament to his Disciples in both kinds, Council. Constant. Sess. 13.
and though in the Primitive Church, this Sacrament was received by the
Faithful in both Kinds, yet notwithstanding all this, the Fathers of that
Council think it fit to abrogate that Custom, and threaten the Priest with
Excommunication, that shall offer to give the consecrated Wine or Cup to the
Common People. And, I confess, this is plain Dealing, but in the worst Sense;
as Men do justify their Sins, and boast of their Iniquities: And with what
Conscience any Person can be of that Church, that does assert, and defend, and
obliges her Members to comply with such manifest contrariety to the Doctrine of
Christ, I know not. This I know, that Obedience to the Precepts of the Gospel
is a commanded Duty, and they are excluded from Christ's Favor and Friendship,
that will not keep his Words; and all pretenses of Love are rejected, as
Pageantry, where obedience to his Commands is not the product of that Love; and
consequently, they can expect but little Favor of him, that knowing their
Master's Will, will not do it; and being convinced, that he has given this
general Rule, Drink ye all of this, prefer their own Fancies, and would rather
break his Command, than either acknowledge themselves in an error, or return to
the Truth, which they have forsaken.

IV. That which gave occasion to this Sacrilege in the Church of Rome, was
partly the pride of the Clergy, who by receiving in both kinds, would needs
distinguish them selves from the Laity; partly the Asservation, or keeping of
the consecrated Bread in some Houses, practiced by inconsiderate People in
ancient times; partly the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, for the Roman Clergy
perceiving, that the People would never receive this absurd Doctrine, if they
did not make them believe that in the Wa^er they received Christ's Blood, as
well as his Body, thereupon denied them the Cup; partly some frivolous
pretenses, as, that in some places Wine could not be had, others were
abstemious, and naturally hated Wine; some had long Beards, and might spill the
Holy Wine upon them; and some had the Palsy in their Hands, whereby they might
let the Cup fall; etc. Pretenses which the Primitive Church did not so much as
dream of. It is certain, that this Sacrament is a Feast, and as any ordinary
Feast would look strange, if no drink were given to the Guests, so the
Sacrament in the Roman Church, loses the name of a Spiritual Feast, by their
denying the Cup to the Laity: And one may justly wonder, how, in that Church,
they can understand the 6th Chapter of St. John's Gospel of the Holy Sacrament,
since it is expressly added, v. 53. Except ye drink the Blood of the Son of Man,
you have no Life in you: This very place did so much pinch Aeneas Sylvius, who
was afterward Pope, by the name of Pius II. that when the Bohemians and
Taborites, demanded the Cup in the Sacrament, upon that saying of Christ, he
had no other way to extricate himself, but by alleging, that in that Chapter
Christ did not speak of the Sacrament at all, but only of Spiritually Eating
and Drinking, in general, viz. by Faith, or practical Belief of his Doctrine.
And this Opinion, not a few of the Romanists are forced to espouse; yet the
generality of them understand it of the Sacrament, and how the People can
content themselves under such a threatening, if that be the sense, I cannot
comprehend. And though some of them plead, that there is a difference betwixt
the Institution and a Precept; and though Christ instituted this Sacrament in
both kinds, yet he did not command it to be received in both kinds; yet who
sees not the weakness of this Exception, since Christ has commanded us to use
and administer this Sacrament, as he has used it, and expressly adds a Command
concerning the Cup, Drink ye all of this. And though in Luk 24. 30. Christ is
said to be known of the Disciples by his breaking of Bread, yet from hence it
follows not, that by that breaking of Bread is meant the Eucharist, nor if we
granted, that the Eucharist is to be understood there, that therefore they had
no Wine, since the whole action is commonly expressed by breaking of Bread, as
Act 2, 42. And if this were granted, it would follow, that Christ consecrated
only in one kind, which they of the Church of Rome themselves will not allow.
But they, that from such expressions would infer, that Bread only was used in
the Eucharist, betray their stupid ignorance of the Customs and Expressions,
used among the Jews, who commonly called any Meal whatsoever, where all sorts
of Food and Drink were used, by the Name of breaking Bread; and to break Bread
with a Man, was as much as to Dine or to Sup with him: And so the Grecians,
from the other part of a Meal, called it (...), or Drinking together, as the
Jews call a Feast (...) Mishteh, or Drinking; though Meat as well as Drink, was
set upon the Table. Hist. Eccl. l. 13. C. 7.
What some allege out of Nicephorus, concerning a Woman, in St. Chrysostom's
time, infected with the Heresy of Macedonius, who coming to receive the
Communion, substituted or took common Bread, instead of the Sacramental Bread,
which thereupon, by a Miracacle, was turned into a Stone, and would infer from
thence, that the Laity, at that time, received the Bread only, is altogether
insignificant; for not to mention that that Story may justly be suspected of
Falsehood, since St. Chrysostom himself makes no mention of it, it is evident
from his Writings, that the Laity in his time received the Communion in both
kinds; and if such a Miracle had been wrought before she received the Cup, how
does it follow from thence, that none of the other Communicants, which were
present, did receive the Cup? God might, by that Miracle, show and discover to
her, her unworthy receiving, whereby being frighted, she might be afraid of
receiving the other part of the Sacrament; yet still, that does not make it
out, that the Communion was in those days received only in one kind: And
besides, what would the practice of a particular Church signify, if it
contradicted both the practice of Christ, and of all other Churches? That the
Sacramental Bread was carried home, kept and preserved by some in Boxes at
their own Houses, which in case of necessity or imminent danger, they made use
of, we deny not; but the practice of particular Persons is no Law, no
Prescription, and the Papists themselves will not allow Laymen to keep the
consecrated Wafer in their Houses, and to communicate without a Priest: So that
this practice of particular Persons, neither infers the lawfulness of it, nor
the lawfulness of communicating in one kind. The Primitive Churches were very
much against this keeping of the consecrated Bread, or carrying of it home; for
in St. Jerome's after the Communion, Hierom. in 1 Cor. 2.
if any of the consecrated Bread were left, the Communicants divided, Hist.
Fccl. l. 17. c. 25.
and eat it up; Nicephorus assures us, that it was the custom of the Church of
Constantinople, for many years together, that if after the Communion, much
Bread were left, more than the Ministers present could eat, the Boys, that were
Fasting, were called from their School, and had liberty given them to eat it
up. In Hesycheus's time, Hesych. in Levit. 18.
it was customary, if after the Communion any Bread remained, to burn it, And
in the Council of Caesar Augusta, Can. 3.
about the Year of Christ 513. it was decreed, that if any did not eat all the
Bread in the Eucharist, that was given him, but did carry it home, he should
stand Exmunicated for ever. So that, whatever the practice of some particular
persons was, the Church, we see, protested against it, and abrogated it, partly
because there was no example for this keeping of the Bread at home, in the
Gospel, partly because it might, as afterward it did, give occasion to many
Superstitions, as indeed the asservation of the consecrated Waser in the Church
of Rome at this day, is nothing else; for they keep it in Boxes or Chests, that
they may carry it about, and promote the Adoration of it in the
Circumgestation; and when any great Fire, or Wind, or Tempest happens, this is
pretended to have great Virtue, either to lessen or avert those evils. It is
pleaded commonly, that the Laity may, with greater convenience, receive only in
one kind, and with as much profit to, as if they received in both; but that
this is false, appears from hence,

1. Because nothing can be convenient for the Laity, that is against Christ's
Institution and Command; and as the Bread is to lead them to the contemplation
of Christ's Crucified Body, so the Cup is to direct them to fix their Thoughts
on the Blood he spilt for them. And if this way of reasoning were just, why
should it not be as convenient for the Priest to receive in one kind, as for
the Laity?

2. Because the Profit that is to be received by the Communion, must be
received in that method and order, that Christ has thought fit to dispense it;
and since Christ thought it most proper, that this Profit should be received by
communicating in both kinds, to expect Profit contrary to Christ's design and
intention, is to deceive our selves. Some of the Papists themselves grant, and
it was asserted by several in the Council of Trent, That greater Grace and
Comfort was to be received by Communion in both kinds, than by Communion in one
only; and there were some of the Primitive Fathers, that thought that the Bread
extended its Virtue to the Body only, but the Wine to the Soul; and if this
were to be allowed of, the Laity, in the Church of Rome, must be either
supposed to have no Souls, or that their Souls receive no Profit by the
Sacrament, since they are denied the Wine. But however, if Communion in one
kind be so profitable for the Laity, why should it not be as profitable for the
Clergy?

V. Why Christ made use of Wine in the Institution of this Sacrament, several
Reasons may be given: As,

1. One great property of Wine is, to give Man a cheerful countenance, and to
make glad the Heart, Psalm. 104. 15. And surely this was to let us see, what joy
our Souls are to express at the remembrance of God's Compassion and Charity; a
joy, which will appear very rational, if we frame right apprehensions of our
natural condition; for, let me take a view of the state of my Soul abstractedly
from Christ's mediation and God's Love; I shall appear to my self a creature
forsaken of God, destitute of Mercy, deprived of hopes of Pardon, an object of
Wrath, a scorn of Angels, the sport of Devils, a companion of Reprobates, a
prey to ravenous Birds, an heir of the burning Lake, a subject of Damnation, a
slave to the worst of Masters, hated by Heaven, condemned by mine own
Conscience, and in a worse condition than the Beasts that perish; and let me
suppose that I were surrounded by Wolves and Lions, in a barren Wilderness,
Vipers and Serpents crawling about my heels, every moment in danger of being
torn to pieces, and in danger of a cruel, lingering, and barbarous death; and in
these sad circumstances, should some kind Deliverer leap from behind a Thicket,
or come riding toward from afar, to rescue me from this impendent ruin, how
should I rejoice at the unexpected and unlooked for Providence! My case, by
nature, is much worse; for wild Beasts may devour me, and make an end of my
pain: but here I find my self beset with hellish furies, so far from being
willing to make an end of my life and pain together, that they seem resolved to
increase it daily; and no Angel, no Lazarus, no Messenger out of the Clouds,
vouchsafes a drop of Water; and therefore, in so deplorable an estate, to see
the Son of God spriging in, and flying to my rescue, and crying, I will heal
thy backslidings, and unto my Enemies round about me, O death, I will be thy
Plague, O grave, I will be thy destruction; what joy, what gladness, what
comfort must this cause!

2. By Wine he represented the everlasting joys, he intended to purchase for
his followers, by his bitter death and passion; he himself gives us a hint of
this, Matthew. 26. 29. I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of this Vine,
until the day that I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom, i. e. Of
this material Wine, I shall, after this, drink no more in your company; but
when you are advanced to the Joys and Glories of my Father's Kingdom, then I Will
Drink and Feast with you again; and the Wine, I will then give you to drink of,
shall be new Wine, infinitely different from this Wine, which shall have others
effects, and other operations: Wine, which the dull World is a stranger to;
Wine, which Glut^ons and Drunkards shall never taste of; Wine, that shall fill
your Souls with the purest Joy's with Delights, purely Spiritual and Celestial;
so that these everlasting Joys may be called (...), Wine fulfilled, as St. Luke
speaks of the Bread, Luke 22. 16. And then the Wine may be said to be
completed and fulfilled, when that, which is represented by it, is actually
fulfilled and conferred on the person, who are counted worthy of it. The Joys
above, are the Wine of Angels; this Wine is the clear vision of God, or the
Glorious sight of the Fountain of Light and Beatitude; this inebriates their
Understandings, irrigates the Spirits of Men made perfect, makes them drunk
with Joy, and their Reason is lost in Raptures and Ecstasies; and therefore
justly styled Joy, which Eye has not seen, and Ear has not heard, and Heart
cannot conceive: The Souls of Men, it seems, are channels too narrow to hold
those joys; they overrun the Banks; and as the flame of a Candle is lost in
the brighter Sunshine, so the Divine Light in Heaven shining upon Souls, they
are, as it were, lost in that Glorious splendour.

3. Wine is the Emblem of Wisdom too; so much we may guess from what we read,
Prove. 9. 1, 5. Wisdom has built her a bouse, she has hewn out her seven
Pillars, she has killed her Beasts, she has mingled her Wine, she cries Come
eat of my Bread, and drink of the Wine that I have mingled: So that we have
reason to conclude, that our Savior in using Wine in this Sacrament, would
express the necessity of a vigorous application of our Minds to spiritual
Wisdom, even to that Wisdom which drives out sensuality, expels the Wisdom of
the Flesh, despises the Wisdom of the World, and values Christian simplicity
above all words which human Wisdom teaches; Wisdom which seems folly in the
eyes of the World, but is really an effect of the Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding; Wisdom, which concludes, If Christ has done for me, what the
Scripture says he has, laid down his life, spilt his blood, sacrificed
himself, given himself a ransom for me, a mercy without which I could neither
have been safe nor happy, and a share in which must needs be more to me, than
the wealth of Kings: What can be more reasonable than that he should be my
Master, and I his Servant, that he should command, and I obey, that he should
govern, and I submit; that he should prescribe Laws, and I act according to
those Laws, whatever Danger, whatever Trouble, whatever Inconvenience I put my
self to. This is the Wisdom of God, or rather infused by God into the Soul; and
if any sort of wisdom were hinted by Christ's using Wine in this Ordinance, it
must be this Wisdom; for this is gratitude and ingenuity, and an argument, that
we receive not the grace of God in vain.

4. Wine has briskness and spirit in it, and might not this be an Item to tell
us, how lively and vigorous our Love should be to Christ Jesus? and how like
new Wine, our Love should be ready to burst the bottles, at least vent it self
in some such ejaculations? Oh Jesu, how sweet, how lovely. how amiable art
thou, how full of Beauty, how full of Glory, how full of Majesty in the midst
of all thy pain and sorrow! Thy wounds look dismal, yet was never any thing
more medicinal, never did any thing afford greater virtue; for they can cure
sin, they are preservatives from Hell, and the surest Amulets against
inffection; from these the costly Balsom flows, that must restore my wounded
Soul! Oh how I love thee! Oh how I prize thee! Oh how I esteem thee! Thou art
more to me than Father or Mother, more than Lands or Houses: I read of
Fountains that flowed with Oil, when thou wast born, but that is no comfort to
me; Thy wounds are the springs that send forth an Oil precious and sweet, and
odoriferous, whereby the diseases of my Heart are expelled; This is the Oil of
gladness, anoint my Head with it, and from thence let it run down to the skirts
of my clothing, that my whole Man may be thine, and my Soul and Body, and all
I have, may participate of thy grace and compassion!

5. Wine is cleansing too, and might not this be an hint of the purifying
quality of the Blood of the Holy Jesus? Surely that Blood cleanses us from all
sins it washes whiter than Snow, Fullers-Earth is not to be compared with it.
Though the Sinner wash himself with Nitre, and take much Soap, to purify his
Soul, yet that will not take away one spot, still his iniquity will be marked
before God; but the Blood of Christ will make him clean, so clean, that God
will spy no iniquity in Jacob, and no perverseness in Israel; so clean, that no
wrinkle shall appear in him; one would think nothing could have been more
filthy than some sinners have been, yet upon their Repentance, the Blood of
Christ has so purified, so cleans'd, so beautified their Souls, that even
Angels have fallen in love with them.

VI. That Christ made use of a Cup in the distributition of the Wine, we have
already taken notice of; but whether there might not be some mystery in his
making use of a Cup, and no other Vessel, is a thing worth our consideration.
And.

1. The Prophets had spoken of a Cup of trembling, and of a Cup of God's fury,
Es. 51. 17. Jerem. 25. 15, 17, 18. This Cup the Jewish Nation was to drink of,
their Commonwealth and Policy was to be destroyed, and inexpressible Calamities
were to light on them; and the second Captivity was to be worse than the first,
as their Sins that caused the second, were greater than those which occasioned
the first; Miseries so great, that when Christ beheld the City, he wept over
it, and said, The days will come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a
trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, and
shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee, and they
shall not leave in thee one stone upon another, because thou knew not the
time of thy visitation, Luke 19. 41, 43, 44. This was the Cup of astonishment,
that unhappy Nation was to drink of, so that his making use of a Cup, was an
allusion to that misery; for now the time drew near, and they were going to do
that, which would hasten their ruin, viz. kill the Lord of Glory, and their
greatest Friend.

2. Himself was to drink the Cup of the Lord's fury, to atone for the Sins both
of Jews and Gentiles, and of this, the Cup he took was an Emblem. He had
generously and freely undertaken to open to Mankind a way to God's Favor. This
way could not be made, considering the Decree of God, but by his Sufferings;
and and accordingly we find him drinking so deep of this Cup, that in the
Garden of Gethsemane, he falls into an Agony, and his Sweat was, as it were,
great drops of Blood falling to the ground, Luke 22. 44. That which made this
Cup so bitter, was the greatness of the sins of Mankind, and the dreadful wrath
of God they had deserved, particularly the monstrous sins of the Jewish Nation,
to whom the first offers of Grace were made, and the unspeakable temporal
calamities which were to come upon them for their perfidiousness, and contempt
of the greatest mercies, and their total desolation and destruction, for their
hardness and wilful stupidity. These, as they were represented to his Mind in a
lively manner, so it caused prodigious Grief in his Soul, insomuch that he
professed his Soul was sorrowful unto death; This was a Cup, the most loathsome
that ever mortal did take, and therefore he calls it by that name, Father, if
it be possible, let this Cup pass from me, Luke 22. 42. He takes therefore a
Cup here, that his Followers in future ages might think of the Cup he had drunk
of, with so much terror and consternation.

A Cup he took, to let us see, that the Cup he took in this Sacrament, was the
true Cup of Salvation: we find mention made of a Cup of Salvation, and of a Cup
of Consolation, Psalm. 116. 13. and Jer. 16. 7. But the Cup in this Sacrament is
of a far greater virtue. The Cup of Salvation among the Jews, was either the
Cup of Wine they made use of in the Passover, or the Cup they drank of at
Festivals or Feasts, when they rejoiced with their Friends, after some signal
Mercy and Deliverance. The Cup of Consolation was properly that, which they
gave to Mourners at Funerals, especially where People took on excessively for
the death of their near Relations, or were ready to sink with Grief; But the
Cup in this Sacrament, is a Cup of Salvation and Consolation in a sublimer
Sense. By the Blood of Christ, Mankind was made capable of inheriting Life and
Eternal Salvation, which is beyond being saved from Egypt, from the Midianites,
from the Assyrians, and from the Chaldeans, so that he that drinks of this
Blood contained in the Sacramental Cup, and drinks like a thirsty Man, with a
thirst after Righteousness, drinks Salvation, drinks everlasting Mercy, drinks
to the content and satisfaction of his Soul, and out of his belly shall flow
fountains of living waters, i. e streams of Grace and Goodness shall flow from
his Heart, to the watering and enriching of those that are round about him,
John 7. 38. And this must needs make it a Cup of Consolation; for what greater
comfort can there be, than to drink the rich draught of Pardon, of Peace, and
Mercy, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, as every Soul is supposed to do, that comes
to this Ordinance, with unfeigned Resolutions to have her conversation in
Heaven.

4. A Cup he took, to put us in mind how necessary God's Goodness, Favor and
Providence is to us, for this was expressed in the Law, by making God the
Portion of their Cup, as we see, Psalm. 16. 5. The Lord is the Portion of my
Inheritance, and of my Cup; a phrase much used among the Jews of the devouter
sort, when they would declare, not only their interest in God's special
Providence, but the necessity of having a Right and Title to it. A Cup is a
necessary Utensil in a Family and there is scarce any person so poor and needy,
as to, want a Cup; so hereby they expressed both the absolute necessity of
having a special interest in God's Love, and the possibility the poorest body
was in, to arrive to this Privilege. A Man may be happy without Lands and
Houses, and happy without an Estate, without Father and Mother, without
Children, without a Prince's Favor; but he cannot be happy without an interest
in God's Gracious inclinations and Complacency. Even an Idolatrous Laban, Genesis
31. 30. was in some measure sensible of this Truth; for when Rachel had stolen
her Father's Images, he seemed to be much concerned for them; If thou would
needs be gone, wherefore have thou stolen my gods? As if he had said, I could
have been content with thy taking away my Daughters, my Grandchildren, my
Cattle, and my Sheep; but to steal my gods, than which nothing is more dear, or
more necessary to me, this I cannot brook. A Cup therefore Christ made use of
in this Sacrament, to tell us of what concernment it is to have God for our
Friend; and if he be our Portion, we need no more; if he be the portion of our
Cup, we have Wealth and Bliss enough, and may defy all the Powers of Hell, who
in this case may assault, but cannot prevail against us. Indeed if Christ be
ours, and will vouchsafe to intercede for us, we are more than Conquerors. O
Jesu; Thou art our All, our Crown, our Glory; if thou be for us, we need not
fear who is against us! Let thy Wounds be ours, and our wounded Spirits will be
at rest: O tell us, that thine Agonies are ours, and we will triumph over
death, and sing, O Death where is thy Sting! O Grave where is thy Victory.

5. A Cup he took, to bid us mind what he had so often told the Pharisees, and
to hint to us, that, whenever we see this Cup in the Sacrament, we ought to ask
our Hearts, whether we make clean the inside of the Cup and Platter; as the
expression is Matthew. 23. 27. i. e. Whether we purify our inward Man, our Souls
and Spirits, from those covetous, disorderly, unclean Desires, Thoughts and
Imaginations, which are so apt to harbor there. True Religion is no outside
business, but must be rooted in us, and a Sense of the Love of God, must be
riveted into our Spirits, that there, God may become truly amiable to us, and
what we feel within, may force, as it were, the outward Man into a suitable
Fruitfulness. Most Men's Religion, like their Clothes, adorns only the ovtward
Man, and saying their Prayers, going to Church, and doing such little things as
are no trouble to their Lusts, or sinful Appetite, are the principal
Ingredients of their Divinity; but this is not the Light, which Christ's
Religion gives, for that strikes the Understanding, works upon the Will, and
puts all that is within us into Fermentation; This cleanses the Heart from
filthiness, the Thoughts from vanity, the Mind from prejudice, the Affections
from love of the World, from malice, hatred, and supercilious contempt of our
Neighbors, and the desires from revenge and greediness after the Shells and
Husks of outward Comforts; so that true Religion is a new Principle, which
produces a new Creature, and newness of Life, 2 Cor. 5 17.

6. And why may not we piously believe, that his making use of a Cup, was also
to encourage our Charity and Hospitality, expressed sometimes by giving a Cup
of cold water to a Disciple, in the name of a Disciple, Matthew. 10. 42. He that
knows any thing of this Holy Sacrament, knows, it is a Feast of Charity, a
Feast, at which we remember our Spiritual Poverty, and lying at the Gate of
Heaven, fuller of Sores, than the famous Beggar before the Palace of Dives; and
can the undeserved, unexpected, and inexpressible Charity of God to our Souls,
shine in our Faces, and not warm our Hearts, and Bowels into compassion, and
commiseration to the poor and needy, such especially as are of the Household of
Faith? If we are so low in the world, and Providence has put us in so mean a
condition, that we can give no more than a Cup of cold water, and do but run to
the next Well or River, and fill the Cup, and bring it to a distressed and
fainting Christian, a good Man, and a Disciple of our Lord, even that shall be
interpreted favorably, and God will find out a recompense for it; a
recompense, which shall make the Giver sensible, that it was for that Cup he
gave, that he receives that Mercy; provided still, that this Charity proceeds
from a sense of the Love of God, and tenderness to the necessities of the
Humble Man. This consideration one would think should be baulked by none that
comes to the Lord's Table, where the Lame, and Blind, and Maimed are
entertained; for such abasing Thoughts of our selves, we are to entertain here;
and if so, How easy, how natural is the Inference? If so miserable a Creature
as I, am feasted here, and God gives Bread of Life to my hungry Soul, How can I
express my Gratitude better than by casting my Bread upon the Water, especially
when I am promised to find it again after many days, floating on the Rivers of
Pleasure, which are at the Right Hand of God for evermore.

VII. Both the Evangelists and St. Paul taking notice, that Christ took this
Cup after he had done with the Cup in the celebration of the Passover, we must
not pass it by without making some Remarks upon it. And,

1. It was to teach us Order in our Duties, and to avoid confusion in our Holy
performances. God is the God of Order, and it is fit, his Servants should
resemble him in this particular, Greater Duties must ever be preferred before
the lesser, and Mercy many times comes to be a greater Duty than Sacrifice.
Ordinarily a Duty of God's Worship, we have resolved upon, ought to be
preferred before a Duty of Civility; and a customary visit is not to dash or
hinder our intended Devotion. God must first be pleased, and then Man, in
things lawful and convenient; yet Charity is of so great a value in the sight
of God, that many times he bids us prefer that before Devotion. When my
Neighbors House is on fire, I am bound to run, and endeavor to quench that,
though the hour is come, that I use to enter into my Closet to pray to my
Father in secret; and my sick Neighbor wanting my help and assistance, I may
justly prefer a charitable Visit before my accustomed Suplications. Nor is this
all the Order, that is to be observed in Duties; The business of our calling
must be begun with Prayer, and concluded with Thanksgiving; and he that, when
first he awakes in the Morning, lets his first Thoughts be of God, and when he
is up and dressed, applies himself to singing of a Psalm, or to meditating in
the Law of God, by reading a Chapter in the Bible with attention, then kneels
down to Prayer, either by himself, or with his Family, and afterward goes to
his lawful employment, and in the midst of that employment forgets not, that
God sees and hears him, but runs up often with his Thoughts to Heaven, takes
notice of God's Providence, and before he goes into company, arms himself with
Holy Ejaculations against Sin, and Infection, and at night reviews what he has
been doing in the daytime, such a person acts orderly, and draws a Blessing
down upon the work of his hands, not to mention the Peace, he thereby procures
to his Mind, and Conscience.

2. He took this Cup after the Paschal Cup, to show, that after the Jewish
Economy, another, and much nobler Dispensation was to follow, a Dispensation
not of Shadows and Types, and Images, but of Truth, of Reality, and
Accomplishment; a Dispensation not requiring Sacrifices of Lambs and Bullocks,
but such as pressed Spiritual Sacrifices and Oblations; a Dispensation not of
Bondage and Slavery, but of Freedom and Liberty; a Dispensation, which should
be large and diffussve, not confining its Privileges and Influences to a
single Nation, but spread them abroad to the comfort of all the Inhabitants of
the World. None drank of the Cup of the Passover, but persons circumcised; but
the Cup Christ takes here, all Nations, both circumcised, and uncircumcised,
were permitted to participate of; all Penitents, what Kindred, People, Tongue,
or Nation soever they were of.

3. He took this Cup after the Paschal Cup, to show there was greater Virtue
and Excellency in this last, than there was in the first. After me comes a Man,
says the Baptist, John 1. 30. that is preferred before me, for he was before
me. So it may be said of the Paschal Cup, after that, came a Cup, which was far
more Excellent and Glorious, and Beneficial, than the other. Christ came after
Moses, after the Law, after the Prophets, yet went beyond them all in Light, in
Knowledge, in Virtue, in Goodness, and in bringing glad Tidings; And so the
Passover, though it was before the Lord's Supper, yet does this Supper of the
Lord transcend the other by many degrees, and both represents and confers
sublimer Mercies than the roasted Lamb could do; for here the Blessed Trinity
manifests it self, in greater charms than it did in the Baptism of the Lord
Jesus, in which St. John saw the Heavens open, and the Holy Ghost descending on
the Son of God in the shape of a Dove, and the Father completing the
stupendous Scene with an Acclamation, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well-pleased; For in this Sacrament the Holy Ghost falls on the Souls of
sincere Believers, as Rain on the Mowen Grass, and as the Showers that water
the Earth; The everlasting Father not only tells us, which is the Beloved Son,
but by setting his Sons death before us, shows that he loved us, in a manner
better than his Son, in giving that Son to dye for us, than which nothing can
be more kind, nothing more surprising; the Son himself invites us, and offers
to wash us from our sins with his own Blood, and assures us, That being
sprinkled with his Blood, we are fafe and secure against all the Curses of the
Law, and the Thunders of Mount Sina. These things were Mysteries and Paradoxes
in the Passover; but this Sacrament which came after it, opens the door, and
lets us in, to see this Glorious Representation, and consequently is a Richer,
Greater, Holier, Sublimer, and more Heavenly Ordinance, than the Passover.

The Preeeding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. AMong the Heathen Poets there is much talk of Circe's Cup, which
transformed Men into Brutes and Swine, a Fable whereby they represented, how
sensual pleasure transformed Men into Creatures void of Reason and Discretion.
But the Cup we speak of has contrary effects, and Fire and Water are not more
opposite, than the operations of these two; For this Sacramental Cup transforms
Brutes into Men again, and changes Beasts into the Image of the Son of God.
Sinner, make but a trial of it, thou, I mean, that have not had so much
understanding as the Swallow, and the Turtle, and the Crane, for they know
their appointed times; whereas thou have not known the time of thy return; thou
that have rusht into Sin, as the Horse rushes into the Battle; thou that have
wallowed in the Mire with the Swine, and acted like a Creature made of Earth
and Dung. Take courage prepare thy self for drinking of this Cup; purify thy
Soul, for profane Hands must not touch it; confess thine iniquity, make War
with thy Lusts, Fight with thy carnal Desires, and drink of this Cup, and thou will find how thy Reason will clear up, how thy Understanding will be
enlightened, how thy beastly Qualities will die; The Blood in this Cup has
such Virtue in it, that it will transform thee by the renewing of the Mind, and
make thee prove what is the Holy, Perfect, and acceptable Will of God. It Is
true, the bare drinking will not do it, but drinking it with Contrition, with
contemplation of the Person, whose Blood is in the Cup, with consideration of
the Cause, viz. the Sins that spilt it, with thankfulness for the infinite
Mercy of him, that thus freely parted with it, and with resolutions to love
him, that did not think his own Blood too dear to let it flow for the good of
his enemies. Petrus de Natalibus, l. 5. 21.
Petrus de Natalibus tells us of a Woman, who, having labored many years under
very great infirmities of Body was brought exceeding weak, but drinking one day
accidentally out of the Cup, that a Holy Man Scion by Name, did use to drink
of, she was restored to perfect health; Though we cannot promise, that this
Sacramental Cup will work such a Miracle of the Diseases of the Body, yet
surely it will transform a Soul, sick to death, into a lively and healthful
constitution; though, with the Woman in the Gospel, she has lain under her
distemper, a considerable time.

II. Among the Scythyans, Herodot. l. 4.
as Herodotus tells us there was a custom for the Princes of the Country to
meet once a year, at a certain Feast where a Cup was set upon the Table, a Cup
of Honor, which none durst presume to drink of, but such as had signalized
their Valor in Battle, and killed more or less of their public Enemies.
Though this Sacramental Cup is too High, too Sacred, and too Lofty a thing, to
be compared with Cups, used at the Feast of Barbarians; yet I may take occasion
from hence to tell you, that this Holy Cup is fit for none to drink of, but
such as have either shown, or are at least resolved to show their Valor
against their Spiritual Enemies. Christian, if thou have fought with the Old
Serpent, encountered the Hellish Dragon, wrestled with Powers and
Principalities, expressed thy Courage against Temptations, defied Goliath, the
Lion and the Bear, the World, the Devil, and the Flesh; or art resolved to be a
Champion for thy God, and fight the Battles of the Lord; Thou art that valiant
Man, that may drink of this Cup: Thy God will give thee leave to drink of it
with other Hero's, with the greatest Worthies, with Men, of whom the World was
not worthy, with Men, whose Faith has advanced them above the Stars, and who
are to shine as the Sun in the Firmament, in their Father's Kingdom. Let no
despairing Thoughts, no suggestion of the Devil, no slavish Fear, no pretense
of Unworthiness, discourage thee from touching this Cup, or drinking of it.
It Is mingled for thee, for thee it is prepared; The King expects thee at this
Feast, thou art called to this Banquet. Thus shall it be done to the Man, whom
the King of Heaven intends to Honor. What? If thou have not slain thy
Thousands with Saul, nor thy Ten thousands with David? What if thou have not
brought thy Two hundred Foreskins of the Philistines to thy Lord and Master,
thou do a greater act in conquering thy Thoughts, thy Desires, thy Passions,
thy Appetite, thy vain Imaginations, than if thou had laid Countries waste,
ruined Kingdoms, or bound their Kings in Chains, and their Nobles with Fetters
of Iron. Such Honor have all all his Saints.

III. Hear this, thou fainting Soul! that groanest under the burden of thy
Sins, go heavy laden with Sorrow, and like Rachel, wilt not be comforted.
Behold, thy Lord and Master touched with the feeling of thy infirmities, and
afflicted in all thy afflictions, who waits to be Gracious, and loves to
converse more with a weeping Publican, than with a jovial Herod, he reaches
forth a Cup to thee, a Cup of Joy, a Cup of Gladness, a Cup of Comfort. It is
this Sacramental Cup. Drink of it, thou thirsty Soul, Why should thou fear?
This Cup is designed for laboring Souls; they that have born the heat and
burden of the day are to taste of it. It is designed to recreate, designed to
refresh, desing'd to revive, designed to support their Spirits: Do thou
believe this, Christian? Dare to believe it: Take thy Saviors word for it, and
triumph in the Promise. The Mercy may be too big for thee to ask, but not too
big for him to grant. Thou have a Master to deal withal, who gives like
himself, like a King, like a Prince, whose Stores are inexhaustible! Let no
Senacharib deceive thee, regard not what such a Rabshakeh says, Hearken not to
the frightful Stories of thine enemies, who rejoice to see thee discouraged,
are glad to see thee forbear drinking of this Cup, and think it their interest
to keep thee from that, which may, and will, give thee everlasting health. I
have read of a precious Stone, of considerable value, that dropped, no Man knew
how, into the Holy Cup, while the Priest was administering the Sacrament. There
needs no precious Stone to drop into this Cup, to make it of greater value;
That which is in it, is of greater worth than Ten thousand Worlds; It
represents that which neither Pearls, nor Rubies, nor Diamonds, can
counter-balance. The Papists boast much of the Gifts of their Popes, how
Sylvester gave three Golden Cups to be used in the celebration of the
Eucharist; How John the Second gave a Cup of Gold weighing Twenty pound; How
Gregory the Second, and Leo the Third presented their respective Churches with
Cups, all beset with precious Stones; What if thou can bring no such Presents
to God, thou bring a better when thou bring a Spirit, a Heart, a Soul
lamenting and mourning, because thou have departed from him, contented thy self
with a form of Godliness, and under the profession of Religion, have denied him
in thy actions. A Heart touched with the sense of the unreasonableness,
odiousness, and loathsomness of all this, and finding a relish in the things of
God, and of Salvation, qualifies a Man more for comfortable drinking of this
Cup, than if, with the Wise Man, he had offered Gold and Myrrh, and
Frankincense to Christ Jesus. Is not this the Cup whereby my Lord divineth,
says Joseph's Steward, Genesis 44. 5. Christian, by drinking of this Sacramental
Cup, thou may divine thy future happiness, guess at what will become of thee
hereafter; make conjectures of thy Glory, and conclude, that thou shall feel
the comfort of drinking the Cordials of a Blessed Eternity.

The PRAYER.
O Jesu! Great Fountain of all Goodness! who did drink of the bitter Cup
which my Sins had mingled! I am sensible there was no sorrow like thy sorrow,
which was done unto thee, and wherewith the Lord afflicted thee in the day of
his fierce anger. How was thy Spirit disturbed! How sore amazed was thy Soul!
How dismayed thy Mind! To such an exceeding height of Grief and Sorrow, did
the Sense of the incumbent load of my sins, and the prospect of calamities
hanging over my head, together with the reflection on my wretched condition,
skrew up thy Affections! innumerable evils encompassed thee, thou saw the
wrath of God flaming out against my Sin, and trembledst! Thou stoodst before
the mouth of Hell which I had deserved, and wast astonished! Thou with thine
own Heart Blood did quench the wrath of Heaven! O how am I obliged to adore
thy Love! O everlasting Father! What Charity was it not to spare thine own Son,
but to deliver him up for us all! What pity and compassion was it, O thou
Eternal Son of God, thus to pour forth thy Blood! What Affection, what
tenderness to my Soul, O thou Eternal Spirit, have thou expressed in inspiring
my Blessed Redeemer, with Charity more than Human; and in supporting him to
undergo all pressures with invincible patience! If I forget thy Love, sweet
Jesu, let my right hand forget her cunning! What an encouragement is here to
believe thy Word, which I see so punctually accomplished! The ancient Prophets
foretold that Christ should suffer, and so it came to pass! Let me for ever
believe thy promises: In all Dangers, in all Troubles, in all Necessities, let
thy Promises be for my Comfort! Let me never mistrust thy Goodness, after so
great an instance of thy Goodness, as the Gift of thy Son must be! How can I
despair of Mercy, upon unfeigned Repentance, when, in this passion, Mercy was
drawn out to that length on purpose, that it might reach the greatest Sinners.
O Jesu! thou have defeated all mine Enemies! Thou have evacuated all the
obstacles of my Salvation! Let me pretend and plead excuses no more. Now let me
run with patience the race, which is set before me, the way being opened into
the Holy of Holies, encourage me to walk in it, with all that wait for the
Salvation of God. Affect my Heart with a Religious Fear, and let thy humble
Passion kill my Pride! Let my Sins appear more dreadful to me, when I
contemplate thine Agonies; and let the World with all its deceitful Vanities
become loathsome to me, when I see how little thou did regard it. Let every
thing die in me, that is not agreeable to thy Life, that when thou, who art my
Life, shall appear, I may also appear with thee in Glory. Amen. Amen.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Covenant represented by the Cup in this Holy Sacrament.
The CONTENTS.
A seeming contradiction betwixt the Evangelists, reconciled. The Greek Word,
which we render Testament, proved to signify a Covenant too. The manner of
making Covenants in ancient times, applied to the Covenant made in this
Sacrament. The difference between the Old and New Covenant, discovered. In this
Sacramental Covenant, the parties mutually engaging one to another, proved to
be God and Man. Under what Notions both parties are to be considered,
explained. The nature of this Sacramental Covenant, its beginning, and first
rudiments in our Baptism, the necessity of renewing it, when we come to some
maturity of Understanding. Our consent to it, and how that consent must be
qualified. This Covenant, if broken, after a due ratification of it, whether it
may be renewed. What things do not break or null it. What Sins they are, that
make it void. How it may be renewed by sincere Repentance, and what kind of
Repentance it must be. Great presumption to enter into a Solemn Covenant with
God, and not to consider the wieght and importance of it. The great misery and
wretchedness of Men, who are not actually in Covenant with God. How necessary
it is for persons, when young, to make or renew their Covenant. No impossible
thing to come to a rational Confidence, that we are in Covenant with God. The
Mercies and Advantages of being God's faithful Confederates. The Prayer.

I. CHrist in describing the Nature of this Sacramental Cup, or the Wine in the
Cup, tells us, as St. Matthew and St. Mark relate it, This is my Blood of the
New Testament, or as St. Luke and St. Paul rehearse it, This Cup is the New
Testament in my Blood. St. Luke being St. Paul's companion in Travel, it is like
the Apostle made use of St. Luke's Commentaries, which he had by him, though
perhaps they were not yet published to the World, nor must we therefore suspect
a contradiction in these different expressions; for the Evangelists, in their
Histories, do not always tie themselves to the very number and order of Words
and Syllables, which our Savior spoke, but many times think it sufficient to
express the Sense; and that the Sense is the same here, though the Expression
be different, will easily appear to an impartial Reader, though it may be said,
that Christ might very justly use both expressions, one after another, say
that, which St. Mark, and St. Matthew mention, and afterward that which St.
Luke and St, Paul take notice of, by way of explication; and for brevitys sake,
one Evangelist might set down one; and another, the Sense being the same,
another.

II. The word which we render Testament, is in the Original (...), which indeed
in some few places of Scripture, particularly Hebr. 9. 15. is used for the last
Will and Testament of a Testator, but for the most part stands for a Covenant,
answering to the Hebrew (...) Berith, and imports a compact, or contract of two
Parties, mutually engaging to one another, to do and perform what is proper,
convenient, and fit to be done, and this by the consent of all Interpreters, is
the chief signification intended here; and that which will give Light to this
Notion, is the custom of the first Ages of the World. For Covenants in ancient
times were usually made by the slaying of a Beast, and shedding its Blood,
which was to put the Confederates in mind, that if they broke the Articles
agreed upon, they must fear as base a death, as that Beast did suffer^ and
Providence would not only take notice of the violation, and revenge it, but by
the ceremony they imprecated themselves, that in case they proved false to
their promise, such a sudden violent death might seize on them. Among the more
barbarous sort of Mankind, when in these cases they had slain the Beast, they
poured the Blood of the Hog, or Calf, or Ox, that was shed, into a Cup, and the
Confederates drank of it, to make the tie stronger, and the execration more
dreadful, and consequently more forcing. But the civiller sort, after they had
killed the Beast, to seal the Covenant, instead of Blood, filled the Cup with
Wine, and the respective Parties drank of it, which they thought, and believed,
to be as obligatory, as the other; In a word, hereby both parties expressed
their resolution and serious intent to perform the mutual Engagements, and
tacitly wished Death, and Judgment to themselves, in case of nonperformance of
the Articles: And though this cannot be applied in every circumstance to the
Covenant made betwixt God and Man in every particular, God not being capable of
imprecating himself, and his Word being of greater weight and moment, than all
the Oaths and Execrations Man can take, yet from the premises we may easily
guess, that Christ alludes to these practices of Mankind, in saying, This is my
Blood of the New Testament; and that in this Sacrament Men enter into a
Covenant with God, or rather confirm the Covenant made betwixt God and them, by
the Mediation of the Blood of Jesus, who was the innocent Lamb slain from the
foundation of the World; for it is with regard to that Blood, that God is not
only willing to enter, but actually enters into compacts, and contracts with
lapsed Man, and as in the aforementioned federate Rites and Ceremonies, the
parties engaging to one another drank of the Blood of the slain Beast, or of
the Wine, which was in lieu of that Blood, thereby to confirm their mutual
promises; so they that come to this Holy Sacrament, are not only admonished by
drinking of the Cup, or of the Wine in the Cup, representing the Blood of
Christ, to enter into solemn Engagements and Promises to be true and faithful
to that God, who bought them at so dear a price, as the Blood and Death of his
own Son; but in actual drinking of it, profess and declare, that in case they
prove false and treacherous to their great Confederate, break their promise
wilfully, and allow themselves in it, that they deserve that everlasting Death
and Damnation, from which that Blood was intended to deliver them; and besides,
it is a tacit imprecation too, if they be not true to their Engagements, that
then those Agonies, and Miseries, and dreadful Death, the Son of God endured,
shall fall to their share and portion, which illustrates the Apostles saying, 1
Cor. 11. 29. He that Eats and Drinks unworthily, Eats and Drinks Damnation to
himself: But of this I shall have occasion to Treat professedly in the sequel.

III. There is frequent mention made in Scripture of the Old and New Covenant.
By the Old is meant the Covenant or Compact, God by the Ministry of Moses made
with the Israelites, as they were a Commonwealth, whereof God himself was
pleased to be the King and President. This Covenant was fitted to the slavish
temper of the People, God had to deal withal; and as God promised them temporal
Felicity, eating the Good of the Land, a plentiful Harvest, increase of their
Kine and Cattle, full Barns, and a rich Vintage, multitude of Children, and
protection from their temporal Enemies, so it required in the Consederates, or
Jewish People, an exact compliance of their outward Man with the Precepts, Laws
and Statutes God appointed and gave them. The New Covenant is that Contract
which God makes with Mankind in Christ Jesus, wherein he promises to admit
sincere Believers into his special Favor, and, for Christ's sake, to bestow
upon them the riches of Grace and Glory, and on our side requires renouncing
all Love to a sinful Life, and resignation of our Souls, Spirits and Bodies, to
his Will and Government. It Is called New, in opposition to the Civil or
Political Covenant, God made with the Jewish People, as they were a Nation,
immediately under his Jurisdiction; for both the Promises and Obedience under
that Dispensation, were different from the Promises and Obedience of the other,
one promising only Temporal Blessings, and requiring External Obedience; the
other promising Spiritual and Eternal Blessings, and requiring Internal, and
sincere Obedience; and though the New Covenant, which God makes with the People
under the Gospel, had its beginning already in Adam's time, immediately after
the Fall, and was again published in the days of Abraham: Yet notwithstanding
all this, it may justly be called New, because of the clear and fuller
Revelation of it, when Christ the foundation of it appeared, and by his Death
confirmed all the Predictions, Prophecies, Types and Prefigurations of it,
before and under the Law of Moses; for then was made a new publication of it,
new Witnesses were made use of, and new Motives and Encouragements were given,
and new Sacraments as Seals of that Covenant were added. And this New Covenant,
the Blood or Wine, the Emblem of it, in the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, relates to; and he that drinks of that Wine or Blood, represented by
it, confirms that Covenant, professes that he approves of it, will stand to it,
and acknowledges the justness of his threatenings denounced against those, who
count this Blood of the Covenant an unholy thing. Even the Civil and Political
Covenant which God made with the People of the Jews, was solemnized by Blood.
which is the reason of that passage, Exodus 24. 7, 8. And Moses took the Book of
the Covenant, and read it in the audience of the People; and they said, All
that the Lord has said will we do. And Moses took the Blood, and sprinkled it
on the People, and said, Behold the Blood of the Covenant, which the Lord has
made with you, concerning all these words. And as in their suffering themselves
to be sprinkled with that Blood, they declared their unfeigned assent, and
consent to the conditions of that Covenant, and professed that it was just with
God to inflict death and ruin upon them, if they did not study to obey that
Covenant; so in the New Testament, in this Holy Sacrament, those that come to
be Partakers of it, are sprinkled, as it were, with the invaluable Blood of
Christ, and by that, own their hearty consent to the Conditions of the New
Covenant, and ratify their Obedience, and God's Promises and Threatenings too,
which are the Sanctions of this Covenant.

IV. In this Covenant, the Parties concerned are God and Man; yet from hence no
Person is to conclude, that God stood in need of this Alliance. We indeed had
need of it, and it was our Interest, that God should do so. His vouchsafing to
come to such a Contract, speaks his Goodness, and there is not a greater
Argument of his Clemency and Compassion: He could have been Great, Glorious and
Magnificent without us, and what need had he of the Friendship of such
miserable Creatures, as we are, that was All in All? His Excellency and
Beatitude receive no addition by this Covenant; and what had it been to him, if
we had been left in the common mass of Corruption and Perdition? What could he
have lost by our Eternal Groans, or what disparagement could it have been to
him to let us sink into the Gulf, when our Sins and Offenses were the
meritorious cause of it? It shows his infinite Goodness and condescension, that
he will enter into promises and engagements with his Creatures; and we are
Brutes, if the thoughts of his Mercy, in this particular, do not force our
Tongues to break forth into admiration of it. Our Misery and Wretchedness
required such a favor, and without it we must have been as great strangers to
happiness, as we were to power and ablility to help our selves. Commisseration
to our Poverty and undone Condition, moved the Almighty to come to terms with
us, and this Covenant is our advantage and emolument. God gets no profit by it,
and though it is a publication of his Goodness, and proclaims the Wonders of
his Loving Kindness, yet God might have found out other ways to manifest that;
and it is we, that are the Gainers by this Contract.

V. In this Covenant, God must not be considered only, as an infinite, most
perfect, and most excellent Being; but more particularly under that threefold
Relation of (...), Son, and Holy Ghost. Man also, is not only to be looked upon
as Gods Creature, but as a Sinner fallen from God, apostatized from
Righteousness, and standing in need of Gods Help, Assistance, Grace and
Reconciliation, and as one, who, of a Child of Wrath, is to be made a Child of
God; of an Enemy, a Friend; of an Heir of Hell, an Heir of Heaven, and Coheir
with Christ: And accordingly, this Sacramental Covenant is nothing else but a
mutual Promise, of an offended God, and the offender, whereby both Parties do
unfeignedly, and without guile, or fraud, or equivocation, declare themselves,
willing, ready, and resolved to perform the things agreed upon; God, what he
promises; and Man, what he engages to do. For God, considered as the Father
Everlasting, promises here to treat us as his Children, to be tender of our
Spiritual and Eternal Welfare, to seek our good, and turn all things to our
good; to pass by the Unkindnesses, and Indignities, we have offered to him, to
forgive, and throw them into the depth of the Sea, to impute them no more, to
count us innocent, to justify us here, and, like a Father, to provide an
Eternal Inheritance for us, i. e. to glorify us for ever. The Son of God,
considered not only as the Eternal Wisdom of the Father, but as Mediator and
Redeemer of the World, promises to be our Intercessor and Advocate, with his
Righteousness to cover our Infirmities, with his Wounds to cherish our Souls,
to answer all the Arguments and Objections of the Devil against us, and to be
our Friend, our Brother, our Shepherd. and our New and Living Way to his
Father's Bosom. The Holy Ghost does promise to enlighten us, to be our Guide in
the dark, to comfort us in all our Tribulations, to teach us how to pray, to
assure us of God's love, to fill us with joy in believing, to increase our
Graces, to strengthen us in all Difficulties, to support us in our Spiritual
Dangers, to arm us with Arguments against Temptations, and to give us a Right
to a future happy Resurrection. This is the mighty promise God makes to poor
Sinners in the Sacrament: On the other side, we that come to the Table of our
Lord, and do not intend to come in vain, do solemnly promise, particularly to
the Eternal Father, that we will own that relation with joy, and walk as his
Children, not fashioning our selves according to our former Lusts in our
ignorance, but be holy, as he, that has called us, is holy; that we will no
longer live like Rebels and Prodigals under the Name of Children, but make good
that Glorious Title by our Lives, shine as Lights in the World, and endeavor
to be spotless and blameless, and by our Lives, and Actions, and good Works,
glorify our Father which is in Heaven. We promise here to God the Son, and the
Great Redeemer, that we will not only accept of his purchased Blessings, but
submit to his Scepter too, and that he shall be not only our Savior, but our
Sovereign King and Master also, to whom we will think our selves obliged to
submit in all things, that he shall say unto us in his Gospel; that his Life
shall be the pattern of ours, and his Example and Command shall do more with us
than our Gain, or Appetite, or Interest; that we will be loyal to him, who
redeemed our Lives from Destruction, and will act as Spiritnal Subjects in his
Spiritual Kingdom. We promise also to God the Holy Ghost, That we will not only
expect his Benefit and Comforts, but be guided by his Motions; That we will not
re^^st his Checks and Reproofs, but hearken to them, whenever our Hearts do
smite us; That we will not prefer the Dictates of a Lying Devil before his
Lively Oracles, nor join with the Motions of our F^esh against his Entreaties
and Obtestations: That we will make much of his gracious Visits, and take heed
we do not by our Sins and Follies, defile the Temple of the Holy Ghost: That we
will cherish his kinder Influences, and take care, that the Grace, and Talent
he confers upon us, be not buried in the Earth, or laid up useless in a Napkin.
And this is a Scheme of the solemn Covenant, a Believer, a Receiver, a
Communicant enters into, with the Holy Trinity, in this Tremendous Sacrament; a
Covenant that ought to be more sacred than the Leagues of Princes, and more
religiously observed than the Treaties and Engagements of the dearest Friends.

VI. This Covenant we enter into, first of all in our Baptism, when our Age is
Tender, our Desires Innocent, and our Souls, like soft Wax, fit for any
Impression, and consequently fit for the Impress of the Divine Image; and
though that Age be not capable of entering actually into a Covenant with the
Lord of Heaven and Earth; yet it is enough that our Parents and Friends, who
have Power over us, do then make this Covenant with God for us, dedicate us to
his Service, appoint us Candidates of Holiness, and consecrate us early to the
performance of the Conditions, required in this Covenant; a Charity just, and a
genuine effect of Paternal Care, which as it loves, the Child should share in
their Temporal Enjoyments, so it cannot but desire, it should participate of
the Blessings of this Covenant; And since these Blessings are not to be had
without the Obligation of Faith, Repentance and Obedience, though the Child
cannot actually exercise these Virtues, yet being offered to God upon these
Conditions, the Parents do not only show their good Will, to have the Child
enrol'd in the Book of Life, but lay the strongest Obligations on the Child, to
stand to the Terms of the Covenant, when it comes to display the Glory of its
Rational Faculties; and therefore may expect an actual Conveyance of the
Spiritual Blessings of this Covenant to the Child by the secret Operations of
the Holy Ghost; which Blessings the Child has a Right to, till enticed by
Lust, and the Vanity of the World, it grows proud, rebellious, and shakes of
the conduct of its Guide, viz. The Spirit of the Holy Jesus: For, God knows,
the World and the Devil watch the first rising of the Sun, I mean, the first
Appearances of Reason, and seek to obscure and darken them by Mists of
Sensuality, into which Pit the Young Man, that was in his Infancy dedicated to
God, too often falls, and there lies and sleeps, and many times awakes not,
till Death summons him to the dreadful Bar of Heaven. Where it is so, that the
Covenant, we entered into in the Morning of our Days, is forgotten, slighted,
and polluted with Filthiness, and superfluity of Naughtiness, what can we
think, but that the intended Blessings of the Covenant cease and die, and are
withdrawn from the degenerate Creature, and the Promises of God being our
Father, our Savior, and our Comforter, are nulled, at least the performance of
them suspended, till the Apostate comes to himself again? This early
perfidiousness, too common, and too general, discovers the absolute necessity
of renewing this Covenant, when we are able to understand the greatness and
importance of the Contract, and to enter into that Bond in our own Persons,
especially, in the Supper of the Lord, and there solemnly to engage our Souls,
to the performance of the Conditions, required on our side, upon which, what
God has graciously promised will effectually be performed again: an offer, not
to be slighted, for it is an argument of infinite Patience and Goodness, that
God will give the Backslider leave to enter into the broken Covenant, and will,
upon that return, let the still streams of his Promises flow in, and Water his
Soul again; so that, if this opportunity be neglected, we know not the
Treasures of Wrath we heap up against our selves, for it looks like resolution
to die, and to be miserable.

VII. That God consents to this Covenant unfeignedly, we need not doubt; and
that what he promises, he intends to fulfill, we may be confident of, since we
have his Word for it, and his Nature is such, that he cannot lie. The great
danger lies on our side, who are very mutable Creatures, and apt either to
equivocate in our consent, or to consent only by halves, or to forget the Terms
we have consented to. It Is fit therefore, I should explain the Nature of that
consent we give, or are to give, in this Covenant, especially at the Table of
our Lord; where the Sacred Cup, filled with the Blood of Christ, at once
represents Gods willingness to enter into a Covenant with us, and invites us to
accept of the Offer; and our Drinking of it shows, we actually consent to all
the Terms of this Covenant. Therefore to prevent Hypocrisy in this consent, I
must tell you, that this consent must be,

1. Deliberate, and the effect of Consultation. Sometimes a melancholy Humor
seizes upon our Spirits, and not knowing how to ease our selves, we try whether
Religion will not qualify our trouble, and then we are consenting to this
Covenant, though we cannot tell why, or how; whence it comes to pass, that if
Religion does not presently cure our Melancholy, we grow weary, and throw it
off again. Most Men have sometimes a Religious Fit upon them; and when either
something has crossed their designs, or a disaster has put them into
discontent, they are, during that Paroxysm, resolved to consent: But as it was
a sudden Motion without a good Foundation, so it soon withers and comes to
nothing It Is necessary therefore, we should take pains to understand, what this
Covenant means, what consent God requires, how reasonable and just that consent
is, what a privilege it is, that God will admit us into such a Compact, what
the things are, he requires on our part, and how necessary it is, he should
require such at our Hands: and after we have counted the cost, and seen, and
thought, and consulted, what this unfeigned consent will stand us in, and
weighed both the Advantages, and Inconveniences, then, in the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, freely and cheerfully to agree to the Conditions required in this
Covenant, this is a consent, which, in imitation of the great Planet of the
Day, is like to go on to a perfect Day.

2. This consent must be hearty, the intent strong, and the desire vigorous to
perform the Conditions of this Covenant; such a consent as he gives, that for a
considerable Reward, promises to do, what we put him upon. He fully designs it,
he knows nothing that should hinder him, his Heart, his Mind, his Affections
are bent upon the doing of it; for the Reward presses upon his Understanding,
and the greatness of that gives force and resolution to his Will and Desire.
Here must be used no underhand dealings. God is not to be put off with
Complements: The Young Man, that said, I go, Sir, but went not, Math. 21. 28.
stands branded for a Hypocrite. A full purpose of Heart is requisite in this
case; as serious a purpose as Men have, when under great hopes or fears, which
are most likely to make their purpose invincible. To consent to walk as Sons of
God, to embrace the Lord Jesus as our King, to prefer the Motions of Gods
Spirit before the Suggestions of the Flesh; I say, to consent to all this, and
not to intend very seriously to act accordingly, is to impose upon God, at
least to act, as if we would do so, and to slight his Omniscience, or to carry
our selves, as if he did not know our down-sitting, and our up-rising, or did
not understand our Thoughts afar off, which is impious.

3. This consent ought to be impartial and entire, even to all the parts of the
Conditions, expressed or understood in this Covenant: Here must be no accepting
of Christ by halves, but our Affections must embrace him both as a Ruler, and a
Friend: To accept of the Sweets of his Sufferings, and to refuse his Yoke; to
rejoice in his Mercies, and to reject his Law; or to be willing to submit to
some of his Laws, and to take liberty as to others, is, to divide Christ, and
to part his Offices, or to hold both with Christ, and with the Devil. A King
had as good have no Subjects, as disobedient Subjects; and to what purpose had
all that costly Method of the Son of God, to purchase a People to himself,
been, if the intent had not been to make them subject to his Will and Power?
That there might be no dispute about this point, the Apostle has left it upon
record* Heb. 5. 9. That he became the Author of Eternal Salvation, to them that
obey him; And there needs no great Logic, to infer from hence, That no Man
has a Right or Title to Salvation, till he actually and sincerely obeys him,
and obeys him in all that he requires: For he that obeys partially, does not
obey in a Scripture sense. We our selves do not much affect Servants, that are
only for what they can get, and care not how little Work they do; and God, to
be sure, has no Reason to look upon those as true Confederates, that consent
only to be made happy by the Death of Christ, but are loath to die to the
Vanities of this World, or to admit his Kingdom and Empire into their Souls: So
that he, that truly consents to this Covenant, must consent not only to enjoy
the Comforts of a Savior, but that Christ shall be Master of his Will, Desires
and Affections, that these shall be at his Beck, move by his Order, and be
managed according to his Direction.

4. This consent must not only respect our future Seriousness and
Conscientiousness, but express our present Designs and Inclinations. As in
Marriage, so in this Covenant, it must be a present consent that ratifies the
Contract; and as in the former, I take thee for my Wedded Wife; and I take thee
for my Wedded Husband, makes the Matrimonial Compact valid, so in this, present
agreeing to the Terms proposed and required, makes a Man a welcome Confederate,
and unites, and knits him to that God, who enters into solemn Engagements in
this Covenant, to discharge the Offices of a kind Husband to us; And, O God,
the Father of Heaven, I do here most humbly offer and tender unto thee my
filial Affection: O God the Son, Redeemer of the World, I am content to be thy
Loyal Sabject, and to be governed and ruled by thy Holy Laws: O God the Holy
Ghost, preceding from the Father and the Son, I take thee for my Guide, and my
Counselor, by whose advice I mean to steer my course. Such present
Declarations of our consent admit us to the Blessings of this Covenant; so that
he who enters into this Covenant, and is not willing presently, and without
delay to discharge the Conditions of it, uses Tergiversations, and equivocates
with God; and though a Man may intend, that some time hereafter; when he is
freer from Business, more clear in the World, has fewer Divertisements, and is
more at leisure, he will not fail to perform all that is required of his part,
yet that will not satisfy, nor answer the design of this Agreement; for who
knows, what he shall do hereafter? The present time is only in our Power, and
he that is not presently resolved, is not likely, considering the Temptations
he may meet withal, to do any great matters for God, or for his Soul, hereafter.

5. This content must be absolute, or, which is all one, without Reserves.
Secret Conditions have no place here. And that Man is not fit for the Kingdom
of God, that desires first to bury his Father, or to take his leave of his
Friends and Relations, and then to follow Christ, Luke 9. 59. To consent to
this Covenant, and to reserve any one darling Sin; to consent to the
performance of the Conditions, with exception of a single Lust, which our
Place, Calling, or present Circumstances will not let us part withal, is a
sign, the Heart is not upright with God, and a Man that has not that high
esteem of God's Grace and Favor, he ought to have. The Soul must come naked to
the Cross of Jesus. Here must be no Bargainings with a Tremendous Majesty, no
Proviso's as Pharaoh made with the Children of Israel, when he was to let them
go. He was content, the elder People should march and sacrifice to their God,
but the little Ones he would have staid* God must not be told in this Covenant,
Lord! If thou will, let me enjoy this piece of Pride, or give me leave to
vindicate my Honor, by avenging my self; If thou will let me comply with such
a sinful Man's humor, wilt let me flatter him, or dissemble with him for my
Profit and Interest? or if I thrive and prosper in my Trade, Profession and
Employment; if I may enjoy temporal Felicity, and live as happily as my
Neighbors, I freely consent to all the rest, that thy Power and greatness
expects at my Hands. For this is to contradict the design of this Covenant,
which is to make us entirely his. And that no Man may stroke himself with a
Fancy, that he never made, and never intends such formal exceptions in his
consent, I must add, that where a person does actually reserve such things,
whether he does formally and expressly except them or no, the case is the same,
and is as much, as if such formal exceptions had been made in our entering into
this Covenant; whatever our lot or fortune may be in the World, whatever
inconveniences may happen in the strict observance of this contract, those
must be overlooked for the greater benefits offered us on God's part in this
Covenant.

VIII. But here a question will arise, If this Covenant be broken, after it is
thus ratified, or established in the Lord's Supper, whether, and how it may be
renewed? To give a satisfactory answer to this point, I shall lay down what is
fit to be said to it, in these following particulars.

1. By Breaking this Covenant, I mean, to make it null, not only on our side,
but also on God's part, so that we can have no assurance, no hope, no rational
confidence, that God loves us any longer as his Confederates, as his Friends
and Children, or with a love of complacency, or that he is our reconciled
Father, or that we are dear to him, and Heirs of Heaven, or that the Promises
of the Gospel belong to us; in a word, so to make it void, as to put our selves
in the same condition, we were in, before ever we had any thoughts of giving
our selves up to Almighty God in a formal Covenant, so as to become objects of
God's Wrath and Indignation, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for
ever. This being premised.

2. Every thing, that clouds or darkens the comforts arising from a sense of
our being in Covenant with God, cannot, must not, presently be interpreted, a
total breach of it; There are many sincere Christian Israelites indeed, in whom
there is no considerable guile, who either through weakness of understanding,
or through some bodily distemper seizing on their nobler parts, or for want of
consulting with some conscientious Divine, or through vehement assaults of the
Devil, may not feel the streams of consolation, which formerly used to flow
into their Souls from the cheerful apprehensions they had of their being united
to God by a solemn Covenant, who yet still go on to fulfill the conditions of
this Holy Contract, and are exceeding cautious of offending, or acting against
the Laws of it: and most certainly the Mists and Fogs, which obscure and dull
the brightness of their comforts, are no arguments of their having made void
this Covenant, or that God's Paternal affection to their Souls is gone: For
though they may even complain with Zion, that the Lord has forsaken them, and
their God has forgotten them, yet still they are Children of Light in the
midst of Darkness; and were but the noise of temptation over, or the distemper,
which discomposes them, abated, they would soon hear God speaking to them in
the Language of a Father, Can a Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should
not have Compassion on the Fruit of her Womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will
not I forget thee: Behold, I have engraven thee on the Palms of my Hands. Es.
49. 15.

3. No unallowed of Miscarriages, I mean, Miscarriages against the settled bent
and resolutions of our Souls, can be said to null this Covenant: For God
promising in this Covenant, to be a tender and gracious Father to us in Christ
Jesus, we must needs suppose, that as a Father pities his own Children, so the
Lord takes pity on them that fear him, as we read, Ps. 103. 13. Therefore, as a
Father, who has an obedient Son, if he hear him speak a rash word, or see him
do an imprudent act, he was never guilty of before, and perceives him blushing,
as soon as he has done it, which shows the Error was not in his Nature, or the
effect of an evil Habit, but caused by some accident, or before he was aware,
and consequently does not thereupon presently cast him off, or turn him out of
Doors, or withdraw the affections and inclinations of a Father from him; so
neither does God from his dear Confederates, if sometimes by surprise they are
overtaken in a fault, upon which their Hearts immediately smite them, and they
take shame to themselves; for this shows, that it was not temper, but
temptation, that caused this fall, and that it was against the bent and settled
inclinations of their Souls.

4. Neither do blasphemous Suggestions null this sacred Covenant: By these, I
mean not wilful Blasphemies, or reviling of God, the effects of Malice, Hatred
and Enmity against God, of aversion from Goodness, and inveterate Wickedness in
the Soul; for these are Characters of a Man's being in Covenant with the Devil,
and at Agreement with Hell: But by Blasphemous Suggestions are understood here,
sudden Representations of things horrid, monstrous and unnatural to our Minds,
which savor of Blasphemy, come in unforeseen and unlooked for, and look indeed
like our own Thoughts, but are not, but, in good truth, are Injections of the
Devil, who shoots and darts such dismal things into our Understandings or
Imaginations, contrary to our Will, Desire, Liking, and Approbation. Of these
tedious and troublesome Guests, not a few Persons do complain, who with great
seriousness apply themselves to the real practice of Godliness. The Enemy of
Souls, being no longer able to sooth them up in carnal security, and finding
them weary of the Yoke of Sin, betakes himself to this Stratagem, and tries by
such Suggestions and Assaults to drive them to despair; for they are things
dreadful, and such, as both Nature and Grace, and Conscience, tremble at; and
very strange effects they have in many Christians, that are ignorant of these
devices; They make them rise from Prayer, assault them at the very Altar,
disturb their warmest Devotions, and many times tempt them to Self-murder; and
the Patient frequently thinks, that a Hell is begun in his Bosom, that he is
possessed, and has a Legion with him. They come in, like Lightning, and cause
such confusion in the Thoughts, that the tempted Christian thinks none so
miserable as himself. These Suggestions, while they are resisted, detested,
opposed, slighted, abhorred, and protested against, do not null this Covenant,
because they are things we cannot help, nor does it lie in our power to hinder
the Devil from trying Experiments and Conclusions upon us: All we have to do,
is, not to consent, or not to yield to them, and thereby we establish the
Covenant. Nor,

5. Does want of such a degree, either of joy or sorrow, null this comfortable
Covenant. There are many sincere Believers, who either, because they cannot
weep so much for their Offenses, as David, and Peter, and Mary Magdalen, or
cannot raise their Affections to that pitch of Life, and Joy, and Briskness,
that other Constitutions can in things Devotional and Spiritual, are apt to
conclude they have no share in the Comforts of this Covenant: And the Argument
they commonly make use of, to prove the inference, is, because, did God love
them, as his Children, he would give them the same spiritual Blessings, he
gives to others. But this consequence is weak, for though God does promise, and
give, to all Children Grace, and his Holy Spirit, and inclines their Hearts to
his Testimonies, and whoever are of the number of true Children of God, we may
confidently affirm, they have the Love of God shed abroad in their Souls; yet
God has no where promised, that all his Children shall have the same degrees
of Grace; much less the same degrees of Joy and Sorrow: For as there is one
Glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, and another Glory of the Stars; and one
Star differs from another Star in Glory, to use the Apostles expression, 1 Cor.
15. 41. so also is it in the Resurrection of the Soul from the Death of Sin,
all are made partakers of the Grace of God, but all have not the same degrees
of Grace, and the degrees of spiritual Joy and Sorrow differ too.

1. Because God hereby encourages, and would encourage, the Industry of his
Children. Greater degrees of Grace are rewards of the industrious, and the
laborious have these baits laid before them. God Crowns the pains of his
fervent Lovers with these Laurels, and the harder a Soul works in the Lord's
Vineyard, the higher they are advanced in this spiritual Kingdom, as we may
guess from the Parable of the Talents, Matthew. 25, 20, 21. And of this the very
Heathens were sensible, when they made it a standing Maxim, That the Gods sold
all their Gifts for Labor and Industry; Not to mention, that some Vessels are
more capacious, and will hold more than others, and the larger the Soul is, the
more it will contain.

2. That all have not the same degrees of Joy and Sorrow, the reason is,
because God gives not to all his Children Constitutions alike, upon which, the
external expressions of Joy and Sorrow do very much depend. If Grace meets with
a moist constitution, or affectionate Temper, it makes the Eyes flow in
stronger currents, and fills those Channels with larger streams of Tears, which
a more even Temper is not capable of So, if it mingle with a sanguine and
cheerful complexion, the Joys in spiritual things must necessarily rise higher,
than in Persons of a heavy or Melancholy constitution. Grace does not alter the
constitution, but directs it. It gives not a new habit of Body, but disposes
the habit, it finds, to exhert and vent it self in matters of Religion,
suitably to its Nature. Should all arrive to the same degrees of Joy and
Sorrow, God must be at the charge of a Miracle every day, for he would be
obliged to alter the several constitutions, which as he does not think fit to
do, so neither is it reasonable Men should expect it; and from hence it is
evident, that a Believer may sincerely fulfill the conditions of this Covenant,
and yet want the same degrees of Joy and Sorrow he sees in others, and
consequently this want does not null the Covenant.

6. All Sins allowed of do certainly null this Covenant, whether they be great
or small; By Sins allowed of, I mean, not only Sins committed deliberately
against knowledge, and the dictates of Conscience, but Sins also, we live, or
go on in, without remorse or a rational care to be rid of them, and that such
Sins as seem inconsiderable in the Eyes of the World, these as well as those of
a larger size, if allowed of, do null this Covenant, is manifest, partly from
hence, because they put the Soul into a State of enmity against God, which
enmity destroys the relation between Father and Child, for to be wilful in
doing that, which I know, or may easily know will displease my Father, is pure
rebellion, not the error of a Child, a spot of a Leopard, not that of a Son of
God; partly, hecause these little Sins, dandled and allowed of, are expressly
said to exclude from the Kingdom of Heaven, or, which is all one, to make a Man
least in the Kingdom of Heaven, which Kingdom is the great Blessing promised in
this Covenant, for so we read, Matthew. 5. 19. Whosoever therefore shall break
one of these least Commandments, and shall teach Men so, either by word, or by
his Example, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. And the
reason, why even Sins, which People make nothing of, such as calling their
Neighbors, Rogue and Fool, without a just cause, lascivious desires and
appetites, and revengeful actions, See The Happy Ascet. Exerc. 6.
etc. have so severe a Sanction annexed to them, if they be cherished and
loved, is this, because the less they are, the sooner, and the more easily they
are avoided, and therefore it must argue strange aversion from God, not to
oblige him in so small a thing; and that Men, after they have entered into this
solemn Covenant at the Table of the Lord, may be allured, and enticed by
Temptations, and persuaded to allow themselves in known Sins both great and
small, and thereby null the Covenant, we have no reason to question, since
Experience is beyond all Witnesses in the World.

7. The only Plank left us, after the Covenant is thus broken and nulled, to
swim out of the Gulf of perdition, and to regain God's favor, is confessed on
all hands, to be true and deep repentance, and particularly a Repentance
attended with Fasting, Alms and great future Self-denials. In the stricter Ages
of Christianity, especially in the Second and Third Centuries, it was very much
questioned, whether a Person, who had solemnly and deliberately entr'd into a
Covenant with God, either in Baptism* or in the Lord's Supper, if afterward he
fell into some of these three Sins, Adultery, Murder or Idolatry, was capable
of regaining the favor of God, promised in this Covenant: The African
Churches, especially, were very stiff in this point, yet the more moderate
allowed of a Second Repentance, reckoning the first to be that, which had been
made by adult Persons in either of these Sacraments, and the second, if after a
new fall, or wilful precipitation into any of these crimes, he rose again with
very great purposes and resolutions; but if a Man fell again into any of these
Sins, after the Second Repentance, they looked upon the Third as impossible.
Others, though they did not exclude the Persons, thus fallen, totally from the
possibility of God's favor and Salvation, in case he repented, either the
Second or third time, yet, did not think fit to receive him again into the
Communion of the Church; and this, which the African Fathers looked upon only,
as a thing convenient, Novatus enraged, it is like, because he could not be made
a Bishop, improved into absolute necessity, which made his followers exclude
all such Persons, as were fallen after their first Repentance, into any of
these Sins, from their Communion. That which gave occasion to this Doctrine,
was their too rigid interpretation of some places in Scripture, particularly
that of Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and the other 1 John 5. 16. which places are to be
understood rather of a malicious denying the Faith, and forsaking the very
Profession of Christianity, and turning Jew, Heathen or Infidel, than of the
aforesaid acts of Sin; The Roman Church was the first that received such
sinners, after a tedious and laborious Repentance, into their Communion again,
for which Tertullian expostulates with the Bishop of Rome, and accuses him of
Rashness, imprudence, and breach of the ancient Canons. However, since the
Apostle himself, 2. Cor. 2. 7. received the incestuous Person into the
Communion of the Church of Corinth, and desired the Corinthians to do the like,
after a sufficient demonstration of his Repentance, after such falls into
wilful and habitual Sins, be sincere and true, exemplary and laborious, that
there is just hopes, such a person may renew his Covenant, get a Title again to
the promises of it, and be readmitted to God's Favor and Complacency. But then,

1. This Repentance ought to be speedy: To live long in such Sins, after the
first wilful breach of this Covenant, is dangerous, hardens the Heart, gives
the Devil greater power over the Soul, and the Person thus sining knows not,
but he may be given up to hardness of Heart, and to reprobate mind, in which
condition he may be snatched away by Death, and haled to the great Tribunal.

2. Such a Person must not make a trade of Repenting and sinning, for if he
fall often into the same Sin, and still pretends to repent, its a sign, the
Repentance is counterfeit, his love to God fickle and unsincere, his
resistances of God's Spirit strong, and the inward Man left without a Guard to
secure it against the assaults of the Devil.

3. Upon this new Repentance, greater watchfulness than ordinary must be used,
and the Penitent must become a gainer by his Sins, i. e. the dreadfulness of
his fall must help toward the great exemplariness of his Life; and the Sins he
has lived in, must make them dread them more than ever. A very signal growth
in Grace must succeed his Fall; and the Ball having been struck against the
ground, must now rebound the higher. His time must now be redeemed, and he,
that has been so careless, must now double his diligence. He must therefore
love much now, because he expects, much should be forgiven him; and his greater
fervor in Religion, is the best demonstration of his unfeigned return from his
Apostasy,

The Preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. IT must needs be great presumption, for Men and Women to enter into a
solemn Covenant with God in this Sacrament, and not to consider the weight and
importance of it. Christian, when thou enter'st into this Covenant with the
Holy Trinity, thou solemnly obligest thy self, that as thou hopest for Heaven
and Happiness, as thou hopest for Pardon and Salvation, as thou hopest to have
thy Sins washed away with the precious Blood of Christ, thou will take Christ's
Yoke upon thee, endeavor to be humble and meek, as he was, learn of him, and
die to the World, crucify thy Lusts and Affections, fight against the vanities
of the World, and labor to con^orm to the great example of that Savior, that
spilt his dearest Blood for thee. Either thou understandest, what this
engagement means, or thou do not: If not, how dare thou touch the Sacred
Elements with polluted Hands? If thou understandest it, and art not firmly
resolved to take care to perform what thou promisest so solemnly, how do thou
think to escape the Judgment of God? Art thou afraid of breaking a solemn
promise made to a Prince and great Man, whose Smile or Frown can either help or
prejudice thee much, and art thou not afraid of violating thy Engagements to
the great God of Heaven? What do thou make of God? Do thou take him to be
some Heathen Deity that has Eyes, and sees not, Ears and hears not? Do thou
oblige thy self to be his Subject, and do thou turn Rebel? His Child, and
become a Prodigal? His Confederate, and conspire against him with his Enemies?
Do thou take him for thy Lord, and wilt not thou do what he says? If these
thy unfaithful dealings with thy Lord and Master, be entered into Gods Book of
Accounts, as certainly they are, and the black Roll shall at last be opened and
read in thine Ears, do not thou think, what Terror, Amazement, and Confusion
thou will be in! O Sinner! There is no jesting with such Bonds and Obligations.
The God thou have to deal withal, is a jealous God, and if these Engagements
cannot oblige thy Soul to a serious Conversation, they will be witnesses to
promote and hasten thy Condemnation.

II. See here, what a miserrble and doleful state it is, not to be in Covenant
with God. He that is not, has no security from the wrath of God, the
Threatenings of the Gospel are in force against him, and he knows not, how soon
the Thunderbolt will fall upon his Head: Like a condemned Malefactor, he is
reprieved for a while, and can promise himself a share only of the common
Blessings, which the Great Creator bestows indifferently upon his Friends and
Enemies. Not to be in Covenant with him, is to be dead to his Paternal Grace
and Favor, and to be deprived of those Influences, which make the Saints
joyful in Glory, and cause them to sing aloud upon their Beds. Till you are in
Covenant with your God, you can have no hopes of Pardon, your Sins remain upon
you, and that load will crush you at last into despair. O think of it you that
never made such a Covenant with your God in good earnest: Notbeing in Covenant
with him, Christ's Blood, and Death, and Wounds, and Agonies, do not profit
you: And for you, O miserable Creatures, Christ died in vain, that Damnation,
Christ came to deliver the World from, continues to be your Portion; and should
you die in that condition, you are undone to all intents and purposes. Till you
are in Covenant with God, you are under the power of Darkness, and under the
Government of the worst of Tyrants; you are Slaves in the midst of all your
jollities, Bondmen in the midst of your Pleasures: You laugh in Chains, triumph
in your Fetters, and stand upon the brink of Destruction. O do not make light
of this unhappy state; your making light of it, speaks you desperate; but being
concerned at your danger, may yet be a means to free your selves from the Net,
you are at present intangl'd in: Fear of being undone, may yet keep you from
it, and sorrow that you have not seriously thought of it, may yet turn the
stream, and convert the Heart of God to you into Mercy and Compassion;
therefore it is, that we instruct you in meekness, if God, peradventure will
give you Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth, and that you may recover
your selves out of the Snare of the Devil, who have been taken captive by him
at his Will, 2 Timothy 2. 26.

III. From hence it appears, how necessary it is for People, when young, to
make or renew this Covenant with their God; As no Man can close too early with
the offers of Grace; so if this Covenant were made by all young Men and Women
seriously, and with deliberation, what a restraint would it be upon their
juvenal Desires! What a curb to their extravagant Fancies! What an Armor
against Sin, and the ill examples of the World! How would this considerate
Engagement keep them in, and fright them from consenting, when sinners do
entice them! The reason, why it has not this effect upon them, is, because it
is not made with suitable applications of the Mind to the importance of it, or
to the Greatness and Majesty of that God, with whom it is made, and to the
danger and hazard they run, in breaking of it for every trifle that comes in
their way, and when they have made it, they do not keep their Hearts warm by
ruminating upon what they have done, nor do they renew it so often as they
might, and should do, Were it preserved fresh and green, and flourishing in
their Minds, it would harden them against impression of all those little
allurements, which now draw their Affections and their Souls another way; Did
they think, when a sinful show, when vain company, when a glozing pleasure,
when a base suggestion invites them to consent, I have washed my Feet, how
shall I defile them again! I have given my self up to the disposal of him, to
whom all Power in Heaven and Earth is given, How can I be faithless, and escape
his Anger! I have in this Sacrament made a resignation of my Heart to him, that
rescued me from the burning Lake, how shall I break with him, and escape his
displeasure! I have consecrated my self to a greater Master, How shall I debase
my self, and serve such pitiful nothings! I have but one Soul, and have given
that away to my Redeemer, How shall I espouse this Vanity! I have promised
Obedience to him, that washed me with his Blood, How shall I obey his Enemy!
Such Thoughts as these, repeated often, would make the Heart inflexible to all
the charming entreaties of the World, or the Devil; and Oh! that you would but
make this Trial, you would find, that we are not Mad, but speak the words of
Truth and Soberness, as St. Paul told Festus, in a case not much unlike this,
Acts 26. 25.

IV. It Is no very difficult thing, to come to a Holy certainty, and assurance,
that we are in Covenant with God. It must needs be difficult to the unwilling;
and to him that hopes, God's Favor will fly into his Mouth without seeking it,
any thing seems hard; and if it were difficult, the difficulty is not
insuperable, especially if we look into the conditions of the Covenant, There
is no man that is in his Wits, but may upon a diligent search find, and know,
whether he heartily agrees to the conditions, and whether he promises, what is
required on his part, out of love to the ways of Religion, and whether he makes
conscience of performing his promises. It Is true, the Heart is deceitful, but
that it is so, is our own fault, we may remedy that deceitfulness, if we will
search it, and, by the Rules Christ has prescribed in the Gospel, bring it
into order. It is not to be imagined, that God would leave us in uncertainties,
in so great a concern as this, and he that bids us apply the Comforts of this
Covenant, must be supposed to have left us signs and characters, whereby we may
know that we are confederates with him, and have a right to what he has said,
he will do for us, and there can be no greater character, than the testimony of
our Conscience, that our engagements influence our Spirits, keep us in awe,
prevail with us to be cautious, and can do more with us, than a base Lust, or
any sinful gain and pleasure. If thou freely resignest thy self to the guidance
and direction of thy Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier, and the love of God,
manifested in this Covenant, works upon thine Affections, and thou art content
to be ruled by ois Law, art sensible of the equity and reasonableness of it,
consentest to his injunctions, not only professest subjection, but actually
endeavourest to submit to what he commands, and art willing without any
reserves, that not only thine Understanding, Will, and Desires, but thine
outward Man too, thine Eyes, and Ears, and Feet, and Gestures, and Behavior,
thy Reason, Memory and Passion should all be at his beck, move by his
prescription, act according to his appointment, be seasoned with his Grace, and
conducted by his Wisdom; If thou art content, that all shall go, rather than
his Favor; if his Love, or a share in it, be dearer to thee, than the dearest
of all outward enjoyments; be of good cheer, it is a good sign, and thou may
rationally infer, that thou art in Covenant with thy Lord, and have a right to
all the privileges, that are annexed to it for thy encouragement.

V. And here, we may justly reflect, what a mercy it is to be in Covenant with
God; a mercy indeed, which no Tongue can express, nay, no Apollos neither, as
eloquent as he was, can describe, no Tertullus, no Cicero, no Demosthenes
represent according to its worth; a mercy, which no Man knows, save he who
receives it; a mercy weich fills the Tongues of departed Saints with praises; a
mercy which unhappy Souls that groan among Devils, would give Millions for, if
they had them; a mercy which sweetens all Conditions, makes Sickness easy, and
Iron Chains sit soft, mitigates pain, and tempers grief and anguish; A mercy,
which made the penitent Publican stand confounded, amazed the humble Magdalen,
caused St. Paul to go cheerfully through Stripes and Imprisonment, and
encouraged the Believers of old to defy death and torments. He that is in
Covenant with God, enjoys all that Son of God enjoys, though not as yet in
fruition and possession, yet in title and reversion; God the Father carries him
on his Wings, as the Eagle does her young, the Eternal Son of God is his
faithful Friend; The Holy Spirit of God speaks to him in the still voice of
peace and comfort. He that is in this Covenant, is safe in the midst of Spears
and Arrows, safe when he goes through the Water, safe when he passes through
the Fire, safe when the Waves do roar, safe when Hell gapes upon him, safe in a
Storm, safe at Sea, safe on the Shore, safe in his Life, safe in his Death; God
is concerned for him, in all his afflictions He is afflicted; The Lord Jesus is
touched with his infirmities, and the Spirit of God makes intercessions for him
with groans that cannot be uttered. In a word, there is no Condemnation to
them, that are in Christ Jesus, to them, that walk not after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit, Romans 8. 1.

The PRAYER.
O God! whose pity is infinite! whose compassion knows no bounds! How shall I
extol thy Humiliation! How shall I admire thy condescension to this poor Worm!
Will God, the Great, the omnipotent God, look upon such an one as I? Will thou
enter into a Covenant with this lump of Clay? will thou tie, and oblige thy
self to do me good? The Favor is wonderful! I could not have thought it
possible, but that thou have most graciously revealed it to me. I believe,
Lord! help my unbelief! Behold, I am Servant, the Son [the Daughter] of thine
Handmaid. Be it unto me, according unto thy Word. I accept of thy offer. I
count my self happy, that I may be admitted into Covenant with thee. I renounce
the Devil and all his Works. Thou shall be my Master, my Father, my Guide, my
Director, my King, and my God, my Master to command me, my Father to counsel
me, my Guide to lead me, my Director to conduct me, my King to rule me, my God
to dispose of me as thou please. I will know no Will, but thy Will. By the
Blood of the Covenant unite my Will to thy Will. Grant me to desire, what thou
delightest in, desiring to search after it, searching to know it, and knowing
it, to fulfill it. Make me, O Lord, for thou alone can do it, make me Obedient
without contradiction, Holy without defection, Chaste without corruption,
Patient without murmuring, Humble without dissimulation, Cheerful without
licentiousness, Sorrowful without dejection, Grave without affectation, nimble
in Religion without lightness, Fearful without despair, Upright without
Hypocrisy, and fruitful in good Works without presumption. Give me a watchful
Heart, a Heart not easily drawn away by vain imaginations, a Heart unbroken by
afflictions, unaffected with the vanities of the World, that may not swell with
prosperity, nor sink in adversity. Grant me understanding to know thee,
diligence to seek thee, wisdom to find thee, a readiness to please thee,
perseverance to wait for thee, and confidence at last to embrace thee. O Holy
and Eternal Spirit! I depend upon thy assistance. Make me faithful to my God,
faithful to my Neighbor, faithful to mine own Soul, faithful in my Calling,
faithful in the discharge of my Duty, faithful in my Promises, faithful in my
Conversation, faithful in my Love, faithful in my Obedience, faithful in thy
House, faithful in mine own, faithful unto Death, that I may obtain a Crown of
Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

CHAP. XV.
Of frequent receiving the Holy Communion, and the necessity of it.
The ONTENTS.
Frequent coming to the Lord's Table, the Practice of the Primitive Christians.
Receiving every Lord's Day, an universal observance. Different Customs, in
different Churches. Decay of a good life, the cause of Communicating seldom.
The necessity of frequent Communicating, shown in four particulars, as the
Eucharist is a great preservative against Sin, an engagement to emulate
Christ's Virtues, a Motive to Charity, and the frequent coming, a thing very
pleasing to God. Inquiry made, how often a conscientious Christian is bound to
Communicate; The measures of that Obligation to be taken, partly from the
Orders of the Church we live in, and partly from the fervency of our love to
Christ. An Objection drawn from the danger of contempt, and disesteem of the
Ordinance, if we come often, answered. Arguments to prove, that lawful business
in the World, is no just impediment of Communicating frequently. An
Expostulation, pressing frequent Receiving. The frequent Communicant, an Object
of Divine Mercy. The Prayer.

I. THough the Example of the Primitive Believers is not properly a Law, yet we
may have leave to infer so much from it, that being well acquainted with the
Will of Christ and his Apostles, in those Practices especially. which were
universal, we ought not without very urgent reasons to depart from that
Pattern* and if this Rule hold, frequent communicating at the Lords Table, will
become, if not absolutely necessary, yet highly useful and expedient, since it
was the practice of the best of Men, in the best of Ages, and of this the Acts
of the Holy Apostles give us a very large account, particularly Chapter 2. 42. 46.
which place being generally understood of the Eucharist, it must follow, that
the Believers did daily participate of it. But this seems to have been a custom
peculiar to the Church of Jerusalem, for though St. ^yprian, St. Chrysostom,
and St. Austin speak of some places in their time, where the daily Sacrifice
was celebrated, yet even in the Apostles days we find, other Churches did not
tie themselves to that practice, particularly that of Troas, where the
Communion was celebrated every Lords Day only, as St. Luke informs us, Act. 20.
7. And upon the first day of the week, when the Disciples came together to
break Bread, Paul preached unto them; and this custom the Apostles seem to have
established in most Churches, because it was followed almost in all places, not
only while they lived, but after they had left the world; and continued for
several Centuries, till Zeal and Fervor in the House of God decayed; and
because none of the Ancients has so fully described this custom as Justin
Martyr, who lived in the second Century, or 150 years after Christ, Just. Mart.
Apol. 1. pro Christianis. (...), etc.
it will not be amiss to set down his words, which are. On the day, called
Sunday, all who are either in the City or Country, come together in one place,
and the comentaries, or Writings either of the Apostles or Prophets, as time
will permit, are read to the Congregation. The Reader having done, the (...)
President, or the Chief Minister of the Church makes an Oration, in which he
instructs the hearers; and exhorts them to a sincere imitation of the excellent
things, that have been delivered to them. Upon this, we all rise, and apply our
selves to Prayer. This done, Bread, and Wine, and Water are brought forth, and
the President, as far as he is able, offers to Almighty God Prayers and
Praises, at which the People joyfully say, Amen; Whereupon distribution is made
of the consecrated things to all that are present; If any be absent, the
Deacons carry them to their Houses: Those, who are of the richer sort,
contribute Alms every one according to his ability, and what is thus gathered,
is deposited in the President's hand; and out of that he re, lieves Orphans,
and Widows, and such as, by reason of sickness, or some other distresses, have
need of it; such also as are in bonds, and poor Strangers, that come to him; in
a word, he is a Steward to all that are in want; And on Sunday particularly we
meet thus, because it is the first day in which God, out of darkness and
matter, which he had created before, framed this visible World, and Jesus
Christ our Redeemer rose that day from the Dead, for the day before Saturday he
was Crucified, and after that, which is Sunday, he appeared to his Disciples,
and bid them do what we have here related. To this purpose speaks Tertullian,
who lived about Fifty years after him; and of this Lords Day, it is probable,
Pliny the Heathen Governor spoke, when giving Trajan the Emperor an account of
the life and manners of the Christians, he tells them that they used to meet
Stato die, on a set day; In a word, for Believers to receive the Lord's Supper
every Lord's Day, was counted in those Ages as necessary as public Prayer, and
hearing the Word of God explained. In Epiphanius's time it was customary, in
some places to receive the Holy Communion thrice a week, and they looked upon
that practice, as derived from an Apostolical Tradition, viz. Wednesdays,
Fridays and Sundays. In some Churches, as Socrates informs us, they had a
Sacrament constantly on the Sabbath Day, or Saturday, but that was much
disliked by the Churches of Rome and Alexandria; St. Basil makes mention of a
Custom in his time, which was to Communicate four times a week, Wednesdays,
Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays. Afterward, some received the Holy Communion
once in three weeks. At last, as all things in progress of time, deviate from
the first Institution, the Christians came to Receiving of it thrice in a year,
which they thought, was the least, a Man, who professed himself a Christian,
could do, which occasioned that Canon in the Council of Turin, that a Layman,
who did not Communicate thrice a year, should be Excommunicated, or, which is
the same, not be counted a Christian; from which Historical reflections, it is
evident, that, in the purer Ages of the Church, frequent Communion was counted
a very necessary Duty.

II. What was necessary then, cannot, must not, be counted needless now; and
the reasons that enforce the necessity of it, at this Day, are these following.

1. It must be granted, that this frequent Communicating is a very great
preservative against Sin: The Heathens talked much of their Amulets, and
preservatives against the Arts of Sorcerers and Magicians; but this, without
any Superstition, may more truly be called a preservative against the
Witchcraft of Sin, and offending God. Nothing is more rational, for in this
Sacrament the demerit of Sin is represented in very sad Characters. In the
Wounded and Mangled Body of our Great Master, in the Anguish His Soul was in,
upon the account of our Sins, we behold what odious and monstrous things they
are, how abominable to God's purer Eyes, how contrary to His Holiness, and what
a separation they make betwixt the Creator and the Creature; how they move Him
to forsake us, to withdraw His Gracious Presence from us; What fears, what
tremblings, what shame, what ignominy, what sorrow, and what grief they cause.
All this certainly is to be seen in the floods of Misery, which fell upon our
Mediator, who undertook our Cause, bore our Sins upon the Cross, and was made
Sin for us, put his Shoulder under our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows, was
wounded for our Transgressions, and bruised for our Iniquities: And having
taken that tremendous burden upon himself, see, how he was rejected, despised,
forsaken, trampled on, what horror, what fears, what darkness fell upon Him,
which is an Item, not only of what our Sins have deserved, but of what we shall
feel everlastingly, if we embrace not this Mediator as our Sovereign Lord, or
are not resolved to tread in his steps; for when he cried, My God, why have
thou forsaken me? it was not for his own sake, that he fell into this
exclamation, but for ours, to show, that the Sinner, who, after this, would not
repent, should be forsaken of God for ever: And can I see in this great
Example, how God will deal with me, if I neglect the calls of Grace and Mercy?
And can I be so brutish, and hug those Sins, which, upon my account, were so
severely lashed in him, that was my Surety, who stepped in and took the Blow,
that would have lighted upon me? All the Goodness, Holiness and Divinity, that
was in this Savior of Mankind, could not make the Sins, he bore, look lovely
in the Eyes of God; and though he was the Son of God, yet our Sins being laid
upon him, as they were on the Sacrifice under the Law, God's Justice and Purity
would not dispense with looking upon them with a favorable Eye; and though he
was the dearly beloved of his Eternal Father, yet God punished those Sins in
him in a very terrible manner, to let us know, that if we accept not of the
remedy, Christ offers us, do not make his Cross a motive to Conversion, they
shall be thus punished in our persons, and that to all Eternity. All this is
represented to us in this Sacrament, a Savior groaning, and weeping, and
sighing under the burden of our Sins, and thereby giving notice, that if we
grow not weary of Sin, we shall weep, and groan, and sigh for ever; and shall
not the dreadful Spectacle fill my Soul with abhorrency and detestation, of
what I see so signally punished? Shall not I run away from it, and say to it,
Get thee hence, thou evil and unclean Spirit, touch me not, what agreement has
the Temple of God with Idols? And if this Holy Sacrament be so great a
preservative against Sin, surely we cannot too often make use of it,
especially, since we see, how easily Sin does beset us, how often we are
tempted to it, and how we are daily encompassed with suggestions and
provocations to it.

2. This frequent Communicating cannot but be a mighty engagement to a pious
emulation of the Virtuous and Gracious Life of the Ever-Blessed Jesus. There is
none but knows, how frequent going into company, that is of such a Temper, and
seeing their Manners and way of Acting, is apt to produce assimulation of
Disposition in the persons that frequent it: That Society, a Man frequently
resorts to, gives a tincture to his Nature and Inclination, and consequently,
the frequent seeing and conversing with the Holy and Gracious Jesus in this
Sacrament, is very likely to have the same effect. For in this Ordinance, we do
not only come to see him Bleeding and Dying, for his Enemies, but to look upon
his eminent Virtues too, his wonderful Meekness, his deep Humility, his
unparalleled Patience, his cheerful Submission to the Will of God, his
admirable Self-resignation, his unshaken Contentedness, his generous contempt
of the World, and his steady living in the thoughts of future Bliss and Glory?
Can I see these Virtues shine in his noble Soul, and remember, that they are
set before me to raise my desires of being like him, and believe, that God
expects, and requires of me to transcribe them on my Temper? Can I see, how
lovely, how amiable, and how beautiful these Graces are, how, in the midst of
all his troubles, they proclaim him to be the Son of God; and, in despite of
all the contempt and scorn of Men and Devils, speak him to be a favorite of
Heaven? Can I see, how in the midst of all the Affronts and Derisions, and
Indignities he endured, these Graces still made him amiable, glorious in a
Storm, bright in that dismal Night-dress, Illustrious in Misery, Magnificent in
Poverty? Can I see how these Diamonds glister in the black Jet, in which they
are placed, and, notwithstanding the dull matter that does encompass them, are
Diamonds still of an infinite value, prized by God, esteemed by Angels,
magnified by all good Men, agreeable to Reason, conformable to Gods Nature? Can
I see all this, and continue stubborn and obstinate, and an enemy to these
Virtues? Is not this enough to make me enamored with them, to oblige me to
long for them, and to cause a disquiet in my Soul, till it be possessed of
these inestimable Treasures? And if this Sacrament be such an engagement to
this pious Emulation, and endeavor after the same gracious Qualifications, is
it not fit, is it not expedient, is it not reasonable, is it not necessary,
that I should communicate frequently, and Eat often, and Drink often at this
Table, except I am afraid of being too lively, too good, or too serious?

3. This Sacrament is a mighty promoter of fervent Charity; and since the
frequent exercise of this Charity is necessary, frequent Comunicating must be
so too, this being the cause, or incentive, to the other. That in an eminent
manner it promotes and encourages Charity and Love to our Fellow Christians,
Concord and Unity, Peace and Amity, readiness of Mind to do good, and bowels of
Kindness to our Brethren, none can doubt, that is sensible, what Charity is
represented in this Ordinance: Here I see, how the Great Commander of Heaven
and Earth offers Reconciliation to a desperate Offender; and whereas the
Offender should be the first, that should seek and implore God's Pardon, God
prevents him, and with his Royal hands unasked, bestows upon him a Patent of
Grace and Mercy: Here I see, how the Supreme Judge, who has absolute power
over our Life and Death, is willing to be friends with a wretch that owes him
Ten thousand Talents, and willing frankly to forgive him all, to discharge him
of all his Debts, and to supersede all Actions against him. Here I see, how the
Everlasting Father is ready to receive the Prodigal into his House again, to
admit him to his Table, who had spent all his Substance in riotous living,
ready to kill the fatted Calfe for him, to put a Ring on his Finger, and to
betroth him to himself in Righteousness: Here I see, how he, before whom all
Nations are as Grasshoppers, offers to embrace the Worm that has resisted him,
spoken ill of him, prostituted his Glory, exposed Religion, and studied and
contrived ways to dishonor him. Here I see the Son of God ready, with the
Balsom of his Blood, to anoint the Wretch that made the Wounds, and dying for
the Men, the multitude of whose Offenses has seemed to vye with the number of
God's Mercies. Here I see how infinite Light offers to twist its Rays with
loathsome Darkness; and how the greatest Prince proceeds to those excesses of
Humility, as to give the greatest Sinners room and entertainment in his
Banqueting House, to call them Brethren and Friends, and sheep of his Flock,
than which, there are scarce more endearing Titles: All this I behold here, and
shall not such a wonderful Scene of Charity blow those little sparks of
Affection, I find within, into greater flames? Can I see here what God has
done for me, who have acted more treacherously against him, than my greatest
Enemy ever did against me, and shall not this raise Compassion in me to my
Fellow Servants; and move me to lay down all Wrath and Enmity to them, whose
Injuries are but Fleabites in comparison of those, I have offered to the Best
of Beings? And if this Sacrament be so strong an engagement to this Charity, it
stands to reason, that frequent Communicating must be necessary too, the
rather, because we are so often in danger of breaking the bond of Peace, and
dissolving the cement, which must hold and knit Christians together. So that.

4. This frequent Cammunicating cannot but be acceptable to God, and this he
declared in the example of the Primitive Believers, whose frequent receiving
did so incline the Favor of God toward them, that the Evangelist takes notice,
Acts 2. 47. The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved. In this
the Divine Bounty expressed its liking of their frequent repairing to the Table
of the Lord: This was not only a reward of their frequent Communion, but God
made that frequency a motive to others, to embrace the true Religion. Nothing
works upon strangers more to join themselves to the Mystical Body of Christ,
than to see the Professors live up to their Principles, and maintain the rules
their Master has given them; This enforces even such, as are Aliens to the
Commonwealth of Israel, to encourage one another in the Language of those
votaries, we read of Psalm. 122. 1, 2, 3. Let us go into the house of the Lord,
our Feet shall stand within thy Gates, O Jerusalem! Jerusalem is builded as a
City, that is compact together, whither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the
Lord, unto the Testimony of Israel, to give Thanks unto the name of the Lord,
for there are set Thrones of Judgment, the Thrones of the House of David: Pray
for the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee, Peace be within
thy Walls, and Prosperity within thy Palaces; for my brethren and companions
sake, I will now say, Peace be within thee, because of the House of the Lord
our God, I will seek thy good. So that what the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 22. says of
the gift of Tongues, the same may be said of frequent Communicating, that it is
a sign to them that believe not. Hereby they are persuaded to believe, seeing
the Professors act like persons that believe what their Master has said. This
frequent Communicating shows their Zeal and Unity, and there is no Man versed
in Ecclesiastical History, but knows how much these two prevailed with Infidels
to come in to the Sheepfold of Christ Jesus. It being evident therefore, that
this frequent Communicating is very acceptable to God, how can we say, we love
him, if we are loath to do what we know will please him? The Father has not
left me alone, says our Savior, because I do always the things that please
him, Joh. 8. 29. And the same may be applied to the frequent Communicant; the
Father will not leave him alone; He will be sure to guard him, though a
thousand fall on his side, and ten thousand on his right hand, yet he will take
care, that no evil shall happen unto him, for he does those things that please
him.

III How often a conscientious Christian is bound to Communicate, the Scripture
has not thought fit to determine: That it ought to be done often, the Apostle
does sufficiently intimate, 1 Cor. 11. 26. but there is no Law extant in the
whole Gospel, that says, So many times a Year, or Month, or Week, you shall
appear at the Lord's Table; and from hence rose that variety of customs in
several Churches, we mentioned before: And what Socrates observes in this
point, is very probable, that that variety of practice derived its Original
from the various Judgments and Constitutions of Bishops, in their several
Dioceses, which with their posterity past into a Law; yet though they varied in
Times, and Days, and Hours, yet it is easier to gather from those various
customs, that all made conscience of coming frequently to the Holy Communion,
till Ignorance and Vice invaded the Priesthood, as well as the Laity; and when
the Priests became regardless of this Ordinance, no marvel if the Laity did
either despise or neglect it. And most certainly, to Communicate once, or
twice, or thrice a Year, cannot be called frequent eating of this Bread, and
drinking of this Cup, for this is to do it but seldom, and is an argument that
we are not very solicitous to gain, or preserve our Master's Favor and good
Will, which is ever kept warm by frequent Addresses and Importunity. It was
therefore an unworthy act of Pope Innocent the Third, in the Lateran Council,
in the year 1215. to make a Canon for Laymen, that it was sufficient for them
to Communicate but once a year, for hereby they fell into great Ignorance,
Debauchery, and Sensuality, and that which should have restrained them from
Sin, being so seldom administered to them, they sunk daily into greater
barbarity. This Petrus Cluniacensis was so sensible of, that, having understood
of the Petrobrusians, that they had a Communion but once a year, he thus
expostulates with them, You say, once only; but Christ and his Apostles say,
not once, or twice, or thrice, or an hundred times, or a thousand times only,
but as often as you do it. There is a great difference between as often, and
once or twice. Here is the beginning of numbers, but the other expression
exceeds all numbers; here is more singularity, but in the other is infinite
multiplicity. The Arabians have a Proverb, Visit seldom, and you increase Love;
but, however this Maxim may hold among Men, I am sure it is not so with God,
who, in the commendation of his Servants lays their stress up-the assiduity in
his Service; and therefore, when the Holy Ghost speaks in the praise of Anna
the Prophetess, he gives her this Character, that though she was a Widow of
about fourscore and four years, yet she departed not from the Temple, but
served God with Fastings and Prayers night and day. I know, this is not spoken
with respect to this Sacrament, but all that I prove from it, is this, that the
assiduity and frequency of Divine Worship, is that, which God is pleased to
make a sign, not only of his Love, but our Sincerity too. His kindness to our
Souls advances with our Importunities, and frequent Adorations cause frequent
influences of his Love; and since the Holy Ghost has not thought fit to
resolve, how many times in the year we are to Communicate, on purpose to leave
room for our Free-will-offerings, the Examples of the Saints of old, are a very
safe Rule to go by; in our civil Affairs, where a Statute is wanting, Customs
and Presidents are a Law, and we think it reasonable it should be so; and when
St. Paul calls to us in the style of a Command, Brethren, be followers of me,
and mark them that walk so, having us for an ensample, Phil. 3. 17. The
Examples of the Saints of old will be found to be of greater force in our
practice, than is generally believed; and though the ancient Churches have had
different customs in this particular, yet that, which most have agreed on, may
justly oblige us to imitation. However, nothing is more certain, than that we
are placed under Governors, whose lawful Commands we are to obey; and as the
Governors of the respective Churches, have power to order the circumstantial
and decent part of Divine Worship, so he acts most safely that conforms to the
constitutions of the Church, he is of; and since in the Church, we are Members
of, both to prevent contempt of this Sacrament by too frequent coming, and
Peoples hardening their Hearts in Sin, by a too long neglect of it, it is
thought fit to receive the Holy Communion once a Month; we have not only great
reason to conform to that order, but to thank God, we are encouraged to this
frequent Devotion. In some particular Churches among us, a Communion every
Lord' Day is kept up, according to the Primitive Rule; however, a Month is a
just distance, to take notice what progress we make in Goodness, and what
effects the last Communion has upon our Spirits, and though I can allege no
express Command for it, out of the Word of God, yet there is a Command which
imports as much, even this, Obey them that have the Rule over you in the Lord,
and submit your selves, for they watch for your Souls, as they that must give
an account, that they do it with Joy, and not with Grief, Heb. 13. 17. But
these Arguments are needless to a Soul, that has a lively Sense of the Love of
God. Love will run without a driver; and there needs no pulling, or haling him
to the Communion, who has seen and tasted how sweet and how gracious the Lord
is. That inward Sense will make him come frequently, whether his Superiors
command him or no. He that does nothing in Religion but what his Governo^s
force him to, does not yet understand what that means, The Love of God is shed
abroad in our Hearts. He that has this Sense, finds a Law within stronger than
the Law of all Superiors, and which has greater power with him, than all
external motives. He that loves Christ fervently, will love to be with him
frequently; and since the Communion Table is the place, where Christ has
promised to him, he will be as often there as he can, except Sickness, or some
such inevitable impediments hinder him, the rather, because here Men hear the
joyful sound of Pardon, and walk in the light of God^s Countenance, Psalm. 89.
15.

IV. But because I foresee, it will be objected here, That frequent
Communicating will abate our esteem and veneration of this Sacrament, as all
things, when grown common and familiar, are apt to breed contempt and
carelessness: It Is fit I should answer, and remove that pretended
stumbling block. And therefore,

1. It cannot be frequent Communicating, considered in it self, that abates our
Zeal and Fervor to this Ordinance; for, let the Communion be never so frequent,
the Arguments and Motives are still the same, their Grandeur, Strength, Force
and Power, is still the same; still these are able to kindle holy Fire on the
Altars of our Souls, to raise admiration of God's Mercies; and to enliven our
Spirits into Conscientiousness and severity of life; and if this be the natural
tendency of these Motivies at one time, it is so to another, and consequently
the abatement of our esteem and veneration, is not the necessary effect of
frequent Communicating; and in this the Primitive Believers are a signal
instance, who, though they Communicated some every day, some every Lord's day,
yet did not that frequency lessen their Veneration of these mysteries. It
rather increased and cherished it; and we have reason to ascribe their contempt
of Sublunary Contents, their Courage in Adversity, their Valor in Persecution,
their ardent desires after another Life, their invincible Patience under
reproaches, their Constancy in the severest Trials, their wonderful Joy in
Troubles, and their prodigious Self-denials to this frequent Communicating.
This as it was a means to set their Master always before their Eyes, so it left
an aw upon their Spirits, not to dishonor him by their lives. This was a
perpetual curb to their Lusts, and having his Image constantly before them,
made them walk as Children of their Father, which is in Heaven; so that, if
frequent Communicating be not the necessary cause of an abatement, in our
veneration of this Sacrament, it must be some other accidental thing, which may
be remedied, that must occasion it. And therefore,

2. Some decay in the Receiver, some indisposition in the inward Man, must be
charged with this dis-esteem of the ordinance; and it is not the frequent
Communicating, that is the cause, but want of care, and watchfulne^s in the
Communicant. Indeed, where People approach this Holy Table frequently, and
bring no Hearts with them, no desires after a better Life, do not think it
worth while to spend serious thoughts on the Death they are going to remember,
come to it without any design of being like Christ, premise only a few Prayers
out of Custom, touch the Ark with unwashen hands, dive not into their hearts,
nor do prepare themselves for this Banquet, thrust themselves in, as the Guest
in the Gospel, without suitable Ornaments, do not plow up the fallow Ground, or
do not make it soft and Mellow with Meditation and Praises, and consider not
what they come for, or to what end and purpose they give their attendance at
the Altar, there we need not wonder, if frequent Communicating abates their
esteem and veneration of this Sacrament; but this is their Sin, and frequent
Communion is not to be blamed; it is their love to the World, that will not
suffer them to bring that attention, watchfulness and devotion with them, as is
requisite to the comfortable use of this Ordinance; a Sin which must be
deplored, and, like the cursed thing in the Camp of Israel, removed before they
come to see the goings of God in the Sanctuary. The Covetous Man abates not in
his esteem of his Wealth and Treasure, though he look upon it every day, and
the reason is, because his Affections are set upon it; and were our Affections
set upon him, from whose fullness we all received Grace for Grace, our frequent
Communicating would be so far from lessening our esteem of this Sacrament, that
it would render it more lovely and more amiable to our Souls. Two Men of the
same Trade live together, the one grows rich, the other continues poor, the one
thrives, the other decays, because the one is industrious, the other lazy, one
minds his business the other lies in Alehouses and Taverns: This is the Case
here; if some fall into a disesteem of the greatness of this Ordinance, by
frequent Communicating, it is because they take no pains with their Souls,
before they Communicate, whereas others, who are laborious and careful, though
they recieve never so often, they go on from strength to strength, till every
one of them appears before God in Sion.

V. But since frequent Communication requires frequent Preparation, and
frequent Preparation is a thing, that Persons who have much business in the
World, cannot attend, how can it be supposed necessary, for such to Communicate
frequently? Though Preparation be a Subject that I intend to spend a distinct
Chapter upon, yet something may be said of it here by the by, and by way of
anticipation, to show the weakness of this excuse, and the vanity of this
exception. And therefore,

1. Business is either lawful or unlawful: If it be unlawful, no conscentious
Man must either involve himself in it, or continue to mind it; for whoever
applys his Thoughts, Desires or Affections, to any business of that nature,
puts himself in a state of Damnation, and hangs over Hell fire by a very weak
and feeble Thread, even this Transitory Life, which if it chance to break, his
Soul is lost; in a word, unlawful business makes a Man unfit, not only for
frequent Communicating, but for Salvation too; and then his business is
unlawful, if either out of greediness he takes too much of worldly business
upon him, more than he can well go through with, and which must necessarily
hinder him from minding his everlasting concerns, or, if his business in the
World necessitates, or necessarily engages him in Sin, as when a Man's business
engages him to Lying, or Cheating, or Stealing, or Extortion, or grinding the
Faces of the Poor, or unreasonable Usury, or encouraging Men in their sins,
whether Drunkenness, or Uncleanness, or to Flattering, or Dissembling. etc.
Where any such Sins are so bound up with the Worldly business, that the one
cannot be performed without the other, there the business is unlawful, sinful,
odious to God, and must be quitted, banished, abandoned, though he beggars
himself by it, though he were to starve upon quiting of it, for this is
inconsistent with any hopes of Salvation, and a Man had better die ten Thousand
times, than lose the comforts of Eternal life, and to be sure it must be
quitted too, that a Man may be capable of coming to the Holy Communion, for,
without it, he is no more fit to be seen at this Table, than a Swine in a Royal
Chamber. If the business be lawful, it can be no impediment to seeking first
God's Kingdom and his Righteousness, for lawful business is Commanded, and one
Command does not clash with the other, and if it be no impediment to a serious
course of life, except a Man will needs make it so, it can be no just
impediment to Prayer and Meditation, and acts of Love, and contemplating the
mystery of the Cross, and consequently no impediment to frequent Communicating.

2. Preparation to the Holy Sacrament is either Habitual or Actual; Habitual
Preparation Divines call that, when a Man's constant care is to please God, and
to approve himself faithful to God, and to be conscientious in all his ways,
when he makes it his business, and the bent of his Soul is, to arrive to higher
degrees of Sanctification, and he is fully and invincibly resolved, not to
harbor any thing, that he shall know, or suspect, to be offensive to God. This
habitual Preparation is as necessary as conversion it self; and I doubt not,
but a Man, thus prepared, may at any time, upon a very short warning, recieve
the Holy Sacrament to his Spiritual comfort, as is manifest from the example of
the Primitive Christians, who, at first, before they were very numerous,
recieved the Eucharist every day, and therefore could not well come with any
other Preparation, but what was habitual. Actual Preparation consists, as we
shall show hereafter, in retirement, suitable Prayers and Thanksgiving, in
Self-examination, and Contemplation of the Death of Christ, and the Motives,
Reasons, and Benefits of it, Resolutions etc. This actual Preparation is either
more prolix, or more compendious. The prolix, or longer actual preparation is
necessary, till Men become Masters of that gracious habit, I have already
spoken of; but if this be once become the constant guest of the Soul, if this
once become an Inhabitant, a shorter actual preparation is sufficient; and
therefore, where a man is habitually prepared, by a Conscientious course, he
may follow his lawful concerns and business in the World, and yet that need not
hinder him from those shorter actual Preparations, requisite in frequent
Communicating. In a Word, let a Man but once, in good earnest, proclaim War to
all his known Corruptions and Imaginations, that exalt themselves against the
constitutions and Injunctions of Christ Jesus, and he need not doubt, but that
a very short actual preparation, though it were only some few fervent
Ejaculations, will make him a worthy partaker of the comforts of Divine Love,
tendered to him in this Sacrament; and consequently, lawful business can be no
just impediment to such frequent preparation: But if this I shall have occasion
to say more hereafter.

The Preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. It Is no wonder to see that strictness, Christ has Commanded his Followers
to observe in their lives, decay and dwindle away to nothing but Show and
Formality, in the Age we live in, since frequent Communicating is so much out
of date among us. Blessed be God, all are not of this mind, and many pious
Souls we have, which conscienciously appear at the Lord's Table, as often as
they are called to it; but still what a vast number of miserable Souls there
are abroad, who are such perfect strangers to this frequent Communicating, that
some even die, and leave this World without ever thinking of it; and others
delay their coming to it, till Death fills them with horror, upon the account
of their neglect, and others come as seldom as they can. What shall I say to
such Persons? What Arguments shall I use with them? How shall I aggravate their
Offense? Are you Christians, or are you Heathens? That a Turk, a Pagan, a Jew,
does not show himself at this Holy Table, is no wonder, for he is unacquainted
with the Religion of a Crucified Savior: But that you who profess your selves
his Disciples, should be loath to come and see what has been done for you upon
the Cross, what Wonders, what Miracles of Love, God has wrought for you on the
Tree, to which the Son of God was nailed, what can we think, what can we
imagine, but that you are Infidels under the name and show of Believers? How
justly may I Expostulate with you, what are you afraid of, that you either come
not at all to this Well of Salvation, or come but seldom? What frights you?
What stops your Journey? Are you afraid of parting with that, which is death
himself to your redeemer, your Sins and Naughtiness? Are you afraid of
purifying your Selves, even as he is pure? Are you afraid of living up to his
Example? Are you afraid of losing your foolish Delights and Satisfactions? Do
you pretend to be friends of Christ, and are you loath to accept of him for
your Friend? Does he promise to come and meet you in this Ordinance, and are
you loath, or ashamed, to be seen in his Company? Had you rather keep your
Trash, and Dung, and Filth, than come hither and be made clean? Tell me not
that you are willing to receive him, if you will not receive him in his own
way: In this Sacrament he offers himself to you, if here you will not embrace
him, if here you will not express your esteem of him, what hopes have you that
he will ever be your portion? What can the Ever-Blessed Jesus think of you?
What can he judge of you? What opinion can he entertain of you, but that you
are his Enemies, Enemies to his Supper, Enemies to his Love, Enemies to your
own Souls? Must you be dragged to your own Happiness? Must you be forced to
drink of this Water of Life? While you keep off and stand out, are not you the
Persons that would not have this Man, this more than Man, to Reign over you?
There can no just Reason be given for your not coming frequently to this Holy
Table, but that you are loath to agree to the Terms of sincere Repentance and
Obedience, he requires at your hands; and are you loath to be saved? Do you
take pleasure in being Reprobates? Is it such Comfortable thing to be excluded
from God's favor? While you wilfully absent your selves, do not you refuse to
be healed? Here the kind Physician comes, and declares his Willingness to cure
you by the Balsom of his Wounds, and had you rather be sick, than of a
healthful Complexion? Here is a Medicine tendered unto you, a Medicine for your
sin-sick Souls, and had you rather perish, than rise and awake, that Christ may
give you life? Has the Son of God endured so much, gone through such a
Discipline of Torments, through Fire and Water, that your Souls might live, and
do you despise his Love, Do not you Despise it, when you come so seldom to
apply it? Would not one think, that you have a mind to be miserable, when you
are so backward to come to him, that would deliver you from your misery? Ah!
did you believe the astonishing misery of God's Love, how would you breath, how
would you pant, how would you hunger and thirst for this Fountain, opened for
the House of Judah and Jerusalem, It Is a sign your Appetite is dull, your
desires feeble, your Affections cold, your Inclinations frozen; were all things
right within, the Fire would burn, and at last you would speak with your
tongue; I come, Lord! I come! I delight to do thy Will! It is the Will, the
Order, the Command of that God, in whom you believe to come often, and shall
any thing hinder you from obeying his Command? Shall not his Orders prevail
with you? Can you prefer your little business before his Will? Do you believe
that he must be your Judge, and will you allow always your selves in Rebellion
and Contumacy under his Injunctions? If any man serve me, let him follow me,
and where I am, there shall also my Servant be, says Christ, Joh. 12. 26. Ah!
Shall so sweet a voice be lost upon you? Shall not this Invitation of the
bleeding Jesus melt you! He was just going to his Cross, when he said so. He
was just going to institute this Sacrament of the Cross, when he called so! Ah!
How sweet are these words! How full of Kindness! How fragrant is this Breath!
What can work more upon hardened hearts? break, break, thou stubborn heart! The
Rocks sympathize with him and cleave asunder, and cannot this voice, this voice
of Mercy, make an Alteration in thy breast! O take heed, lest this Lamb, which
came to take away the Sins of the World, put on another shape ere-long, even
that of a Lion and roar upon you, as it is Luc. 14. 24. I say unto you, that
none of those Men that were bidden shall taste of my Supper. I know, there are
some honest Souls, who, out of a Sense of their own unworthyness, dare not
come, and dread frequent approaching to this Table; but such I would not
fright, but win to this frequent Communion; and all I shall say to them, at
this time, is this, Are you willing Christ should, set up his Throne in your
Souls? Are you willing, he should tread down his Enemies in you, Enemies which
have usurped his power? Are you content, he should be formed in you, and fill
all your Faculties? Are you content, all should stoop to him, and all that is
within you should bow to his Scepter? If so, fear not, you cannot come too
often, your frequent running to his Altar will be Incense to him, Incense,
which he will smell, as he did Noah's Sacrifice, and secure you against future
Destruction.

II. The frequent Communicant ought to receive some Comfort from these
Instructions. But then, by the frequent Communicant, I do not mean one, that
does indeed come often to this Table, but knows not what it is to be heated by
the fire of Divine Love, whose Sins are strong, and his holy desires weak, and
whose frequent coming has made him as careless, as the vast number of Sermons
he has heard: For such a frequent Communicant God has given us no comfo^ts,
to such a one we have no message, no Embassy of Peace; but the frequent
Receiver, whose choice of the better part is both confirmed and increased by
frequent Receiving, this is the Man, to whom we are bound to carry Balm and
Spices, for a Present To you it is that this word of Consolation comes. Your
frequent attending at this Table, is living under the precious drops of the dew
of Heaven How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob! How justly may you say, that God
loves you, when you love to be often with him, whom your Souls do love! Surely
your Souls will grow fat and flourishing, that are so often nourished at this
Table! It Is a sign you long for the Courts of the Lord, and you shall certainly
appear in a Nobler Court one day, a Court where nothing is mean, nothing
trivial, nothing savouring of Terrestrial delights; but a Court where all the
Servants are Kings, and all enjoy more, than the Greatest Monarchs of this
World do: Blessed are your Eyes, for they see, and your Ears, for they hear.
The oftener you see the precious Sacrifice on this Table, the more endearing it
will become to you; the oftener you hear him call here, come to me, all that are
weary, the more desirable will he grow in your Eyes; the oftener you meet here,
the greater will be the friendship betwixt him and you, till this friend comes
at last and recieves you to himself, so that you shall be for ever with the
Lord.

The PRAYER.
O Dearest Savior, dearer to me, than Father and Mother! My Friend in all
dangers, my Benefactor in all wants, my Fortress in all troubles! I cannot but
confess that thou have frequently called to me, frequently entreated me,
frequently expostulated with me, and frequently asked me, why I would die? And
I have as frequently stopped my Ears against thy call, and been deaf to thy
voice, and my follies have kept pace with thy favors! I see my mistakes, I see
my errors, and my Sins I desire may be ever before me, I know thy voice. It is
the good Shepherd's voice, that calls me to this Table, and thy Sheep hear thy
voice. I earnestly desire to be one of that number. O feed me with thy
pleasures! O open mine Eyes, that I may see the rich pastures, that are to be
found in thy Grave! To this Sepulcher let me repair often! O persuade me to
look often into it, that I may, with the Holy Woman, see the Angels sitting
there. To increase my willingness to come frequently, visit me frequently with
thy Salvation. Let not my familiarity of that sight, lessen my esteem of the
Sacred Mystery. The oftener I participate of it, the greater let my Love, my
Affections and my Admiration be! Open still new Springs of Love, when I come to
this Sacrament of thy Everlasting Love, that the New Springs may still give new
life to my Soul, new courage to do thy Will, new Power to tread on Serpents,
new resolutions to conquer all that stops my way. And thus, my dearest Lord,
transform me by the renewing of my Mind, that I may prove, what is the Holy,
acceptable and perfect Wall of God. Amen, Amen.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Perpetuity of this Ordinance, and the Necessity of its Continuance to
the World's End.
The CONTENTS.
St. Paul's Command to the Corinthians, of showing forth the Lord's Death, till
he come, not to be understood of Christ's coming to them in the Spirit, but
coming to Judgment. This proved largely by many arguments. The reasons laid
down, why this Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is to last to the end of the
World. Christ's coming to Judgment, proved to be a very proper object of our
Contemplation in the Recieving of the Holy Eucharist, and a help to Patience
and Faith, and confidence in the Goodness of God. God's Mavelous care of our
everlasting welfare, shown, in tying us up in Bonds of Obedience in this
Ordinance. Men who look for Grace and Salvation, as they are bound to make use
of the means of Grace, so they are obliged to make use of this. The wretched
state of those, who neglect to show forth the Lord's Death in this Sacrament.
The same temper required in Recieving the Eucharist, that we desire to be in,
when we shall be summoned to Judgment. The Prayer.

I. THat this Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is a standing Ordinance, and to
last to the end of the World, St. Paul expressly tells us, 1 Cor. 11. 26. For as
often as you Eat this Bread, and Drink this Cup, ye do show, or, do ye show the
Lord's death till he come. Whereby is plainly meant Christ's coming to judge
the World; and this has been the unanimous belief of the universal Church,
since the Apostles time unto this day, which makes us justly wonder at the
boldness and ignorance of Quakers, and other Enthusiasts, who have presumed to
abolish this Ordinance in their Conventicles, pretending, that this Sacrament
was fitted only for the Infancy of the Christian Church, but intended it should
cease, when Christ should come to them in the Spirit; and having already
received Christ, as they fancy, in their first Conversion and Regeneration,
they foolishly and ridiculously imagine, that they have no need of receiving
him again, in the use of the outward Symbols, tendered to Christians in this
Sacrament. Puffed up with this airy conceit, they run into this Sinister and
Childish Interpretation of the Apostle's words, contrary to the sense of all
Christian Churches, as if Till he come were as much, as Till he come to you in
the Spirit, to which impertinent Exposition, nothing could possibly lead these
silly Men, but the Spirit of error and contempt of all human Learning, and
undervaluing the common dictates of Reason, and a monstrous Spiritual Pride,
which not only swells them with an opinion, that they are wiser, than all the
Christians in the World besides, but tempts them to other insolences and
Prophanations of the Written Oracles of the Holy Ghost; and therefore, lest weak
Capacities should be ensnared by such specious pretenses, it will be necessary
to show the unreasonableness of this interpetation.

1. There is not the least Syllable, not the least hint given us in all the New
Testamen^, that this Sacrament, after it was once instituted, was ever to be
abolished; which made, not only the Apostles introduce it into the Christian
Congregations, while they lived, but all the Churches, planted and founded by
them, retained and continued it, knowing nothing to the contrary, but that this
Ordinance was to be perpetual and Eternal; and therefore, as they had recieved
the necessary use of it from those, who laid the foundation of their Religion,
so they propagated the same to their posterity: Nay, among the Heretics, that
left and separated from the Church, there were very few, but what preserved the
use of this Sacrament in their Congregations; and though they had the insolence
of Blaspheming other Mysteries of Christianity, yet this Ordinance they were
afraid to abolish, being sensible that it was one of the Corner stones of
Christianity: And who could imagine otherwise, that considered, how this
Sacrament succeeded in the room of the Passover, which was Item enough, that it
was to last for ever; for as the Passover, after its first Institution, was to
last to the end of the Jewish Economy, that expiring with Christ's Death, so
this succeeding, was an argument, that it was to continue while the
dispensation of Christianity should last, and that is to the end of the World.

2. No Man will deny, but that those three thousand Souls, converted by St.
Peter's Sermon, did receive the Holy Ghost, for St. Peter expressly promises
them, Acts 2. 38. Repent and be Baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus
Christ, for the Remissions of Sins, and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy
Ghost; and this was very common in those days, for true Penitents to receive
the Holy Ghost, immediately upon their Baptism, and sometimes before their
Baptism, as Cornelius and his Company, Act. 20. 44. 48. And though by the Holy
Chost, in those places, are meant the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost,
speaking with Tongues, healing diseases, etc. Yet it must be granted, that in
their conversion, they had the Sanctifying Spirit of God, sent upon them, yet
these very Persons, that and so received the Spirit, continued in breaking of
Bread, and in Prayer, as we are told, Act. 2. 42. And that by breaking of Bread
there, is not meant sitting down to their private and ordinary meals, is
evident from hence, because it is mentioned as a part of their Devotion and
public Worship, to which their ordinary Diet cannot be referred, and therefore
it must be the Encharist, or this Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, that is meant
by it; for by that Term it was usually expressed in the Primitive Church, as we
see, 1 Cor. 10. 16.

3. Those very Corinthians to whom the Apostle writes in the place
aforementioned, and gives a Command to show forth the Lord's death in this
Sacrament, till he came, had already received the Spirit of God, as we read, 1
Cor. 2. 12. Now we have received, not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit
which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely given us of God:
and to this purpose he adds, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of you, but ye are
Washed, but ye are Sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. These Men then had received the Spirit of
God, and therefore, when the Apostle, writing to them, chap. 11. Says, that
they should show forth the Lords death, till he come, most certainly he cannot
mean, till he came to you in the Spirit, for they had received this Spirit
already, and he was already come to them in the Spirit; and what sense would it
have been, to say, Ye that have received the Spirit of Christ, must show forth
his death, till he come to you in the Spirit, just as good sense, as if a Man
should say, Ye that are in London, must do such a thing till you come to
London; so that, if this were the sense, the Apostle must have contradicted
himself, or spoken that which no body knew what to make of. It follows
therefore, that since by his coming in Scripture is frequently meant, his
coming to Judge the World, as Rev. 22. 20. 1 Cor. 4. 5. Luc. 18. 8. That here
it has the same sense, because without it, the words will not bear a
reasonable construction.

4. The design of the Apostle in this 11th. Chapter, is, to rectify several
mistakes, and errors, and abuses, that were crept in among the Corinthians, in
their administration and eating of the Lord's Supper, and this is intimated v.
17, 18. So that his intent, in writing to them, must be, to inform them, how
they were to behave themselves in the use of this Ordinance, what exorbitancies
they were to abandon, what evil customs they were to retrench, what vulgar
errors they were to beware of, and consequently, his intent could not be, to
abolish this Sacrament, or to teach them to use it no longer, than Christ
should come to them in the Spirit. He that gives a Man directions about a good
work, in what manner he is to perform it, what he is to take heed of in the
practice of it, what Rocks and Stumbling Blocks he is to shun, does not
persuade him to leave the good work undone, or to neglect it, but chalks out to
him only the way he may walk in with safety, does still allow the work to be of
Eternal Obligation, only that it may be acceptable to God, bids him beware of
the Shelves and Sands, he may run upon in the prosecution of it; and though, in
reformation of abuses, the thing it self, which gave occasion to the abuse, is
very often cancelled and taken away, yet that Rule holds only in things
indifferent. In Duties and things Commanded, such as the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper is, this could not be practiced, for if Ten thousand abuses were
committed about Prayer, yet Prayer would still be a Duty; and therefore the
Apostle, reforming the errors of the Corint^ians in the administration of this
Sacrament, cannot be supposed to abrogate the Sacrament it self, for as he
says, v. 20. He had received it of the Lord; i. e. by way of a commanded Duty,
which therefore could not be abolished.

5. Let us admit of this odd expression of Christ's coming to them in the
Spirit, if a Man have received the Spirit of Christ, that is so far from being a
sufficient reason to justify his staying away from this Sacrament, that it is
a powerful motive to come to it; not only because he, that has the Spirit of
Christ, will be sure to do what Christ Commands him, but because the Spirit of
Christ must be cherished, preserved, kept warm, and made much of, which is not
to be done, but by frequent contemplation of God's Love and Charity, and
compassion to, our immortal Souls, whereof this Sacrament does not only put us
in mind, but gives us a faithful representation. The Spirit of God, within us,
must be preserved by the use of such means, God has appointed; and since this
Sacrament is one of these means, he that neglects it, cannot promise himself a
long continuance of that Spirit in his Soul; and what if Men, that have
frequented this Ordinance, have found no good by it, for that must be their own
fault, and because they come to it like Swine, no wonder if they come away from
it in no better condition.

6. Though it is readily granted, that true Believers, in their first
conversion, receive the Spirit of Christ, yet that puts no stop to their
receiving larger and greater influences of it, by the use of this Sacrament: As
Grace is begun in their first conversion, so it is increased by a conscientious
use of this Ordinance. The coming to it does not abate the power of this
Spirit, but advances it. This Ordinance being a Spiritual Ordinance, the Spirit
of Christ is the more likely to exert its virtue in a sincere Believer, that
frequents it: The Cross of Christ, which is Foolishness to the Greek, is Wisdom
to the Spiritual Man, and the more he looks upon it with suitable Devotion, the
greater courage and strength he will receive from it, to fight the Battles of
the Lord. The Spirit of Christ that works in a true Believer, works by rational
Arguments, by Arguments that are most apt to prevail with rational Men; and
since nothing can be a more effectual Argument, than the Love of Christ,
manifested on the Cross, and particularly in the Sacrament of the Cross, it
must follow, that the first operations of Christ's Spirit in the Soul, are no
hindrance to his farther operations in this Holy Sacrament.

7. It Is true, in this Sacrament, external Symbols and Elements are made use
of, but that is not at all improper, or inconsistent with a Gospel state; nor do
these Symbols hinder any Man from worshipping God in Spirit and in Truth, but
rather promote it. If under the Gospel, Men may make no use of external tokens,
to put them in mind of Spiritual things, the Apostle was out in his Divinity,
when he tells us, That the invisible things of God are clearly seen, being
understood by the things which are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead,
Romans 1. 20. Christ indeed abolished the burdensome Symbols of the Ceremonial
Law, but did no where tell us, that he would leave no Symbols at all in his
Church to remember him by: And though we grant, what the Apostle says, Col. 2.
20. 21. Wherefore, if ye be dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the World,
why, as though living in the World, are ye subject to Ordinances, touch not,
taste not, handle not? Yet it plainly appears from his discourse, that he
reprehended no other but Judaizing Christians, who having embraced the
Christian Religion, were still observant of the Ancient Ceremonies, which
Moses, while the Church was in its Minority, had given to the Jewish People;
such as were distinctions of Meats and Drinks, touching dead Bodies, or any
thing that was defiled with Leprosy, touching any thing unclean, whether Man
or Beast, etc. whereof a large account is given in Levit. 7. 21. So that this
Saying does not reverse the Symbols, used in the Holy Sacrament, they being of
another nature, and instituted upon a different design, and so far from
evacuating a Spiritual Worship, that those become most Spiritual persons, that
frequently exercise themselves in a devout use of it; and therefore what
arrogance must it be, for Men to think themselves wiser than Christ himself;
and when he, whose Wisdom cannot by searching be found out, has given us these
Symbols, and by them thought fit to help our infirmities, to fancy, that Christ
did more than he need to have done, as if he understood not our Natures better
than we? Those that look upon those Symbols, as Crutches for weaker Christians
to lean upon, and such, as they themselves have no need of, had need examine
and search their Hearts better, than hitherto they have done, lest they be
unable, when the time comes, to stand before the Son of Man.

II. Why this Sacrament is to last in the Christian Church to the end of the
World, or till Christ come to Judgment, may easily be guessed at; for,

1. The means of Grace are the same and unalterable to the end of the World;
and whatever things bore the name of ordinary means of Grace, in the Apostles
days, still bear that Name, and shall bear it, till Heaven and Earth do perish;
for God intended but one Gospel to the Christian World, even that Gospel which
we have, and, after it, we are to expect no other: This is to serve the Church,
while it is a Church, and as the Church is to last to the consummation of all
things, so this Gospel is to last, for which reason it is expressly called, The
Eternal Gospel, Rev. 14. 6. And the Apostle is very peremptory in his
Assertion; Though we, or an Angel from Heaven, should Preach any other Gospel,
meaning either now, or hereafter, than what we have Preached to you, let him be
accursed, Gal. 1. 8. And if the Gosbe to last to the end of the World, this
Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, in the Church, must needs last as long, for
this is part of the Gospel, as much as Prayer, Preaching, or any other message
delivered in that Book. That which is most properly called the Gospel, or
Gladtidings, is the mystery of God's reconciling the World to himself in Christ
Jesus, and this is in an eminent manner expressed in this Sacrament, so that
this Sacament is the principal part of the Gospel, the chief subject it treats
of, the principal thing it aims at, the very foundation of the whole, For other
Foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Christ, says St. Paul,
1 Cor. 3. 12. Nay, he determined with himself, not to know any thing, save
Jesus Christ, and him Crucified; which is the very purport and scope of this
Ordinance; and if the Gospel be a thing perpetual and eternal, the principal
part of it, without all peradventure, must be so.

2. The comforts of Christian Souls are to last, while Christians live in the
World, and that, by virtue of Christ's Pontificial Prayer, Joh. 17. 20. 21.
Neither Pray I for these alone; but for them also, which shall believe on me
through their word, i. e. to the end of the World; that they all may be one, as
thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, than
which, there cannot be greater comforts; and if such are to last to the Worlds
end, the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper must needs be of the same perpetuity,
for from hence flow the greatest comforts of true Believers, this assuring us,
that as the material Bread, by eating, is united to ou^ Bodies, so is Christ
united to our Souls, or our Souls united to him, as Members to their Head; and
to be one with Christ, it such a Treasury of Comforts, that there is no
affliction, no condition so mean, or so calamitous, but may receive ease and
content from this Consideration; for if I am one with Christ, my Blessed
Redeemer, will be concerned for me, will take care of me, will be with me in
the Trials that fall to my share, will support me under Temptations; assist me
with his Grace, relieve me by his Presence, subdue Satan under my Feet shortly,
will furnish me with Arguments to resist, will not leave me when I dye, but
convey and conduct my Soul, where her Head is, that it may be for ever with her
Lord, and will make me partaker of the same Glories too, which himself is
possessed of. By this Sacrament we become one with Christ Jesus, and this comfort
being to attend sincere Christians, while Christians are in the World, the
means, whereby that Union is made, must necessarily last as long as
Christianity lasts, i. e. to the Day of Judgment.

3. Lo, I am with you, says Christ to his Disciples, who were Representatives
of all future Christian Congregations, that should maintain the purity of his
Doctrine and Morals, to the end of the World, Matthew. 28 20. This is not to be
understood of his Bodily Presence or Human Nature, for that was to be
Translated into his Father's Kingdom, and with respect to that, he had told his
Followers before, that they should not have him always with them, Matthew. 26.
11. And as to his Divine Nature, though the words may be referred to that, yet
it is to be noted, that he spoke these words, as one, who had all Power given
him in Heaven and in Earth, v. 18. and therefore as Mediator, or the promised
Messiah of the World; and if he spoke these words, as Mediator or Head of the
Church, it must follow, that he meant them of his being with them, and their
Followers to the World's end, by his Spirit and virtue, and influence in their
observing all things, whatsoever he Commanded them, as the words immediately
preceding do evince; for he does not tie his special Presence to a bare
function of Men, as the Romanists falsely infer, but to Obedience; and as
Baptism was one of the things he commanded them to use and observe, in the
Verse before, so the Lord's Supper and Celebration of it was another; so that
if Christ's Presence be necessary to the Worlds end, and that Presence be tied
to Obedience, and this Sacrament be one of the things he has commanded, and in
which he must be obeyed, in order to his Gracious Presence, this Ordinance also
must be necessary, and must needs be kept up to the end of the World.

4 Christ's Church is to last to the World's end, for it is for his Church's
sake, that the World stands so long as it does, as the World was created upon
that account, because God meant to gather a Church out of the World, out of the
foreseen corrupt Mass of Mankind; so it is preserved upon that account, even
that the number of those, that shall be saved, may be completed; which great
Truth, is, I believe, aimed at by the Apostle, Col. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18. and to
this end, this Church is said to be so durable and so firm, that the Gates of
Hell shall not be able to prevail against it, Matthew. 16. 18. The Devil, we may
be confident, will endeavor to b^tter it to to the very last moment of the
World's duration; and if, with all his stratagems, and continued and lasting
assaults, he shall not be able to conquer or to destroy it* it must stand and
last as long as those assaults do last. The Apostle therefore makes mention of
sincere Christians, that will be alive at Christ's coming to Judgment, 1 Thessalonians.
4. 17. And consequently, the Church will last till then; and if the Church is
to last to the Worlds end, the Marks of that Church must last as long. It Is
true, Holiness of life is one Mark, but that is not all the Marks the Christ's
Church must have. The Sacraments are Marks too, and Marks whereby it may be
better known, than by Holiness; not but that Holiness is the principal Ornament
of the Church; but as those that are to join themselves unto the Church, are
generally more inquisitive after the Constitutions and Ordinances of it, and
the means whereby that Holiness is effected, than after any thing else, so this
Sacrament being part of those means, and therefore one of the necessary Marks,
it must last to the end of the World, as much as the Church it self, and as
long as there is any probability of Men's joining themselves to the Church; and
by this means Holiness of Life is signally promoted, as experience sufficiently
witnesses. As Christians in general, so the Church of Christ, or the respective
Societies of Christians professing Christ's Doctrine, and imitation of his
life, are compared to a City set on a Hill, and which cannot be hid, Mat. 5.
14. Not that Christ's Church must always appear outwardly Magnificent and
Glorious, thereby to attract the Eyes of Spectators, no, but that the purity of
Doctrine and sound Preaching of the Word, and the due administration of the
Holy Sacraments, together with innocence of Life, must make it visible, and
this, it may be, under the greatest persecution, and when a severe Tempest
falls upon her; by these Marks she may still be known; and if these are her
Marks, these Marks must last as long as the Church it self.

III. The term therefore, to which this Holy Sacrament is to last, even Chrst's
coming to Judgment, may very justly be taken into consideration in receiving of
the Blessed Eucharist, I hinted so much, Chapter 1. Fa. 9. But must upon this
occasion enlarge upon it: For

1. This consideration will help to encourage us to Patience under reproaches,
Injuries, and Men's unrighteous dealing with us. It serves to quiet the Soul, to
think that Christ knows my Sufferings, and the Injuries that are done me, and
sees my Integrity and Innocence, and will clear me in the last day before the
whole World; What need I resent such an affront, when the Son of God takes
notice of it, and if I am patient under it, will, in that great day, plead my
Cause, set the Sinners Transgression, if he repents not, before his Eyes, and
confound him; not that I am to wish that confusion of the offender; but my
consideration, that Christ will actually do it, may promote my contentedness
under that affliction; What need I revile my Persecutors, when he, for whose
sake, I endure that persecution, will sufficiently vindicate me in that day,
for it is a righteous thing with God, to recompense Tribulation, to those that
trouble you, says St. Paul, 2. These. 1. 6, 7, 8. This Judge will at last
discover, how Men were mistaken in us, how unjust there Censures were, what
sinister Constructions they put upon our Actions, how malicious their Slanders
were, how unjust the Punishments they inflicted on us, how inhuman, how
contrary to Charity, all their ill Lauguage was; He shall bring forth our
Righteousness as the Light; and our Judgment as the Noonday, Psalm, 37. 6. and
this consideration must needs be very effectual to promote Patience.

2. This Consideration will help to increase our confidence, and arm us against
distrust and diffidence, for if the powers of darkness would fright us from
laying hold on Christ's Merits, because he will be a very severe Judge in the
last day, the timorous Christian may answer thus. True, he will be my Judge,
but he has promised to be a Father too, to those that fear him: He Will be my
Judge Indeed, but he is a Judge of my Flesh and of my Bone, and who will have
regard to my infirmities: He Will be my Judge, but he is my Head withal, who will
be tender of his Members: He Will be my Judge, but he is a merciful High Priest
withal, who will be my Advocate, and answer the Objections I cannot confute. I
will cling to his Precepts, I will not wickedly depart form him, I will express
my Love to him in Holy Obedience, I will dread his Judgments, and make his
Mercy a motive to Purification. I will not give place to the Devil, I will
fight against his Temptations, I will stand upon my watch, I will not lie
asleep in the Bed of Sin, I will get up if I chance to fall, I will rise again
when I am overtaken in a fault, I will accuse my self and beg his pardon, I
will endeavor to walk worthy of the Vocation, wherewith I am called, with all
lowliness and meekness and long-suffering, I will not take part against him
with his Enemies. This is the work I have resolved upon, according to this Rule
I will walk, and such a Soul, I know, this Gracious Judge will not cast away
nor condemn; what inadvertencies I may run into, I will not justify, but
strive against them, and I doubt not, but his Cross will cover them, while my
Heart is sincere, and my Soul is ever toward him. This Judge will absolve me,
he will deal favorably with me, as with a person whom he has redeemed. I will
look upon the Promises and apply them. He has promised, that he will not take
away his kindness utterly, from such as love him; while I live, I will love
him, and I question not, but as severe as he is to the obstinate and
untractable, he will visit me with everlasting kindness.

The Preceding Considerations improved. and reduced to Practice.
I. O Let us admire the Goodness of God, and his mavelous care of our
everlasting welfare! He sees, how slippery our Natures are, how fickle, how
mutable, how changeable, how apt to turn from the Holy Commandment delivered to
them, and therefore he ties us in Bonds, in Covenants, and in Sacraments of of
Virtue, whereof the Lord's Supper is the strongest, the greatest and most
Sacred, and therefore the best defensative and guard against the encroachments
of Temptations; insomuch, that he, who can break through this Mound, and will
not be kept in by Arguments drawn from the Death of Christ, but, in despite of
the Blood of the Covenant, he has drunk and sealed his Promise with, will
plunge himself into known sins; that Man's case is desperate, that Man is truly
resolved to be miserable, and will die, though the Lord Jesus call to him from
the Cross, Live, in thy Blood, live: He that can Swear, and Vow to God, in this
Sacrament, vow upon the Body and Blood of Christ, that he will be Drunk no more,
and Swear no more, and Lie and Cheat no more, and yet forgets the Oath of God,
that is upon his Soul, and dares fall to his old Sins again; that Man's last
Estate is worse than the first, and he slights him, by whom he must be saved,
despises him, who alone can make him happy, refuses that Blood, which alone can
cleanse him, undervalues the only Champion, that can secure him against the
Rage of the roaring Lion, loses and rejects the Prop, which alone can support
him against the wrath of an offended God, and affronts that Friend, which alone
can help and comfort him in the day of Vengeance.

II. This Sacrament being a standing Ordinance, and a notable means of Grace,
as much as Prayer and hearing the Word of God, it must necessarily follow, that
Men, who look for Grace and Salvation, must make as great Conscience of this,
as of any other; and if they account it a Sin, to neglect Prayer and hearing
the Word, they must look upon it as sinful too, to neglect this Ordinance. If
this be a means of Salvation, as well as the rest, he that hopes to be saved,
must seriously make use of this means, else he can have but little hopes of
arriving to the end without the means. Surely, this Sacrament is a means,
whereby you and I must come to love the Lord Jesus Christ, a Duty of that
consequence, that he that love him not in sincerity, lies under a severe
threatening, and is liable to a dreadful Curse, 1 Cor. 16. 22. But how shall we
ever love him to any purpose, except we use the means, whereby that Love must
be raised and kindled in our Breast? Does any Man hope to thrive in the World,
that will not bestir himself, become active in his profession, and apply
himself to Labor? Does any Man hope ot arrive to Learning and Scholarship,
without Books or Reading? Does any Person hope to keep himself warm in Winter,
that puts on no Clothes? Or, was ever any so foolish, as to hope to come to his
Journies end, if he sits still in a Tavern or Alehouse by the way? If this
Sacrament be a means of obtaining Happiness, will that Happiness fall to our
share, without using the proper means? If thou refusest to come to this
Ordinance, how can God be kind to thee, how can he visit thee with the Favor
he bears to his own People? How can he wash thee with the Blood of the Lamb?
How can he make thee Blessed, and a companion of Seraphim, and give thee a
right to the Treasury of Christ's merits, when thou neglectest the means,
whereby these Mercies must be consigned and applied to thy Soul? And therefore,

III. How wretched, how sad, must be the case of that Soul, which neglects to
show forth the Lord's Death, in this Ordinance, when the Lord shall come to
Judgment? When the Son of God shall appear in all his Glory, and the Sinner,
who neglected this Holy Sacrament, shall be brought before him, it will not be
an ordinary fright, the wretch will be in; especially, when the King of Glory
shall accost and ask him, How can thou hope to share in my Glory, that did
not think my Death worth remembering, in the Congregation of my Saints? How
can thou hope to participate of my Happiness, that would not weep at my
bitter Passion? How can thou hope to be advanced to my Throne, who wast
ashamed to look upon me hanging on the Cross? How can thou hope to enter into
thy Master's Joy, that would not, by lively representations of my suffering
in the Sacrament, I ordained, be melted in Tears? How can thou hope for a
seat in the Eternal Mansions, where no defiled thing must enter, that would
not cleanse thy self from filthiness? Or how could thou hope to be cleansed,
that would not make use of my Blood to wash thy self? Here none can be happy,
that were not Holy upon Earth, and how could thou expect to be Holy, that
did neglect the means which was intended to enrich thy Soul with Holiness?
Such an Address of such a Majestic Person, and to an offender too, that knows,
and cannot but know, that all this is true, must necessarily strike the
Malefactor dumb, fill him with horror, and make him cry out, though too late, O
that my Head were Water, etc. Expostulations of displeased Princes with their
Servants, that have acted contrary to their Will, in things of far less moment,
have cast them into Grief and Swoons, and fatal diseases, and we must needs
conclude, that in the case we speak of, as the Person offended is greater than
the most puissant Prince in the World; and the neglect greater, than if a Man
had neglected to provide for the security of a Temporal Kingdom, so the
Expostulations will be more terrible, and the Sinner's Heart, to whom they
shall be spoken, in far greater consternation.

IV. This shows with what temper and disposition we ought to come to this Holy
Table, even with the same temper we would, or desire to be in, if, within a few
hours, we were sure to be summoned to Judgment: Were any of you to appear to
Morrow Morning before the Bar of God, and had you all imaginable assurance of
it, that, by such a time, you must certainly attend there, would you lie or
swear, or dissemble, or break out into a passion, or pray carelessly, or be
backward to do good, or be averse from Holy thoughts and discourses, etc. I
trow, not; and as you would not appear before the Judge with an unmortified
temper of Mind, so neither can it be advisable to appear before him at this
Table, with such a disposition. As the appearing before his Judgment Seat,
would make you call your most serious Thoughts together, and make you loath the
charms, the inticements, and the alluring temptations and suggestions of the
Flesh, and of the World; so your appearing at this Table requires the same
inclinations; for, as in the day of Judgment, the King will come forth and
behold the persons cited into that Court, to see, whether they are qualified
for Heaven and Happiness, so in this Feast, he comes to look upon the Guests,
and to see who comes with a worldly and carnal disposition, and takes as much
notice of the frame and temper of your Hearts, as he will do in the last day.
Here thy great Master comes, and takes a view of thy Thoughts, Words, Desires,
Affections and Actions, whether they proceed from a principle of Love and
Submission. Happy the Soul that sits down at this Table with a sense of her
duty, and the greatness and goodness of the Master of the Feast; for such a
Soul anticipates her future bliss, and feels, in some measure, the sweetness
and comfort of the joyful Absolution, which shall be pronounced upon her with
greater solemnity in the last day, even this, Come ye blessed of my Father,
receive the Kingdom, etc.

The PRAYER.
O Thou Eternal Wisdom, who alone know what is best for me, who have
established this Ordinance in thy Church, and ordained it as a means, whereby
thy loving Members may come, in the unity of the Faith, unto a perfect Man. It
shall be established for ever, as the Moon, and as a faithful witness in
Heaven: Give me, O give me, perseverance in the use of it, O Jesu! Thou art the
promised Seed, the promised Messiah, the promised desire of all Nations! Thou
art the fruitful Vine, and by the precious Liquor that drops from thee,
innumerable Souls are cherished and refreshed! Thy Sacred Name is as Ointment
poured out! I smell the rich composition. My Soul does gather strength, and
life from that perfume. I am the wounded Man that is fallen among Thieves. O let
thy Blood heal me of my Plagues! Thou have been lifted up to the Cross, that
the Enemy of Mankind might be trodden down. O let me participate of the Virtue
of that exaltation, that I may trample upon his Temptations. Thou have been
lifted up to draw me after Thee, and to withdraw my Heart from worldly Desires
and Affections. O lift me up from the Earth, that I may relish the comfort of
thy Exaltation. Thou wast lifted up, that thou might be beheld by all. O let
me look upon Thee, whom I have pierced by my Sins, that I may mourn for them
bitterly. Thy Holy Arms were stretched out, that thou might embrace all that
come unto Thee. I come, Lord! Take me into thy Arms and love me! O let thy
Cross be my security against all my Enemies! Let thy Wounds be my refuge in the
hour of Temptation! Let that innocent Blood, that dropped from thy Hands and
Feet, and Side, wash away the spots and stains of my abominable Actions.
Henceforward my Hands and my Heart shall be lifted up in Prayer and Praise, and
Love, and Devotion. O direct me, and give me grace to obey thy Directions, and
leave me not till I am past all danger; O see me safe through the wilderness of
this World, that I may for ever Admire and Adore Thee in thy Everlasting
Kingdom. Amen.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Eating and Drinking unworthyly in this Ordinance, and the Guilt, the
unworthy Receiver incurs thereby.
The CONTENTS.
Both good and bad Men frighted witb the thoughts of Eating and Drinking
unworthily, but the good without just cause. Wherein unworthy Eating and
Drinking does not consist, shown in Thirteen particulars, with the reasons of
the assertion: and wherein it does consist. The danger of unworthy Eating and
Drinking, proved to lie in making our selves guilty of the Body and Blood of
the Lord. How Men involve themselves in that guilt, discovered. A great
difference betwixt Receiving unworthily, and being not worthy to Receive. The
great imprudence and Weakness of those, that are loath to depart with their
Sins, and therefore are unwilling to come, for fear they should make themselves
guilty of the Death of Christ, and of Damnation. The impudence and boldness of
others, who come to this Sacrament, receive unworthily, and are not concerned
at their danger. The Joys and Comforts which arise from Receiving worthyly. The
Prayer.

I. THough from the Premises, the Reader may easily guess, what is it to Eat
and Drink unworthyly, and though in Chapter 4. some general notions concerning it
have been laid down, yet since it is a point, which frights, not only bad Men,
but even some of those, who are otherwise piously inclined, from coming to the
Lord's Table, it will be necessary to give a distinct explication it, that
neither the bad may think, they gain any thing by abstaining, nor the good be
discouraged from coming. As bad Men have no sense of Spiritual things, which
makes them live merrily in neglect of commanded Duties, so not a few of those,
whose hearts are tender, are apt to discompose their minds with needless
scruples, whereby they too often deprive themselves of the comforts, they might
reap from God's Ordinances, and besides, expose themselves to strong
Temptations of the Devil, who takes pleasure to see good Men in confusion,
hoping, that one time or other they may fall into his net, and when they know
not how to extricate themselves out of their Labyrinths, will shake of the Yoke
of all Religion, and become his Votaries, run into the the other extreme, and
turn either careless or Profane. To prevent these and other dangers, it will
be convenient to discourse of this Eating, and Drinking unworthily, first,
Negatively, what it is not, and secondly, what it is, and wherein the sin
consists. And therefore.

II. To Eat and Drink unworthily, is not, 1. To Eat and Drink at this Table
with a weak Faith. By a weak Faith I mean such a belief of the truth, and
necessity of the things commanded in the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, as
makes the Soul ready, and willing to do the things, required of her, but is
attended with great fears, and doubts, with wavering, and inconstancy; and this
weakness proceeds not so much from want of will to submit to Christ, as from
want of understanding either the extent of the Grace of God, or the nature of
the Gospel of peace, or the design of God in his Providence, or the Latitude
of true Christian Liberty, which defect must needs cause great mistrusts of our
safety, danger of being scandalized with little things, and unsteddiness in
Holy Duties, as we see, Romans 14. 1, 2. etc. yet this weakness of Faith does not
make a Man an unworthy receiver.

1. Because Christ is willing to receive such into favor, and he expressed
this willingness in his kind behavior to the Man, we read of Mark 9. 22. Who
believed indeed, but waveringly, and soon after cried out, and said, with Tears
in his Eyes, Lord! I believe, help thou my unbelief. The Disciples of our Lord,
upon their first adhering to him, were at the best but weak in Faith, and
therefore Christ calls to them so often, O ye of little Faith, yet he does not
therefore reject them. He cherishes the very Seeds of Faith, and when it is no
bigger than a grain of Muster-Seed, he makes much of it. Though the Branches of
it be but tender, yet he does not Root up the Tree, or Command the Husbandman
to cut it down, lest it should cumber the Ground, or throw it into the Fire: To
which purpose there is an Excellent Character given of him, Esa. 40. 11. He
shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd, and gather the Lambs with his Arms, and
carry them in his Bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young. There
are Lambs in his Flock as well as Sheep, and as these two require various
management, so both may be confident of his tenderness. All Stars do not shine
alike, yet even those, that give not so great a brightness, shall be preserved,
as well as the greater Luminaries. Love is an acceptable present to him, and
though in some, like fire under green Wood, it burns but dimly, yet he will
quench it no more, than he will the more blazing Flames. But then when I say,
he will not frown on those, that are weak in Faith, I do not mean, such as have
no saving, no working Faith, and as refuse to work the work of God, such are
Infidels, not Men weak in Faith. Weakness of Faith supposes readiness to good
works, but the various doubts, which attend it, cause this weakness. That there
are such Persons, as Children in Grace, St. John assures us, 1 John 2. 12. Yet
even their Sins, he is willing to forgive for his Names sake.

2. Because this Sacrament was instituted for the strengthening of our Faith.
The weak in Faith are called, and invited to it, that they may grow more
robust, and lively; and to this end Christ offers himself in this Ordinance as
Spiritual Meat and Drink, that living upon him, and feeding upon him, we may be
brought up to greater perfection; that our Souls may follow him with greater
alacrity, Grace may become more active, and Faith more solid, and more
defecated from Hypocrisy; And as here we contemplate Christ, so we behold his
extraordinary Faith in God, that seeing it, it may give us courage to tread in
his steps. His Father's promises to him, as Man, and Mediator, were great, and
large, and extensive. God had promised, that he should be King of Heaven and
Earth, that all Power should be put into his hand, and that he should be as it
were, his Lieutenant General; Ask of me, says he, Psalm. 2. 8. And I shall give
thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth
for thy possession, thou shall break them with a rod of Iron, thou shall dash
them in pieces like a Potter's Vessel. There was little probability of the
performance of these promises, when he was mocked, derided, scourged, beaten,
bruised and crucified, when he was made liker a Worm than a Man, the reproach
of Men, and despised of the People, when all that saw him laughed him to scorn,
and did shoot out their Lips, and shook their Heads, saying, He trusted in the
Lord, that he would deliver him, let him deliver him, seeing he delighted in
him, when many Bulls compassed him, and strong Bulls of Basan did beset him
round, when they gaped upon him with their Mouths, as ravening and roaring
Lions, when he was poured out like Water, and all his Bones were out of joint,
when his Heart was like Wax, and melted in the midst of his Bowels, when his
strength was dried up like a Pot-sherd, and his Tongue cleav'd to his Jaws, and
he was brought into the dust of Death, when Dogs compassed him, and the
Assemblies of the wicked did enclose them, when they pierced his hands and his
Feet, as David describes his misery, Psalm. 22. 6, 7. 8, 9. etc.
yet in the midst of all these disasters, he believed the promise of his Father
would be punctually fulfilled, which makes the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews say, that for the Glory set before him, the promised Glory, He endured
the Cross, and despised the shame, Heb. 12. 2. His Faith bore him up under all
these Floods of ungodliness, so that he is not only the Author, and Finisher,
but also the example of our Faith, an Example set before us in this Holy
Sacrament, that we may light our Candle by his Fire, strengthen our Faith by
his Plerophory and Confidence, and if this be the end of his being represented
in this Ordinance, the weak in Faith cannot be excluded, nor can weakness of
Faith make a Person an unworthy Receiver.

Nor, Is it want of a total purity, or of freedom from all Sin, that makes a
Person an unworthy Receiver; It Is true, the Gospel commands those, who mean to
receive worthily, to purge out the old leaven, 1 Cor. 5. 7. And putting off the
old Man with all his deceitful Lusts, Ephesians. 4. 22. and whoever hopes to be
partaker of the benefits of Christ's death, his purpose at least must be
serious, and unfeigned, without partiality, and Hypocrisy, to renounce all
Love and Affection to a sinful Life; but still there is a great difference
betwixt destroying the Reigning power of Sin, and being free from all Sin; of
the former, the aforesaid passages must be understood, and the worthy
Communicant must in sober sadness mortify, and resolve to mortify the
Imperial Power of Sin in his Soul, so as not willingly and wilfully to yield
unto the sinful dictates of the Flesh, or of the World, but to prefer his God,
and what he requires, before his own Temporal advantages: But from thence it
follows not that the worthy Receiver must not be so much as subject to errors,
and inadvertencies, and falls by surprise, and before he can well recollect
himself; and therefore the want of such spotlesness, is not it, that makes a
Man Eat and Drink unworthily at this Table.

1. Because this Feast is not instituted for Angels, but for Men. Angels have
no need of such encouragements to Virtue, they being determined to Goodness.
Were Men free from all Sin, they would not stand in need of this Ordinance,
which is intended to make sinful Men good, and good Men better. Those that are
whole need no Physician, but the sick; and as Christ is the Physician in this
Sacrament, so they are the sick he invites to come to him. The best Man that
is, though he labors under no Chronical distemper, yet he has ailings still,
and infirmities about him, which want the Physicians hand, and Medicine, which
is here most Graciously tendr'd to him. (...)
The Scripture of the Old Testament calls Man Enosh, infirm, weak, sickly, and
though good Men are arrived to a far better state of health than Hypocrites and
grosser Sinners, yet who, even of the strictest mortals can say, I have made my
heart clean, so that no spot shall be seen there? This Sacrament therefore
being ordained for Men, it must be granted, that it is ordained for sinful Men,
not to encourage them in Sin, but to make them hate it, not only the bigger
stains, but even the relicts of it, that remain in the Regenerate. To this end
Christ's Agonies and exquisite Torments are set before us in this Sacrament,
the Torments, I mean, our Sins, inflicted and brought upon him, that that sight
may terrify us, and fill us with abhorrency of that, which has made the Son
of God so miserable.

2. No Sinners are excluded from this Sacrament, that are willing to reform
their Hearts, and Lives. Those that with Ephraim, will have no more to do with
Idols, take with them words, and turn unto the Lord, saying, Take away* all our
iniquity, and receive us Graciously, so will we render the Calves of our Lips;
Ashur shall not save us, neither will we say any more to the works of our
hands, ye are our Gods, as it is said, Hos. 14. 2, 3. Such are called by the
great Shepherd of the Sheep, not stubborn Sinners, but penitent Sinners; not
obstinate Sinners, but tractable Sinners; not Sinners that will be miserable,
but Sinners, that long to be delivered from their misery; not Sinners that are
resolved to walk on in the Imagination of their Hearts, but Sinners who are
ambitious of a clean Heart, and of a new Spirit; not Sinners that will keep
their Sins, but Sinners that are weary of them; not Sinners who still find
Sweetness in their Sins, but Sinners who are sensible of the Bitterness of
them; not Sinners who make a Mock of Sin, but Sinners to whom Sin is a Grief
and Burden; not Sinners that make a Covenant with Hell, but Sinners that break
that Covenant, to be the Lord's Freemen: So that, not to be free from Sin, is
not to eat and drink unworthily.

Nor, 3. Does all Dullness in holy Duties make a Man an unworthy Receiver. There
is a Dullness, indeed, which proceeds from an Aversion to the holy Commands of
the Gospel, from a voluntary Stupidity of Mind, and want of Relish of Spiritual
Things; and this, without all peradventure, is very prejudicial to the Soul,
and a bad Preparative for the Communion, and no small Impediment to the Grace
of God. But there is a Dullness, which is the Result of Faintness, when the
Spirits are spent, and the first Intenseness of the Mind is worn out: In such
Cases, a Dullness and Deadness may easily rise, but much against our Wills, and,
to be sure, without our Approbation. Nor is this Dullness to be seen only in
Temporal Concerns, but even in Spiritual Duties and Devotions. When the first
Heat of Devotion in the Morning is over, and the Spirits of the Blood, which
were the Porters that served to carry up our Prayers on high, are in some
measure tired, the Soul that, after this, applies her self to the holy
Communion in the public Congregation. may want that Liveliness and Briskness
of Thought, Desire and Affection, because the first Flames, which were
strongest in the Morning when we rose, are spent. Now, This Dullness does not
make a Person an unworthy Receiver: And the same Judgment we are to make of
that Dullness which rises from natural Imperfections and Sicknesses, incident to
good Men, as well as bad; such as Lethargies, Dropsies, Scurvy, Consumption,
and other Distempers, which are either beginning, or are come to a considerable
Strength: Neither the one, nor the other, if they seize us at the Communion, do
make us unworthy Receivers.

1. Because God does not judge of us so much by the present Liveliness and
Activity of our Spirits, as by the Sincerity of our Souls. Where the Soul is
bent to please God, does not regard Iniquity in her Heart, and preserves so
much of Fear upon her Mind, as makes her, that she would not offend God
wilfully, though it were to gain the Kingdoms of the World; is willing to be
better informed, to have her Errors discovered to her; is desirous to be
strengthened in the Inward Man; is still ready to embrace any Good, suggested
to her from the Word of God, or the Ministers of his Ordinances; there the Soul
has reason to bless God for the Sincerity that is in her, and to believe,
that, notwithstanding her present accidental or involuntary Dullness, he will
meet her in this Sacrament with a favorable Aspect, bid her welcome, and give
her the glorious Blessings she expects in the Holy Communion: For, if there be
first a willing Mind, it is accepted according to what a Man has, and not
according to what he has not, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8. 12. If that Soul
finds a present Dullness, is willing to be rid of it, is so far from being
pleased with it, that it is her Burden, would be more lively in her Desires if
she could; there God will certainly spread open his Arms to her, and receive
her.

2. Because God rejects no Person for what he cannot help. I know, this is the
common Plea of all unconverted Sinners: When they are exhorted to close with
God, and to cashier their known Sins, or are reproved for continuing in them;
the String they harp upon is this, That they cannot help it. But, not to
mention that, by thinking or saying so, they make God a Liar, who says, they
can help it if they will use the Means the Holy Ghost prescribes; it is evident
to all wise and considerate Men, that this pretense of Impossibility is nothing
but Resolution and Obstinacy to continue in the State they are in. And
therefore, when I say, that God rejects none for what they cannot help, the
meaning is, for what he sees and knows they cannot help: As a Christian who,
upon the account of his Conscientiousness, is cast into a Prison or Dungeon,
God will not reject him for not frequenting the public Ordinances; so here,
for the Dullness that seizes upon pious Christians in their holy Performances,
God will not withdraw his Kindness; especially where he sees that either the
faintness of their Spirits, or the prevailing Distempers in their Bodies,
baffle all their repeated and reiterated strivings to be lively and
affectionate in their Addresses to God, and particularly in the holy Communion.
In this case, God regards rather the brave Intention of the honest Believer,
and his swimming against the Stream, than the Want of what he desires: Nor will
he condemn him for not doing that which he would do, and cannot. And the same
is to be said of those blasphemous Suggestions I mentioned, and gave an Account
of, Chap. 14. Sect. 7.. 4. They being things which no Man can help, (for, Who
can hinder the Devil from tempting him?) if detested, they cannot make the
Person that resists and abhors them an unworthy Receiver, though they should
fly or dart into his Mind in the Act of Receiving. All that can be done to
them, is, to abominate them when they come in; and though they may be the
Devil's Sin, who frames these fiery Darts, and shapes them on his Anvil, yet
they are not Sin to the assaulted Person, who says, I renounce the Devil, and
all his Works. There is no fighting of them with Swords and Spears; they are
not to be cut in pieces with Knives or Axes; are not to be expelled by Forks
and Weapons: Resistance, and Detestation, and Prayer, and Declarations of our
contrary Belief, is all the Force that can be used; and while this is done, the
Soul is safe under all those Skirmishes of the Enemy. Nay, Who can promise
themselves a greater Welcome to this Table, than those that resist Temptation?
Resistance is a Virtue, and a Sign the Soul is touched with a Sense of God:
It Is a Character of Grace, and Abhorrency of Evil, a Fruit of the Spirit; and
those that are led by the Spirit, cannot but be worthy Communicants. Whatever
Temptation we meet withal, while we consent not, we preserve the Safety of our
Souls: And though it is true, that these blasphemous Suggestions come in
sometimes so thick, and so fast, and make those strange Impressions on the
Mind, that the Patient cannot well tell whether he consents to them, or not;
yet it being, in a manner, impossible we should consent to things our very
Nature abhors, and which we know to be against the common Principles riveted in
our Souls, he that feels them, has reason to believe that he consents not to
them, though for the present they stun him: However, when he recovers out of
his present Fright and Consternation, if deliberately he rejects them, it is
enough: And though they should follow him Twenty Years together, yet, if he
resist and detest them Twenty Years together, they cannot make him an unworthy
Communicant.

4. Impossibility of forgetting an Injury does not make a Man an unworthy
Receiver. By not being able to forget an Injury, I mean, not being able so to
put the Matter of Fact out of our Minds, that we shall never think of it, or
remember that such an Injury was done unto us. It Is true, the uncharitable Man,
as he is a Stranger to Christ's Religion, so it cannot be supposed that he will
meet with any kind Entertainment at the Lord's Table: And whoever would not go
away empty from this Ordinance, must from his Heart forgive the Offender who
has either wronged or disparaged him, or wounded his good Name: Nay, so far he
must forget the Injury too, as not to exercise Revenge when it lies in his
power; nor must he remember it with Wrath and Passion, or ill Language, or with
an Intent or Resolution to withdraw from him the charitable Offices of
Humanity, or with renewing his Grudge and Hatred to him, or with making the
Remembrance an Argument and Motive to desist from the Good he intended him; for
he must not forget to do good to Enemies, and such as have despitefully used
him. And though no Person is, by the Law of the Gospel, obliged to make a
Person who has been notoriously ^alse and treacherous to him, his Bosom-friend
and Familiar, or to trust him again without Fear or Suspicion, except he sees,
and is sensible of the Offender's sincere Repentance; yet still the Injury must
be so far forgotten, as not to deny or refuse to help the Offender in things we
can conveniently and easily serve him in. But to think sometimes of the Injury
done to us, with Pity and Compassion to the Offender; or not to be able so to
extinguish the Thoughts of it, that it shall not so much as beat upon our Minds
again: This, I say, does not make a Person an unworthy Receiver.

1. Because God does not intend the Destruction of our Faculties, whereof
Memory is one: Never to remember an Injury, or not to be able so much as barely
to think of it, supposes Destruction of our Memory. All that God intends in our
Reformation, is the Destruction of our evil Qualities, and the Irregularities
of our Faculties. His Design is not to annihilate our Minds, but the evil
Thoughts that are apt to take up their Lodging there* not to abolish our Wills,
but the Perverseness and Stubbornness that cleaves to them; and consequently,
not to destroy our Memories, but the Revenge, and Hatred, and Malice, and
secret Grudges, which are apt to harbor there. Even then, when God presses
upon us the Destruction of the Body of Sin, it is not that we are to kill our
Natural Bodies, but the Mass of Corruption that lies in them. And though Christ
bids us cut off our Right Hand, yet he means no more than that the Sins should
be resected which cleave to it: And that is the the meaning too of pulling out
the Eye; i. e. the evil Looks, and unchaste Desires, and foolish
Concupiscences, which are apt to incorporate with that Organ. So that he who
can so far raze an Injury out of his Memory, as to destroy his own Ill Will,
his ill Designs, his evil Inclinations to the Offender, which are written
there; his not being able totally to obliterate that such a thing was ever done
to him, need not make him afraid that he shall be an unworthy Receiver in this
Ordinance.

2. This Sacrament will help us totally to forget the Injury; or, if not
totally to forget it, yet totally to forget requiting the Offender according to
his Demerits; and so to forget it, that the Remembrance shall cause no
Commotion, no Disorder, no Tumults, no Risings in our Minds. For here we are
told, and here we are made to see, how God, that has far greater reason to
stand upon Points of Honor than any Mortal Man, freely and graciously forgives
and forgets our Sins and Offenses against him, in the Blood of his Son, blots
them out like a thick Cloud, and, notwithstanding all the Wrong we have offered
to him, is willing to pass by the foulest Trespasses; willing to open his Gates
to us, though we have locked our selves out; willing to vouchsafe us his Smiles
again, though we have forfeited the Light of his Favor; and willing to adopt
us for his Children, though we have lived like Prodigals; which must needs be a
great help to make us forget the Wrongs we have suffered from unreasonable Men:
And therefore, he that is not able totally to forget, ought to come, that by
this great Example of God's forgetting his Offenses, he may be persuaded
totally to forget his Neighbor's Trespasses.

5. Worldly Business, either a Day or Week before a Man receives, does not make
him as unworthy Receiver. By Worldly Business, See Chap. 15. Sect. 5.. 1.
I mean lawful Business; not Playing, or Drinking, or going to Stage Plays, or
mis-spending our Time, etc. but such Business as appertains to an honest and
lawful Calling, or Business considered abstractedly from the evil Concomitants
of it: For lawful Business is one thing, and the way of managing of it is
another. A Man may manage even his lawful Business sinfully, and run himself
into Danger; but following it without Sin, as it may happen that the Day or
Week before he may have greater Occasions than ordinary to look after it, as
this need not hinder him from an holy Life, so neither can it be a just
Impediment to his Receiving worthily.

1. Because it is our Duty to mind it on such Days of the Week as God has
permitted us to work in; which makes the Apostle enjoin us to do our own
Business, and work with our Hands, without making any distinction in Days, 1
These. 4. 11. It Is true, where public Authority, either Civil or
Ecclesiastical, appoints a Day in the Week to be kept holy, or a Festival, or a
Fast, or where a Person, by a Vow, has consecrated a certain Day in the Week,
to spend it entirely in religious Duties, there Working ought to be forborne;
for Magistrates ought to be obeyed, and a Vow does bind the Soul. But set aside
these Cases, the Command to work extends to all Days, except the Lord's Day;
and therefore, he that is to receive the holy Sacrament on the Lord's Day, is
not necessarily obliged to abstain from minding his lawful Business the Day
before.

2. Lawful Business does not, need not hinder a Man from preserving holy
Thoughts, holy Desires, and holy Affections, if his Soul were acquainted with
any before. A good Man, in the midst of his lawful Business, will keep God in
his Eye, that he may not sin against him, that he may do what is just and
righteous in his sight, and that at Night he may reap Comfort from a Review of
his Actions of the Day. Lawful Business is consistent with watching against
Temptations, and keeping our selves unspotted from the Pollutions of the World;
and this St. James calls Pure Religion, Jam. 1. 27. And if this pure Religion
be joined with our Business, I do not see how our lawful Business, if we mind
it the Day or Week before, can make us unworthy Receivers.

3. No Man has so much lawful Business, but, if he pleases, he may find time
to retire, and enter into his Closet, and walk with God. Where a Man pretends
that his lawful Business allows him no time for Devotion, it is to be feared he
either tells a Lie, or he manages his lawful Business very ill, or imitates the
carnal Sort of Mankind, who, when they have spent the whole Day, or the
greatest part of the Day, in Fooleries, and needless Business, give out, they
have no time, and can find no time for God's Service. A Conscientious Man, if
he be really so, will take heed how he conforms to the World in this
particular; and if he manages his Affairs with discretion, I question not but
he will find time to ask his Heart what it is that is nearest to him, whether
God, or the World; what his chief Aim or Design is, whether to be rich, or to
be good? And as he will find time to ask himself such Questions, so he will
find time for pious Exercises, whereby his Soul may be brought to a serious
Sense of the Mystery proposed in this holy Sacrament; and if he do so, his
lawful Worldly Business the Day or Week before, as it need not discourage him
from coming to this holy Table, so it need not fill his Head with Doubts and
Fears, that coming to it, having been engaged in much Business the Day before,
will make him an unworthy Communicant.

6. Worldly, Crosses, Troubles and Disappointments do not make a Man an
unworthy Receiver. I do not deny but Crosses and Troubles of the World, if they
fill the Mind with Torments, and mistrustful Cares; if they depress the
Understanding, make it lie grovelling on the Earth, and mind little else but
Second Causes; if they possess the Soul with despairing Thoughts, drive it into
Discontent, draw it away from Heaven, render the Promises of God insipid to
her, and do so far prevail with her that the future Joys, and the Bliss of the
other World, are insignificant things to her; these Effects do not look very
amiable in the sight of God, are no very tempting Objects to the Son of God,
the Master of this Spiritual Feast; and are so far from being Allurements of
his Blessing, that they are like to procure his Curse: But I consider Worldly
Crosses, as abstracted from all these Abuses; and, as such, they cannot make a
Person eat and drink unworthily.

1. Because, What were the Communicants under the first Persecutions of the
Church, but so many afflicted, distressed, troubled, and evil-entreated
Christians? Their Crosses were great, their Afflictions heavy, and their
Pressures grievous; they were in daily danger of losing, not only their nearest
Relatives, but their Lands, Houses, Possessions; they were hunted, pursued,
driven from their Dwellings; the Heathens were set against them; the Jews were
their Enemies; they were reproached; they were made Spectacles to Angels, and
to Men; they were tormented; they were committed to Wild Beasts; they were
harassed, beaten, bruised; they were wrongfully accused of Treason, of
Sedition, of Atheism, of murdering their Children, of promiscuous Copulations,
and of other Crimes; they were hated, branded with odious Names; they were
charged with being the Causes of Plagues, Inundations, Famine, etc. Yet nothing
of these discouraged them from coming to this Table; they came to it to choose,
and thought themselves the fitter to approach, because they were made
conformable to Christ in his Afflictions.

2. A Man may have such Crosses, and yet be very Conscientious. It Is far from
being impossible to be afflicted, and yet good; miserable, and yet serious;
destitute, and yet religious; hated, and yet a Lover of God. In the midst of
the greatest Troubles, a Man may put his Confidence in God, praise him for his
Goodness, rejoice in him, because he has promised him Eternal Life; keep his
Tongue from Evil, and his Lips from speaking Guile; take occasion from his
Troubles, to consider the Emptiness of Sublunary Comforts, the Permanency of
Spiritual Consolations, the Sweetness of God's Favor, the Beauty of God's
Providence, the Wisdom of his Dispensations, the Happiness of Lazarus in the
midst of all his Sores and Boyls, the Designs of God to make him humble and
patient, and to fit him for Eternal Happiness. And where a Person makes this
use of his Afflictions, there is nothing can dispose him better for receiving
the holy Communion.

3. This Sacrament is an excellent Help to bear our Troubles and Misfortunes
with a contented and cheerful Mind: For here the Lord Jesus is represented to
us as dumb under all Reproaches, unmoved at all the bitter Language that is
given him, silent under the Rage of Enemies, meek^under the foulest
Accusations, giving his Back to the Smiter, and not opening his Mouth under the
Scorns and Derisions of his Adversaries, contented under all his Losses,
courageous under all the Calumnies that False Witnesses invent against him,
satisfied with the Will of God, bearing his Cross without murmuring, answering
calmly to his Oppressors, patient under his Scourges, ready to do good to those
that came to apprehend him. And is not this a powerful Motive to bear what
Providence thinks fit to inflict upon us? And therefore, Crosses and Worldly
Troubles, separated from the ill Management of them, cannot make a Person an
unworthy Receiver. Where Men storm and fret, and burn with Revenge under an
Affliction, will be their own Carvers, will be vindicated their own way, that
way that Flesh and Blood suggests, and will rid themselves of their Trouble by
unlawful Means; these, indeed, if they receive, they eat and drink unworthily:
But that is not a necessary Effect of the Affliction, but a Product rather of
their Wickedness and Carnality, which, instead of being cherished, must be cut
off, and mortified.

7. A Man's having formerly received unworthily, and coming again afterward to
the holy Sacrament, with a great Sense and Abhorrency of his former unworthy
Receiving, does not make him an unworthy Receiver. For,

1. If it did, we might as well say, that he who has sinned grievously, cannot
safely venture on a true Repentance: To have done ill, is no Bar to a sincere
Return, but a Motive to it; and though the Sin be never so great, yet if he can
so order and manage his Remorse, that it may be hearty, kindly, and attended
with a real and universal Change of Life, and Love to Goodness, he has no
reason to despair of Pardon; this being the great Comfort of the Gospel, That
Repentance and Remission of Sins should be preached in the Name of Jesus, among
all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, says our Savior, Luke 24. 47. And that
which will illustrate this Saying, is the Story in Sophronius, Sophr. vel
Mosch. in prat. Spir. cap. 31.
of two old Men of exemplary Holiness, who traveling, and tired with their
Journey, the Heat of the Weather also being great, they retired into a Stable
or Barn that was hard by; where thinking to be private, contrary to
Expectation, they found three Young Men caressing of an Harlot: However, not
discouraged with that ill Company, they retired into a Corner of the Barn, and
there read the holy Evangelists. The Harlot, at once surprised and charmed with
their Seriousness, drew near, and sat down by one of them, who thrust her away,
wondering at her Confidence to join her self to their Company: To which she
replied, I beseech you, thrust me not away from you; for though I am laden with
Sin, and have made a very ill use of the Means of Grace, yet I find not that
Christ drove the Harlot from him, that kneeled down at his Feet. One of them
soon answered her, saying, That Harlot whom Christ received, did not continue
an Harlot. To which she instantly made this Return, From this time forward, I
seriously renounce this evil Life of mine, and nothing shall divert me from the
greatest Severities of Religion. She was as good as her word, received
Instructions and Comfort from the old Men, followed their directions, and
retired from the World: And therefore if a Man have received unworthily, and
truly laments and deplores his former presumption, applies himself to newness
of Life, and is transformed into a Christian temper, he may lawfully return to
that Table, and there receive and expect remission of Sin, where formerly he
swallowed Death and Poison; and though his Guilt has been of a very deep Dye,
yet Repentance, if unfeigned, has that Almighty Power, that it can make
Ethiopians white, and Deformity amiable: But then,

2. He that has received unworthily, and comes to be sensible of it, and
thereupon Receives again; had need watch, and take heed, he do not return to
his former folly, for fear God be tired with pardoning, and speak Peace no
more, for he will speak Peace unto his People, and to his Saints, but let them
not return again unto folly, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 85. 8. Implying, that
the Peace of God is not to be had at all times, especially after frequent
contempt. There are offenses which provoke God to say, as it is, Judge. 10. 13.
Ye have forsaken me, wherefore I will deliver you no more, The Peace of God is
no trifle, which Men may play withal, and command when they please; God makes
another-guise account of it, where it is lost, it is not a very easy matter to
regain it; and so much we may guess at from the examples of good Men, who,
through strong temptations, have fallen into any great Sin; It has cost them
much labor and pain to recover, and God has on purpose withheld his Peace
from their Souls a long time, that they might learn how to prize and preserve
it with greater care, after its return: It Is folly to think, God is such a one,
as we our selves, or that he is as willing to part with Peace, and Pardon, as
we to have it, when ever we stand in need of it. As it is one of the greatest
comforts Man can expect of God, so he expects it should be managed with
prudence and cautionsness. It does not lie like a drug upon his hand, which he
is willing to be rid of, whenever we are pleased to take it off: If we know not
how to prize it, there are those that will, and by those few God can be
glorified, while others bewail the loss of it in outward darkness.

8. A Lawsuit that is depending, does not necessarily make a Man an unworthy
Receiver.

1. If the Lawsuit be begun for small things and trifles, such as any wise and
impartial considerate Man, were he consulted with, would judge to be trivial,
and of no great importance; or if it be commenced upon the account of Revenge;
or against persons who are known to be insolvent, only to have our Will and
base humor gratified, and to have the satisfaction of throwing the Indigent
wretch into Prison, or if it be managed in a sinful way, with opprobrious
Language, and bitter Expressions, false Accusations, suborning of Witnesses
against the adverse Party; or with harboring Malice, Hatred, or secret Grudges
in our Hearts, against him; and we feel no Godly sorrow for it, i. e. Do not
resolutely, upon the account of Christian Love and Charity, quit and renounce
these evil companions of our Souls, and yet come to this Holy Table; there,
without all peradventure, we Eat and Drink unworthily, because we Eat and Drink
without consideration of the Love of Christ, and the conditions of the Pardon,
we expect by his Cross; and the dangerous Meat we have swallowed, is not
vomited up but lies raw and undigested in our Bowels, which must needs be a bar
to the Grace and Mercy of God, and our own Comfort. But then,

2. If the Lawsuit be commenced, upon the account of something that is of great
importance, either to our Selves or Friends, or Heirs; if there be no other way
to come to our Right, and ordinary references will not do; if it be merely to
obtain reparation for the Damages we have sustained, or are like to sustain; if
these Suits be carried on with Meekness, with Justice, with using honest and
lawful Means, with Candor and Ingenuity, without addition of the hidden things
of dishonesty, without supplanting the other Party, without wounding his good
Name, or mis-representing things of his side, without catching at Bulrushes, or
taking advantages of his infirmities; if the ground and motive of the
Enterprise be only, that our Neighbor, and we, may both be satisfied in the
case, that is in dispute; if the Suit be managed without Pride or Passion, with
Gentleness and continuation of our wonted Civility, Kindness and Charity to the
Party we are at Law with, and do not upon that account, forbear the Respect we
formerly showed him. In this case our coming cannot be prejudicial to worthy
Receiving; for as it is impossible, but Contests and Disputes will arise, and
the Law of Nature requires, that Justice should be done to every Man; it must
necessarily follow, that there must be Courts of Judicature, and that God not
only permits, but appoints them too. It Is certain, that God, in the Jewish
Theocracy, ordained such Courts; and human Societies not being able to subsist
without them, natural Equity requires, there should be such things in all
civilized Nations, whereby Contests may be decided, Controversies ended,
Differences superseded, and every Man come to his Right; and though St. Paul, 1
Cor. 6. 1, 2. etc. finds fault with the Corinthians for going to Law; yet the
reason why he blames them, is, partly because they quarreled about smaller
Matters; partly because in their Lawsuits, they forgot the Law of Charity; and
partly because they did all this before Infidels and Idolaters, and would not
refer their Disputes to indifferent Men that were Christians, but impleaded one
another before Judges that were Pagans; whereby the Gospel was reproached,
Religion blasphemed, and Christianity traduced, and strangers were induced to
believe, that the Gospel gave Men no better Principles, than either Indaism or
Heathenism, nor raised them to higher Virtues, than what Nature and Custom had
taught others, that were not of that Religion: Nay, it is evident from the whole
Discourse, that he allows their going to Law before the Saints, as it is said,
v. 1. i. e. before Christians, only that was too mild a course, they thought;
that was not the way to triumph over the Adversary, or to have him punished,
and be made a public Example; and this ill Nature St. Paul reproves, and
justly forbids, and commands them, rather than do so, to suffer them selves to
be defrauded, and to take wrong, v. 7. Christ indeed, Matthew. 5. 40. in that
saying, If any Man will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him
have thy Cloak also seems to condemn all going to Law; but the very expression
he uses, shows, that he restrains the unlawfulness of it to certain cases; i.
e. if the matter be small, inconsiderable, and of no great moment, such as a
Coat, or a Cloak, and other things of the same nature; and indeed it is a very
lamentable case, to see how many of our People sue their Neighbors for pitiful
Debts, and cast them into Prison; for proof of which, a Man need go no farther
than the Marshalsea, a thing not to be thought of without horror. Besides,
Christ, in the foregoing Verses of that Chapter, enters into a discourse
against recompensing Evil for Evil; and to extirpate that devilish temper of
Revenge, would have us deny our selves to a very high degree, rather than think
of rewarding Evil with Evil; and to this purpose, instances in another Man's
going to Law with us out of Spleen and Malice, in which he would not have his
Disciples follow or imitate such Men, but rather than return the like injury,
suffer and bear with their unjust Acts, leaving Vengeance to him, who has
said, I will repay; so that Christ does not absolutely condemn going to Law,
but only in these two eases. 1. If the Concern be small, and of no great
moment, or consequence: And, 2. If we cannot go to Law, without Animosities,
Grudges, and revengeful Thoughts and Desires against our Neighbors. Dr.
Hammond.
And hence it was, as a Learned Man of our Church observes, upon James 2. 2.

That the Christians, even under the Heathen Emperors, very early erected
Courts of Judicature among themselves, in which Causes were decided, and
Differences about Meum and Tuum determined: And though the Assemblies spoken of
in St. James, are usually interpreted of Religious Assemblies, yet he very
judiciously shows, that it is more probable that they were Assemblies upon the
Account of hearing and deciding Causes betwixt Man and Man, because Judges are
expressly mentioned, Verse. 4. And these Judges had Seats or Benches elevated,
and higher than the Pavement, on which they sat; and had their Foot-stools
also, under which the Poor were ordered to sit, Verse. 3. From whence we may
guess, what kind of Partiality they used; the Poor Plaintiffs or Defendants
were ordered to sit in the lowest Seats; the Richer were permitted to sit with
the Judges, or the more honorable Men; which argued too great a Respect of
Persons, and was contrary to the Jewish Rule, and, indeed, against the Law of
Nations, which condemned all Partiality in Judgment, and gave the Poor as free
Admittance to the Bar as the Rich, and required equal Consideration of both
States and Conditions; All which not being easily applicable to Assemblies
where the Word was preached, and the Sacraments administered, it is in a manner
necessary that we apply it to Courts of Justice, where Civil Affairs and
Matters were debated: And if so, going to Law could not be absolutely unlawful;
and consequently, the Rules and Conditions abovementioned being observed,
coming to this Table during the Contest, and while the Lawsuit is depending,
cannot make a Man an unworthy Receiver.

9. Knowing that other Men are not in Charity with him, does not make a Person
an unworthy Receiver. This I have known to be the fear of otherwise well-minded
Christians; while their Relations, Friends and Acquaintance have been angry
with them, and averse from being reconciled to them, they have forborne to
receive, for fear they should eat and drink unworthily. But,

1. If it be, indeed, through our own fault, that others will not be friends
with us; if we have given the Offense, and will not humble our selves to the
offended Party, nor acknowledge our Faults, nor make them Restitution, or
Satisfaction, or Reparation for the Injury; and if thereupon, he that is
offended will entertain no charitable Thoughts of us; there the Case is plain,
that if we come to eat and drink at this holy Table, we come with unrepented
Sins upon our Backs, because we receive, living in the Omission of a known
Duty. He that might quench a dangerous Fire, and will not, is guilty of all the
Mischief that ensues upon it: And he that can shut the Sluice, thereby to
prevent the Inundation of his Neighbor's Garden, and wilfully forbears to do
it, has an Hand in all the Hurt and Damage that his Neighbor's Ground
receives. As in the Law, Exodus 21. 29. if the Owner of the Beast knew that his
Ox did use to push with his Horns, and did not keep him in, he was charged with
the Man's Death that followed upon it; so he that has given just Occasion to
others to be displeased with him, and will apply no Remedy to heal the Breach,
does not only sin, but makes himself accessory to the Uncharitableness of his
Neighbor, and becomes Partner with him in his Sin: And such a Person is a very
unfit Guest at his Master's Table. But,

2. If other Men hate us without a just Cause, and we have given them no
Occasion of Ill Will or Displeasure against us; or, having offended them by
Words or Actions, if we have tried all rational and prudential Means to re-gain
their Friendship, and to recover their Charity, and after all this, they will
not be reconciled, there their Sin and Obstinacy must not, cannot hinder us
from our Duty. Indeed, if they that are so stiff, and will hearken to no Terms
of Peace, come to this Table, they sin with a witness; but their causless
Hatred cannot have the same Effect in us, it being not with their Sins, as it
is with a sort of fore Eyes, whose poisonous Steams will infect those that look
upon them; but the Arrows they shoot, light upon their own Heads. If it were
not so, all the Apostles must have been unworthy Receivers, for all the World
clamoured against them; they were hated by Heathens, hated by the Jews, reviled
by Strangers, reproached by their Countrymen; and there was greater hopes to
reconcile Fire and Water, Light and Darkness, than of reconciling some People
in the World to them: Yet did not this Hatred and Surliness of others make them
unworthy Communicants. If my Neighbor will throw himself down from a
Precipice, why should that hinder me from walking in a plain Path? And if
others will be wicked, why should that be an Impediment of my being good? It Is
true, Christ, Matthew. 5. 23, 24. tells us, If thou bring thy Gift to the Altar,
and there remember that thy Brother has ought against thee, leave there thy
Gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and
then come and offer thy Gift: Which Words seem to import, that if another Man
be not in Charity with us, our Devotion cannot be accepted, till he be
reconciled to us. But these Words of Christ must be explained by Verse. 22.
which brings in the Discourse, Verse. 23. for there our Savior tells us, I say
unto you, that whosoever is angry with his Brother without a Cause, shall be in
danger of the Judgment; i. e. He that conceives Anger against his Neighbor,
and hopes to escape the Guilt of Sin, must have a very just Cause for it, viz.
There must be a just Cause given him by his Neighbor; and then it follows, If
thy Brother have ought against thee, i. e. have ought against thee justly,
which thou have given just Occasion for, first be reconciled to thy Brother,
and then offer thy Gift. So that it is not another Man's bare having ought
against us, that makes us unworthy Receivers; but if he have ought against us
that we have been the just Cause of, if we have kindled his Anger by something
that we have injuriously said or done against him, there till we seek to be
reconciled unto him, our Gifts, and what we offer to God, must needs be odious
to him, because they are offered with an Heart that is not right with him: But
where we have either done nothing that he can take just Exception against, or
have done our Duty, and what became our Place and Station, without any Intent
of doing him harm; or if, in case of an Offense given, we have, by proper Means
and Addresses, sought to be at Peace with him, and notwithstanding all this, he
will still have ought against us; there his Hatred, and the whole Guilt of it
will fall upon his own Pate; nor can his Insolence or Ill Nature darken the
Light of God's Love and Favor to us, who sees we have done what became
Christians, and honest Men; and though it will not satisfy the angry Man, yet
his Choler cannot deprive us of the kind Looks of our Father which sees in
secret, nor make us unworthy Receivers.

10. A Man's having, as he supposes, received no Benefit by this holy
Sacrament, and coming to it again, does not necessarily make him an unworthy
Receiver: For,

1. A Man may really be the better for having been at this Sacrament, and yet,
for the present, may not be sensible of it, because he may measure his not
being better, by the want of some particular Qualifications he is desirous of,
and overlook those Advantages he has in good truth received by the holy
Communion. Many a pious Christian is the better for this Sacrament, though he
is loath to believe it; for his coming to this Table either strengthens him in
his Hatred of Sin, and in his Love to Religion; or advances him in Humility,
Patience, Readiness to forgive Injuries, and in Charity; and yet because he
feels not just after it, those lively Desires, those earnest Breathings after
God, that Fervor of Spirit, that Ardency in Prayer he expected, he may think
he receives no Benefit, because he does not get what at present he most
desires, and feels not those Excellencies and Accomplishments which are most
upon his Mind; yet all this while there may be an actual Growth of Goodness in
him, his other Graces may be established, his Cautiousness of offending a
merciful Redeemer increased, his Obedience and Self-denial advanced, his Faith
of another Life augmented, his Resolutions to shun the very Appearances of Evil
fortified; all which, upon a strict Search, and View of his Inward Man, he may
find: And therefore I may justly conclude, that if he receives the Benefit God
thinks sit for him, though he receives not the Benefit he desires, that that
Supposition of his, of receiving none at all, cannot make him an unworthy
Receiver.

2. It Is possible we may receive no Benefit at all by frequenting this
Ordinance; and we may know we do not, if we are the same in our Lives we were
before. If the Cross of Christ does not draw us after him; if it leaves us
without Desires to be like him, or does not check the Sins we have been fond
of; if it does not make us stand in awe of God any more than we did before; if
it work no Love to God, no Charity to other Men's Souls and Bodies in our
Hearts; if after it, we rush into Sin as easily as before; if it prove no
Bridle to our sinful Appetite, no Curb to our covetous Desires; if it restrains
us not in our Affections to the World; if it gives us no Courage to resist, no
Boldness to withstand those Lusts which were dear to us; (but still this is
clearly our own Fault* and for want of considering the Arguments and Motives
the Cross of Christ affords us to die to Sin, for want of thinking on the
Design of Christ's Death, and for want of taking pains with our selves, for
want of reflecting on the Force of Divine Love, and for want of earnest Prayers
and Addresses for the powerful Assistance of God's Spirit:) If it be thus with
us, we have reason to be afraid God will not rejoice over us when he comes to
view our Souls in this Ordinance. However, All this need not be an Obstacle to
our Reformation: If we have done ill, it is our Interest to awake out of Sleep,
and to redeem the Time: If we have received no Benefit before, upon our
Amendment we may: If we have done the Work of the Lord negligently, upon our
Reformation, God may may turn our Captivity, as the Streams in the South. It is
with this Sacrament as it is with a rich Mine, which yields no Profit to the
Owner, till he works it. The Benefit Men receive here, is the Effect of Labor:
They must be disposed and qualified for this Gift; and that which qualifies
them, is, to quit that Slothfulnes they were guilty of.

11. Communicating with Persons that receive unworthily, does not necessarily
make a Person an unworthy Receiver. For,

1. Every Man shall bear his own Burden, Gal. 6. 5. If another be wicked, how
can his Wickedness unsettle my Faith, or disorder my Devotion, except I consent
to his Impiety, or suffer my self to be enticed by it? Every Man's Sin is a
personal thing, (except in case of Scandal) and the Offender only shall feel
the Smart of it: He that is free from the other's Offense, shall be freed also
from the Penalty due to the Offense; and then what hurt do I receive by an ill
Man's communicating in my Company? I may eat with a Leprous, with a diseased,
with a Gouty Man, at a common Table, and yet not participate of his Distemper:
And why should I share in his Guilt at the Lord's Table, when I both abhor it,
and keep my self from the Infection? The Soul that sins shall die, is God's
standing Rule, Ezekiel. 18. 20. The Son shall not bear the Iniquity of the Father,
neither shall the Father bear the Iniquity of the Son; the Righteousness of the
Righteous shall be upon him, and the Wickedness of the Wicked shall be upon
him. If therefore I approach with a practical Faith, and another with Unbelief,
or, which is all one, with a Faith without Works, shall his Unbelief make the
Faith of God of no effect? Romans 3. 3.

2. What Hurt did the Guests receive at the Wedding-Feast, Matthew. 22. 11, 12.
by eating with the Man who had no Wedding Garment? Were they rejected by the
Master of the Feast, because they feasted in his Company? No; All that came
adorned with a suitable Temper, and in whose Spirit there was no Guile,
received the Caresses of the King; and none but the profane Wretch felt the
Thunder of the Prince's Anger; of him alone it is said, Bind him Hand and Foot,
and take him away, and cast him into Outer Darkness, there shall be Weeping and
Gnashing of Teeth: As he was singular in his Sin, so he was singular in his
Punishment: His coming unprepared did not divest others of their Garments, nor
did his Misery reach those that sat down with him: Their own Faith saved them,
while the other's Infidelity condemned him: The Master does not so much as
frown upon the rest, does not so much as give them an angry Word; nor does he
expostulate with them, why they would bear him Company: They charitably
believed he was a good Man, because he was invited with them; and their Charity
made their own Sacrifice acceptable, while the other's was Abomination to the
Lord.

3. If I see another Man, whom I know to be, or to have been a notorious
Sinner, kneel down by me at this holy Table, he must not therefore be an Object
of my Scorn, but of my Pity and Compassion. I can make an excellent Use of
seeing him in my Company, for I can pray for him, and beg of God that he would
overawe his Spirit with a Sense of the Death of Christ, and strike him into
Repentance and Humiliation. I can entreat my Heavenly Father to give him a
Sight of the Errors of his Ways, and Resolutions never to profane that Cross
again, on which the great Redeemer of the World suffered. I can pray that his
Sight of the Bleeding Jesus may work upon his Soul, and fill his Heart with
holy Compunctions, and his Eyes with Tears. I can pray that, after this
Communion, he may take heed, and sin no more; that the Solemnity may leav^ such
a Fear upon his Spirit, that he may dread to offend God, more than putting his
Hand in the Fire. And where I do so, I do at once exercise my Pity, and raise
mine own Devotion; I imitate Christ on the Cross, praying for his Murderers,
and, with him, become a Solicitor for those that have derided and spit upon
him. And this, sure, cannot make me an unworthy Receiver.

4. Who has given me a Key to other Men's Hearts, whereby I can judge, at the
Receiving of the Eucharist, that my Neighbor receives unworthily? How do I
know, but that he who was vicious a Week ago, may become a Penitent that Day?
Or, Who assures me, that he who did cast God's Laws behind him Yesterday, may
not this Day cry out, O wretched Man that I am? Who bids me trouble my Head
about another's Receiving, when I have enough to do with mine own Heart? And
while I give my self liberty to judge another, is it not a very great Sign that
I am not very sensible of mine own Vileness? If I am truly concerned about mine
own spiritual Welfare, I shall not be at leisure to dive into other Men's Lives
and Consciences. My own Sins will be Burden enough to me, that I shall not
need to concern my self about another's Business. If I give my self to
Censoriousness at such times, I lose my Charity and Humility: And if the Rule
be, to esteem others better than our selves, I do not very heartily obey that
Precept while I suffer my Mind to dwell upon other Men's Faults and Errors.
Christianity bids me to have humble Thoughts of my self; and if I think that
all that receive with me, may be, for ought I know, better than my self, I
assuredly prepare for God's Favor, who ever gives Grace to the Humble.

5. If Judas the Traitor was present at this Sacrament, as well as the other
Apostles; and his being present, did not make the rest unworthy Receivers; why
should I think that a wicked Man's coming with me to this Table should make me
one? That Judas was present at this Sacrament, we have the concurrent Testimony
of three Evangelists; for they all confess that Jesus sat down with the
Twelve, to the Eating of the Passover; and while they were eating, Jesus
administered the holy Sacrament to them: So St. Matthew. 26. 26. As they were
eating, Jesus took Bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the
Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body. So St. Mark, 14. 22. And as
they did eat, Jesus took Bread, and blessed, and brake it, and gave to them,
and said, Take, eat, this is my Body. Nay, St. Luke is more express, 22. 19,
20, 21. And he took Bread, and gave Thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them,
saying, This is my Body, etc. But, behold! the Hand of him which betrays me, is
with me on the Table, etc. St. John, indeed, tells us, that Judas having
received the Sop, in the Passover, he went immediately out, Joh. 13. 30. But
since the Evangelist mentions nothing of the Sacrament, his Silence about
Judas's being present at the Sacrament, can be no Argument; and his Words may
justly be construed thus, Having received the Sop in the Passover, and stayed
till the Sacrament was administered to him and the rest of the Disciples, he
immediately went out. For the Sacrament being administered by Christ, while they
were eating the Passover, by the Sop, St. John must needs be supposed to
understand both the Passover, and that which was, without Delay, subjoyned to
it; i. e. the Sacrament. And whereas it is objected, that the Sacrament could
not have been conveniently administered if the Traitor had been present, that is
a Supposition which contradicts the Matter of Fact recorded by the Evangelists:
And who can judge so well of the Convenience and Inconvenience of Things, as
Christ himself? If Christ thought it convenient to give it him, who shall say,
it was not so? Nor could the Disciples be much surprised at it, when they had
so often heard their Master say, that the T^r^s and Wheat must grow together
until the Harvest; and that the Kingdom of Heaven, or the Church-Militant, was
like a Net, containing good Fish and bad. And though the Words Christ used in
this Sacrament, This is my Body, which is given for you; and This is the New
Testament in my Blood, which is shed for you, for the Remission of Sins, cannot
be directly applied to Judas; yet since these Blessings are promised
conditionally in other places of Scripture, they might belong to Judas
conditionally, in case he repented, or brought forth Fruits meet for
Repentance; as they belonged to the other Disciples absolutely, because their
Hearts were sincere, and without Hypocrisy. Nor is it strange, that Christ
should say in the presence of Judas, I will not drink henceforth of the Fruit
of the Vine, until the Day when I drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom:
For there is nothing more common in the Writings of the Apostles, when they
address themselves to a whole Church, than to apply to them in general the
Promises of the Gospel, though true Believers only have a Right in them. We
remember, without ceasing, your Work of Faith, and Labor of Love, and Patience
of Hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the Sight of God, and our Father: Knowing,
Brethren, Beloved, your Election of God; and ye became Followers of us, and of
the Lord, etc. says St. Paul to the whole Church of the Thessalonians, 1 These.
1. 3, 4, 6. in which we may suppose there were diverse Hypocrites, to whom these
Elogies could not properly belong: And therefore, when Christ spoke these Words
to the Disciples, Judas being present, it was enough that they belonged to the
major part of them; and those that were qualified for that Mercy, might
appropriate it to themselves. It is confessed that Christ, Matthew. 7. 6. says,
Give not that which is holy unto Dogs: But it is evident from the Connection of
the Words, that that Saying is to be understood of Reproof, or Fraternal
Correction; which is to be superseded where Men are incorrigible, and Mockers
of Religion, and, after several Admonitions, instead of being better, become
worse, and scorn the Truth of the Gospel; a Precept of the same Import with
that of Solomon, Prove. 9. 8. Reprove not a Scorner, lest he hate thee. If it
were to be understood of public Ordinances, it might be applied to the
Preaching of the Word, as well as to the Sacrament; and it would follow, that
wicked Men were to be banished from the one, as well as the other; which is
absurd, and contrary to the practice of the holy Apostles. And what if Christ
calls Judas a Devil? Joh. 6. 70. Devils, it is true, are incapable of Receiving
this Sacrament; yet we must not think that he calls him so upon any other
Account, but his Hellish Qualities: For which Reason he says of all other
wicked Men, that they are of their Father the Devil, Joh. 8. 44. Nay, in his
Reproof to Peter, who was against his Suffering, he calls him Satan, or Devil;
because to be against his Suffering, was to join with the Devil, who, of all
things, dreaded that Death, as the Ruin of his Empire. So that Judas was still
a Man, though a wicked Man; yet not so wicked, but that he was still capable of
Repentance; and in giving him this Sacrament, he declared him so: And though he
received nothing but the external Elements, yet in being admitted to the
external Symbols, he had an Item given him, that if he had come with unfeigned
Faith and Repentance, he should have received the Promise too. And that Christ
offered him these Symbols, was to tell his Followers how it would be with their
Congregations in time to come; and how Wolves, as well as Sheep, would present
themselves at this Table. But it is usually pleaded, that if it be granted that
Judas was present at this Sacrament, yet still he had a good Outside, he was
far from being a scandalous Sinner; so that the Congregation could not be
offended. But this Argument is of no weight at all; for, whether he were a
scandalous Sinner, or no, as long as Christ had declared him a Devil, and a
Traitor, it was as much as if he had been a scandalous Sinner; and the
Disciples might be as confident of it, as if they had seen him run into Excess
of Riot. So that Judas being present at the Sacrament, and his Presence not
interfering with the worthy Receiving of the other Disciples, it follows, that
another Man receiving unworthily, cannot make us, that come with suitable
Virtues, unworthy Receivers. And yet, after all this, I would not be
understood, as if scandalous Sinners were not to be separated from this holy
Table, by those whose Office it is to forbid and hinder them: For though Christ
suffered Judas to be present, thereby prophetically to foretell, how in future
Ages, notwithstanding all the Care that should be taken, Hypocrites and Sinners
would mingle with the Good and Sincere in this Sacrament; yet this contradicts
not the Commission he gave to the Apostles, to do all things decently, and in
order; of which orderly part, this is one great Rule, 1 Cor. 5. 11. If any Man
that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a
Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such an one, no not to eat. It Is
confessed, that this is to be understood of common Meals: However, the
Consequence is very easy; if we are not to eat with such at common Tables, we
are to forbear eating with them at the Lord's Table: But then it is fit withal,
that the Church should excommunicate such Persons first, that there may be a
Mark set upon them, whereby we may know them to be so, and avoid their Company.
If the Church, either by reason of the Multitude of such Sinners, or for want
of sufficient Information, cannot, or, through Neglect, does not; a private
Christian is not therefore to be scandalized at such Persons when they come to
the Sacrament, nor think himself therefore an unworthy Communicant because such
are present, there being no public Mark set upon them, whereby he is
authorized not to eat with them. The Church, indeed, does as good as formally
excommunicate all such, when, in her Admonition or Exhortation before the
Sacrament, She declares, Therefore if any of you be a Blasphemer of God, an
Hinderer or Slanderer of his Word, an Adulterer, or be in Malice or Envy, or
any other grievous Crime, repent you of your Sins, or else come not to this
holy Table, lest, after the Taking of this holy Sacrament, the Devil enter into
you, as he entered into Judas, and fill you full of all Iniquities, and bring
you to destruction both of Body and Soul: But though this be a kind of general
Excommunication, yet except the particular Persons be taken notice of, and
branded by the Church, a private Chrstian must judge charitably of those that
come; and if he do so, their Impiety cannot hinder him from being a worthy
Partaker of the Sacrament. I have been the longer upon this Point, because I
have known it to be a great Scruple, that has hindered many from coming to the
Lord's Table, being possessed with Fear, that if they should meet with such
Persons there, they should eat and drink unworthily

12. Eating and Drinking at this Table, with some scruples upon the Mind, does
not necessarily make a Man an unworthy Receiver. By a scrupulous Conscience, I
do not mean an erroneous, nor a doubtful Conscience, the former being, when a
Person thinks that his Duty, which is directly against the Word and Will of
God, as it was with the Jews, Joh. 16. 2. The other, when a Person doubts,
whether such and such Actions be lawful or unlawful, as it was with those
Christians, Romans 14. 23. But a scrupulous Conscience proceeds from fear, and
fear caused by slight and weak Arguments, whereby a Person is satisfied, that
such a Thing or Action is his Duty but Melancholy, or the Devil, or Converse
with scrupulous Persons, inject some Thoughts, which makes a Person fluctuate
or waver in his performance: For example, a Man, conscious of his own wants,
knows, that coming to the Lord's Table is his Duty, and accordingly he comes,
yet comes with fears in his Mind; fears caused either by what he has read, or
by what he has heard, or by what he has seen in others; fears that suggest to
him, that he should not have come, because he has not every thing that he
observes in other good Christians. Now, I say, that eating and drinking with
such scruples upon his Mind, does not make him an unworthy Receiver.

1. Because, notwithstanding these scruples, he may be sincere in his Faith and
Love, he may sincerely desire, and be sincerely willing to keep himself
unspotted from the World, and to embrace the Wisdom, which is from above, first
pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated. He may, for all this,
deliberately choose Holiness, as the better part, and his Faith may be carried
out to embrace Christ, as his Mediator and Governor* and he may actuate his
Love so, that he shall be afraid of the appearances of Evil; and if it be thus
with him, notwithstanding his little scruple, he may be, and will certainly be,
a welcome Guest at this Holy Table; for God judges of us by the sincerity of
our Hearts, not by every little accidental fear that may surprise us, and to
discompose a timorous Mind. And therefore,

2. Such scruples may lawfully be rejected, opposed, and banished out of our
Minds, without danger: Nay, they ought to be resisted, and a Christian in this
case is obliged not to harbor them, and to be resolute in stopping his Ears
against them, especially where he finds so good a foundation in himself, as I
mentioned in the foregoing Paragraph. To give regard to them, is the way to
multiply them; and to ruminate upon them, is to let in, or to open the Door to
greater perplexities. Nor is this to act against Conscience, but according to
the true Rules of Conscience, for a Scruple is a needless Fear, and without
just ground, which Fear can bring no obligation upon the Party thus assaulted:
And it is observed by experience, where Persons use a kind of Violence to expel
such Scruples, they strengthen their Faith and their Conscience, fit themselves
for greater Duties, and become more expedient in their Journey, to the City of
the living God.

13. Want of great Knowledge does not make a Man an unworthy Receiver. It Is
confessed, that some knowledge is necessary in order to a worthy Receiving, for
this is Eternal Life, that they know thee the only true God, and him, whom thou
have sent, Jesus Christ, Joh. 17. 3. But the knowledge requisite lies within a
small compass, and he that knows no more than the six Fundamental Principles
laid down by St. Paul, Heb. 6. 1, 2. knows enough, in order to a comfortable
Communion. Those Principles are, 1. Repentance from dead Works, That Repentance
from our known Sins is absolutely necessary. 2. Faith toward God, That God
must be believed, according to the Revelations he has vouchsafed to Mankind,
in his Word, and that the things contained in that Book are infallibly true. 3.
The Doctrine of Baptism, That we are Baptized in the Name of God the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, and thereby have given our selves up to his Service. 4.
Laying on of hands, That the Holy Ghost, whereof that laying on of hands in
Confirmation is an external Sign, is certainly dispensed and bestowed in some
measure on all those that are Baptized, whereby they are enabled to fight
against Sin, the World, the Flesh and the Devil. 5. Resurrection of the Dead,
That there shall be a Resurrection of Men's Bodies, wherein they shall be
reunited to their Souls, and appear before God's dreadful Tribunal, to give an
account of their Lives and Actions. 6. Eternal Judgment, That in the last Day,
the controversy of Men's Happiness, or Unhappiness, shall be decided, and Men
shall be either sent into Eternal Life, or into Eternal Fire. He that knows
there Six Principles, and believes them, and is resolved to act accordingly,
has knowledge enough to fit him for a worthy participation of this Ordinance;
for these are sufficient Motives to remember the Death of the Son of God, with
holy Resolutions to follow him, that we may be partakers of his everlasting
Bliss. But that a Man must needs be a competent Scholar, and understand the
whole Mystery of Godliness, and be able to give an account of the nicer Points
of Divinity, and to answer the harder Questions about the manner and nature of
those Things, which God has revealed; This is not necessary: Ignorance of the
abstruser Problems of Theology, does not make a Man an unworthy Receiver. For,

1. So much Knowledge is only necessary, as serves to make us Practical
Christians, and a small stock of Knowledge will do that; and he that knows,
that Mankind was lost by Adam's ^all, and stands in need of a Savior, to
reconcile them to God; and that Christ Jesus the Son of God, who being in the
Form of God, assumed our Nature, and died for us, is that Savior, who is both
able and willing to reconcile us to an offended God, upon the reasonable terms
of turning from a sensual and sinful Life, and making his Life and Precepts the
Rule of our Conversation, whereupon we shall be pardoned, and obtain Eternal
Life. He that knows these few particulars, (and how easily are they learned and
imbibed!) knows enough to make him a Practical Christian, if he will but act
according to these Principles, and this unfeigned willingness makes him a
worthy Receiver; for this Sacrament, as has been often hinted in the Premises,
is to increase our Practice, to augment our Love to Holiness, to strengthen our
Resolutions to follow Christ, to cleanse us from that filthiness which naturally
besets us, and to enlarge our Graces; and since that Knowledge, I have
mentioned, is a sufficient Preparative for all this, it must be a sufficient
Preparative for the Holy Sacrament.

2. Much Knowledge very often hinders Men from the Practical part of Religion.
It need not do it, and it ought not to do it, but we see it frequently does:
for Men are apt to be taken with fine Notions; and while their Delight runs all
that way, they forget too often to delight greatly in God's Commandments. This
is too evident in many Men, who are great Scholars, who satisfy themselves
with this, that they know more than the Vulgar, and neglect those severer Parts
of Practical Religion, which many of the Vulgar do conscientiously observe; and
many an ordinay Man, that knows little more than his Creed, but makes that
Creed an inforcive to Obedience, is in a happier condition, than the greater
Literati, who trouble their Heads so much about Controversies and Criticisms,
that they bestow little time upon Mortification. In the Primitive Ages, when
Men knew not much, they practiced more; as, since Knowledge has increased,
Men's practices have much degenerated from the simplicity of the Gospel: Not
that I commend Ignorance in the Laity, as they do in the Church of Rome, but, I
think, a little knowledge improved into great severity of Life, is safer, and
more beneficial, than great skill in Divinity, without suitable Fruits of
Righteousness. So that upon a review of the whole, I may safely conclude, that
want of great Knowledge does not make a Man an unworthy Receiver.

III. From what we have said, it will be easy to guess in the next place, what
it is to Eat and Drink unworthily: For from Negatives, Affirmatives may be
inferred without any great difficulty; and though, after this Discourse, I might
spare my pains in setting down the particulars, yet to assist the Weak, and to
conform my self to the meanest capacity; I shall explain the Nature of this
unworthy Eating and Drinking, in the following Observations.

1. To Eat and Drink unworthily, is to Eat and Drink by force. By Eating and
Drinking by force, I mean, coming to this Sacrament, either because the Law of
the Land Commands it, or because our Superiors, under whose Command we are, or
from whom we expect some Gain and Benefit, or, in case of neglect of their
Orders, apprehend some danger or injury to our Temporal Concerns, will not be
satisfied without it: Not, but that a Servant, or whoever is under a Command of
others, ought to give heed to the Pious Counsel and Advice of those that are
above him, take it into consideration, and make advantage of that opportunity,
to apply himself to the serious practice of it, and thereupon consu^t with
Divines, and with his own Conscience, how to make his Calling and Election
sure; but where a Person is altogether passive in the thing, regards more what
his Superiors say, than what his Conscience feels, and comes more to please
those which are above him, than to discharge his Duty; where his chief motive
is to give content to those, whose Favor he is loath to lose, where he would
certainly neglect coming, were it not for the danger of prejudicing, what is
very dear to him in the World; there, I say, he Eats and Drinks unworthily: For,

1. Such a Person stands more in awe of Man, than of God. God's Command cannot
make him do that, which Human Injunctions can. Dust and Ashes prevail more with
him, than the Holy One of Israel. Man's Anger and Displeasure moves and affects
him more, than the Indignation of a jealous God; and with what Eyes can the
Almighty look upon that Wretch, whom he sees more concerned to please a poor
Grasshopper, (so Man is called, Es. 4. 22.) than him that sits upon the Circles
of the Earth? How can he but set his Face against that Communicant, whose
slavish temper he spies at his Table; whose Heart sticks close to the Earth,
and makes no great account of him, who daily courts him by his Favors? How can
he but frown upon that Creature, whom no Charms of an Almighty Love can melt,
and the threatening of Man can affright into any thing? Who art thou that thou
should be afraid of a Man that shall dye, and of the Son of Man, that shall
be made as Grass? And forgettest the Lord thy Maker, that has stretched forth
the Heavens, and laid the foundations of the Earth? says God. Isa. 51. 12, 13.

2. Such a Person, his outward Man only receives the Holy Sacrament. His Soul,
for which this Feast is chiefly prepared, receives nothing. The Brute only
appears at the Table, the Angel stays away* God expects the Master at this
Banquet, not the Slave. The Body is not capable of this Sacred Food, the Soul
is the proper Guest: This is it, that can expect refreshment at this Board; and
he that comes to feed his Body only, knows not yet what this Ordinance was
intended for; where a Man brings nothing but his Body to this Love-Feast,
leaving his Soul enslaved to the Profits of the World, or to the Will of Mortal
Men, he must needs receive unworthily; for God's enemy, which is the World,
engrosses that part, which should appear before God, and behold, and be
ravished with his excellent Greatness and Goodness, and with the admirable
designs in spreading the Royal Table for him. To what purpose is the Carkase,
while that, which should animate it, is engaged another way? Can the Shell
please God, who has so often declared, that he will be satisfied with nothing
but the Kernel? And in vain does he require the Heart, if the outward frame
were Sacrifice sufficient. So that what Christ says, Joh. 6. 63. may justly be
applied here, though with some variation of the Sense, It Is the Spirit that
quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing.

2. To Eat and Drink unworthily, is, to make this receiving a matter of custom
only: Where Men approach, because it is fashionable, to observe the decorum of
their being Members of a Church more, than to grow in a Spiritual Life, and
know no other enforcive, or can give no account of any other, but this, Because
it is usual for Men, who are Baptized, and profess themselves Christians, and
go to the Public to do so; there they must needs Eat and Drink (...),
undecently, or unworthily: And this is the case of many ignorant People, both
in City and Country, who come for company-sake; and because their Neighbors use
to do so, who think it not a Province belonging to them to know, or dive into
the mysteries of Salvation, but trust to it, that God is merciful, and will
save them, though they know not why, or how; whose Affections are bound up with
the Earth, and will be sensible of no higher Felicity, than what a good Crop,
and a full Purse, affords. Now, that to receive with no higher Aims, or from no
better Principles, is, to receive unworthily, will appear from hence:

1. Because such Persons receive, without being affected and touched with the
Riches and Treasures opened, revealed, discovered and offered in this
Sacrament; Treasures greater than those the Wise Men laid down at the Feet of
the Infant Savior; Treasures beyond all Gold, and Myrrh, and Frankincense, and
all the Gums the Happy Arabia yields; Treasures of higher value than those the
Queen of Sheba brought to Solomon the Great; Treasures richer than those the
King of Judah showed to the Babylonian Ambassadors. To show their Excellency
above all Earthly Treasures, were to prove that Light is better than Darkness,
and a Ball of Diamond than a piece of Turf, or that the Wisdom of a Minister of
State exceeds that of a Sucking Babe: For, if it be true, as without doubt it
is, that God was crucified, or that he who was God humbled himself to an
ignominious Death for our sakes, and that this Love, with all its Benefits, is
proclaimed in our Ears, and tendered to our Souls in this Sacrament; there is
not a Child, but must grant, that all that this World affords must be mere
Pebles to it. And as this Treasure of the World's Redemption is the rich Mine
discovered in this Sacrament, so he whom Custom and Company only brings to it
must needs receive unworthily, because he sees not, he feels not, he is
sensible of no such Treasure; which, if he were, he would go to it as a poor
Beggar, almost starved, goes to a rich Man's House, there to receive a vast Sum
of Money, beyond his Expectation; and come wondering at the Honor that God
intends him, wondering at the Favor God designs him, wondering at the Riches
he shall be presented with, wondering at himself what God should see in him, to
be thus liberal and bountiful to him; wondering to see what God has provided
for him.

2. Such a Man eats and drinks in this Sacrament, as if it were common Bread
and Wine that is set before him; he approaches, and makes no more of it, than
if it were a private or ordinary Table; he considers not what this Bread and
Wine represent, and, as the Apostle's Phrase is, discerns not the Lord's Body;
discerns not that the Body of him who was the Creator of Heaven and Earth, is
pointed at in these Elements. It Is true, materially considered, it is the same
with the Bread and Wine set upon our Tables at home; but the signification of
it makes it Celestial Food, separates it from common Use, raises it above
vulgar Diet; and the Stamp God sets upon it, makes it truly the Bread of the
Lord, and the Cup of the Lord. He whom Custom only carries to the House of God,
distinguishes not the Mysteriousness and Holiness of this Food; which, if he
did, he would touch it with the same Awe and Reverence that the Woman, troubled
with a Bloody Issue, touched the He^ of Christ's Garment, Quaking and
Trembling, Mar. 5. 33.

3. To eat and drink unworthily, is, to receive without true Repentance. Where
Men either do not think it requisite to leave their Sins, or pretend that they
do part with them, when they do not; where they mistake the present Damp that
is upon their Spirits, for a Change of Life; or the melancholy and sullen
Humor that has surprised them, for the new Nature Religion is to give them;
or forbear the external Acts of their Sins they have formerly hugged, and run
out into, but are not resolved to mortify their secret Desires after him;
where they mistake their Act of Preparation, for the Act of pulling down the
Strong Holds of Iniquity, so that their Lusts and Love to Sin remain; where
they give the Devil leave to retire a while, but are loath to take their
Everlasting Farewell of him; and therefore, after the House is swept and
garnished, even after Receiving, open the Door to him again: Where it is so,
there Men eat and drink unworthily. For,

1. Such Persons, instead of doing Honor to Christ, affront him, are still in
League with that which killed him; pretend Sorrow for their Sins, yet secretly
espouse them; give out they have sent them a Bill of Divorce, but still keep
close Correspondence with them; would make God and Men believe that they are
Christ's Servants, when they are still his Enemies; would persuade others that
they have brought their Necks under his Yoke, when the (...), or that which
bears rule in their Souls, is their Carnality and Sensuality. In this Sacrament
a most solemn Profession is made, and ought to be made, of our Weariness of a
sinful Life; which is the reason why the Church, in her Public Office, does
particularly address her self to such Persons as find it; and to such, that
comfortable place of St. John is usually applied, If any Man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, 1 John 2. 1. that is, If
any Man sin, so as to be truly weary of it; or if he has sinned, and feels
such a Remorse, that he detests himself for having done so, and thereupon bids
Defiance to the Works of Darkness; We have an Advocate that will plead for us,
prevail with God not to cast us away because we have forsaken him, and, by his
Merits, make our Repentance valuable, that it shall prove a Propitiation for
our Sins. But he that professes Weariness, yet is not tired with his sinful
Course, not only mocks God, but gives himself the Lie; and seems to fancy, that
he who dwells on high sees not the secret Intrigues and Intentions of his
Soul: Which is Profanation of Religion.

2. Such a Person destroys the End for which he pretends to come to this holy
Sacrament; for that End is, Growth in Grace: And how shall he grow in Grace,
that is unresolved to part from those Sins which do so easily beset him? These
things are, and cannot but be, Obstacles and Impediments to that Growth: And
Worms and Caterpillars are not more noxious to young Trees, than these
unrepented Sins are to this Growth; and a Man may as well hope that an Elm in
his Ground will, within a few Years, be tall enough to over-shadow his whole
House, when there is nothing but Rock at the bottom. Unrepented Sins make the
Heart mere Stony Ground: Goodness may peep forth, but, having no Earth, it must
necessarily wither, and come to nothing. People may pull and hale a Ship with
their Arms long enough, before they can make it move, while the Anchors are not
taken up* Their unrepented Sins are the Anchors that keep the Soul fixed to
Earth and Hell; and to think Grace will move or advance while that Anchor holds
it, is to imagine that an House will be built without Materials; or a Field
bring forth Corn, that was never sown, or never felt the Labor and Industry of
the Husbandman. The End must ever be procured by the Means; and they only
betray their Folly and Simplicity, that talk of adding to their Faith, Virtue;
and to Virtue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance,
Godliness; and to Godliness, Patience; that have not escaped the Pollutions of
the World, through Lust, 2 Pet. 1. 4, 5. This is to invert the Method of Grace;
and to expect that a Tree should begin to grow at the Top before it has a
Root, or that Bread should be baked before the Oven be heated. These Pollutions
must first be removed; and the Ground being cleared of the Rubbish, you may go
and superstruct the intended Edifice.

4. To eat and drink unworthily, is, to eat and drink without sincere
Resolutions of Obedience. This is consequent to the former Article, for
Obedience is a necessary Concomitant of Repentance; and when the Repentance
ends not in Obedience, the Repentance is a Cheat. A Man may, by some Reasons
and Arguments, be prevailed with to part with Sins that are of the bigger sort,
when he thinks of coming to this Sacrament; but except he, at the same time,
seriously resolves to obey Christ in every thing he commands him, and
particularly, in things which are levelled against his Worldly Interest. and is
heartily willing to endeavor after those Virtues which are the proper
Characteristicks of his Disciples, he certainly deceives his own Soul. To shake
Hands with scandalous Sins, and to think that now the Work is done, without an
holy Readiness to venture on those Graces which rendered the Apostles and the
Primitive Believers what they were, i. e. amiable in the Sight of God; such as
Humility, Meekness, Overcoming the Evil with Good, etc. In a Word, to lop the
most luxuriant Branches of the evil Tree, and not to take care that it may
bring forth good Fruit, is, to do the Work by halves, and the Way to eat and
drink unworthily. For,

1. Such Persons continue in Rebellion against God. What is Rebellion, but not
to obey when we know his Will, and have all possible Opportunities to know it?
If God will have me do a thing, and I pass it by, as if I heard him not; and
when it is often inculcated and pressed upon me in Sermons, and my Memory
refreshed with the Duty, and yet still I look upon it as needless, or a thing
which does not concern me; what is this but Obstinacy? And I need not tell you,
that Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15. 22. Thus Samuel tells
Saul, upon his Disobedience to the Command of God, of extirpating the
Amalekites. It Is probable, Saul had his Excuses, and thought God might not mean
it in that rigid Sense that the Prophet's Words imported; or, that if he
executed part of the Order, it would be sufficient: But these are not things
that avail much with God; notwithstanding all this, the Prophet calls his
Neglect, Rebellion. I know, and am sensible, that a very worthy Communicant may
sometimes ignorantly neglect a Duty, and yet preserve an Interest in God's
Love; because, as soon as he comes to know his Error, he does not encourage it
in himself, but reforms it. But this differs very much from Disobedience to
things peremptorily commanded, and which, every Day that we hear or read the
Word, are represented to us, as necessary: Here, not to resolve to do those
things, is, opposing our Wills to God's Will; and though we do not do it
openly, yet, in effect, we do it; and whereas God thinks such a Virtue
necessary to Salvation, we will not think it so; and, notwithstanding his
assuring us, that without such Accomplishments, we cannot inherit Eternal Life,
we fancy we may: And what is this, but crossing the Will of God? And how much
does this want of Rebellion, and thinking our selves wiser than God? And
surely, these are not very good Qualities to dispose a Man to eat and drink
worthily at this holy Table.

2. Such Persons discover their Desires to be their own still, their own
Masters, their own Governors, and at their own dispose; contrary to the express
Assertion of the Holy Ghost, That they who pretend an Interest in Christ's
Blood, are their own no more. And the Reason is exceeding strong; for, says
he, ye are bought with a Price, 1 Cor. 6. 19. 20. He that redeems a Slave out
of Turkish Captivity, redeems him with this Intent, That for the future he
shall not do his own Will, but his Master's that has ransomed him. The same we
must think of the Son of God, who, we may suppose, would never have freed us
from the Devil's Yoke by a voluntary Death, to give us leave to do what we
list; but that we might be at his beck, and act like Persons that have, in a
manner, nothing to do with our selves, but are to mind only what our Master who
bought us would have us do. Now, he that comes to this Sacrament without
sincere Resolutions to obey Christ in those commanded Virtues, which may cross,
or go against his Interest, discovers his Regret at the Mystery of Redemption,
dislikes Christ's redeeming him, for this End, that he might not be his own,
betrays his Wishes, and could have been contented that he had redeemed him upon
softer and more favorable Terms; and, in a manner, declares and expresses his
Desire that he would be his own still, after that wonderful Price that was paid
for him; which, though unthinking Men do take no notice of, yet he that
searches the inward parts of the Belly does, and cannot look upon such a
Person as a worthy Receiver.

5. To eat and drink unworthily, is, to eat and drink without a Speculative
Esteem of Christ Jesus. Where Men are not satisfied, or not persuaded that his
Love deserves sacrificing all to his Interest; and, in case Times of Trouble
and Persecution should come, are unresolved to hate Father and Mother, Wife and
Children, Lands and Houses, even Life it self, for Christ; and with this
Irresoluteness come to this holy Sacrament; they certainly want that which must
make them worthy Receivers. For,

1. He has expressly told us, that he that loves Father or Mother more than
him, is not worthy of him, Matthew. 10. 37. And if such a Person be not worthy of
him, how can be worthily receive him in the Sacrament? Not to be worthy of him,
is, to have no part in the Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and reserved
in Heaven for his faithful Servants. It is to have no Share in his
Intercession, no Right to his Comforts, no Right to the Act of Indemnity he
has published for the Benefit of those who adhere to him in all Dangers, no
Right to his Promises, no Right to the Privileges he communicates to those that
continue with him in his Temptations, no Right to the exceeding Greatness of
his Power toward them that believe. And how can Christ dwell in such a Person,
that looks upon the Pelf of this World, and his outward Accommodations, as
greater things than his Favor; that is ashamed of him in a sinful and
adulterous Generation; and is more taken with the Things that are seen, than
with the Things which are not seen, though confirmed by Divine Promises, and a
Thousand Miracles? So that it is evident, that he that comes not to this
Sacrament with Resolutions and Desires to value him above all, cannot be a very
worthy Receiver.

2. Such a Person undervalues his miraculous Love, and is supposed to esteem it
no more than the Love of a Servant, or the Love of an ordinary Friend. He does
not value it as the Love of Him, in whose Power it lay to make him
everlastingly miserable; he values not the unparalleled Condescension that
appears in it, the infinite Humility that shines in it, the inexpressible Grace
and Favor that runs through the whole Frame; prefers Dross and Dung before it,
contrary to the Apostle's Example, Phil. 3. 8. will not understand the Need he
has of Christ, nor the dreadful Consequences of his Sin; nor what it is to be
freed from the power of the Roaring Lion, and from Condemnation, from Eternal
Mournings and Lamentations, from being swallowed up by the fierce Anger of the
Lord: Mercies so great, and a Love so much beyond all that this World affords,
that God thought the very hearing of it would make Men ^eap for Joy, and
immediately leave all, and follow Christ.

6. It is, to eat and drink without sincere Reconciliation to our Neighbors,
who have offended or provoked us to Anger. Where either our Forgiveness is
slight and superficial, or we forbear to vent our Sp^een, and Malice, and
Ill Will, for a time, with an intent, when a fair Opportunity offers it self, ^
Sam. 14. 31. compared with 2 Samuel ^18. 14.
to let the Party feel the weight of our Anger; like Joab, who was a great
Master in the Art of dissembling, and could connive at the Injury Absalom had
done him, give him fair Words, fawn upon him, and introduce him to the King;
but when a convenient time came, re-pay'd it home with a witness. Where we are
either averse from Reconciliation, or make but a show of it, and eat and drink
at this Table, we cannot be supposed to eat and drink worthily. For,

1. In this Case, we can have no hope that God will be reconciled to us, God's
Reconciliation to Man depending upon Man's reconciling himself to his
Neighbor; so that where this is wanting, the other is impossible, as is
evident from Matthew. 18. 35. He that can have no just Hope of God's being
reconciled to him, comes to this Sacrament to very little purpose; or if he
come with Hopes of his Favor, he must hope that God will prove false to his
Word; which can never make him a worthy Receiver: So that his Hope can be no
other than that of the Hypocrite; the Character of which we have, Job 8. 13,
14. His Hope shall be cut off, and his Trust shall be as the Spider's Web. He
shall lean upon his House, but it shall not stand: He shall hold it fast, but
it shall not endure. An ill-grounded Hope must needs be a bad Preparative for
this Table, where nothing is so acceptable as Sincerity; and both the
Reconciliation and the Hope of Mercy being destitute of this Qualification, the
Soul is under very ill Circumstances. A sound Hope, we are told, makes not
ashamed, Romans 5. 5. The Hope we speak of cannot but cause Shame and Confusion,
when God shall demand of us, how we could have the Courage to hope for his
Mercy, when he has expressly told us, that he is resolved to show none, as long
as we are unacquainted with it, in Offenses and Trespasses committed against us
by our Neighbors.

2. Add to this, That a Person communicating under such Circumstances, shows,
he has something that is dearer to him than God's Reconciliation; even his
Lust, and Ill Nature. And what is this, but to prefer Darkness before Light;
the Suggestions of the Devil, before the Motions of God's Spirit; a blustering
Passion, before the Meekness of the Holy Jesus; Bondage, before the Freedom of
the Gospel; and a Blast of Honor, before the soft and still Voice of the Holy
Ghost? It Is true, If such Persons were asked whether they do so, they would
have the Confidence to deny it; for Men are loath to have their Sins anatomized,
and drawn in their native Colors; but God still judges of us by the tendency
and complexion of our Actions, not by the soft and plausible Names we put upon
them; and if our Actions speak so much, God passes his Verdict of them,
according to what he finds at the bottom. Though we may be unwilling to speak
out, yet God is not afraid to declare what he sees, and finds; and therefore,
where Men will not be heartily reconciled, and yet venture to Eat and Drink at
this Table, God's judgment of us can be no other than this, That our
perverseness and ill humor is dearer to us, than his being reconciled to our
Souls, and surely such a person cannot Eat and Drink very worthily.

7. It is to Eat and Drink without any serious Thoughts. Where we come to this
Table with Thoughts as loose, as they were in a Tavern or Market place; where
we take no care to contract those Beams of our Minds, so as to unite, and fix
them on the Scene before us; or on something relating to it, whether it be our
being Created after the Image of God, and our Apostasy from that state, and the
ruin and misery which came with that violent Stream; or the great necessity of
being renewed to that Image, and the way that is opened to that Renovation by
the Blood of Jesus; or the Honor and Privileges God offers us by his Son; or
the advantages we receive by being Christians, and having an interest in the
benefits of his Passion; or the Glory of the other World, which we are made
capable of, by the Death of him, who was the Lord of Glory; or the Holy
Ambition we see in the Saints of old, to be made partakers of that Glory; and
their Industry and Care, and Pains, they took to attain unto it, and the Joys
they found in the remembrance of Christ's Sufferings; or the Attributes of God,
his Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, Mercy, Power, Love and Good Will to the Children
of Men, all which appears in the Sacrifice offered for us, etc. As these
particulars are the most proper objects of our Thoughts at such times, so he,
that lets the thoughts of his Trade, Business, and other worldly Concerns, to
engross his Understanding, and go in and out at their pleasure, does not come
with that Respect and Reverence, requisite in the participation of this
Ordinance. Not but that such Thoughts may accidentally, and by the wicked
diligence of evil Spirits, that always hover about us, invade the Mind upon
such occasions; but it is one thing, to be surpised with such imaginations
contrary to our design and purpose, and another to give them Entertainment,
without any serious opposition of their importunity. Not the later, but the
former, makes the Communicant an unworthy Receiver. For,

1. Hereby the Holy Spirit is excluded from taking possession of our Souls, a
Guest the Soul has reason to make preparation for, and from whose Presence, it
may date its fruitfulness and happiness. Serious Thoughts invite him to our
House, and are the best attractives of that Glorious Light* These are the Bed
where he sows his noble Seed, and on these, he moves more powerfully, than he
did on the Waters of the first Creation; by these we caress illapses, and court
his kinder irradiations. As God's Majesty is described, Psalm. 104* 3. That he
makes the Clouds his Chariot, and walks upon the Wings of the Wind, so it may
be said of Holy Thoughts in this Sacrament, they are the Chariot and Vehicle,
on which the Spirit of the Holy Jesus makes his entrance into our Soul* These
dispose the Soul for his Gracious Communications, and put her into a capacity
of being Blessed and Enlightened by him; where he spies these, he addresses
himself to the Soul, in the language of the Spiritual Bridegroom, Cant. 5. 1. I
am come into my Garden, my Sister, my Spouse. I have gathered my Myrrh with my
Spice: I have eaten my Honeycomb, with my Honey, I have drank my Wine with my
Milk: Eat, O friends; yea, drink abundantly, my Beloved: Which are nothing but
Rhetorical Expressions, of the Gracious Influences, the Spirit of God is
willing to confer on the Soul, that makes preparation for him, sweeps the House
of the Rubbish of vain Imaginations, and, by Pious Contemplation, makes the
Chamber ready for his Entertainment; and though these Expressions run all in the
strain of the Perfect Tense, yet, in Holy Writ, the Perfect and the Future
Tenses are used promiscuously; and as the Future many times stands for the
Perfect, so the Perfect Tense very often stands for the Future, and the future
Blessings are expressed by what is past, to assure us of the certainty of them,
and that the Soul has no more reason to doubt of them, than if it did already
actually enjoy then.

2. Want of serious Thoughts is a kind of profanation of this Ordinance.
Profanation of Holy Things, consists not only in reviling and reproaching, or
actual perverting them, to what is ill and forbidden; but also in not using of
them with that decency and seriousness, which ought to be the proper
Concomitants of them. The Jews therefore, Mal. 1. 12, 13. are said to profane
the House of the Lord, not because they turned it, as their Forefathers, into
a Den of Thieves, or Mansion of Idolatry; but because they did not bring
suitable Oblations, and those, they brought, were brought with an unwilling
Mind; and they looked upon the Service of God, as tedious and wearisome, and
did not offer such Incense as was pure, nor such Sacrifices as were whole and
sound, and without blemish. And certainly, not only he prophanes God's Name,
that tears it with his Oaths, and Curses, and Blasphemies, but he also, that
gives it not the Honor that is due to it: Profanation of the Lord's Day, is
not only to sit Drinking and Revelling at home, or to spend it in Play and
Sports, and Pastimes, and Rioting and Drunkenness, but not to sanctify it by
public and private Devotion; and if so, not to bring Holy Thoughts to this
Ordinance, to the Altar of God, and to the Cross of Christ, must be a
Profanation of these Mysteries, as he that puts no Oil to the Lamp,
extinguishes its Light, as much as he that blows it out. Holy Thoughts are part
of that Honor and Veneration we owe to this Ordinance; and as Men count it an
affront, not only to be beaten, but not to have that respect given them, which
is due to their Rank and Quality, so God has for greater reason to look upon
it, as a profanation of this Sacrament, where Men bring not with them Thoughts
pertinent to the Majesty and Holiness of the wonderful Things manifested and
represented here; and he that profanes this Ordinance, cannot be supposed to
Eat and Drink worthily.

IV. But it is not enough to give an exact description of the Sin: the danger
of it, is the next thing we must speak of: And this, St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 11.
27. is, making our selves guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. A great
guilt certainly! to be counted a murderer of the Son of God, and to be
reckoned among Jews and Infidels, that embru'd their hands in the Blood of the
ever Blessed Jesus; for so much the Apostle's words import; and if the unworthy
Receiver incurs this guilt, he needs no other argument to discourage him from
his Sin and Impiety. The Charge is dreadful; nor must we therefore think, that
it is only spoke, in Terrorene, to fright People, as we terrify Children, with
strange things; not that there are such things in being, but to make them
desist from their unlucky Enterprise or Frowardness. No, God need not make use
of Bugbears, nor must we imagine, that what he says, has the least shadow of
untruth. As dreadful as this Charge is, he means what he says, and speaks what
he thinks, and unworthy Receiving is neither more nor less, than making our
selves guilty of the Body and Bl^^d of the Lord Jesus: And how this is done by
him that Eats and Drinks unworthily, deserves consideration.

1. He that Eats and Drinks unworthily, makes himself guilty of denying, that
the Body and Blood of Christ was sacrificed for him. As they that dishonor the
Christian Religion, by their covetousness, and unrighteousness, and lewd
practices, are said, To deny the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2. 1. because
they live, as if Christ had not bought them, or had not redeemed them from
Iniquity: So the unworthy Receiver, being loath to mortify his known and
voluntary Sins, even in the act of Receiving, denies that Christ was Sacrificed
for him. His unwillingness to reform, is a tacit denial of the Mercy, and a
Sign that he does not believe it heartily: For the Holy Ghost supposes, that
he, who believes it with any seriousness, will be affected with it, and stand
amazed at this Act of God, even at this infinite, immense* unsearchable and
incomprehensible Love: that he who needs not the society of Men or Angels, and
can be Etenally happy without them, should yet have that value and respect for
Mankind, who were his Prisoners, and had forfeited their Lives to his Justice,
were the objects of his Wrath, and had justly deserved to be banished from his
Gracious Presence for ever, as to find out a remedy, whereby they might be
restored to his Favor, freed from their slavish Condition, and admitted to his
Bosom, and such a Remedy, as might at once assert his Justice, and declare his
Mercy, and, in order thereunto, freely, generously, and without compulsion,
part with the Eternal Son of his Bosom, prepare a Body for him, a Body which
might be capable of Dying, and fall a Sacrifice at once; assert God's just
Anger against Sin, and keep off the fatal blow from Man; at once defend God'ds
Right, and establish Man's Felicity, and thereby put the poor miserable Worm in
a capacity of becoming Heir to the Riches of God, who was an Heir of the
Treasures of Wrath; and a companion of Blessed Spirits, who had deserved to
howl with Apostate Spirits; a Child of Light, who was a Son of Darkness; and a
Servant of Righteousness, who was a Slave of Sin. I say, the Holy Ghost
supposes, that he that seriously believes all this, will think nothing too good
for God, will not stand out against so great a Mercy, will fight no more
against so great and so good a Master, but will submit to him, be ready to run
at his Commands; give himself up to the Will of so great a Benefactor, and will
be hearty and sincere in serving him. Now, the unworthy Receiver being so far
from doing this, so far from turning to God with all his heart, and with all
his mind, that he refuses the Dominion of God, will be a Slave to his Sin
still, and had rather obey the Devil, than this most bountiful Master, who has
done so much for him; by doing so, denies that Christ's Body and Blood was
sacrificed for him; for if he believed it, he could not do as he does; and though
he may protest by all that is Good and Sacred, that he believes it, yet Words
and Compliments will not absolve him; and if talking were believing, no Man,
that professes Christianity, would ever be damned: What does a Malefactor's
pleading at the Bar, that he is not guilty, signify, when the Evidences are
strong, and the Matter of Fact is proved against him? Belief, that does not
touch the Heart, or renew the Mind, or spiritualize the Affections, is mere
Infidelity; and where this Belief is not to be found, the Sinner is accused of
denying the Mercy he pretends to believe: And to this purpose, says the
Apostle, They profess that they know God, but in their works they deny him,
Tit. 1. 16. So that the unworthy Receiver, i. e. He that receives, and yet will
not reform, whatever his Profession may be, in his Actions he denies, that
Christ was Sacrificed for him; and therefore makes himself guilty of the Body
and Blood of the Lord.

2. He Eats and Drinks unworthily, makes himself guilty of jesting with the
Body and Blood of Christ; As the Fathers of the Council of Eliberis speak: He
plays with the most tremendous things, Council. Eliber. c. 3. Ne lusisse
decommunione Dominica videantur.
for, in coming, he seems to confess, that by the Death of the Son of God, his
miserable Soul was redeemed, and a Pardon purchased for him, and the Heavens
made to bow to him, and the good Will of God procured, to save him for ever,
and yet he does not think all this worth forsaking a sinful Lust, or shaking a
pleasing Dalilah from his Bosom; and what is this, but playing with the Body
and Blood of Christ? Should a Man make a very curious Harangue in commendation
of his Neighbor, compare him with Solomon, for Wisdom; with David, for
Sincerity; with Jonathan, for Faithfulness; with Josiah, for Piety; for
Generosity, with Moses; for Chastity, with Joseph; for Patience, with Job; with
St. Paul, for Courage; with St. Peter, for Zeal; with Absalom, for Beauty; with
Zacheus for Charity; with Abraham, for Hospitality; nay, with Angels for
clearness of Understanding; and for Purity of Life, with Seraphim: And when he
has done, abuse and reproach him, or do that, which he cannot but know, must
be offensive and irksome, or prejudicial to him, gives the Spectator just
occasion to think, that all that flanting Panegyric was only a jocular thing,
designed rather as an essay of Wit, than as any real affection to the Virtues
of the commended Party. The unworthy Receiver does in effect the same; for, his
coming to this Sament, is a tacit Commendation of Christ's Crucified Body and
Blood, whereby he seems to applaud the wonderful Works that Christ has done
for him, and to proclaim to all the standers by, what an Obligation that Death
is, to mortify the body of Sin, and to be true and faithful to him, that did
not count his Life dear, to do him good; and yet having no real purpose within,
whatever external Declaration he may make, to become a new Man; but after he
has been at this Table, when temptations assault him, temptations to his
former sins, yields to them as easily as ever, plainly declares, he was in
jest, when he seemed to magnify this Munificence of his Savior; and from
hence it must follow, that he is guilty of playing with the Body and Blood of
Christ.

3, He that Eats and Drinks unworthily, seems to wish that Christ may dye
again, and upon that account, is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord; for
in that Christ's Death is not efficacious to pull down the strong holds of Sin
in him, or rather, in that he will not let that death prevail with him, to the
mortifying of his sinful Lusts, he seems to wish for an iteration of that
Death, which may be more powerful, and have a greater influence upon the
destruction of his Sin. It is a Declaration, as it were, that the Death of
Christ, as the case stands, does no good upon him; and therefore, since the
Death of the Son of God must be the means to break the power of Sin in him, he
stands in need of another death of that Savior, which may do greater miracles
upon his Soul, or sinful Temper. Christ's Death, indeed, must break the
reigning power of Sin; but then, a Person, in whom this effect is to be
wrought, must apply that Death, think upon it, warm his Heart with the
Consideration of it, ruminate upon the Motives of it, and upon the greatness of
his own Sin, that occasioned it, and upon the vast Advantages that flow from
that Death, and be restless with God, to make it effectual to his Soul: For to
think that this Death will do the work without our Labor or Industry, or
pondering the weight and moment of it, is to imagine, that God will deal with
us, as with Brutes, that have no understanding. As Christ died once in the end
of the World, so his Death spreads his Virtue to all Penitents, from the
beginning to the end of the World. But wherever it works a serious Reformation,
it must be improved by Faith, and Thoughts, and Prayer, and Contemplation; and
should Christ dye a thousand times, if these means be neglected, his dying so
often would signify little to the inconsiderate Spectator. This is the
monstrous Fancy of some Men, that they hope, the Mysteries of Religion will, or
must change their Hearts, without any trouble of their own; which Conceit must
needs make them contemptible in the sight of an All-wise God, who sees them
neglect the Powers and Faculties he has given them. The unworthy Receiver
therefore, finding no good by this Death of the Lord Jesus, for it makes no
alteration in his Life for the better, looks, as it were, for a new Sacrifice
for Sin; and since he will not be purged from his known Sins, by the Blood of
Jesus, which has been already spilt, if he has any hopes of being purified
from his Sin, in order to the obtaining of Eternal Happiness, seems to desire a
more effectual Death of that great Mediator, which may, against his Will, drag
him away from his sinful courses, and thereby would have Christ suffer, and be
killed again; and consequently, makes himself guilty of the Body and Blood of
the Lord.

4. He that Eats and Drinks unworthily, kills the Lord Jesus: You will say,
This is impossible, Christ being in Heaven, and incapable of any such Act of
Violence. No more could Saul, if you understand it according to the Letter,
persecute him, after he was glorified; yet the voice that came to him, in his
way to Damascus, said, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act. ^. 4. The same
may be said of an unworthy Receiver, he cannot, strictly speaking, kill the
Lord Jesus; yet being unwilling to venture upon a change of Life, under all the
Abjurations of a bleeding Redeemer, that stubborness is Death to Christ, as God
said to the Jews, Ezekiel. 6. 9. I am broken with your whorssh Heart: So may the
Savior of the World cry to the Communicant, that comes to remember his Death,
and will not die to his known Sins, Thou piercest, thou woundest, thou killest
me, by thy obstinate and refractory temper, as we say of a tender Father, that
the ill course his disobedient Son takes, is death to him, because it is as
grievous to him, as if one should attempt to take away his Life. The unworthy
Receiver, by being loath to conform to the Rules of the Gospel in his Practices,
even while he beholds, as it were, Christ Crucified for his Sins, does an Act
so unworthy, so disrespectful, so injurious, that it is as much, as if he made
attempts upon his Life; nay, he kills the preventing Grace Christ affords him,
and slays the good motions whereby Christ lives in him. Christ is said to be in
us, as we are Christians; and the unworthy Receiver, being desirous and willing
to maintain and keep his darling Sins, does thereby drive Christ out of his
Heart, and kill him in his own Soul; for Christ, and Love to a sinful Life, are
inconsistent and incompatible things. These destroy his Life in the Soul; and
therefore, in this Sense also, the unworthy Receiver makes himself guilty of
the Body and Blood of the Lord.

5. He that eats and drinks unworthily, consents to the Murder the Jews were
guilty of when they killed the Lord of Life, and approves of that barbarous and
inhumane Act; and therefore is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. He is
supposed to consent to that Murder, that is not sorry for if: And how can he
be sorry for it, that is not sorry for his Sins, which were the principal Cause
of it? The unworthy Receiver being supposed to be one that does not heartily
shake hands with a sinful Life, and is loath so to renounce his known Sins, as
to tear them from his Heart; we cannot imagine that he is heartily sorry for
them, for his Sorrow has not those Effects which Godly Sorrow is said to have,
2 Cor. 7. 11. For this same thing, when ye sorrowed after a Godly sort, what
Carefulness it wrought in you! Yea, what clearing of your selves! Yea, what
Indignation against Sin! Yea, what Fear, i. e. of offending God! Yea, what
vehement Desire! Yea, what Zeal! Yea, what Revenge! The Tree is known by its
Fruits: And if Sorrow for Sin must be discovered by such Effects, and these
Effects appear not in the Communicant; as he cannot be thought to eat and drink
worthily, so in not being sorry for his Sins, he does not appear sorry for the
Murder the Jews committed upon the Body of our Savior; his Sins being the
Cause of that Murder. And does not this look like Consent, or Approbation of
that Murder? You will say, How can any Man be sorry for Christ's Death, when
that Death is our greatest Comfort; and what Consolations the pious Soul feels,
it feels by virtue of that Death? Shall a Man be sorry for that, which God had
ordained, appointed and designed for the Relief and Redress of our Misery? If
Christ had not died, we had been ever wretched and unhappy, and must have
looked for no Friendship from above; and therefore, to charge Men with being
guilty of his Death, because they are not sorry for it, seems to be both
against Scripture and Reason. Is any Man sorry for a Treasure he finds in the
Field? Or sorry for an Estate that falls to him by the Decease of a Relation?
Or sorry for an Act of Oblivion which a gracious Prince imparts to Offenders,
whereof himself is the Principal? But to this, the Answer is very easy; for
the Benefit of Christ's Death, and the Mercy God intended Mankind by it, must
be carefully distinguished from the Instrumental Causes whereby Christ was
brought to his Death; which were, partly our Sins, and the barbarous Cruelty of
the Jews. The Benefit that came by the Death of Christ, a Christian, most
certainly, ought not to be sorry for, but has reason to rejoice in, Day and
Night: But that he was so inhumanely murdered by the Jews, and that our Sins
were such abominable things in the Sight of God, that, to expiate them, God was
moved to give up his own Son to the lawless Rage of those cruel Enemies; this
requires our Grief and Sorrow. That the Jews did commit a very heinous Sin in
crucifying Christ, is evident from St. Peter's Discourse, or Sermon, to the
Murderers, Act. 3. 17, 18, 19. For, though God has decreed that Death, as an
Expedient to reconcile Man to himself, and decreed not to hinder the Jews in
pursuing their wicked Designs and Purposes, but to make that Death an Antidote
against Everlasting Death; yet that does not excuse the Jews from the Guilt of
Sin in killing of him, whose Cruelty God was resolved to turn to the Good of
all true Penitents, and sincere Believers; nor a Christian from an hearty
Sorrow, that his Sins were the deserving Cause of it. So that a Christian may
at once rejoice in Christ's Death, and be sorry for it; rejoice in the
unspeakable Mercies procured by it, and be sorry that those stubborn Wretches
did with that Cruelty dispatch him; or rather, that his Sins did arm those
desperate Sinners to put the Lord of Life to death; for the Jews could have had
no power to murder him, but that the Sins of Mankind, crying aloud for
Vengeance, enabled them, and gave them Strength, and ministered Occasion to do
it. So that he that is not heartily sorry for his Sins, is not heartily sorry
that the Jews did murder him; and therefore, the unworthy Receiver, not being
heartily sorry for the Sins he has lived in, consents to that Murder of the
Jews, and, upon that Account, makes himself guilty of the Body and Blood of the
Lord. Our Church therefore, in her Confession before the Sacrament, obliges all
those that come to receive to say, We do earnestly repent, and are heartily
sorry for these our Mis-doings. Now, he that is heartily sorry for his known
Sins, will watch and strive against them, and take heed he does not, through
Carelessness, rush into them again; which the unworthy Receiver not being from
the Heart resolved to do, involves himself in that Guilt we speak of.

The Preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. HEre I cannot but take notice of the great Error of the First Council of
Toledo, celebrated about the Year 400. after Christ, which made a Canon, that
he who had no Wife, but, instead of a Wife, a Concubine, ought not to be kept
or debarred from the holy Communion, provided that he content himself with one
Concubine, and add no more. It Is evident that such a Conjunction is Filthiness
and Uncleanness, condemned by the Apostle, Gal. 5. 19. Marriage it is not; and
Carnal Copulations without it, are mere Fornications; as we see, Heb. 13. 4.
And therefore such Persons, if admitted to the Communion, could not but eat and
drink unworthily. Nor does it mend the matter, that Leo I. Pope of Rome,
approved of that Canon; for that only shows, that Popes are as fallible as
other Men; nay, more subject to mistake, as they are very jealous of their
Riches, and Grandeur, and Temporal Interest. Bellarmine, to excuse this Fault,
alleges, that by Concubine in that Canon, was meant, nothing but a lawful
Wife, only married, and taken without a Portion, or public Solemnity. But this
Conjecture must be false, because, both in the Civil and Canon-Laws, Concubines
are Persons distinguished from lawful Wives, and but a better Name for Whores.
And as that Council did very ill to admit such Persons that were known to live
in such Sins to the Sacrament, so they did as ill to prohibit Ministers Widows,
if they married again, Cap. 8.
or took a second Husband, the use of the Communion; as if an honst Marriage
were more scandalous than Fornication. And though a Bishop or Pastor of the
Church is ordered by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. 2. to be the Husband of one Wife,
yet how does it follow from thence, that his Widow, when he dies, must never
marry again?

II. There is a great difference betwixt Receiving unworthily, and being
unworthy to receive, Every Man that thinks himself unworthy to receive these
Mysteries, is not therefore an unworthy Receiver. Alas! If we go to the
Worthiness of the Person that comes to this Table, Who of us can be said to be
worthy to come before so holy, so jealous, so great a God? Or, Who of us is
worthy of that incomprehensible and diffusive Love, represented to us in this
Ordinance? If we reflect on the mavelous Purity of the Divine^Nature, Who of
us can be thought worthy to approach it? The best of us have reason to cry out,
at the sight of that Tremendous Holiness, Unclean, Unclean: There are few of
us, who have not reason to complain, (to use the Words of Thomas de Kempis)
that they are yet so carnal, so worldly, so unmortified in their Passions, so
full of disorderly Motions of the Flesh, so unwatchful over their outward
Senses, so often entangled with vain Thoughts and Fancies, so vehemently
inclined to external Comforts, so negligent of the Ornament of a meek and quiet
Spirit, so prone to immoderate Laughter and Immodesty, so indisposed to Tears
and Compunction, so strongly inclined to the Ease and Pleasures of the Flesh,
so dull to Strictness and an holy Zeal, so curious to hear News, and to see
gaudy Sights; so slack to embrace what is humble and low, so covetous of
Abundance, so niggardly in giving to pious Uses, so close in keeping what
Providence has bestowed upon them, so inconsiderate in speaking, so unbridled
to Silence, so loose in Manners, so covetous after Gain, so greedy after the
Meat which perishes, so deaf to the Word of God, so apt to sit still, so slow
to labor, so watchful to idle Tales, so drowsy in God's Service, so hasty to
make an end of their Prayers, so inconstant in Attention, so cold in Devotion,
so undevout in the holy Communion, so quickly discomposed, so seldom wholly
gathered into themselves, so suddenly provoked to Anger, so ready to take
Displeasure at their Neighbor's Actions, so prone to judge, so severe in
Reprehension, so jolly in Prosperity, so impatient in Adversity, so often
purposing much Good, and yet performing little. There are very few of us, who
have not reason to deplore such Defects as these; and then, Who can be worthy
to feast with the King Invisible, Immortal, Blessed for evermore? But it is God
that makes us worthy: He will not count us unworthy if we strive against these
Errors, if we labor to conquer them, if we will not be Friends with them, if
we proclaim War against them, if we are resolved, whatever we venture, to be
rid of them, if we will not hug them in our Bosoms, if we will open the
Everlasting Doors, and let the King of Glory come in; if we will hate what he
hates, and love what he loves, and will continue our Hostility against those
Lusts which interfere with his just Right and Prerogative. He will not go to
the utmost rigor with us. He will deal gently with us, liker a Father, than a
Judge. To let us go on in our Offenses, without Remorse, or a serious Care to
please him, he cannot; and such is his Holiness, that he must not. He considers
our Frame, that we are Dust; and therefore will not take advantage of every
accidental Miscarriage: But he considers withal, that he has given us his
Gospel, and Everlasting Motives, and his Holy Spirit, whereby we may certainly
master the Corruptions we find stirring in us, though not immediately, yet by
degrees; if we are but willing, and labor, and wrestle, and are active, and do
not suffer our selves to be overcome by Laziness, and the Satisfactions of this
present World: And upon these Terms, he is willing to count us worthy
Receivers. O Sweetness incomparable! O Condescension ineffable! beyond all that
Kings and Princes express to their Subjects! What Christian that is acquainted
with this Frame, this Spirit, this humble and tractable Temper, this
Resolution, and this Willingness, and that feels these Characters in his Soul,
can, after all this, forbear coming, upon a pretense of being unworthy? Coming
to this holy Table with such Purposes, with such Designs, with such
Qualifications, let him be confident that his Father, his Savior, his Redeemer
will bid him welcome. This spiritual Frame, Christian, will make thee worthy:
Thou come not to this Sacrament to give God any thing, but to receive a
Blessing from him: Thou come not hither to contribute any thing to his
Happiness, but to open thy Mouth wide, that he may fill it: Thou come not
hither to proclaim thy Perfections, but to have thy Imperfections supplied:
Thou come not hither to boast of thy Cleanness, but to be washed from their
Sins: Thou come not hither to glory in thy Merits, but to receive an Alms at
thy great Master's Hands; his Grace, his Love, his Compassion will make thee
worthy: Thou come not to give him an Account of thy Riches, but as an hungry
Beggar, that wants Bread, to feed on the hidden Manna. All that is required of
thee, is, to look upon thy Redeemer as thy greatest Friend, and to use him like
a Friend, to make his Friendship an Enforcive to love him; and so to love him,
as to hearken to his Counsels, to be governed by his Directions, to bid farewell
to all things that will destroy that Friendship, to repent of thy Unkindnesses
to him, and to prefer his Advice before that of Flesh and Blood; to hearken to
his Instructions, more than to the false Suggestions of the World; and so to
remember that thy Sins have contributed to his Crucifixion, as to punish them
with Frowns and Mortifications. If thou art willing to this, he will supply thy
Defects, he will satisfy thy hungry Soul, he will feed thee from his
Storehouse, and make thy Soul Partaker of his purchased Possession: Let not thy
Unworthiness discourage thee. It Is confessed thou art a poor, vile Worm, a
Sinner, a wretched Creature, not worthy of the least of all his Mercies, not
worthy to be taken notice of, not worthy of the least Glimpse of his Favor;
but still, if he is pleased to count and esteem thee worthy, it is Contempt of
his Love if thou do not accept of this gracious Offer, and come and li^t up
thine Hands toward his holy Oracle. If thou will but look upon thy Sins as
Enemies; and if they do assault thee, wilt vigorously oppose thy self against
their Attempts; and if they do surprise thee once or twice, wilt renew thy
Courage against them, and do any thing rather than yield to them, and set up
this Resolution in thy Heart, that the Lord shall be thy God, thou shall be
worthy; he will give thee Grace, which shall make thee worthy: His Flesh shall
nourish thy Soul; his Blood shall enrich the Ground of thy Heart; his Presence
shall give thee Life; his Assistance will make thee spiritual; his Spirit will
enable thee to rejoice in him that made thee, make thee a worthy Conqueror,
worthy of the Tree of Life, and worthy of that Pardon he has purchased for
thee on the Cross, when in his own Body he bore thy Sins upon the Tree, that
thou being dead to Sin, might live unto God.

III. Among the various sorts of Persons that are loath to come to this holy
Sacrament, those betray strange Imprudence, as well as Obstinacy, that are loath
to part with their Sins, and therefore are loath to come, for fear they should
eat and drink unworthily, and make themselves guilty of the Body and Blood of
the Lord, and eat and drink their won Damnation. But, O Generation of Vipers!
Who has told you that this is the way to escape the Wrath to come? Who has
been so wise, as to inform you, that this way you may flee from the Indignation
of the Lord? In what Scripture have you read, that your not coming to this
Sacrament, because you are loath to profane it by your Sins, will save you from
Perdition? It Is very true, and you are in the right, when you suppose, that
your Refractoriness to Reformation and Amendment, makes you unworthy Receivers:
But can you imagine that you are ever a whit the safer for not coming? Will not
the Sins you live and continue in, do your Work for you, and make you Heirs of
Damnation? The wilful Neglect of this Sacrament is a damnable Sin: And can you
think that your not coming will make your Condition more easy and tolerable?
It Is true, you pretend you will not profane it, and therefore do not come: You
are sensible it requires Reformation; and because your Circumstances will not
permit you to lead better Lives, you are loath to add to your Danger, by eating
and drinking unworthily. But when your not coming to this Sacrament makes you
miserable, as well as your coming and receiving unworthily, it is strange that
the Point of adding some Grains to the Bulk of your Misery, should make you
afraid of coming. I will not deny, but Eating and Drinking unworthily does, in
some measure, aggravate the Evil a Man lives in, because he adds Scorn to his
Impiety; but as long as his Impenitence without coming, and his coming
unworthily, do both involve him in the Danger of Damnation, it is a foolish
Plea, to preted you dare not come, for fear of aggravating your Condemnation;
as if Damnation were tolerable, and the Degrees of it only intolerable. But we
see what you drive at: You hope, some time before you die, and when you will
not have those Opportunities of sinning that now you have, you may receive it,
and save your Souls at last. But to hear Men talk of what they shall do
hereafter, when they have not one Minute of their Lives at their Command, is so
ridiculous, that it needs no Answer. This is certain; your Sins are sweet, and
your evil Lives make you fit to live in the World, and therefore you will not
come. But will this Argument hold Water, do you think, when God shall plead
with you? Surely, your Sins are very precious things, that you dare refuse
coming to this holy Ordinance for them. The Scripture calls them Filth and
Poison; for so they are in the Eyes of an holy God: And are they dearer to you,
than the Love of God? They are perfect Leprosy: And had had you rather be full
of Sores and Boyls, than come hither to be made clean? They crucified your
Savior: And will you keep that which murdered him? They are the Disgrace and
Reproach of your Souls: And will you delight in your Infamy? They are the
things that separate betwixt a glorious God and you: And will you uphold that
fatal Distance and Separation? They exclude you from the Kingdom of Heaven: And
will you be content with that Exclusion? Are you wise and understanding Men:
And will you not open your Eyes, and see your Danger? What do you call Contempt
of God, if this be not it? What do you call slighting of Incomprensible Mercy,
if this do not deserve that Name? Can you hope for God's Pardon at last, that
refuse to accept of it in this Ordinance? Do you believe you have Souls, and
that it is your Interest to secure them against Mischief: And will you prefer a
few airy, volatile Joys before their Safety? Sinner, When is it that thou do
intend to reform? Is it when an angry God looks thee in the Face, and an evil
Conscience upon thy Deathbed presages thy future Torments? Is it possible that
an offended God will then fly into thy Embraces, whom thou did not care for
all thy Days? Behold, in this Sacrament, the Son of God does not only offer to
reconcile thee to thy God, but shows thee the way too, how it shall be effected
to thy Content and Satisfaction: Here he offers to enrol thy Name among the
Friends of God; but it is impossible to make thee God's Friend, while thou
maintainest thy Enmity against him: To leave thy Sins, and to come to this
Sacrament, are one and the same thing; these two are inseparable, to divide
them, is, to divide Light from Fire; which implies Impossibility. Oh, think
therefore! Till I come to this Ordinance, God will be my Foe; and should I be
snatched away while God is so, who will plead for me when I come to appear
before God? I will arise therefore, and go to my Father, etc.

IV. As squeamish as some Sinners are, there are others that dare come and
receive unworthily, and be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, and be no
more concerned, than if they had committed any trivial or indifferent Action:
Such are they who are the same after they have received, as they were before;
vicious before, and vicious after; revengeful, lascivious, unclean, malicious,
proud, Boasters, intemperate, Back-biters, implacable, unmerciful before, and
after too; nor does the threatening that they make themselves guilty of the Body
and Blood of the Lord Jesus fright or discompose them. Lord! How stupid a thing
is Sin! How hard, how insensible does it make the Heart! What Venom does it
shed upon the Soul! Who would imagine that Men could be so perverse, Men that
live under the Gospel too, as to be guilty of murdering Christ? Murdering of
Christ! You will say, Who can murder him now he is in Glory? What Bug-bears
are these, to fright poor silly, ignorant People with? So easily do Men slide
from Hypocrisy, into Profaneness; and from Profaneness, into the Scorner's
Chair! But, What if Christ be in Heaven, and out of the reach of thy Baseness
and Malice? If Christ interpret thy Continuance in known Sins, after thou have
been viewing his Death and Crucifixion in this Sacrament, as murdering of him;
how great, how heinous, and of how deep a Dye must thy Sins be! What Guilt,
what Loads, what Mountains of Wrath must we suppose, do thou lay, and pull
down on thy Shoulders! Who can tell so well the venomous Influences and
Tendencies of thy Sins, as he that perfectly understands the poisonous nature
of it? If he says, that it amounts to murdering of him, Will thy laughing at
the Conceit excuse thy Folly when his Anger shall be kindled? Need he value thy
Flouts and Jeers, that has Flames and Vengeance at command, to lash thee into
better Manners? It is impossible he should be mistaken in his Verdict of
things: And will thou say, he does not speak what is true? Art thou wiser than
he; Or do thou see farther into things than he? Must his Wisdom be modeled
by thy shallow Reason; Or shall a Creature dispute the Oracle of its Creator?
If he sees and knows that thy wilful Impenitence runs so high, as to make an
Attempt upon his Life again, wilt not thou believe him, or dare thou charge
him with a Lie? The Holy Ghost, speaking by St. Paul, protests so much: And
will thou add sinning against the Holy Ghost to all thy Offenses? Believe it,
Sinner; it is Death to the Lord of Life, to see a Creature, for whom he took
such pains, wallow still in those Sins after Receiving, which he was supposed
to abjure in Receiving. It Is Death to him, to see thee more tender of keeping
thy Word with a Man that must die, than with him that lives for ever. It Is
Death to him, to see thee wilful in breaking that solemn Promise thou made
under his Cross, and did seal with drinking of his Blood. Thou do in this
Sacrament make a Covenant with him, and oblige thy self, as thou hopest to have
a share in his Merits, that thou will be guided and governed by him, who, to
the Astonishment of Men and Angels, died for thee, (and there cannot be a more
sacred Tie;) and to see thee violate that Oath, and break through that Vow,
into Damnation, into that Damnation from which he came to rescue thee; this is
Death to him, and a new Attempt upon his Life; and if thou dare be so
barbarous, so inhumane, as to do so, Heaven and Earth will be Witnesses against
thee; and that very Blood which thou prophanest, will be a Witness against
thee; and all the Saints that see thee profane that Blood, will be Witnesses
against thee; and it is enough to make the Lord repent that ever he died for
such a Wretch. O then, play not with these Mysteries; for it will be hard for
thee to kick against the Pricks. But,

V. Let the worthy Receiver rejoice in the midst of all these Terrors. These
Thunderbolts do not reach him. These Threatenings do not concern him. He is
safe under all these Storms: They will not fall on him, to crush him. These
Hailstones will not bruise his Head: This Weight will not sink him. He can
pass through all these Messengers of Death, and fear no Evil: Even he, who sees
greater Comfort in a crucified Savior, than in this gaudy World; and can
admire the Mercies purchased by his Death, while others stand gazing on stately
Buildings, and sumptuous Palaces: Even he, who makes Conscience of performing
what he promises to a glorious God; and feels Desires in his Breast to be more
and more conformable to the holy Life and Example of Christ Jesus; and to whom
no Interest is so dear as that of a crucified Savior, who loves as he loves,
without Hypocrisy or Dissimulation. Let such a Soul be glad in the Lord, and
believe, that God will command his Loving Kindness in the Daytime, and in the
Night will cover him with the Shadow of his Wings. Let him not be disquieted,
nor think God has forgotten him, when his Soul is bowed down to the Dust, and
his Belly cleaves unto the Earth: Christ, the Son of God, will certainly
manifest himself unto him, be present with him, pour Grace into his Heart, and
Comfort into his Soul; give himself to him, be his Hiding Place, compass him
about with the Songs of Deliverance, and say unto him, I will instruct thee,
and teach thee in the Way which thou shall go: I will guide thee with mine Eye.
Such a Person receives Christ indeed, receives him with all his Blessings, and
with all the Spoils he recovered of the Enemy: He receives him with all the
Wealth he has fought for, and purchased with his B^ood. He receives him with
all the precious things he has labored for in the Sweat of his Brows. He
receives ^im laden, and abounding with glorious Promises, which shall, by
degrees, be all fulfilled in him; for they belong to him, they are his Right,
they are his Portion; Christ will make him worthy to receive them. He shall
ask, and his Master will give: He shall seek, and find too: He shall knock, and
the Lord Jesus will answer; and though he may knock often, yet, at last, the
Gates will be opened to him. The Everlasting Door, the Gate of Grace and Mercy
shall be unlocked to him, and he shall get more Grace, greater Strength, larger
Influences; his Incomes shall be greater, his Revenues more plentiful: He will
open the Windows of Heaven to him, and refresh his Ground with kindly Showers;
They shall drop on the Pastures of the Wilderness, and the little Hills shall
rejoice on every side. Such a Receiver is like to abide in Christ, and his Word
like to abide in him. He may be sure of his Love, sure of his Friendship, sure
of his favorable Looks. For him Christ laid down his Life indeed; and he may
be confident that he is one of his little Flock, for he hears his Voice, and is
willing to be guided by him: For him the Savior of the World has prepared a
sure Refuge, a Munition of Rocks, where he shall dwell securely, free from the
stormy Wind and Tempest. Such a Receiver believes in him, and he shall not die:
Nay, Though he were dead, yet shall he live: Because Christ lives, he shall
live too: And though his Life be hid with Chrst, in God; yet when Christ, who
is his Life, shall appear, then shall he also appear with him in Glory. His
Faith shall at last be turned into Fruition, his Hope into Vision, his
Expectations into Enjoyment. He shall see Christ at last in his Majesty: He
shall see him in his Wedding-Robes: He shall sit down with him at last, at the
Supper of the Lamb, and lean on his Bosom; and the Angels will say, Behold, the
Disciple whom Jesus loved. He shall walk with him in shining Garments; and the
King's Daughter, which was all glorious within here, shall be all glorious
without too: Her Glory shall be the Joy of Saints, and the Envy of all wicked
Men. Such a Person rejoiced in his lig^t here, and he shall be decked with
Eternal Light. He that is the Light of both Worlds, shall be his Everlasting
Companion, and Darkness shall not annoy him. In a Word, Christ will lift up the
Light of his Countenance upon him, and he shall be safe.

The PRAYER.
O Great and admirable Savior! who have said, I will give unto him that is a
thirst, the Fountain of the water of Life, freely; my Soul thirsts for thee,
my Flesh longs for thee in a a dry and thirsty Land. where no water is, to
see thy Power and thy Glory! I am unworthy to receive so Glorious a Guest into
my Soul! I am unworthy to wash the Feet of the Servants of my Lord! Unworthy of
the least Crum that falls from thy Table! The Angels, purer than the Sun, think
themselves unworthy to Praise and Glorify thee; How unworthy then must I think
my self to receive thee, the sweetest, and the brightest Being, into my House!
yet thou offerest to come, and make thy abode with me. What Bounty is this!
Whence is it, that the Sovereign King of Heaven and Earth will come and dwell
in me, who am a sink of Misery, a stye of uncleanness, a den of filthiness! How
unworthy am I of this astonishing Savior! I freely confess, that I have
deserved to be plunged into the depth of Hell, rather than to receive thee, the
Glory of Heaven and Earth, into a Heart so defiled, so polluted, so corrupted
with Sin and Misery! Yet, since thou do freely offer me this unspeakable
Mercy, Come, Lord, and make thy Residence in my Soul. I desire to receive thee
with all Love, and Purity, and Devotion! To this end, destroy in me all that is
contrary to thee, and enrich my Soul with all suitable dispositions to receive
thee! I hate my Sins, I renounce them, I desire to think of them with horror,
because they were the cause of thy Torments, and of that death thou sufferedst
on the Cross; I would hate them, as the Angels, and the Saints of Heaven do. I
am sensible, thou art worthy of all Honor and Glory, and from my Heart wish,
that I never had offended and dishonored thee! O that I had something of that
Sorrow I see in thy Soul, when thou made thy Soul an offering for Sin! Thy
Soul was exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. It was my Sin that caused that
Sorrow, O let me participate of that Sorrow! O Jesu! my Light, my
Righteousness, my Sanctification, my Redemption! Open mine Eyes, that I may see
the vast Mercy, offered me in this Blessed Sacrament! Give me that Repentance,
that Faith, that Love, which may make me a worthy Receiver of thy Benefits! I
humble my self before thee, I throw my self down at thy feet. I give my self to
thee, I dedicate my Thoughts, my Words, my Actions, my Understanding, my Will,
my Affections to thy Service! Set up thy Kingdom in my Soul. Destroy my
inordinate Self-Love, my Anger, my Pride, and all my disorderly Inclinations.
Let thy Humility, thy Charity, thy Patience, and all thy Graces reign in me!
Where thou art, there is Heaven. If thou art in me, I shall not fear what Man,
or Devils can do against me; for thou will hide me in the secret of thy
Presence from the Pride of Man, thou will keep me secretly, in a Pavilion, from
the strife of Tongues. Blessed be the Lord, who has showed us his mavelous
Kindness; I will sing of the Mercies of the Lord for ever, with my Mouth will I
make known thy faithfulness to all Generations. Amen, Amen.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the sad Effects and Consequences of Unworthy Eating and Drinking in this
Holy Sacrament, and First of Temporal Judgments.
The CONTENTS.
The word (...), which is rendered Damnation, explained; and its various
significations discussed. Of Temporal Judgments in general, which are, or may
be procured by Eating and Drinking unworthily at the Lord's Table. Several
Instances of Persons, who have felt signal Judgments, for profaning Holy
Things. This applied to the Holy Sacrament. How Men Eat and Drink Temporal
Judgment to themselves, explained. There being many unworthy Receivers, at this
day, who meet with no Signal Judgment in this Life, what we are to think of it,
and how we are to reconcile this Impunity to the Truth of the Apostle's
threatening. A Question resolved, whether such. Judgments, if they befall an
unworthy Receiver, do expiate his Sins? God proved to be a consuming fire, and
in what sense. Though it be dangerous to Eat and Drink unworthily, yet this
ought to be no discouragement from coming to the Lord's Table. The Prayer.

I. THE Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 29. in general, tells us, He that Eats and Drinks
unworthily, Eats and Drinks Damnation to himself. A fearful word! The Writer of
the Life of Ida de Nivella tells us, that whenever she passed by the Altar,
where the Eucharist used to be celebrated, a trembling seized upon all her
Joints, a kind of Ague fit came upon her, and a Sacred horror invaded her Soul,
imitating the Earth in that particular; which trembled at her receiving the
Body of Him, who fills Heaven and Earth with his Presence; but whether it was
so or no, I enquire not. At these words of the Apostle, a serious Reader has
reason to tremble, and to be afraid, and take care he comes not to this Table,
without a decent behavior. And indeed, not a few are so frighted by these
words, that they think it safer to abstain from this Sacrament, than to come to
it, though it is evident, that they might come, and yet prevent that danger, if
they were not more in love with their own, than God's Will: What we render
Damnation here, is in the Original, (...), and we may justly question, whether
by this word is always meant, an everlasting separation from the Glorious
Presence of God, having our Portion with Devils, feeling the treasures of God's
everlasting Wrath, and suffering the vengeance of Eternal Fire. That the Word
is used sometimes in Scripture in this Sense, is evident from Joh. 9. 39.
(...), where, though our Translation Reads, For judgment am I come into the
World, yet the Greek Interpreters, Theophylact especially, interprets the
expression, of Damnation, I am come into the World, (...). for their greater
punishment, and condemnation, and Romans 13. 2. They that resist, shall receive
to themselves (...), or Damnation. On the other side, it is as certain, that by
this word is very often understood no more, than Judgment, and particularly
some extraordinary, signal, exemplary punishment, whether Spiritual, or
Corporal, inflicted in this present Life; therefore our Translators finding the
word ambiguous, like Men of Integrity, and Honesty, have put the word Judgment
in the Margent; and indeed the words, v. 30. where the Apostle explains
himself, and shows what he means by (...), import so much, For this cause,
says he, many are weak, and sickly among you, and many sleep, which words
cannot be conveniently applied to any other, but some exemplary punishment in
this World, inflicted on the first Offenders, and Prophaners of this Ordinance.
However, since the Word is of that large extent, it is fit we should consider it
in both significations, as it imports both Temporal and Eternal Judgment, and
consider the reasonableness of the Commination; So that we shall be obliged to
speak, 1. Of Temporal Judgments in general. 2. Of Bodily Sickness and Weakness.
3. Of Spiritual Sickness and Weakness, or Sleepiness. And 4. Of Damnation it
self. All which are implied in this one word, and are all just consequences,
and very sad effects of unworthy Eating, and Drinking in this Holy Sacrament.

II. I begin with Temporal Judgments in general, which he that Eats and Drinks
unworthily, Eats and Drinks to himself. That Judas received this Sacrament
unworthily, none of those Divines, that believe he received it at all, does
doubt; but see the vengeance that attended him, he went and hanged himself; and
though it is confessed, that his Betraying of innocent Blood was one cause of
it, yet this unworthy Receiving may very well be supposed to have been another.
The Judgment falling upon him, after Commission of both those Crimes, both may
justly be supposed to have been the ingredients of it. The Guest that came to
the Royal Supper without a Wedding Garment, went home with Fetters on his Feet,
Mat. 22. 12, 13. which was no other than an Emblem of the Judgments, that those
may look for, that come defiled, and polluted with Impenitence, to this Table.
It has been observed by most Historians, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, how
God, as patient as he is, for the most part, yet has frequently revenged the
contempt of Sacred Things, by visible Judgments. Nadab and Abihu, for offering
strange Fire unto the Lord, are suddenly consumed by Fire, Levit. 10. 2.
Uzziah, for invading the Priests Office, is soon after struck with a loathsome
Leprosy, 2 Chronicles. 26. 19. and Josephus takes notice of one Theopompus, who
attempting to take something out of the Bible, and to mingle it with some
profane Discourses of his own, ran mad upon it, and continued so for Thirty
days, till, applying himself to God by Prayer, he at last recovered; And he
adds of one Theodectes a Poet, who having taken some passages out of the Word
of God, to embellish his looser Verses, a sudden blindness seized upon him; And
to go no further than our own Chronicles, William the Conqueror destroyed no
less than 36 Mother Churches in Hampshire, to make his New Forest; And besides
all this, takes away all their Plate, and Treasures, even Chalices; Soon after,
his Son Robert rebels against him, his second Son Richard was killed in the New
Forest, and himself at last is thrown by his Horse, and dies upon it, his Body
for Three days lies neglected, and at last is buried by a private Gentleman at
Cane, where the Clergy refused to bury him, till an agreement of Rent was made;
and in fine, his Bones are dug up again, and scattered abroad. William Rufus
afterward, who stored his Treasure, by the sale of Church Chalices, and Jewels,
was accidentally, as the Story says, killed by Sir Walter Tyrrel, the Arrow
glancing from the Deer, and, by as signal a Providence, dispatching him, as
Ahab King of Israel was killed by an Arrow shot out of a Bow, drawn at a
venture, 1 King. 22. 34. The Heathens themselves have observed a signal
Vengeance, which has waited on the Profaners of Holy Things. And therefore
Aelian makes this remark upon Ochus Artaxerxes, that, having spoiled and robbed
several Temples, he was in a short time after miserably slain, and his Body
thrown to Dogs and Cats, and Vermin, and of his Shin-bones his Enemies made
Hilts, and Handles for Knives and Swords, and other Instruments; and Lactantius
mentions a passage concerning the Potitii, a Noble Family, who having been
notoriously guilty of profaning the Sacred Rites of Hercules, Thirty of that
Family died all in less than a years time; And Appius, who was the encourager
of the Sacrilege, was struck blind; And Servius says of Glaucus, the Son of
Sisyphus, that having derided and mocked some Holy Rites, he was torn in pieces
by his Horses. If it be said, that these sad accidents were inflicted by the
Devil, whom these Heathens worshipped, and that these were only the effects of
his Tyranny over Mankind; yet from hence we may infer, that as the Devil is the
Ape of God, so from God he has learnt to punish the abuse and profanation,
even of his own worship. And if Lucifer cannot endure to see his own Sacred
Rites profaned, how shall we think, that God, who is of infinite Holiness, will
permit such abuses to be committed in things, appertaining properly to him,
without some manifestation of his Vengeance. When the French under Charles King
of Sicily, had turned the stately Church of St. Narcissus into a Stable, and
the Altars there served for Mangers for their Horses; a new sort of Flies was
sent by an invisible Hand, which molested them, and stung them into strange and
painful Distempers, and most of them perished miserably. And as it is with
other Sacred Things, so it is more particularly with the most Sacred Thing of
all, the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Bishop Morton, upon this account,
tells us of one Booth in his time, a Scholar in Cambridge, who being Popishly
inclined, yet loath to own it, would still receive the Sacrament in our Church;
and coming one day to the Lord's Table, he seemed to to take the Holy Bread
with his Hands, and put it in his Mouth, but by an easy craft, he thrust it
into his Pocket; and when the Devotion of the Chapel was ended, he took the
Bread he had hid, and threw it over the College Wall. But see the pursuing
Judgment of God, soon after he threw himself over the Battlements of the
Chapel, broke his Neck, and so ended his life. St. Cyprian, one of the greatest
and most eminent Men in the Primitive Church, relates, that a Girl left by her
Parents in time of Persecution, Sermon. 5. de Laps.
to shift for her self, and taken up by her Nurse, was by that Nurse, being
timorous, and loath to lose her own, and the Child's l^fe for being Christians,
carried to the Heathen Magistrate, and there made to Eat and Drink of the Bread
and Wine offered to Idols, and the Heathen Deities, This Child afterward, her
Mother returning, was by her conducted to Church, and came to the Holy
Eucharist with the rest of the Congregation, for in those days they gave the
Eucharist to Children, as well as to adult Persons, where St. Cyprian himself
was then officiating. The Deacon, as his custom was, carrying the Holy Wine
about, and coming to the Child, offers her the Cup, but finds a strange
aversion in her, to touch it with her Lips, for through a Divine Instinct
teaching her, that the Cup of the Lord and the Cup of Devils were inconsistent,
and incompatible, she turned her Head away, shut up her Mouth, pressed her Lips
together, and refused it with obstinacy. The Deacon, however, (how prudent he
was in doing so, I shall not dispute,) using some force upon her, poured some
drops of the Eucharistical Wine into her Mouth; which she had no sooner
received, but she fell a vomiting, groaned, and sighed, and as the Father
expresses it, In corpore and ore violato Eucharistia permanere non po^uit,
Sanctificatus in Domini sang^ne potus de pollutis visceribus ^rupit. Id. Ib.
The Drink, sanctified in Christ's Blood, broke forth from her polluted
entrails: And to this purpose he has another passage of a Woman that kept the
Bread of the Eucharist irreverently in a Chest. and when one day she went
rudely to open the Chest, a Fire flashing out of the Chest, did fright her so,
that she durst not come near it any more: All which Examples make it evident,
that he that Eats and Drinks unworthily, Eats and Drinks, or may Eat and Drink,
some extraordinary Temporal Judgment to himself.

III. It must be confessed, that the expression of Eating and Drinking
Judgment, is not very smooth* and proper, yet there is great Truth in the
Metaphor, and how the unworthy Receiver Eats and Drinks Judgment to himself,
will appear from the following particulars.

1. By eating and drinking unworthily, he prepares for some extraordinary
Judgment; which Judgment he takes, and grasps, and attracts, and pulls to
himself, as Men do Bread and Wine, or Beer, when they are going to eat and
drink. The Apostle, Romans 9. 22. speaks of Vessels fitted for Destruction; they
fitted themselves for it by their Sins, as a Thief, by stealing and robbing
upon the Highway, fits himself for the Gallows; or as an idle, lazy Servant,
that neglects his Master's Business, fits himself for his Master's Anger: So
the unworthy Receiver, by eating and drinking irreverently, and without regard
to the Obligations the Sight of Christ's Love and Death lays upon him, fits
himself for Judgment, makes himself ripe for God's Vengeance, lays the Wood
together, and erects the Pile; gathers Materials, and combustible Stuff for the
Fire, that will certainly burn him; and though he does not do it designedly,
and the Judgment comes contrary to his Intention, yet as long as he does that,
to which such Judgments are annexed, he fits himself for Judgment, as much as
he that will touch Vipers, and handle Adders, or let a Snake creep about in his
Bosom, though he may intend no harm by it, yet actually prepares and fits
himself for Mischief. Eating and Drinking imports some Desire after, and
Delight in the Victuals before us: So he that by unworthy Receiving, prepares
for Judgments, seems to delight in Judgment threatened him, because he will
needs do that which will certainly end in some Judgment or other.

2. The unworthy Receiver eats and drinks Judgment to himself, by incorporating
the Guilt of some extraordinary Judgment with his Soul. Eating and Drinking
unworthily, at the same time he brings Guilt upon his Soul, and appropriates
the deserved Judgment to himself; and as the Sin sticks to him, so the Demerits
of the Judgment which is threatened to the Sin, sticks to him too. He eats and
drinks unworthily; and the Effect it has upon him, is, God's Indignation,
which he swallows with the Food unworthily taken. God's Wrath goes along with
his Sin; and as he takes the one, so he does the other, into his Bowels. As
Poison and Death go together, so unworthy Feeding at the Lord's Table, and
God's Anger go together; and they both mingle with the Spirits of the unworthy
Receiver, as the Fish, at the same time that he swallows the Bait, swallows the
Hook too; and he has that fastened in him, which will be his Death. So that
Job's Expression is very suitable to the Subject in hand, Job. 20. 23. When he
is about to fill his Belly, God shall cast the Fury of his Wrath upon him; and
shall rain it upon him while he is eating. To this purpose David says of the
Israelites in the Wilderness murmuring, Psalm. 78. 30, 31.
and speaking against God, While their Meat was yet in their Mouths, the Wrath
of God came upon them. So it may be said of an unworthy Communicant: While he
is feeding at the Table of the Lord, the Wrath of God breaks forth against him,
becomes due to him, and is his Portion; falls to his Lot, and he gets a Title
to it. We read of Henry VII. Emperor of the Romans, that he was poisoned in
eating of the Sacramental Bread, given him by a Monk. This, they say, was the
Fate of Pope Victor II. who died of poisoned Wine presented to him, in the
Eucharistical Chalice, by his Subdeacon. And the same is reported of an
Archbishop of York; that he fell down dead, and swelled, upon receiving the
Sacramental Cup, given him by a Priest that bore some Spleen and Malice to him.
These Men did, without a Metaphor, eat and drink their Death: And though he
that eats and drinks unworthily, does not just in the same manner eat and drink
Judgment to himself, yet the Fate that attends him does very much resemble the
Misfortunes of the other; only here is the difference, that the other had a
wicked Priest to put Poison in their Cup, but the unworthy Receiver puts the
Poison in himself; and what was said of the other, may very truly be applied to
him, Calix vitae, Calix mortis: The Cup of Life becomes a Cup of Death and
Misery to him. Thou have made us, says the Psalmist, drink the Wine of
Astonishment, Psalm. 60. 3. This he spoke of the afflicted and persecuted
Believers of his Age; but it may be applied to the unworthy Receiver too. He
drinks the holy Wine, it is true; but it will prove Wine of Astonishment to him
when the Judgment of God lights upon his Head; it will astonish and terrify
him: And what is said, Psalm. 69. 22. is true of him; His Table becomes a Snare
to him: The Table of the Lord, he frequents, he turns into a Snare to his own
Soul, while he involves his better part in the Guilt and Demerit of signal,
exemplary Judgments.

IV. But all this seems to be a groundless Supposition; for there is no doubt,
but there are unworthy Receivers at this Day, as well as formerly; yet we see
no such signal Judgments executed upon any of them: And therefore, what St.
Paul says, must be either confined to the Times he lived in, or, if it extends
to our Age, it does not look like Truth.

1. God sends Judgments upon Men many times, and for their unworthy Receiving
the holy Sacrament too, and they take no notice of it. When God sends
Judgments, because he does not at the same time signify the Crimes laid
against Men, or does not set a Mark upon them to give notice for what Sin the
Judgment comes, neither the Sufferer, nor the Standers by, especially the more
careless sort, take any Cognizance of his Anger: And the Reason why God does
not, at the same time that he sends the Judgment, send a Messenger to tell the
Sinner what the Judgment is for, is, because he has given him Reason and Power
to enquire and search into his Heart and Ways; upon which Search he may
satisfy himself, and come to the Knowledge of himself. It has been a very old
Custom for Men not to take notice of God's Judgments, but to ascribe them to
Second Causes, to Fate, or Chance; whereby God's Design in them has been lost,
and his Displeasure, signified in the Punishment, dis-regarded. God complains
of it, Isa. 42. 25. Therefore has he poured upon him the Fury of his Anger,
and the Strength of the Battle; and it has set him on fire round about, yet he
knew it not; and it burnt him, and he laid it not to heart. And so we read,
Hos. 7. 9. Strangers have devoured his Strength, and he knows it not; yea, gray
Hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knows it not. Where Men are
inconsiderate, and observe not the Providence of God, and the Operations of
his Hand, they may easily fall into a Conceit, that he sends no signal Judgment
upon an unworthy Receiver, when he does. But let a Man enquire seriously into
the Cause of his present Misfortunes, and into the Reasons of the Misery or
Affliction he lies under, or if he will lay himself open to a faithful and
conscientious Minister of the Gospel, he may, without any great difficulty,
find, especially, if he has formerly been at the Table of the Lord, without
considering what he did, that God's Judgment upon the Account of his eating and
drinking unworthily, slumbers not. God speaks once, yea twice; yet Man
perceives it not, said Elihu, one of the Eastern Princes, and J^b's Friends,
Job 33. 14. It must needs be so where Men's Reason lies dormant, and is not
active. But an intelligent Observer will see, that these threatened Judgments
are not so confined to the Corinthians, but that they reach a great way
farther, even to Men we converse with; and that these Judgments are more
frequent, than the generality of unbelieving People think they are.

2. If God does not send always exemplary Judgments upon unworthy Receivers, it
is an Argument indeed of his Patience; but the Sinner is not thereby secured
from the Stroke, for that which does not come to day, may come to ^orrow; and
besides, having deserved the Blow by his unworthy Approaches to the Table of
the Lord, the Sword hangs over him by a very slender Thread, and waits only for
God's Summons, to fall on the Offender's Head: And what if God exercises
Patience for the present? Who knows how soon that Patience will be tired, and
turn into a tempestuous Indignation? The Sinner has still reason to fear it;
and that which seems to be far off this Week, may the next be upon his Back,
and consume both Root and Branch This is certain, ' It Is a fearful thing to fall
into the Hands of the living God, Heb. 10. 31. And if the Sinner be once fallen
into the Hands of an angry God, though he may spare him for a while, as he did
the stubborn Pharaoh, who had long before deserved to be destroyed, only God by
his Providence held him up, that he might show his Power in him; yet whenever
the Judgment comes, the Dealy will but aggravate the Doom, and change the
intended Rods into deadly Scorpions. Had it been executed presently upon
unworthy Receiving, it would have been gentle, and easier to be born; but the
Delay gives it Strength, and makes it sorer; and whenever it comes, it comes
with greater Weight and Fury.

V. It Is very probable, that some will be so curious, as to desire to know,
whether, in case any Temporal Judgments do fall upon an unworthy Receiver, they
expiate the Communicant's Crime; or whether they may be called Satisfactions,
which God accepts of, for the Offense committed against his Majesty. To this,
the Answer is, as follows.

1. That the Punishment inflicted by a Civil Magistrate, atones for the Offense
committed against the Law; and that the Offense is ipso facto forgiven, when
the Offender suffers the Penalty, we cannot deny: And to a Man that
superficially reads the Old Testament, even the Saints of those Ages will seem
to have been of Opinion, that with the removing of the Temporal Judgment, the
Sin, for which it was inflicted by God, was at the same time removed too: As,
Psalm. 85* 1, 2. Lord, thou have been favorable unto thy Land; thou have
brought back the Captivity of Jacob; thou have forgiven the Iniquity of the
People; thou have covered all their Sin. And Psalm. 103. 3. Who forgiveth all
thine Iniquities; who heals all thy Diseases. Which Places seem to import,
that David believed that the removing of the Judgment did, at the same time,
remove the Sin, and the Guilt of it: But still we must suppose, that though
Repentance is not mentioned, yet it is included; and that they did not lay the
Stress of Pardon upon the Removal of the Judgment so much, as upon the
Repentance which was occasioned by the Judgment. And therefore, whatever those
Places may seem to import, considering that the Fathers of the Old Testament
did all eat the same spiritual Meat, and did all drink the same spiritual
Drink; for they drank of the Spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock
was Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4. we must conclude, that since, under the New
Testament, Expiation of Sin is not allowed of without Repentance, the Fathers
under the Law could have no other Apprehensions of Expiation: And though they
mention the Removal of the Temporal Judgment, as an External Sign of the
Expiation of their Sin; yet the Internal Mark of it, and the principal, was
their Repentance; and while they name the one, they do not exclude the other.
The Jews at this Day, lay the Stress of Pardon upon the Removal of the
Judgment, whether they repent of the Sin that caused it, or not; ^ay, they go
so far, as to make their Death an Expiation for all their Sins: By which Rule,
no Jew can be damned. And this comes, in a great measure, from their
misunderstanding of that Passage, Isa. 22. 14. And it was revealed in mine
Ears by the Lord of Hosts; Surely, this Iniquity shall not be purged from you
till you die, says the Lord of Hosts. Which Words import no more than this,
That God, with the Death of those wicked Men, will put an end to the Scandal
they have given to others by their Iniquities; and that by their Death, God
will purge the City, or the Land, from such Abominations; but not that their
Death shall be an Atonement for their Sins. And therefore,

2. Nothing does properly expiate Sin, but the Blood of Christ; and as without
shedding of Blood, there is no Remission; so by the shedding of Christ's Blood,
Men are put in a Possibility of being pardoned. But Repentance is the
Preparative for the Application of that Blood. Till a Man repents, he has no
Title to that Blood, or the Benefits of it: And though God may remove the
Temporal Judgment, yet if it works no Repentance, the Sin shall be produced
against the Offender in the last Day. All Temporal Judgments, though they speak
God's Displeasure at Sin, yet they are intended, withal, for the Offender's
Reformation. And to this purpose Elihu speaks excellently well, Job 33. 19, 20,
27. He is chasten'd also with Pain upon his Bed, and the Multitude of his Bones
with strong Pain; so that his Life abhors Bread, and his Soul, dainty Meat; his
Flesh is consumed away, that it cannot be seen; and his Bones that were not
seen, stick out. He looks upon Men; and if any say, I have ^inned, and
perverted that which was right, and it profited me not; he will deliver his
Soul from going to the Pit, and his Life shall see the Light. And therefore, if
this Judgment which falls upon an unworthy Receiver, instead of softening and
melting his Heart, does but harden him; there the Judgment is so far from
expiating his Offense, that it hastens and aggravates his Everlasting
Condemnation; and this very Sin will be remembered in Hell, and double his
Shrieks and Agonies. And this is rational to believe; for when God, by that
Temporal Judgment, cannot reclaim him, the last Remedy that God makes use of,
to bring him to a better Mind, is lost, his Folly is incorrigible; and as that
Judgment was a Talent he should have improved into Repentance, so dis-regarding
it, and making no other use of it, than Pharaoh of his Plagues, and becoming
more settled upon his Lees, he justifies God's Proceedings against him in the
last Day; which, though they seem ^evere to the Sufferer, who is loath to feel
the pain, yet they are reasonable; and he whom Temporal Judgments could not
reclaim, must know at last, to his Cost, there is no jesting with the Anger of
an Infinite Majesty.

The Preceding Considerations reduced to farther Practice.
I. THE Apostle is in the right, when he tells us, Heb. 12. 29. Our God is a
Consuming Fire. Indeed, to the Tractable, and Docile, who consider his
Providence, and take notice of his Loving Kindness; who see the Vanity and
Uncertainty of the World, and build their Nest among the Stars of Heaven; who
are sensible of the Danger of walking after the Flesh, and deliberately choose
to walk after the Spirit; who run away from Sodom, get themselves out of
Babylon, will not be infected by the Sins of the World, and earnestly desire to
be strengthened in the Inward Man, with all Might: To such he is all Kindness,
all Love, all Mercy, all Light, all Compassion, all Charity: as we see in the
Parable of the Prodigal, where the Father's Acts toward the penitent Sinner
are so full of Sweetness, so full of Affection and Tenderness, that nothing can
be imagined more kind, or loving, or favorable. But Men who undervalue the
Methods of Salvation, will be happy their own Way, make light of that which
they ought to prize above their Lives, are unconcerned about the Sins that cost
the Eternal Son of God his Life; will needs dream of God's Mercy, while they
obstruct it by their Ingratitude; and hope to enter into Heaven,
notwithstanding their Neglect of purifying their Hearts and Lives; nay, can
come to this Sacrament, and will not be divorced from those Sins, which here
they profess an unfeigned Sorrow for. Such Persons shall know, and feel, that
God is Jealous, and that the Lord revenges; that the Lord revenges, and is
furious; that the Lord will take Vengeance of his Adversaries, and reserves
Wrath for his Enemies, Nah. 1. 2. He is, indeed, slow to Anger, and does not
wllfully afflict the Children of Men; but Boldness in Impenitence wakens his
Vengeance; and where his Patience tempts them to greater Wantonness, there is
no dallying with their Errors. These things have thou done, says God, and I
kept silence, and thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thy
self; but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine Eyes, Psalm.
50. 21.

II. Because it is so dangerous to eat and drink unworthily, yet that ought not
to discourage any Person from eating and drinking in this Sacrament. Worthy
Eating and Drinking here, is not dangerous at all; so far from being dangerous,
that it is a Duty, and beneficial, and a Key to the choicest Mercies. And if it
were dangerous, why should it fright any Soul from coming? It Is dangerous to go
to Sea: Yet does the Sea^man therefore forbear his Voyage? It Is dangerous to
climb a Tree: Yet does the Husbandman therefore let his better Fruit drop
down, without getting up to gather it? It Is dangerous to fight against a
numerous Enemy: But is the Soldier therefore dis-hearten'd from venturing into
the Battle? Danger helps us to look to our Steps; and if there be Difficulty in
an Attempt, it whets our Courage, and makes us fall on with the greater Force
and Earnestness: So that if worthy Eating and Drinking were dangerous, it were
an Invitation to an ingenuous Temper to apply himself to it: But in this there
is no Danger. What Danger can there be in Repentance? What Danger in doing the
Will of God? What Danger in performing our Duty? What Danger in serious
Endeavors to cleanse our selves, that we may be pure, even as God is pure?
What Danger in eating and drinking with a Lively Faith in the Promises of the
Gospel? What Danger in making the Love of God, and the serious Contemplation of
it, a Motive and Occasion to grow in Grace? If there be any Danger, it is in
the Unworthy Eating and Drinking at this holy Table; and in that, indeed, there
is as much Danger as there is in cutting our selves with Knives and Lances, or
in running a Sword into our Bowels: And who but a Madman will do so? There is
nothing so good, nothing so safe, nothing so sound, nothing so innocent, but
Men may corrupt it by their evil Inclinations: So they may abuse God's Name,
and Day, and Word, and Ordinances, and the Duty of Prayer, and the Ministry;
and what not? Unworthy Eating and Drinking, is a sinful Eating and Drinking.
Let Men separate the Sinfulness from the Duty, let them pare away that
poisonous Rind, and there is no Danger; and you may eat and drink at this Table
with as little Danger, as you eat and drink at home; there is no Danger here,
but what you make your selves: The Danger rises not from the Eucharist, but
from your Hearts. That which makes it dangerous, is, your Love to Forbidden
Fruit while you eat and drink here. This you harbor, this you cherish; and
that makes your feeding dangerous: But cast out that old Leaven, and you may
feed as peaceably, as contentedly, as securely, as Children under their
Father's Wings, as People that sit under their own Vine, and under their own
Fig Tree.

The PRAYER.
O Jesu! whom I see coming toward me in this Sacrament, not with Balm, and
Myrrh. and Spices, hut with that which is infinitely better, even with the
Balsom of thy Blood, to anoint me, to wash me, and to make me whole, to make
this blind Creature see, and this lame Man to walk, this Dumb to speak, this
Deaf to hear, and to dignifie this Beggar, even me, the weakest in thy Flock,
the poorest in thy House, the meanest person in thy Spiritual Kingdom! What
shall I say of this Mercy? What can I think of it? Thou art both the Giver, and
the Gift; the Feeder, and the Food; the Guest, and the Feast; the Offerer, and
the Oblation: O deal with me after thine infinite Goodness! I have deserved to
be left, to be forsaken, to be rejected, to be cast away from thy Presence!
But, O! let not this miserable Beggar go away from thy Door without an Alms;
scatter thy Bounty, and let me gather it. The poorer I am, the greater Object I
am of thy Pity! I bring my Heart to thee to reform it; I come to offer my Soul,
to thee; be thou entreated to renew it by thy Holy Spirit. Bring me to a more
lively and nearer conjunction with thy self, that I may become a living Member,
incorporated into thy Mystical Body, and may live not longer by mine own
Spirit, but by Thine, which is the Spirit of my Spirit, the Soul of my Soul,
and the very Life of my Life. Thou art my Sun, from whose Beams I must receive
the Light of Grace; Thou art my Fountain, from which I must draw Living Water.
Thou art the Root, from which I must receive Sap of increase. Thou art my Head,
from which I must receive Life and Being. O! let me feel the force of this
Sacrament in my Soul, Power against Sin and Satan, and ability to serve thee.
Corroborate my Spirit, that I may obtain Victory; put off the anxious Cares of
the World, and put on Joy, flowing from Remission and pardon of my Sins. I am
sensible, that Thy Table is the strength of my Soul, the Sinews of my Mind, the
Band of my Confidence, my Health, my Light, and my Recovery. Being sprinkled
with thy Blood, I shall be able to turn to fight the Armies of Aliens, the
Armies of my Spiritual Enemies, and prevail against them, and go on from Virtue
to Virtue, till I shall Hunger and Thirst no more in thy Everlasting Kingdom.
Amen, Amen.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Bodily Sickness, Weakness, and untimely Death, which is sometimes by way of
Judgment, inflicted on Unworthy Receivers of this Blessed Sacrament.
The CONTENTS.
Sickness, and Weakness, and Death, are either Corporal, or Spiritual. Some
Reasons laid down, why God makes use of Sickness, and Weakness of Body, to
Chastize the Unworthy Receiver. How a Person may know, whether the Sickness and
Weakness of Body, that is upon him, comes upon him for his Unworthy Receiving.
How Sickness and Weakness of Body, and an untimely Death, can be said to be
inflicted for Unworthy Receiving, when we see, that even the most worthy
Receivers sicken and dye, and sometimes suddenly, and before their time, and
when it is evident, that these are effects of Natural Causes. The time of
Adversity, a time of serious Consideration. The Soul that loves the Lord Jesus
in sincerity, has no reason to be troubled, when Sickness or Affliction comes,
as if it came for Unworthy Receiving. Worthy Receiving, the best Preparative
for Death. Those that neglect coming, have reason to fear, that all the
Miseries which befall them, come upon them for their neglect. The Prayer.

I. HAving told you in the foregoing Chapter, that the word (...), or Judgment,
does import both Temporal Judgment, and Damnation, and shown, how the unworthy
Receiver makes himself liable to exemplary Temporal Judgments in general; it is
fit I should, in the next place, in imitation of St. Paul, speak of the
particular Temporal Judgments, the unworthy Communicant pulls upon himself,
whereof one is Bodily Sicckness, Weakness, and untimely Death; for thus we
read, 1 Cor. 11. 30. For this cause, i.e. upon the account of this unworthy
Eating and Drinking, many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep; as if
he had said, This your unworthy Receiving brings Sickness, Weakness, and a
preternatural and unusual Sleep upon you: This must needs be meant here, for
ordinary Sleep, or the usual Rest of the Body can be no punishment; and, to
tell you, that by Sleep in Scripture, is frequently understood Death, or
separation of the Soul from the Body, or dissolution of this natural Life, were
to tell you, what all Men know, that have but looked into the Bible; nor can
any be ignorant, that these Phrases are often used in a Spiritual Sense for
Spiritual Weakness, and Sickness, and Death, which will oblige me to take both
significations into consideration. And that God did, in the Primitive Ages of
Christianity, inflict and visit unworthy Communicants with weakness and
sickness of Body, and with an untimely Death sometimes, especially if they
continued impenitent, thereby to put them in mind of their Offenses, and to
exhort them to amendment of Life, all Interpreters agree; and the same Temporal
Judgments, an unworthy Receiver has reason to fear, and look for at this day,
insomuch, that if many a Man's sickness and weakness of Body, and not living
out half his days, were thoroughly examined, and looked into, it would be found
to proceed, in a great measure, from this Cause, even his unworthy Receiving of
the Holy Symbols.

II. If we enquire into the Reasons why God makes use of Sickness and weakness
of Body, to lash the unworthy Receiver in this Life, we must conclude, that,
considering how all Afflictions and Judgments of this Life are curative, and
intended to work a change in the Offender for the better, the Reasons why God
makes use of Sickness, particularly, in punishing the unworthy Receiver, are
these following:

1. Sickness weakens the Flesh, abates and lessens its violent desires, whereby
it comes to pass, that the Spiritual part gets from under the slavery it lay
enthralled in, while the Flesh prevailed, and puts the Sinner upon serious
Thoughts; for now it gets leave to exercise its Authority, which before was
over-awed, and crushed, and oppressed, by the usurping Tyrant, and thereby
occasions terror and consternation in the whole Man about his unworthy
Receiving. While the Flesh is predominant, and bears Rule, Faith and Reason are
mere prisoners, and whatever they suggest is not hearkened to. The Flesh still
baffles their Arguments, and admits of nothing, but what pleads in favor of
its brutish Appetite. Sickness coming, and weakening the Flesh, and rendering all
the delights of the World insipid and unsavory, the Soul recovers her freedom,
and is now at liberty to think of her former Life, to survey the Actions of her
past Practices, and, among other Errors, to reflect upon her unworthy
Receiving, to aggravate this particular Offense, and thereby to incline the
sinner's Eyes and Heart to penitential Tears, for now the Man having no hurry
of business, no noise of vain company, no external Gayeties, no Music of
sensual Pleasures, to call him away from minding the things that belong to the
happiness of his Soul, he is more at leisure to ruminate upon what he has been
doing, and the dreadfulness of his Sin, viz. feeding irreverently at this
Table, and not discerning, that the Body of the Son of God was offered to his
Soul, and if any thing will melt or turn him, this is very likely to effect it.

2. Sickness puts the unworthy Receiver in mind of Death; for he that falls
sick, knows not, but his Illness may end in Death; and there are few Men, but
are of this opinion, when once they take their Bed; fear, that they shall or
may dye, makes them seek out for proper Helps and Remedies, send for
Physicians, if they be able, and sometimes for Divines too; think of making
their Wills, set their House in order, and, after all, leave nothing untried,
whereby they may prevent the stroke of Death; Sickness being of that nature,
and having this influence on men, may therefore be supposed to put the unworthy
Receiver in mind of his Death; and as it puts him in mind of Death, so if he
have any sense of Religion left, it minds him also of an approaching Judgment,
and suggests to him, that, for ought he knows, he will shortly be in another
World, be summoned to give an account of his Life to God, and appear before the
Judge of Quick and Dead, even before Christ Jesus, the Son of God; whose Death
has had no influence upon his Life, whose Blood he has trampled under foot,
whose Sufferings he has not much thought of, whose Love has made no great
impression upon him, whose Charity has wrought in him no considerable
tenderness to his Neighbor, whose Presence in the Sacrament he has
undervalued, and whose entreaties to become Wise unto Salvation, and meek and
humble, and serious and blameless, he has stopped his Ears against; and how
little Mercy he must expect of that Judge, whom to please, he has not been
much concerned. This Kindness Sickness may be supposed to do to the unworthy
Communicant, viz. to put him in mind of his Death, and future account, and the
Judge, whose Body and Blood he has profaned; and his anger and indignation
against such Profanation; and what can be supposed more effectual to promote
Repentance, and Godly Sorrow, and new Resolutions to awake from the Dead, that
Christ may give him Life? And therefore, God makes use sometimes of Bodily
Sickness to afflict the unworthy Communicant, But where Death seizes on the
unworthy Commnicant, either before he can bethink himself, or before a previous
lingering Sickness has melted and wrought his Heart into a Spiritual Life,
there the Man's case is deplorable indeed; for to think, that God will accept
of his Death, as a Satisfaction for his Sin, and save him however, is to make a
new Divinity, and to erect Principles, which the Scripture knows nothing of.
It Is true, in some Cases, where God cuts off a young Man in (...) Flower of his
Age; a young Man, I mean, whose Li^e has been blameless, attended with holy
Fears, and a Conscientious Behavior, at home and abroad; his untimely Death
may be said to be a Temporal Affliction for some accidental Miscarriages, and
single Inadvertencies, such as never swelled into an Habit, or settled
Approbation; by which Affliction he is saved and freed from the greater
Condemnation, according to the Apostle's Rule, 1 Cor. 11. 32. But when we are
judged, i, e. with Temporal Judgments, such as Sickness, Weakness, and Untimely
Death, whereof he had spoken, Verse. 30. we are chasten'd of the Lord, that we
should not be condemned with the World. In this Case, i.e. in Accidental
Miscarriages, God may be said to accept of the lesser, for the greater
Judgment, upon his Account, who died, and rose again, for those who hear his
Voice. But where the Sin is habitual, rooted in the Heart, has invaded the
Complexion, and is allowed of, and thought harmless, and void of Hurt; there an
Untimely Death is no Security against Condemnation, no Shelter against the
Wrath to come: How far it may abate or qualify the future Indignation, I am
not able to say; but it is no Deletory, no Fortisication, no Charm against that
Storm.

III. But here a Difficulty will arise, How a Person may know that the Sickness
or Weakness of Body that is upon him, comes upon him for his unworthy
Receiving? To which, I answer;

1. There is not a more ready Way to know it, than by ransacking our Life; and
particularly, our public Devotions. If, in our present Sickness, we find, upon
Examination, that when we came formerly to the Supper of the Lord, we came
without any sincere Intent, Desire, or Resolution, to be wrought into Love and
Obedience to Christ Jesus, by the Sight of his Cross, and Death, and Charity;
that we came, and went away, unconcerned, unmoved, untouched, at this
Medicamentum Immortalitatis, this Physic of Immortality, Dionys. Areop. de
Hier. Eccl. cap. 5*
as St. Dennis calls it; or, that we thought that the Blessings promised to the
Faithful, and to those who strive, and fight the good Fight, would fall to our
share, and be conveyed to us in this Ordinance, without a due Contrition, and
Endeavors to tread in our Master's Steps; we may easily infer, that we were
unworthy Receivers; and that, among other Causes of our Sickness, this is one,
and the principal too; even our unworthy and irreverent Feeding at the Lord's
Table.

2. Is any sick among you? Let him send for the Elders of the Church, says St.
James, Chap. 5. Verse. 14. In the Primitive Church, the sick Person, especially
he that was doubtful of his Spiritual Condition, sent for Seven Ministers or
Presbyters of the Church, as so many Physicians, to consult about the State of
his Soul; before whom he faithfully spread his Case, giving them as candid an
Account of himself as he could; and so left it to them, to judge and give
Sentence in his Cause. And this also is a very rational Way to come to a
satisfactory Knowledge, whether the present Sickness proceed from unworthy
Communicating, or not. And therefore, he that falls sick after he has been at
the Lord's Table, let him send for a faithful Guide and Director, and
impartially signify and reveal to him the Constitution of his Soul, what it
has been, and what it is; and the Actions of his Life, the manner of his
Worship in public and private, and how and which way he used to address
himself to God; what his Thoughts and Preparations were, when he used to go to
the Table of the Lord; what he felt after Receiving; whether it left an Awe
upon his Spirit, a Fear desiring his own Soul; what his Design was in
Receiving, and how far he closed with God: And a pious, judicious Divine may be
very helpful to the sick Person, to direct, instruct and inform him, whether
the Sickness be an Effect of his unworthy Receiving, or not. And, lest any
should cavil here, and object, What matter is it whether a Man know the
Occasion of his Sickness, and what it was that brought it upon him? I shall
offer, by way of Answer, these few Particulars:

1. If there were nothing but Curiosity in the Case, something might be said
for a Man's being so inquisitive. In Natural Causes of Distempers, Men think no
Curiosity great enough; and if either we our selves, or Children, or Relations,
fall sick, common Curiosity tempts us to ask the Physician, what he thinks the
Cause of our Illness is; nay, if the Cause be unknown, both to our selves, and
others, we have very often the Curiosity to have the Body of a Friend, or
Child, opened, to know the Cause. And why People should not be as curious in
Spiritual Things, as they are in Natural, I know no Reason. The Providence of
God, and his Designs, in the various Accidents that befall us, certainly
deserve our Curiosity and Inquisitiveness, much more than things of an inferior
Nature. Nor is it impossible to find out the particular Cause, why God sends
such a Sickness upon certain Persons, when himself has declared in his Word,
in what Cases, and upon what Provocations he will send it.

2. If the Sickness be found to be a Consequence or Effect of unworthy
Receiving, this helps to strengthen our Faith in the Promises and Threatenings
of God; and finding, that what the Apostle has said so many Hundred Years
agone, comes to pass still, this is a very strong Argument that he spoke by the
Spirit of God, and a Motive to admire the Veracity of God, and Encouragement to
believe the other Promises and Threatenings of the Word of God. Nothing is a
greater Confirmation of Faith, than Experience; and he that has seen the
things the Scripture speaks, very frequently accomplished, has enough to turn
his Faith into a full Assurance.

3. If the unworthy Receiver knows that it is his Sin, committed in the holy
Sacrament, that has brought the present Sickness upon him; if after that, he
recovers, and escapes, it will be an Obligation upon him to come to it with
greater Circumspection; For he that has suffered in the Flesh, says St.
Peter, has ceased from Sin, 1 Pet. 4. 1. And therefore, having suffered for
his unworthy Receiving, that Suffering will make him weary of his Sin; which he
cannot be, except he comes for the future, and draws near with a pure Heart;
holding fast the Profession of the Faith, without wavering; as it is said, Heb.
10. 22, 23. But,

IV. While we are discoursing of this particular Judgment, another Doubt
arises, viz. How Sickness of the Body, and an untimely Death, can be said to be
inflicted for unworthy Receiving, when we see even the most worthy Receivers
sicken, and grow weak, and die young many times, in the Prime and Flower of
their Age: And nothing is more vulgarly known, than that Sickness and Death are
nothing but the Product of Natural Causes? I answer;

1. Though even very excellent Christians, who may be supposed to have been
very penitent and worthy Receivers, ever since they frequented the Ordinances
of God with any Sense and Understanding; though even such do sicken, and many
times die suddenly, and in the midst of their Race; yet that proceeds from
other Causes: And these Accidents are either Trials of their Faith and
Patience, or Preparatives for Heaven, or Preservatives from Sin, or Occasions
to glorify God, or Opportunities to promote the Honor of Religion, or
Chastisements for some rash and imprudent Actions, to prevent their being
condemned with the World. According to which Rule, we are to judge of the
untimely Death of that Prophet, 1 Reg. 13. 24. who cried against the Altar of
Bethel: A good Man, no doubt; but being persuaded by the crafty old Prophet,
who pretended a Counter-Inspiration, he went back, and ate Bread in the place
against which he was warned; for which imprudent Act, a Lion found him, and
slew him. And such was the Death of Uzzah, 2 Samuel 6. 7. who, out of a good
intent, put forth his Hand to uphold the Ark, that was in danger of falling,
the Oxen that drew the Cart, shaking it: For which, God struck him dead upon
the place. And this was the Case of Josiah, a Man noted for his singular Piety;
yet going up rashly against Pharaoh Necho, was killed in Battle, though,
according to the Course of Nature, he might have lived many Years longer. Thus
God chastised the impremeditated Errors of his Servants in this Life, that
they might not fall a Prey to the greater Condemnation hereafter. One and the
same Effect, may have very different Causes; and the Reasons of Things that
happen in the World, are various. The same thing may be a Mercy to one, which
is a Judgment to another; as the Pillar of a Cloud, Exodus 14. 19, 20. was
Darkness to the Egyptians, and Light to the Israelites: And the Meat sent to
Elijah, was a Character of God's Love; whereas that sent to the Israelites,
upon their murmuring, was a Forerunner of his Wrath and Anger. And this may be
applied to Sickness, and Untimely Death: In the unworthy Receiver, it is a
Punishment; in the Worthy, a singular Mercy. A Prince may send two Persons, one
whom he hates, another whom he loves, to Prison, with very different Intents;
the one, with an Intent to have him executed according to Law; the other, to
preserve him from the Rage of his Enemies: And the same may be said of
Sickness, which, we see, lights indifferently, upon Good and Bad.

2. Though Sicknesses, and Untimely Death, are governed by Second Causes; by
Colds, and Heats; by hard Labor, and Straining; by excessive Passion, and
Grief, and Joy; by tedious Journeys, and dangerous Voyages; by Fevers in the
Blood, and Contrariety of pugnant Humors; by Winds, and Storms; by Fire, and
Water; by a Pestilential Breath, and going to infected Places, etc. yet he that
sits at the Stern of the great Vessel, must not be supposed to look on
carelessly, or to be nothing but a Spectator of the Conspiration of the Second
Causes. These Second Causes are constantly governed by a Power supreme; and by
his Order and Influence they move. He directs, and bids them concur to produce
such Effects; and while they seem to act by Chance, and in the dark, he himself
has pregnant Reasons, why he causes such a Concourse of inferior Causes; and
these Reasons he has thought fit to reveal in his Word, where we are to seek
them. So that though an unworthy Receiver may get his Sickness and Death by
Quarrelling, by Gluttony, by Drunkenness and Intemperance, by being wounded and
bruised by rude and insolent Men, yet Providence is not asleep all this while;
and though he does not command or approve the Sins which are the Occasion, or
the immediate Causes of the ensuing Sickness, yet he wisely permits them,
resolves not to hinder them from producing such Effects, for Reasons his
Eternal and infinite Wisdom has pitched upon; so that they may very well be
intended as Punishments and Judgments, even while they are the natural Effects
of Second Causes: And God, in punishing the unworthy Receiver with Sickness,
and untimely Death, lays Righteousness to the Line, and Justice to the Plummet;
there being nothing more just, than that he should fall sick, that has been
sick of God's Service; and he come to an untimely Death, that has disregarded
the Death of Christ Jesus, and counted it an unworthy thing. And what if some
unworthy Receivers live as long as other Men, and perhaps to a very great Age;
yet that does not make the Apostle's Words less true; nor is it any Security to
the Offenders, that therefore they shall go scot-free. The Threatenings of God
that concern this present Life, if they are not executed in this Life, show
however what the Sinner has deserved; and not being executed here, if that
which should have been inflicted here, is added to the Punishment hereafter, he
has no great reason to brag of his escaping here. Sometimes the Sinner
bethinks himself, and repents, and turns from his Error, and by that means
escapes the sad Effects of his Threatening; for all Threatenings have this
implicit Condition included, In case the Offender does not make his Peace with
God. Add to all this, That if the Threatenings of God be executed upon some
Persons, guilty of the Sin to which the Threatening is made, it is enough to
vindicate the Veracity of God: And if any Sinner, of the same Size and Degree,
do escape, still the Threatening shows what they may expect, if they turn not.

The Preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. THE Wise Man's Advice, surely, is very reasonahle, Eccles. 7. 14. In the
Day of Adversity, consider. Times of Affliction are considering Times.
Affliction is sent on purpose to teach, and to instruct us: It Is intended to
put us in mind of the Sins we have forgotten, or been wilfully ignorant of; the
Sins of our Childhood, the Sins of our Youth, the Sins of our riper Age, and
the various Neglects and Defects of our holy Services. And therefore, in the
Old Testament, the Word (...) Jasar, which stands for Affliction, imports not
only Correction and Chastisement, but Instruction too: It is an excellent
Schoolmaster; and he that submits to its Teachings, will become wiser than a
Multitude of Books will make him. Therefore, my Son, despise not thou the
chastening of the Lord; nor faint when thou art rebuked of him, Heb. 12. 5.
Consider who it is that sends the Rod, and what the Design of the unwelcome
Messenger is. Consider how much thou need it, and how justly thou have
deserved it. Consider how it is intended for thy Good; and how thou should
have forgotten why thou came into the World, but for this Remembrancer.
Consider how little Reason thou have to take it ill, when the dearest Servants
of God have passed through this Fire; and how, without it, thou would have
continued a Stranger to thy self. Consider its Mercy, that he will call home
the straying Sheep, and will not let thee wander in the Wilderness of Sin: And
that when he strikes, his Intent only is to beat the Dust out of thy Clothes,
not to hurt the better part. This Consideration will go near to produce that
excellent Temper in thee, which David speaks of; Surely, I have behaved and
quieted my self, as a Child that is weaned of his Mother: My Soul is even as a
weaned Child, Psalm. 131. 2.

II. Let not him that is weak in Faith, yet loves the Lord Jesus Christ in
Sincerity, makes Conscience of his Laws, and would not willingly offend him, to
gain the World; let him not be frighted when Sickness, or any outward Disaster
and sad Accident befalls him, as if that were a certain Argument, that therefore
he has received unworthily. The Enemy may suggest such a Thought; but,
Christian, explode it as boldly as it comes. They are other Reasons that make
thy Heavenly Father lay his chastening Hand upon thee. His Design is, to make
thee entirely conformable to his own Son; to that Son, who, for the Glory set
before him, endured the Cross. He was made perfect through Suffering; so would
God make thee perfect through Affliction. If a Person be never so holy, yet if
he has not passed through the Furnace of Affliction, he wants Perfection.
Afflictions gave the Son of God, as he was Man, a Title to his Father's
Kingdom; and they are Items to thee, that thou shall reign with Christ for
ever. These Troubles that encompass thee, are to make thy future Joys the
greater, and thy Crown more bright and shining. Fear not that thou have
received unworthily, while thy Conscience bears witness that thine Eyes, thy
Heart, thy Affections, were toward him in the holy Sacrament, and are so still:
If thy Treasure and thy Heart was in Heaven then, and thou still endeavourest
to preserve that Frame, thy Eating and Drinking has done thee good, and thou
have been refreshed by it, and the Lines did fall to thee in pleasant places.
These present Afflictions are thy Security, that God loves thee; and as they
tell thee that thou have no continuing City here, so they help to prepare thy
Soul for the Possession of that Inheritance which shall last for ever.

III. Worthy Receiving of the Lord's Supper, is the best Preparative for Death.
No Man can die uncomfortably, that makes it his Business, as often as he comes
to this Table, to receive worthily. Death cannot hurt him, let it be natural or
violent, untimely or orderly; for, by this worthy Receiving, he has laid up a
good Foundation against the Time to come Death may destroy his Body, but cannot
kill the Soul. Death may fright him, but it cannot undo him. It may dis-lodge
his Spirit, but it drives it to a nobler Habitation. It may expel the Guest,
but it gives him a Title to a better Building. His worthy Receiving gives him
an Interest in Christ's Death; and because Christ lives, he shall live also.
Death may come blustering, and make a Noise; but in that Whirlwind his Soul
rides to Heaven. Let his Death come by Sword, or Famine, or Torment, or Fire,
or Water, it makes no Alteration in his Happiness. To him, to live, is Christ;
and die, Gain: And he knows who has said, I am the Resurrection, and the Life.
The worthy Receiver never dies, for he lives in Christ, who abides for ever.
Christ will not suffer that Soul to perish, in which he has been pleased to
make his Habitation. He is concerned to secure her Happiness; and his Eyes are
open upon her, to do her good. Her worthy Receiving arms her against the Fears
of Death, and scatters the Mists which Death does cast before her Eyes.
Receiving worthily, makes the Soul a sit Habitation for the Spirit of God; and
If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that
raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal Bodies by his
Spirit that dwells in you, Romans 8. 11.

IV. As the unworthy Receiver, when Sickness, or some other heavy Judgment,
lights upon him, has reason to believe, that it is for his unworthy Receiving;
so he that wilfully neglects coming to this holy Sacrament, may very justly
conclude, that all the Troubles and Miseries that befall him, do, in a great
measure, befall him for that Neglect. It Is hard to determine which is the
greater Sin, whether Receiving unworthily, or not Receiving at all; both will
admit of great Aggravations: And as these Sins are in a manner equal, so it is
not irrational to conclude, that the Judgments threatened to the one, may be
inflicted for the other too. As the Jews say of the Golden Calf, that an Ounce
of that Sin is an Ingredient into all the Calamities that came upon them; so
there is not a Cross that the wilful Neglecter of this Sacrament feels, or
endures, but he has reason to think that this Neglect contributes toward it;
and all his Miseries call to him, though he will not hear the Voice, not to
neglect so great Salvation; and if all these Calls cannot awaken him into a
Sense of his Duty, how must his Reckoning swell, and how inexcusable must he
be, whom neither the still Voice of Prosperity, nor the shriller Sound of
Adversity, can convince? Take, eat, this is my Body; and Drink ye all of this,
is a Duty, as much as doing by others the same that we would have others to do
us. It will appear, and be made out one Day, that this was not an Evangelical
Counsel only, which the more Religious Sort, that are ambitious of the highest
Place in Heaven, need only mind, if they please. It was said to all the
Disciples, that represented the Church-Militant: And if thou professest thy
self a Member of that Church, thou art no more excused from the Performance of
it, than thou art from coming to Church, and attending the other Ordinances of
God. But if these Motives cannot prevail, God has Enforcives which shall; but
from these, Good Lord deliver us.

The PRAYER.
O God! When thou with Rebukes do chasten Man for Iniquity, thou make his
Beauty to consume away like a Moth! Hear my Prayer, O Lord, and give ear unto
my Cry; hold not thy Peace at my Tears. Oh, let the Afflictions which have
befallen me, and which thou shall hereafter think fit to send upon me, help
toward the strengthening of my Faith in Christ Jesus. Thou have sometimes laid
thy Hand upon me, thy Afflicting Hand, and I have taken no notice of it. Thou
have smitten me, and I have not looked up to Heaven, from whence the Stroke did
come. Thou have corrected me, and I have not been the better for it. I have
been like a Beast before thee; so foolish was I, and ignorant. Oh, teach thou
me! Let me read my Duty in my Crosses. And whatever Trouble comes upon me, let
that Trouble direct me to the Cross of my dear Master, the Lord Jesus. Enlarge
my Contemplations of the Cross of Christ, by the Crosses that knock at my Door.
Let these make me more zealous to participate of the Benefits of the Cross of
Christ. In these Crosses and Troubles, let me find Motives to come with greater
Seriousness to the Table of my crucified Redeemer. Let these prompt me to run
to the Tree which yields the Fruit of Righteousness. Let not these discourage
me from loving thee; but rather inflame my Affections, to make thee my Hope and
Fortress, my Light, and my Salvation. Let me look upon the Joy that all my
Troubles will at last end in, and take Comfort in all my Tribulations. Imprint
this Belief upon my Soul, that thou know better what is good for me, than my
Carnal Heart. I am apt to hanker after the Fleshpots of Egypt; but let me see
the richer Table in thy Kingdom. I am apt to be fond of these outward Comforts:
Oh, quench my Thrist after them! Let me see clearly, that to feed on thy Love,
is better Diet than this Earth affords. Give me thy Peace; not as the World
gives, but as thou usest to give thine own People. Oh! give me what I want:
Thou know my Necessities better than I. Give me better things than my Flesh
desires, even those which may pre^erve me by thy Power, through Faith, unto
Salvation, through Jesus Cheist our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. XX.
Of Spiritual Weakness, Sickness and Death, the Second Temporal Judgment,
inflicted sometime on the Unworthy Receivers of this holy Sacrament.
The CONTENTS.
The Eucharist a Cure for all Diseases, yet many continue weak and sick after
it. The Cause shown to be in themselves. The Signs of Spiritual Weakness,
Sickness and Death. God inflicts these Spiritual Judgments upon Unworthy
Receivers by degrees. The Justice of it vindicated, in four Particulars.
Spiritual Weakness and Sickness, proved to be a greater Judgment than the
Corporal. Of the End of our Eating and Drinking worthily at this Table, which
is Spiritual Health; and wherein that consists. Spiritual Judgments more common
than Men think or suspect. Our Souls are capable of Diseases, as well as our
Bodies. Several Instances and Proofs given of it. The Cure of Spiritual
Weakness and Sicknesses, laid down in several Particulars. The Prayer.

I. AS Corporal, so even Spiritual Weakness, Sickness, and Death, proves too
frequently an Effect of Eating and Drinking unworthily at this Table: Nay,
these Spiritual Sicknesses are more common than the other. It Is true, they
cause no Pain, no Aches, no Torments in the Bowels; they are not felt, as the
Pleurisy, or Cholick, or Twisting of the Guts; but they are Sicknesses still:
And because we find such Things, and God manifests his Anger often against
unworthy Receiving, by such Symptoms we have reason to believe, the Apostle
aimed at these, as well as at Bodily Diseases, when he avers, For this Cause
many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep. It Is true, there is not a
more proper Medicine for all the Diseases of the Soul, than this holy
Sacrament. To which purpose, De Sacram. Did. 3.
Albertus Magnus says very appositely, Tract. 1. cap. 4.
If in the Eucharist, in the Remembrance of our Savior's Passion, we reflect
on his Humility, it will free us from the Infection of Pride. If we think of
his wonderful Charity, we shall be delivered from the Evil of Envy. If we
consider with what Alacrity he went to die for us, and to offer himself in
Sacrifice for us, it will be an Antidote against Weariness of his Service, and
Backwardness to Devotion. If we ponder his Bounty, and how liberally he gives
us himself, and all he has, we shall be rid of Covetousness. If we lay his
Meekness and Patience to heart, it will be an excellent Remedy against Wrath
and Anger. If we remember how frugal his Supper was, and how far from Pomp and
Ostentation, and how mean the Food was he made use of, it will check our
Gluttony and Voracity. And if we cast our Eyes on the bitter Herbs he eat, the
Emblem of his bitter Passion, we shall not be troubled much with Luxury. And to
this purpose was the Saying of Innocent III. De Myster. Miss. l. 4. c. 44.
That the Mystery of the Cross frees us from the reigning Power of Sin; and the
Mystery of the Eucharist, from a Desire of Sin. And if the Woman in the Gospel
was cured of her Infirmity by touching but the Hem of Christ's Garment, what
Virtue may we suppose in his whole Body, if it be touched by a lively Faith in
this Ordinance! If God has given to the Fat of Vipers Virtue to expel Poison,
shall not we think there is greater Virtue in Christ's crucified Body, to cure
the Diseases of the Soul? If he gave Virtue to the Tree of Life in Paradise, to
prolong Age, and to procure Perpetuity of Duration; shall not Christ's Flesh,
represented by the Symbols here, confer Life, and Health, and Salvation much
more? If he have given some Minerals Virtue to disperse Fumes and Vapors;
shall not we believe there is greater Virtue in the Incarnate Son of God, to
disperse the Clouds and Fogs that molest and annoy the Soul? This cannot be
denied; and we may rationally believe, that this Sacrament is intended by God
to cure all the Distempers of the Soul: But if that Medicine be not used as it
ought, the Soul, instead of growing stronger, becomes more weakly, more sickly,
and draws nigh unto the Gates of Death.

II. What this Spiritual Weakness, Sickness and Death, is, will not be very
difficult to discover. If you mind the Apostle's Expression, there is a
Gradation in the Judgment he speaks of; Weakness is a lower Degree of Misery
than Sickness, and Sickness a lower Degree than Death. The first Act of God's
Displeasure against Receiving unworthily is, to inflict Weakness; if that works
no Reformation, then Sickness; and if this does not make the Sinner rise, then
Spiritual Death.

1. Spiritual Weakness. And this may be said to consist in these following
Particulars:

1. In the Loss of Lively Apprehensions of Spiritual Things, which were
formerly vouchsafed to the unworthy Receiver. Even Men that are Hypocrites in
Religion, and whose Hearts were never thoroughly changed, have sometimes Flashes
of Heaven or Hell, coming either from without, or from within. Ahab certainly
had a very great Sense of God's Displeasure, and a Sight of Divine Vengeance
surprised his Mind, when he rent his Clothes, and put Sackcloth upon his
Flesh, and fasted, and lay in Sackcloth, and went softly, 1 King. 21. 27. And
some of us may have known some Persons, who have been given to Drinking, or
Swearing, or Lying, or Uncleanness, or Quarrelling; when their Office, or
Employment, or Station in the World, or some such External Cause and Motive,
have put them upon Receiving the Holy Sacrament; before they have come to this
Table, they have had some very serious Thoughts, and you might observe in them
a Demureness of Behavior, some Apprehensions of the Necessity of Repentance;
and sometimes their Hearts have been so touched, that even a few Tears have
dropped from their Eyes, as a Testimony of their being moved at the Thoughts of
Christ's Death and Passion; but the Sacrament being over, their Devotion has
been at an end too, and they have returned to their old Sins; which made them
unworthy Receivers, because this shows, they were not heartily resolved, when
they came to this Table, to subdue their Corruptions. Their lively
Apprehensions of Spiritual Things, they formerly had, have thereupon grown dark
and decayed, become languid and faint, and no Foot-step of them has been left.
Those Flashes of good Thoughts, though short and transitory, had they been
improved, would have signally strengthened their Souls, and encouraged their
practical Love to Christ Jesus: But being careless and regardless of that
Improvement, God justly lets those lively Apprehensions decay; and thence comes
their Spiritual Weakness. God could uphold those lively Apprehensions; but they
having no Love to them, God, by a secret Judgment, lets them wear out: And
then, What can be the Issue, but Spiritual Weakness?

2. Irresoluteness to resist Temptations, is another Symptom of this Spiritual
Weakness. When the Soul is either unresolved, whether it shall resist such
known Temptations, or not, or resist them but faintly; it is a Sign the Powers
of the Soul are shaken, and the Plague is begun in the Heart. By Temptations, I
mean, such Temptations as are agreeable to our sinful Temper and Inclination;
or such as our Calling and Employment makes us subject to. He that observes,
and takes a View of such Sinners as Receive unworthily, cannot but spy in them
a very feeble and irresolute Resistance of such Temptations: For,
notwithstanding whatever Resolutions they made before Receiving; whatever
Prayers and Supplications for God's Grace and Assistance, they offered, and put
up before; yet, after they have been at this Table, the old Temptations return,
even the same dear Friends that enticed and persuaded them to sin before; their
Resistance is very weak, and they know not well what they shall do, whether
they shall displease their own, and other Men's vain Desires, or no. Perhaps
some little horror, or kind of damp, the Sacrament for the present leaves upon
their Minds, has so much force upon them, that they make some attempts, and
use some trifling endeavors to resist; but as this resistance is not an effect
of an active Faith, but only of slavish fear, so it does not preserve them
untainted, and undaunted, in the hour of Temptation, which is an Argument, both
of Spiritual Weakness, and God's Judgment, because they did not like to retain
God in their knowledge, as St. Paul speaks, Romans 28.

2. Spiritual Sickness, the signs of which are as follows.

1. Want of relishing the Things of God, and the Mysteries of Religion. By
this, we conclude, that a Man is sick in his Body, if the Bread, or Wine, or
Apples, or Meat he swallows, seem to him Food or Drink, different from what
they appear to sound and healthy; and, by the same Argument we may infer, that
a Man's Soul is very sick, when the Promises, Precepts, Commands, Mercies,
Privileges, and Immunities, of the Gospel, are insipid and unsavory to him,
and his Soul finds no sweetness, no agreeableness, no juice, no life, no
pleasantness no delight, no pungency in them. If these appear to her as common
things, and affect her no more than what the Great Mogol does in the Indies, or
what Men talk on the Coast of Guinea. If they raise no wonder, no admiration,
no affection, no appetite, no strong desire in her; if she can hear them, read
of them, survey them, think of them, without being touched with the consequence
and importance of them, the Soul is infallibly under some great distemper, and
the whole Head is sick, the whole Heart is sick, grievously sick, and the wound
is dangerous; and that this Spiritual sickness discovers it self too often in
unworthy Receivers, we need no other proof, but what their known aversion gives
us; I mean, their aversion from good Thoughts and Discourfes, after they have
been at the Table of the Lord. Reading the Word, digesting it, and endeavoring
to see wondrous things in that Law, and meditating of some part of it day and
night, is irksome to them, tedious: and when something savouring of Heaven and
Eternity is proposed to them, they stand upon Thorns all the while, nor can the
goodness of God prevail with them, to deny themselves in any thing they have a
mind or strong inclination to, a certain sign of their being sick, and of God's
Judgment upon their Souls.

2. Another symptom of this Spiritual sickness, is When a known Sin becomes
habitual, and the few single Acts pass into temper, and come to be incorporated
with nature, and turn into constitution and complexion. In this case, the Soul
may be judged very sick, as sick as the Body that is troubled with the Stone or
Gout, and where the distemper, or Morbific Matter, is so dispersed through the
Mass of Blood and Joints, that though it admits of respite, and lucid intervals,
sometimes; yet, as the Humors that feed it, gather strength again, so the
Distemper returns. And this sickness does evidently discover it self in
unworthy Receivers, who were formerly but Punies and Novices in certain sins;
but, after their unworthy Receiving, harden themselves in the practice of them,
commence Graduates, and drink them in, as the Ox does the Water; and they
become their Darlings, their Benjamins, as dear to them as their Right Eye, as
dear as their Foot or Hand, than which there cannot be a surer sign of their
being spiritually sick, and lying under the weight of a spiritual Judgment.

3. Spiritual Death: And this also is to be known by symptoms, which are these;

1. When the Conscience smites no more: When it gives over striving with the
Sinner, he is dead, as that Body, in which the Pulse has left off beating. So
it was with the Prodigal, of whom Christ expressly says, Though his natural
life was sound and whole, that he was dead. No remorse, no regret, appeared in
his Soul. All was still, as in a Charnel-House, no noise within to fright him.
All was turned into the silence of the Grave. He delighted in his nastiness, in
his Mud, and Dung, and Filth, and Swinish Desires, nothing pricked him, nothing
stung his Heart. And that this Death is to be found in some unworthy Receivers,
is manifest from their Actions, for they become stupid in their Errors, and
having baf^led their Conscience, laid that inward witness to sleep, and hushed
it into a fatal slumber; It stirs not, it moves not, and they know not when
they sin, and when they do not. To that insensibleness they bring themselves,
that when God calls, they cannot see with their Eyes, nor hear with their Ears,
nor understand with their Hearts.

2. Another Symptom of this Spiritual Death is, When the Sinner begins to look
upon Religion, either as a trick of Divines, or Politicians, or a needless
thing. This excludes all sense of another world, the only thing whereby the
Soul lives, and therefore that being gone, the Soul is dead, and that he, who
has the power of Death, even the Devil, has killed and mortified all the good
Seed that lay scattered in his Breast. Indeed, this is such a degree of Death,
which unworthy Receivers do not very ordinarily arrive to, yet sometimes they
fall, even into this Gulf; for what should hinder them from tumbling down so
low, that have lost their hold in a Crucified Savior, from whose Arms they
have broke loose, unwilling that he should have any thing to do with them, but
just to save them, if he pleases? The Bands of Love and Obedience, are the only
things that preserve the Soul from Death; and the unworthy Communicant having
made a shift to throw those Cords from him, being loath to be tied and held by
them, he sinks into contempt of these things, and, from thence, into scorning
of Religion it self. In all which, the Judgment of God is clearly to be seen;
for though God does not call by an audible Voice from Heaven, that it is so,
nor set a mark upon the unworthy Receiver, as he did on Cain, whereby
spectators may know, that this is a sign of the Divine Judgment upon him; yet
it is enough, that we are told in the Word of God, Woe to them, when I depart
from them, Hos. 9. 11.

III. And, from hence, it is easy to guess, how God inflicts this spiritual
Judgment upon unworthy Receivers.

1. By a gradual withdrawing his Holy Spirit from them; This Spirit is called
Oil, Heb. 1. 9. and Unction, or Anointing, 1 John 2. 27. Whatever the quantity
of that Oil was, that was put in their Lamps; as that abates, so the strength
of their Soul abates, and from hence comes Spiritual Weakness, Sickness, and
Death. The Spirit of God is the Pillar that supports the House; if this Prop be
removed, the Inference is easy, that the House will not be of any long
standing. There are general Gifts of the Spirit of God, common to good and bad
Men under the Gospel, and there are some, that are peculiar to those that walk
after the Spirit; and, as in an unworthy Receiver, we can suppose none but
general Gifts; so even these, upon his Abuse, and misemploying of them, are
gradually removed, as Men take meat and victuals away from insolent Beggars,
that throw their Gift upon a Dunghill; and as a charitable Pension is withdrawn,
when we find, that the Party, which enjoyed it, spends it in Alehouses and
Taverns, or in Play.

2. By a gradual permitting the Devil to exercise his Power and Jurisdiction
upon them. God does not very frequently suffer the Enemy to fly upon the
Offender with all his force, or to ruin him at once, but he lengthens his Chain
by degrees, to see, whether the Sinner will yet give himself leave to think,
and attempt to be freed from that intolerable Yoke and Slavery; but, that
tenderness and patience of Almighty God becoming fruitless and ineffectual, the
Judge gives the Executioner greater liberty to darken his Mind, to pervert his
Will, and to sear his Conscience. Time was, when but one Devil was permitted to
Tyrannize over him; but if instead of being angry and displeased at that single
foe, the unworthy Communicant embraces, and makes him his friend, then that
Devil takes with him seven other Spirits more wicked than himself, and they
enter in, and dwell there, and the last state of that Man is worse than the
first, says Christ, Matthew. 12. 45. Nor is there any thing of injustice in
these proceedings of God. For,

1. It is nothing but Lex Talionis, a just Retaliation, a Rule, whereby God
ordinarily governs himself in the execution of his Judgments. H^s. 6. 4. He
tells Judah and Ephraim, Your Goodness is as a Morning Cloud, and as the early
Dew it passes away. The Judgment therefore is made proportionable, Hos. 13. 3.
Therefore they shall be as the Morning Cloud, and as the early Dew that passes
away, so here; the Sin is spiritual, the Judgment is so too. The unworthy
Receiver wrongs his own Soul, and, in his Soul, the marks of God's Wrath appear.

2. God, in this case, does no more than what we our selves do, and think our
selves very reasonable and just for doing so. A Father reduces his spend-thrift
Son to a smaller Allowance, and the ground that will not bear any thing after a
world of Toil, we Dung, and Dig, and Manure no more. In this manner, and for
Reasons ^ike these, God withdraws his Holy Spirit from the unworthy Receiver.

3. As the Devil is God's Minister of Justice, his Jailer and Hangman, so he
may justly make use of him to judge and lash the unworthy Receiver, the rather,
because he wilfully hearkens to the base suggestions of his sworn Enemy; and
who finds fault with a Prince or Magistrate for sending an Executioner to
behead or hang those that have committed Treason, or conspired against their
lawful Sovereign.

4. That God does gradually send this Spiritual Judgment upon unworthy
Receivers, this speaks his Goodness, Compassion and Patience, and shows, how
loath he is to give up Ephraim, how loath he is to deliver up Israel to the rage
of the Enemy, how loath he is to make them as Admah, and to set them as Zeboim;
so that there is Charity mingled with the Justice, and, in the midst of his
Anger, he remembers Mercy.

IV. And this will give us occasion to enquire, which of these two Judgments is
greater, the Temporal or the Spiritual. And here, if we consider the mischief
done by them, we must conclude and assert, that the Spiritual is greater. For,

1. Pain, and sickness of Body, may yet bring a Man, or drive a Man, to a true
Repentance, and a sight of the Errors of his ways, as we proved in the
foregoing Chapter; but this Spiritual Weakness makes the way, and passage, to
Repentance, more difficult, and the more any thing does hinder a Man from
Repentance, the more dangerous it is. Spiritual Weakness, Sickness, and Death,
supposes, that the faculties, which should be chiefly employed in the product
of Repentance, are out of order, and violated; such as the Understanding the
Will, and the Affections. Bodily Sickness very often puts these into a new
fermentation, and a strong desire after Spiritual Things. But when the very
Tools, whereby the Soul is to work, are blunt, and their edge rebated, or are
become rusty and useless, the work is very likely to be left undone. If
therefore the light that is in thee, be darkness, how great is that darkness!
says our Savior, Matthew. 5. 23.

2. The Spiritual Judgment is the more dangerous, because it is less perceived,
and taken notice of, than Bodily sickness. If a Man feel the smart and pain of
his Wounds and Sores, they oblige him to seek out for a Physician for Remedy,
for Counsel and Advice; and so we find it is, for the most part, with all
Diseases of the Body, which cause anguish and grief, and great inconvenience
and disorder in the Body; yet, among these various distempers, some there are,
where the poison creeps along in the secret parts, and Men perceive it not,
till it seizes upon the Vitals, invades the very Heart, and tolls the Bell for
Death; and these we count the most dangerous. Of this nature, is Spiritual
sickness and weakness. It leaves the Body in the same temper it found it in,
causes no prickings in the Back, no stitches in the side, no disturbance in the
Head. It lets Men eat and drink, and sleep and walk, and do their business; and
as to the outward Man, they feel no inconvenience, which makes them think, that
they have nothing of a distemper about them, that all is safe, and they ail
nothing. For this Spiritual sickness cannot be perceived without Thinking, and
Self-examination, which being neglected, Men feel it not; whence it comes to
pass, that it spreads insensibly in the dark, while Men are asleep, and, by
degrees, corrupts the Soul, till all its goodness be consumed; and
consequently, this Spiritual Judgment is greater than the Corporal.

3. The Spiritual Judgment is a sign of God's greater anger too; and though it
will not enter into the thoughts of a sensual Man that it is so, or that any
thing can be a sign of God's Anger, but what relates to losses, and
disappointments, and crosses in the outward Man, and in the World; yet
enlightened Souls have ever looked upon Spiritual sickness and Death, as a sign
of God's heavier wrath and indignation, because in this case, God does as it
were let Men alone, leaves them to themselves, and his not punishing of them
with Bodily troubles, looks like an aversion from their Persons, and so much we
may guess from what we read, Hos. 4. 14, 17.

The Preceding Considerations reduced into farther Practice.
I* IF Christ, and his Apostles, press Eating and Drinking worthily at this
Table, it is, because they would have our Souls be in perfect health; and they
are then in perfect health, when they rejoice in the Lord always. Thomas
Aquinas upon that saying, Cant. 1. 13. A bundle of Myrrh is my well-beloved
unto me, observes, that as Myrrh preserves Bodies from corruption, so Christ
taken, and contemplated, in the Holy Sacrament, preserves the soul from various
Diseases. Health is best known by Fruits and Actions; and as a sick Man cannot
perform, what the healthy does; so that Christian, that does not act like a
healthy Man, can boast of no great matter he has received in this Holy
Ordinance. This is intended to give our Souls the strength of a Lion, the
swiftness of Eagles, the alacrity of Angels, and the temper which was in the
incarnate Son of God; and if we Receive worthily, we shall certainly feel these
effects, in some degree at least; For it is plain, that they are felt by others,
that are worthy Communicants, and what should hinder us from feeling the same,
if we come furnished with the same qualifications? Those that are acquainted
only with Men, as carnal as themselves, may possibly think, that when we talk
of things of this nature, we speak Spiritual Romances, and tell them Stories
next to Fables: But those that have been conversant with Persons wh^ ^ave
chosen the better Part, must needs perceive what health and vigor worthy
Receiving adds to their Souls; For what makes them, that they delight in the
Law of the Lord in the inward Man? of (...) What makes them afraid of the very
appearances ^y vil? What makes them converse with God so often (...) Prayer,
and Holy Thoughts? What makes them contented under their Misfortunes and
Disasters? What makes them take such comfort in the Cross of Christ? What makes
them silent, and patient under private injuries? What makes them stand up for
the Glory of God, when they see it profaned and abused? What makes them so
ready to deny themselves? What makes them so solicitous about their Everlasting
State? What makes them kind and tenderhearted, and so easy to be entreated to
that which is Good? What makes them forgo their Interest rather than wrong
their Consciences? Is it not their worthy Receiving? And what better signs can
there be of the Spiritual health, and flourishing state and condition of their
Souls? Christ in this Sacrament does not only communicate to them an empty
Name, or a fruitless Title, but makes them fruitful Trees; and it must needs be
so, for they, that be planted in the House of the Lord, shall flourish in the
Courts of our God, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 92. 13.

II. Who, that seriously considers the Spiritual Judgment we have spoken of,
must not deplore the condition of abundance of nominal Christians, that Receive
worthily? The Persons upon whom this Spiritual Judgment is executed, are not
far from every one of us. To find them out, we need not send you to the Sands
of Africa, nor to the Lybian Deserts, nor to Barbarians, nor to Negro's and
Americans: No, these very Persons, you may see and know at home, and in the
midst of our mixed Congregations. How many have I known, that have come to this
Holy Sacrament, and, after that, have grown worse than ever? Their Drunkenness,
and Lewdness, their Selfishness, and Covetousness, their Extravagant, and
Ungodly Speeches and Actions, which before were but Embrio's and Infants, after
Receiving, have become Giants and strong Men: What an argument is this of their
unworthy Receiving? What an argument of God's Judgment? What an argument, that
God has withdrawn his Holy Spirit from them? What an argument that they are
left to the power of the Devil? O that they were sensible, what a Judgment this
is! O that they knew what a fearful State this is! O that their Eyes were open
to see, that they are in the very suburbs of Destruction! O that the Vail were
taken away, that they might behold the death, the ruin, the misery, the wrath,
the indignation of God, they run into! O thou, that openest the Eyes of the
Blind, and raisest them that are bowed down, and loosest the Prisoners, open
the Eyes of these unhappy Souls, that they may see the precipice they stand
upon, and turn back and save themselves from this untoward Generation.

III. Let us all very seriously believe, that our Souls are capable of
sickness, and misery, and death, as well as our Bodies. Indeed they cannot die,
so as to cease, or to be annihilated, for they are not made of Earth and
matter, and contrary humors and principles, as our Bodies are, but certainly
they can die to God's Favor, and to a sense of Eternity. This Belief, if it be
sound, and strong, cannot but have a mighty influence upon our Lives. If we
believe this, as we ought, with apprehensions of the danger we are in, we shall
be as much afraid of things that will cast our Souls into sickness, or hurry
them into death, and misery, as we are afraid of going to a Pesthouse, where
People lie languishing under their Plague-sores. Ah! sinful Man, how could
thou neglect coming to the Supper of the Lord, if thou did believe, that this
neglect will bring a Consumption on thy Soul? How could thou Receive with an
impenitent Heart, if thou did believe, that thy impenitence will kill thy
Soul? How durst thou venture on those sins, that are poison and venom to thy
Soul? How could thou be so careless of the approaching Judgment of God, if
thou did believe that this carelessness will infallibly bring a Palsy upon
thy Soul? How could sinful delights be so charming to thee, if thou did
believe, that they will throw thy Soul into a violent Fever? Why should thou
make thy Soul sick, when the great Physician offers thee health, and Salvation?
The sickness of thy Soul is much harder to be cured, than the most Chronical
distemper of the Body. Not but that God can heal it, as easily as the other,
and need say no more, than Christ to the Paralytick in the Gospel, Arise, take
up thy Bed, and Walk, and thou art presently whole; but he will not, except
thou be willing too. This thy Spiritual sickness is wilful, that makes Christ
backward to remove it; and if ever thy Soul be cured, it must cost thee great
Mortifications, Rivers of Tears, strong Throws and Agonies, and Troubles in the
inward Man, and who would make work for such a costly and laborious Cure, that
may be well without it? Let the Physician be never so skilful, if the Patient
will not follow his prescriptions, what hopes can there be of his Recovery? If
thou were but willing to follow Christ's prescriptions, thy Cure might be
effected, even after thou have brought thy Soul to the mouth of the Pit, and to
the brink of the Grave; and if you ask me, what these prescriptions are, I must
tell you, that they are these following.

1. Like Newborn Babes to imbibe the sincere Milk of the Word, that you may
grow thereby, if so be ye have tasted, that the Lord is Gracious, to whom
coming, as to a living Stone, disallowed indeed of Men, but chosen of God and
Precious, ye also, as lively Stones, are built up a Spiritual House, an Holy
Priesthood, to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 2, 3, 4. weak and sickly Persons have need of Milk; we use it
in Bodily Diseases, when they have weakened the Body; and, it seems, it is
necessary also for the recovery of Souls, weakened by Sin; but then the Milk is
not such, as Cows, and Sheep, and Goats do give, but it is the Word of the
Lord, which endures for ever; and to apply our selves to pondering, and
meditating in it, and to make it the rule of our life, and manners, is drinking
of that Milk.

2. To pull out the Right Eye, and to cut off the Right Hand, Matthew. 5. 29, 30.
i. e. To shun those Looks, and Actions, which are Provocations to Sin. As he,
that means to recover of Bodily sickness, must avoid all things, that would
irritate the morbifick matter; so he, whose Soul is sick, and would be cured,
must carefully avoid the occasions of those sins, which have made him sick; and
he that would be drunk no more, must avoid the Company that used to persuade
him to intemperance; and he that would be tempted no more by the Harlot, that
drew him in, must not come near her house, Prove. 5. 8.

3. Not to repine at the bitter draughts, Christ gives you to drink of; but to
say, as he in his Agonies, The Cup which my Father has given me, shall not I
drink it? Joh. 18. 11. Whether this bitter Cup be the Cup of Mortification, of
Fasting, of Severities, of being revenged upon thy self, and of deep
Humiliation, or the Cup of Bodily affliction; if he bids you drink of it, it
must be thankfully taken, else expect no cure; and that which ought to
encourage us to drink of it, is this, that this bitterness will end at last in
sweetness unspeakable, and ineffable Consolations.

4. To sell all with the Merchant in the Gospel, to get the Pearl of Price, i.
e. God's love and favor, Matthew. 13. 45, 46. The meaning is, nothing must come
in competition with the great concern of your Salvation, nothing must be
suffered to be laid in the Balance with Eternal Happiness; whatever would
prejudice that, must be rejected, and left to those that know not how to prize
it. To secure that, all must be ventured, and if even Father and Mother should
be the tempters to discourage us from it, even their Friendship must be lost,
and all that we expected from them counted unworthy to be compared with the
Glory, which ere long shall be revealed in us.

The PRAYER,
MOST Glorious God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! Heaven is thy Throne,
and the Earth is thy Footstool. Where is the House that Man can build unto
thee? And where is the Place of thy Rest? Thou dwell not in Temples made
with Hands; yet in an humble, sound, sincere and pure Heart, thou have promised
to fix thy Habitation. Oh, that my Heart were so! When shall I be rid of my
vain, foolish, wicked, and dangerous Thoughts? Oh! When will thou purge and
cleanse this House from the Rubbish which annoys it? When will thou adorn my
Soul with profound Humility, which may be an Invitation of thy Gracious
Presence? How apt am I to look off from Thee! How apt to mind poor transitory
Things! How little am I acquainted with that Fervency of Spirit which I see in
others! Great Physician! Heal thou me: Thou have healed Thousands; Oh, let me
be one of that Number. It may be, of all that Multitude, there was none so
miserable as I am; yet no Spots, no Stains are too hard for Thee to wash out. I
have delighted in my Filthiness, and, with the Swine, taken pleasure in the
Mire. Oh, Let me consider how nobly I am born; and hate that mean and servile
Spirit! I am born of God: So thy Apostle tells me. Oh, Let my God be ever in my
Heart, and let me do God-like Things, even Things that savor of Heaven, and a
Supernatural Temper. Touch my Soul, sweet Jesu! Touch it with the Rays of thy
Favor in this Sacrament, that I may seek after Thee alone, think on Thee
alone, and love Thee alone. Chase away all sinful Sickness from me, and make me
sick of Love; that joyfully, without Tediousness, I may continue in Well-doing.
Thou art a Savior! Be thou so to me; and save me from my Sins. Give me an
healthful Soul, a good Conscience, and a sound Mind, and Purity of Heart; and
with that Purity, frequent Rejoicing in thy Name, Tranquillity of Spirit,
Multitude of holy Thoughts, Innocence of Life, ardent Love, and Everlasting
Charity. Let no Temptations defile me; but let these rather purge, and join,
and unite me to Thee. Give me a constant Zeal for thy Honor and Glory; and let
me be for ever delighted with thy Praises. Amen, Amen.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Damnation, which the Unworthy Receiver Eats and Drinks to himself.
The CONTENTS.
The Word made use of by St. Paul, in threatening Unworthy Receivers, ambiguous
on purpose to fright them from the Sin. How Men eat and drink their Damnation
in this holy Sacrament. The Justice of God, in inflicting Damnation on Unworthy
Receivers, vindicated. The Threatening of Damnation being denounced by St. Paul,
to the profane Corinthians, that came drunk to this holy Ordinance; how that
can be applied to sinful Men in this Age, who are not in a possibility of
coming drunk to the Lord's Table, since the Eucharist is with us administered
and received in the Morning, and most of those who come, do come with some
Preparation. Whence it comes, that Damnation does not fright Men more, it being
the greatest Misery Man is capable of. The Severity of this Threatening puts
Communicants in mind, what a Value and Esteem they are to have for the Death of
Christ. Yet it is no just Discouragement from Approaching with sincere Desires
and Resolutions to become conformable to Christ Jesus. The Prayer.

I. THE Judgment the unworthy Receiver pulls upon himself, is not only
Temporal, but Eternal too. To this End, I have already told you, that the Word
(...), used by the Apostle, in his Threatening denounced against unworthy
Receivers, signifies not only Judgment in general, but also Damnation. And,
indeed, the Holy Ghost does purposely make use sometimes of ambiguous Words,
especially in Threatenings, to rouse Men the more from their Slumber, and to
give them notice, that if the lesser Punishment, threatened in the Expression,
is either delayed, or cannot prevail, that then the greater, included in the
same Word, shall take place. Thus the Word (...) Sheol, in the Old Testament,
used much in Threatenings, import both the Grave, and Hell; and in Comminations
against wicked Men, it does not only signify an untimely Grave, but a far
greater Punishment beyond it; even Eternal Darkness, and Everlasting Howlings;
to show, that if the former Danger cannot fright, the later shall, when it is
too late to repent. And so here; the Word (...), including both Temporal
Judgment, and Damnation, we must believe, the Apostle has some farther
Prospect than this present Life; and that he uses the Word, not only to
terrify the unworthy Receiver with Sickness and Weakness of the Body, and a
Spiritual and Temporal Judgment; but at the same time bids him take heed, that
in case any of the former does not, for Reasons best known to Providence, light
upon him; or, in case the Thoughts of the former do not work upon him, and
transform him into a better Man, he does not run himself into Hellfire, and
Eternal Misery. It is plainly to tell him, that since the Word includes both
Judgments, Temporal, and Eternal, he has no reason to flatter himself, that it
will be only a Temporal judgment; but may justly fear, he shall in our God's
Everlasting Indignation. And therefore our Church retains both Significations
of the Word, in her Exhortation before the Sacrament: So is the Danger great,
if we Receive the same unworthily; for then we are guilty of the Body and Blood
of Christ our Savior, we Eat and Drink our own Damnation, not considering the
Lord's Body, we kindle God's Wrath against us, we provoke him to plague us with
diverse Diseases, and sundry kinds of Death.

II. How an unworthy Communicant eats and drinks Damnation to himself, is the
next thing we are to explain. And this he does this following Way:

1. He makes himself obnoxious to the fierce Anger of the Judge, that is to
decide the Controversy of his Life and Death to all Eternity; and this Judge
is the Son of God, Christ Jesus; who has protested, that Not every one who
says unto him, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that
does the Will of his Father, which is in Heaven; and therefore will say unto
them in the last Day, I know you not; depart from me, ye Workers of Iniquity.
And there is nothing more certain, than that the unworthy Receiver is resolved
not to do the Will of his Father which is in Heaven; whose Will is, that Men
should honor the Son, as they do the Father, Joh. 5. 23. i. e. believe in him,
as they do in the Father; and come to this Sacrament, like Persons redeemed
from their vain Conversation, resolved to war against the Lusts of the Flesh,
like Soldiers of the Cross; and to remember the Death of the Son of God here,
with that Respect and Devotion they owe to God; resolved to live and die with
him, like Persons who have listed themselves under his Colors, with an Intent
to fight against his Enemies, and to take heed they do not dishonor the Son of
God, by an evil Heart of Unbelief, in departing from the Living God. This is
the Will of God; and since Christ, the Judge of the World, is the Person
appointed to examine whether this Will of God has been obeyed, the unworthy
Receiver, dying in Impenitence, and coming before him, and it appearing that he
has nothing less than the Will of God; professed, indeed, that he would do it,
pretended Service and Obedience to him, and yet done his own Will, though
exhorted and moved to do the Will of God by numberless Arguments, Arguments big
with the greatest Charms; what can his Obstinacy cause, but Anger in the Judge,
Anger implacable, since he would continue dead and unconcerned under the lively
Oracles of Heaven, and under the most lively Representations of the Love of
God? The Effect of which Anger, is, the Sentence of Everlasting Condemnation;
Depart from me, ye Cursed, into Everlasting Fire, etc. Matthew. 25. 41. And for
this Reason the Psalmist calls to all, Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye
perish from the right Way, when his Anger shall be kindled but a little, Psalm
2. 11.

2. He puts himself in the same State and Condition, that other ungodly Sinners
are in; to whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever: And that State
and Condition is Wilful Disobedience to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And what the Consequence of this State is, St. Paul explains, 2 These. 1. 7, 8,
9. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in
flaming Fire; taking Vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with Everlasting
Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power. And
that this is the unworthy Receiver's Condition, is manifest from hence, because
he knows not God, i. e. he will not know him, nor obey the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ. He might know that God is an holy God, and has called him to
Holiness, and is not to be put off with blind, lame, and slovenly Devotion; and
yet he will not, nor does he, obey the Gospel, which obliges him, by virtue of
the Grace of God appearing to all Men, to renounce Ungodliness and Worldly
Lusts. This Ungodliness, and these Worldly Lusts, he retains, and cherishes,
and makes much of, notwithstanding his coming to the Lord's Table; and so
putting himself in the same State and Condition that other ungodly Men are, no
wonder if he makes himself liable to the same Damnation.

3. He makes himself fit Company for the Damned, and the Sufferers in Hell.
Those that are in that miserable State, did as he does; and he does as they
did. They suffered the Profits and Pleasures of the World to justle out a
serious Sense of Religion; so does the unworthy Receiver. They had a Form of
Godliness, and denied the Power thereof; so does he. They, some of them at
least, came to this Sacrament with unmortified Lusts, with unsubdued Passions
of Anger and Pride, and with ungovernable Desires after the World, and had no
real Intent to become Proselytes of Righteousness; so does he. They did not
think that the holy Sacrament was such an Inforcive to a Change of Life, as
Divines talked of; so does he. They made no great matter of this Ordinance, but
thought it expedient to comply with the Custom of the Country, and the Usages
of the Church they lived in, and that was all; and so does he. They made
nothing of promising and breaking their solemn Promises to God; no more does
he: And being like them in Manners, no wonder if he be like them in Torments
too: Being their Companion in their Sins, it is just he should be a Companion
with them in their Misery: Having been their Associate in Hypocrisy, it is fit
he should have his Portion with Hypocrites.

III. But here the Sinner, I know, will be apt to clamor, and say, What
Justice can there be in it, that God, for eating a Piece of Bread, and for
drinking a few Drops of Wine irreverently and unworthily, without observing
some Punctilio's, and Nicer Rules of Divinity, should inflict Eternal Damnation
upon a poor Creature? To which I answer,

1. Every supreme and absolute Lawgiver has liberty to set what Penalties he
thinks fit upon the Breaches of his Law. If he will appoint a Punishment that
is very dreadful, for a certain Offense, the Interest of the Subject is, to
keep the Law, not to quarrel with the Sanction. At this rate, a Man might
plead, What great matter is there in opening a Window at Night, to get into an
House, to steal some small, inconsiderable thing in the House? And shall this
be made Felony, without Benefit of the Clergy? All wise Lawgivers have their
Reason, why they inflict severe Penalties upon Offenders; and it is fit that an
Infinite Majesty should both threaten and appoint Punishments suitable to his
Grandeur. Where the Law, and the Sanction of it, is sufficiently known, Men do
not accuse the Lawgiver of of Cruelty, if the Offender runs himself into
Danger; but rather blame the senseless and foolish Man, who, knowing the
Severity of the Sanction, might have easily denied himself in his sinful
Purchase, and secured his Life and Welfare: And the less the Fault is, for
which a severe Punishment is appointed, the more easily might it have been
avoided; and not to avoid it, when the Forbearance was so easy, is an Argument
of strange Presumption; so that the Contempt and Presumption are so severely
punished, and not the Fault it self. Let us apply this to the Case in hand: The
Supreme Lawgiver thinks fit to inflict Damnation on the unworthy Receiver.
Either this unworthy Receiving is a very litt^e Sin, or a very great one: If a
great one, the Punishment cannot be thought too great; for it is proportioned
to the Greatness of the Authority which is despised, and to the infinite and
incomprehensible Mercy which is slighted; not to mention, that unworthy
Receiving is a Complication of many Sins, and more than one go into the
Composition. If it be little, it is more easily shunned; and then the
Presumption comes to be very great, and that Presumption is justly punished
with great Severity. Besides, Who can judge so well of the Contempt, and the
heinousness of it, as he that knows all things, and can best judge how great
the Indignity is which is offered to God in the Sin? Nay, the Greatness of the
Penalty discovers the Greatness of the Impiety, the Foulness of the Crime, the
deep Dye of the Transgression, and the dangerous Tendency of the Offense. A
Christian, from the Greatness of the Penalty, is to conclude, there must be
more in the Sin, than appears to his Eyes; and to infer, that if the Offense
were not greater than ordinary, so severe a Penalty would not have been laid
upon it. So that, at the same time, the Greatness of the Punishment serves to
fright the Sinner from continuing in his Sin, against he comes next to the
Table of the Lord; and is a strong Engagement to him to take nobler
Resolutions, to come with greater Reverence, and with better Purposes, that he
may escape Damnation.

2. That which makes the Penalty just, is, the Reason the Apostle gives, 1 Cor.
11. 29. Because he discerns not the Lord's Body. And what is it, not to discern
the Lord's Body?

1. The unworthy Receiver discerns not, that the Bread and Wine in this
Ordinance, set apart for an holy Use, and consecrated by the Words of
Institution, represents the Body and Blood of the Son of God: Which
Consideration should overawe him into the greatest Reverence and Devotion. He
considers not that by laying his Hands upon the Body of the Son of God, he vows
Faith and Allegiance to him; and therefore, refusing that Faith and Allegiance
in his Actions, is supposed to look upon that Bread as common, which God has
made representative of the greatest Mystery. He considers not, that by eating
of this Bread, his Soul, at the same time, pretends to feed on the Body of
Jesus Christ, and to apply the Mercies and Benefits of his Death; whereby he
brings himself under an Obligation to live as a Member of Christ's Mystical
Body; not according to the Lusts of the Flesh, but according to the Will of him
that bought him at so great a Price. And being, at the same time, unresolved to
do so, he mocks the Lord Jesus Christ, and plays with Vows made in a place
where Angels give their Attendance.

2. He discerns not, he considers not what it is, for God to take a Body upon
him for a poor Sinner's sake, to redeem him from Damnation. For God to take a
Body upon him, is a thing so astonishing, so miraculous, that if the greatest
Prince of the World should voluntarily make himself a Beggar, and wallow in
Dirt and Slime, to deliver a Slave out of Prison in a Foreign Country, it is
not so much, nor a thing of that great Consequence. For God to take a Body upon
him, that he might die for the Sinner, and make him capable of inheriting
Everlasting Bliss, is a Mercy which runs so high, that Reason is at a loss, and
it is enough to make the Mind grow giddy at the Consideration; and
consequently, it is so great an Engagement to devote our selves to the Service
of that God who has done this, that no Obligation can be thought greater, or
more likely to prevail with Men of Common Sense and Ingenuity. And therefore,
for the unworthy Receiver not to discern or consider this, must be a Contempt
that is without a Parallel.

3. He considers not, that it is the Body of his Lord and Master that is
present in the Figure, in this Ordinance; even the Body of that Lord, whose
Servant he is, and owns himself to be. He discerns not, that in eating of the
holy Bread, he acknowledges. Christ Jesus to be his Lord and Master, at whose
Beck he means to run, by whose Command he intends to act, and by whose Will he
designs to be ruled. So that the unworthy Receiver runs himself into strange
Contradictions; He acknowledges at the Receiving of the Eucharist, that Christ
is his Lord and Master, and yet is not willing to be governed by his Laws; his
Lust and sinful Desires still continue his Masters; the Devil is still his
Master, the World is still his Master, and Sin still reigns in his Mortal Body;
Christ is only his Master in show, these in good earnest; he in Complement,
these in sober Sadness: And when this Contempt has all these Aggravations in
it, who can complain that God is unjust in inflicting Damnation on the unworthy
Receiver, if he turns not?

IV. But still they were only the profane Corinthinians, against whom this
Judgment is denounced; Men who came drunk to this holy Sacrament: And since no
Body in this Age can be presumed, or supposed, to come in such a Posture to
this Sacrament, why should the Penalty mentioned by St. Paul, be enforced upon
Men now living, who are not guilty of the same Sin, and in no possibility
almost of committing it, i. e. of coming drunk and disguised to the Lord's
Table? To which, I answer:

1. Not to mention, that Whatever things are written afore-time, are written
for our Learning, it is a great Mistake, that the Apostle restrains the Penalty
to being drunk with Wine, or any other strong Liquor, in the Use of this
Ordinance. He applies it, not only to this Sin, but also to Want of
Self-Examination, and not to discern the Lord's Body; as will appear to any Man
that compares the 28th and 29th Verses in that Chapter; I mean, the 11th of the
First Epistle to the Corinthians. And besides, Though their coming drunk to
this Sacrament gives Occasion to the Discourse, yet he makes a general
Inference, or Conclusion; He that, or Whosoever eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks Damnation to himself. So that if there be more Ways of unworthy
Receiving, than coming drunk to this Ordinance, it will follow, that they all
come under the reach of this Penalty.

2. If one wilful Sin, or Sin allowed of, or Sin of Temper, Custom and
Inclination, which a Man is not heartily resolved to strive against, makes him
an unworthy Receiver, another must be supposed to do the same; for all Sins
allowed of, are of the same Nature, though the Object be changed: And
therefore, whether a Man be loath or unresolved to part with his drunken Cups,
or unresolved to mortify his Envy, or Malice, or Pride, or Hatred, or
Revengeful Desires, or Opprobrious Language, or Injustice, or Cheating, or
Lying, etc. the Change of the Object makes no Alteration in the unworthy
Receiving; and therefore, no Alteration in the Penalty. If a Corinthian
Christian, that professed himself a Member of Christ's Church had come drunk to
the Lord's Table to Day, and come again in the same Posture, and in the same
Disguise, the Lord's Day following, there is no Dispute of it, but coming again
with the same Sin upon his Back, would have made himself an unworthy Receiver:
And if not parting with a known Sin, against he came next, made him an unworthy
Communicant, it stands to reason, that he who is given to lying, and to
Cheating, or to any other known Sin, and comes to the Sacrament without a full
purpose to reform it, draws the same Guilt upon himself, that the profane
Corinthians did. It Is true, Coming with the Guilt of other Sins allowed of, is
not so scandalous a thing as coming drunk; but with respect to God, who is
offended by it, and against whose Laws the Sin is committed, they are of the
same Nature with Coming disguised, or drunk, to the Lord's Table; and therefore
such Men are liable to the same Penalty.

3. Though a vicious Person in this Age cannot well come drunk to this
Sacrament, because it is commonly received in the Morning, and most Men make
some little Preparation, and approach sober, yet he may come drunk with evil
Habits of Sin; and then he comes drunk with evil Habits, when he is so besotted
with the Sins which Custom, or Company, or something else, has made sweet, and
easy, and pleasant to him, that whatever is feigned and pretended, as to
general Purposes, to mend his Life before he receives, yet he is not heartily
resolved to part with such particular Sins as he is very prone to; and all the
Love and Charity set before him ^n the Lord's Supper, cannot work in him a
Change of Mind, or an unfeigned Resolution to use the proper Means to ^hake off
the Sin which is become natural to him: And whether a Man come to the Sacrament
drunk in a natural Sense, or drunk in a spiritual Sense; whether he come to it
drunk with Wine, or drunk with Sin, there is no great difference in the Crime,
the Sin is still the same; especially, since all those who lay claim to the
Promise of Pardon and Salvation, are peremptorily commanded to cleanse
themselves from all Filthiness, both of Flesh and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1.

The Preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. HEre I cannot but take notice, how little the things which are not seen
with our Bodily Organs, though of the greatest Consequence, are minded by the
Generality, even those that pretend to believe them. Damnation is, certainly,
the most dreadful thing imaginable; yet most Men make so little of it, that the
Fear of losing Twenty or Thirty Pounds discomposes and disorders them more than
the Apprehension that they shall lose the Light of God's Countenance for ever.
What can we imagine to be the Reason of it? Surely, it must be, because it is
not seen: And therefore People do not heartily believe it, nor seriously think
of it. And yet, when a thing is very certain, and God has spoke it, and we
have all the Assurances that the thing is capable of, that it is so, though it
cannot be seen with the Eyes of Flesh; yet being certain, the Thoughts of it
surely might effect, and work upon, and discompose the Soul, in a manner, as
much as Sight and Sense. But here lies the Misery; the greatest part of Men are
unthinking Animals; they believe, but think not; they think, but not of that
which concerns them most. This makes Damnation only a big Word to set off a
violent Passion, but it frights not; nay, is so far from frighting, that not a
few do barbarously wish it to their own Souls; yet still, not only Faith, but
Reason, says, there is such a thing; and the Justice of a Supreme Being
requires so much: So that he that will be frighted with Damnation, must first
deliberately examine the Reasons which may convince him of the Being and
Reality of it, and then reflect and ruminate upon the Terror and Consequences
of it: And if this be done, and the Divine Assistance, which must cooperate
with all spiritual Endeavors, to make them effectual, be heartily implored,
Sin, Vanity and Lust, and foolish Desires must necessarily fall, and faint
before it, and a Change of Life cannot but follow, and a Man's Carefulness to
please God must needs be the happy Consequences of it.

II. The Penalty God inflicts upon unworthy Receivers, shows how God would have
us value and esteem what he has done for us in Christ Jesus. The Death of
Christ for poor Sinners God looks upon to be so great a thing, that he expects
that every Soul, upon hearing of it, and sufficient Demonstration of the Truth
of it, should be so surprised with the Mercy, as immediately to throw off the
Works of Darkness, and put off the Old Man, with all his deceitful Lusts, and
to become an obedient Subject of Christ's Kingdom. God sets that high Value
upon it, that he expects that every Soul, to whom the News comes, immediately
lay Force upon the Kingdom of Heaven, rejoice that he is made capable of
Pardon, and an Inheritance incorruptible; and for the Glory set before him,
fall to work, and seek first the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof:
And therefore, for any Person who professes himself a Christian, to entertain
this Message coldly, lazily, and with Indifferency, is an Act so unworthy, so
derogatory from the Sublimity and Excellency of the Favor, that we need not
wonder if he lashes this low, slavish and pitiful Temper of ours with the
severest Vengeance. Can we think, because we have no extraordinary Esteem of
the Mercy, that God will set light by it because we do? Oh! Let us entertain it
with the profoundest Respect, and the deepest Veneration; and think our selves
the happiest Creatures living, that we have this Act of Divine Bounty and
Charity revealed to us. But then, it is impossible we should think our selves
so, except we walk worthy of the glorious News, and transcribe on our Lives the
glorious Zeal, and Fervor, and Sincerity of the Apostles, and Primitive
Believers.

III. As this severe Threatening, denounced against unworthy Receivers, is the
strongest Dissuasive possible from Eating and Drinking unworthily, so it is no
just Discouragement to Receive with sincere Desires, and Resolutions to become
conformable to Christ's Holiness. God frights from sinning, not from doing
well; from wronging our own Souls, not from Endeavors to save them; from
Impenitence, not from true Repentance. All that is to be done, Christian, in
this Sacrament, in order to Receiving worthily, is, to lay and prostrate thy
self at the Feet of Jesus, and to cry, Lord, What will thou have me to do?
Speak, Lord, for thy Servant hears. Such humble Souls escape the Danger, and
may be confident of a gracious Look from the King of Saints. But then, if we
fall down before the Throne and the Lamb, and make this Profession, let it come
from the Heart, and let our Tongues speak what our Minds think, and our Wills
mean to stand to; and let our Desires to be one with him, be such as Simplicity
dictates, lest our Hearts and Tongues not going together, we may be found
Liars, and fall into Condemnation. And, Oh that every unworthy Receiver would
consider what Damnation means! Consider it, thou dull and careless Man; and
then tell me, whether Christ requires any thing unreasonable of thee to prevent
it? Thou that runnest from an House on fire, and from a Land-flood, or Deluge,
that threatens to overwhelm thee; wilt not thou do all thou can to escape
Damnation, that Deluge of God's Wrath, and that Fire of his Anger which no Man
can quench? Should this Damnation be thy Portion at last, we may easily imagine
what thy Wishes will be; the same that all inconsiderate Souls are very full
of, when they have ruined and undone themselves: Oh, that I had been wise
before the Fact, and come to the Lord's Table with a better Frame; put on the
Lord Jesus, and made his Virtues and Graces my Study, my Delight, and my
Pattern! But these are the Wishes of Fools: And, I did not think it would come
to this pass, is a Saying, which we look upon as a Character of a weak, and a
Childish Understanding. Both he that receives unworthily, and he that never
received yet, both have yet Opportunity to turn from their evil Ways.
Therefore, Seek ye the Lord, while be may be found: Call ye upon him, while he
is near. Let the Wicked forsake his Way, and the unrighteous Man his Thoughts,
and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon him; and to our
God, for he will abundantly pardon, Isa. 55. 6, 7.

The PRAYER.
O Lord, Great, and Incomprehensible! Slow to Anger, and great in Power; and
who wilt not at all acquit the Wicked! Thy Way is in the Whirlwind, and in the
Storm; and the Clouds are the Dust of thy Feet. Thou rebukest the Sea, and
make it dry, and driest up mighty Rivers. The Mountains quake at thy Word,
and the Hills melt, and the Earth is burnt at thy Presence; yea, the World, and
all they that dwell therein. Who can stand thine Indignation? And who can abide
the Fierceness of thine Anger; where thy Fury is poured out like Fire, and the
Rocks are thrown down by thine Arm? Who would not fear thee, O thou great
Preserver of Men! Yet thou, Lord, art good, and a Strong Hold in the Day of
Trouble; and thou know them that trust in thee. In my Approaches to thy holy
Table, let me so reflect upon thy Mercy, as not to forget thy Justice. Let me
so look upon thy Friendship, as to cast an Eye, withal, upon thy Severity to
thine Enemies. Thou offerest me thy Friendship in this Ordinance: How great is
thy Goodness! Oh, let me entertain the Offer with Admiration! God will dwell
with simple Man, and therefore requires a Temple; a Temple, not made with hew'n
Stones, not of polished Marble, not of painted Walls; but of living and shining
Gems, and of such Golden Ornaments as Rust cannot touch, and Dust cannot
blacken; a Temple purified with the Fire of Love, trimmed with an holy
Conversation, and decked with variety of Virtues. Make my Soul, I beseech thee,
such a Temple, and come and fix thy Tents here for ever. Thou art the Judge to
whom I am accountable for my Receiving: Let me remember, that as that did
rain down Manna from Heaven upon thy People, so thou did rain down Fire and
Brimstone too upon Sodom and Gomorrah. Let me so rejoice in the Mercies thou
rainest down upon me in this Sacrament, as to fear thy Judgments in case I
abuse those Mercies. If of every idle Word Men shall give an Account in the
Great Day, what Account will they have to give of profaning this sublime and
mysterious Ordinance! If the Dust of thy Apostles Feet shall bear witness in
that Day against the Obstinate and Impenitent, what a Witness will the Body of
the Son of God be against those who would not be warmed with the Sight and
Contemplation of it into Virtue! Let these things sink deep into my inward
Parts, and teach me so to triumph in thy Praise, as to tremble at thy Presence!
Yet, Oh, let not my Goodness be the Effect of a slavish Fear of Damnation, so
much as of Love and Delight in thy holy Ways! Let Kindness do more with me,
than Terror; and let my Heart melt more with the Sight of thy Condescension,
than with the Sight of thy Flaming Sword. Teach me to serve thee with Pleasure
and Affection; and let the Glory of thy Name be the End of all my holy
Exercises. Let thy Love be ever fixed in my Heart; and be thou my Rest, my
Tranquillity, my Peace, my Meat, my Drink, my Food, my Treasure, my Possession,
and my Portion, for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Preparation; And First, of Meditation of Christ's Passion.
The CONTENTS.
Preparation for this Holy Sacrament reduced to Five Heads. Meditation of
Christ's Passion, with reflections on our Selves, Self-Examination, ^udging our
Selves, Self-Resignation, and Devotions suitable to the Occasion. Christ
himself meditated of his own Passion, before he administered this Sacrament to
his Disciples. Meditation of Christ's Passion, useful to bring things to our
Minds we did not think of before, to inflame the Soul with the Love of Jesus,
and to make us remember his Death with a quicker Sense. A Paraphrase upon the
XXII and XXIII Chapters of St. Luke's Gospel. What God said to the Jews, may be
the more justly said to us Christians, What could have been done more to my
Vineyard, that I have not done in it? A vast difference betwixt reading of
Christ's Passion, and meditating of it. Some Rules and Cautions about this
exercise of Meditation. The Prayer.

I HAving in the foregoing Chapters explained the Doctrine, Nature, Use, End
and Design of this (...). It will be necessary to direct the (...) Preparations
for this Blessed Ordinance. (...) may be said to comprehend.

1. Meditation of Christ's Passion, with Reflections (...) ^n our Selves. 2.
Self-Examination. 3. Judging our Selves. 4. Self-Resignation. 5. Devotion
suitable to the occasion.
I begin with Meditation of Christ's Passion, called by Damian, Damian in spec.
Monach.
The Believer's Refuge in the hour of Temptation, his Shade in the heat and
sweat of Afflictions, the everlasting Fuel of Divine Love, and the best Sauce
or Remedy in all Troubles and Vexati^ns. And Christ himself seems to have shown
us an example of seasoning our Hearts with this previous Meditation; for before
he instituted this Sacrament, before he distributed the Bread and Wine to the
Disciples in the Eucharist, he contemplates his own Sufferings in the Paschal
Lamb, he ate of. He saw on the Table a Lamb dead, flead, and roasted at the
Fire: This suggested to him, how himself was, in a few hours after, to be
killed, and scourged, and feel the heat and fire of mighty Torments. He saw his
Friends eat the Paschal Lamb in haste, and he could not but reflect what haste
his Enemies would make to apprehend him. In the unleavened Bread and the bitter
Herbs that were set before him; he saw the Gall and Vinegar he was to taste;
and if the Disciples, at that time, did eat the Passover with staves in their
hands, that could not but put him in mind of the Cross to which he was to be
nailed.

II. What it is that makes Meditation of Christ's Passion necessary, as an act
of Preparation for this Holy Sacrament, we shall easily know, if we consider,

1. Meditation brings things to our Minds, we did not think of before. Though
we know before, that Christ was unjustly accused by the Jews, beaten buffeted,
crowned with Thorns, inhumanly murdered; yet Meditation discovers things to
us, we took no great notice of before, it helps us to enlarge upon the passages
of his Passion; and these cannot but be very instructive to our Minds. This
puts us in mind of the dignity of the Person that suffered all this; how it was
not a mere Man, not a mortal King, not an Angel, not one of the Higher Orders
of Ministering Spirits, but the Son of God that laid down his Life, a Life more
precious than the Lives of all created Beings put together. This puts us in
mind of the indignity of the Persons, for whom he suffered* what vile Creatures
they were, Creatures of whom he could expect no advantage, and fear no danger,
and such as were his Enemies. This puts us in mind of the vast multitude of his
troubles and miseries, how his Body did not only suffer, but his Soul too, how
he suffered in his Habit and Dress, by having it pulled off from him, and
divided among the ruder Soldiers, how he suffered in his Honor, and
Reputation, by being called a Glutton, a Wine-bibber, a Blasphemer, Stir^ing up
of the People, and possessed with a Devil; how he suffered in his Wisdom, by
being called Impostor, and treated like a Fool, and Madman; how he suffered in
his Power, by being accused as a Magician, as one that dealt with a Familiar,
and was in league with the Prince of Devils; how all sorts of Persons did
contribute to his Suffering, a Disciple, whom he had nourished, and brought up
in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, Kings, and Governors, Judges,
Harlots, Soldiers, High Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, Ecclesiastics, Seculars,
Jews and Gentiles, Men and Women. This puts us in mind, how every Member of his
Body was put to grievous pain; how his Head was crowned with Thorns; his Hair
plucked off by the rude usage he endured; his Cheeks beaten; his Face sullied;
his Back crushed; his Neck and Arms tied with Cords; his Shoulders bruised by
the Cross; his Hands and Feet pierced with Nails; his Side opened with a Lance,
and his whole Body made black and blue with stripes: How all Senses suffered,
his Eyes seeing the Mockeries of the multitude; his Ears hearing the
Blasphemies of his Enemies; his Smell forced to endure the stench of dead
Bodies on Mount Calvary; his Taste tormented with Thirst, and what is worse,
with Gall; and his feeling with variety of blows. This puts us in mind, how his
Soul endurd more, far more yet, than his Senses, the Sins of Mankind lying like
an heavy load upon her: This represents how that was afflicted with a Sense of
God's Anger against sin, and with the Damnation of thousands, that would not
prevent their ruin; and how, as the sins of Mankind were without number, so
his Grief and Sorrow was without measure. This puts us in mind, how his Pain
and Torments became more pungent, and afflictive, by reason of the delicacy of
his Complexion, how his imagination being most lively, had therefore a quicker
sense of Misery, how his Torments were without any alloy, differing in this
case from the Torments of the Martyrs of old, who had great comfort administered
to them in their Sufferings, Comforts so powerful, that they walked on glowing
Coals, as on a Bed of Roses, and in the midst of Flames, had a cooling Dew
sprinkled upon them: This suggests how he drunk the bitter Cup without mixture,
without a drop of Honey to sweeten it; and how this makes him the Martyr of all
Martyrs, and the King of all afflicted Saints; and upon that account may be
said to have endured more, than all Men put together, ever suffered in this
World. This puts us in mind, with what affection he suffered, how he chose to
suffer, for the Joy and Comfort he should thereby procure to all sincere
Believers, how Love to Men's Souls engaged him to these Sufferings; and whereas
a few drops of his Blood might have served turn, to redeem Mankind, he would,
notwithstanding all this, to testify his infinite Love, shed every drop of
Blood in his Body for their sakes. This puts us in mind with what fervency and
earnestness he went to meet his Cross, and in order thereunto bid the Traitor
make haste, and do quickly what he designed to do, and with what alacrity he
embraced his Torments; and therefore sung a Hymn with his Disciples, before he
was apprehended by the Murderers, to show the joy he took in laying down his
Life for his Sheep. Meditation does the Painters work, which embellishes the
courser Draught, gives it Features, Lineaments, curious Strokes, and all its
proper Dresses, whereby the Mind is signally edified, and affected with the
Picture.

2. Meditation of Christ's Passion enflames the Soul with the Love of Jesus. At
Patras, a City of Achaia, P. Jean. Bapt. de St. Jure de la Connois. and de
l'amour de nostre Seign. Live. 1. Sect. 2.
there lived a Heathen Priest, Coresus by name, who, intending to Marry, set
his Affections upon one Callirrhoe, a Virgin of that Town, whom he courted, and
loved entirely, but the more he courted her, the more refractory she was, till
she even abused him and reproached him, and shut the door against him. The
Priest, seeing no way to compass his designs, consults his Oracle, and Idol,
but receives no answer. In the mean while, a killing sickness seized the Town,
a Distemper which made People mad, and dye raving. The evil being become
universal, and spreading daily more and more, some of the chief Men of the
Town, resolve to send an Embassy to one of the Heathen Gods, in another City,
which gives them this Answer. That this Plague should not cease, till one
Callirrboe* a Virgin in that Town, were offered in Sacrifice, or some Person
for her. The news of the Oracle being noised about the Town, Callirrboe goes to
all her Friends, to see whether any would suffer for her, but finding none so
fond, she prepares for death, and coming forth at the day appointed, dressed in
her Funeral Robes, Coresus that was to be the Executio^er, appears with his
Sword to cut off her Head, for it was his Office upon such dreadful
Solemnities; but as he is preparing to give the fatal blow, his Bowels began to
yearn; and to destroy a Person whom he had loved with most cordial affection,
was so severe a trial to him, that rather than be guilty of so barbarous a
Fact, in the presence of the whole Assembly, he runs the drawn Sword into his
own Bowels; and as the Blood was now issuing in Rivers from his Body, professes
to the Damfel that he dyed for her, so sincere, so strong, so fervent was his
Love. Callirrhoe astonished at the sight, and confounded with the enterprise,
her stubborn Heart melts, and now would have saved his Life with her own, but
it was too late; yet to make him amends, her Love to him on a sudden grows so
violent, that she resolved not to outlive him, and at the same instant, made
her Life a Sacrifice to bear him company. Meditation of Christ's Passion
produces, in a manner, the same effect, for as it represents Christ's dying for
the stubborn sinner, and ^ying for love of him, it raises reciprocal flames in
the considerate Soul. It puts the case, Suppose there should be a King most
Wise, most Rich, most Potent, most Beautiful, most Gracious, in the very flower
of his age, who being about to Marry, should cast his Eyes and Love upon a poor
Country Maid, his Subject, and withal very much deformed, homely, ignorant,
despised, and disregarded by the meanest Men, adorned with no good Quality,
that should cause attraction, and solemnly Marry her, What an obligation would
that be to that poor infirm Creature, advanced to a Throne from nothing, from
worse than nothing, to entertain that Royal Husband with mavelous respect,
and to behave her self in his Presence with all possible Reverence, and Love,
and Modesty, considering what she has been, and what she is come to by his
means? What an obligation to Treat him with all Respect, Honor, and Humility?
What an obligation to love him with a most ardent, most tender, and most
affectionate Love, and to be most true and faithful to him, loving none like
him, who has deserv^d so much at her hands? What an obligation to commend and
praise him, and to express her Sense of his unspeakable Favor to her? What an
obligation, when he is sick, to tend him, to be about his Bed, to declare her
Sorrow, and Grief, and Compassion by her Tears, especially since he has
humbled himself beyond example to espouse her? What an obligation, when he is
absent, to speak of him, to long for him, and to be impatient for his return?
What an obligation to sing his Virtues, his Condescension, his Mercy, and his
Charity, and to magnify his Wisdom, his Goodness, his Beauty, and his Love to
her? What an obligation, to give him content in all things, and to deport her
self every where, so as to please him? What an obligation, if she have
committed the least offense, to think of it with great regret and remorse, to
beg his Pardon, and to implore his Mercy? What an obligation to endure any
thing, any trouble, any cross, any inconvenience for his sake, and to think her
self happy, that she is in a capacity to suffer any thing for his Name? What an
obligation to be entirely subject to him, and to yield to all things he desires
of her? Finally, What an obligation to think her self most happy in his love,
and to rejoice in being thus advanced by him, to a state she could never have
wished, or hoped for? Meditation having put this case, applies it to the
present occasion, and says, Thou, O my Soul, thou, art that poor, despicable,
contemptible Maid, that the Monarch of the Universe, the Wisest, the most
Potent, the greatest Prince in the World, did fall in love with. There was no
Beauty, no Wisdom, no good Qualities, no Perfection, no Amiableness in Thee,
for which he should think of thee for his Spouse; and that which surpasses all
admiration, this Sovereign Prince, this Prince of Princes, could not gain this
wretched Maiden but by enduring a Thousand Torments, by spilling of his Blood,
and hazarding his Life, and he freely and cheerfully Sacrificed himself to
obtain thy Love. He required no Dowry of thee, for he was infinitely Rich, and
thou miserably Poor. He loved thee not in a foolish Passion, for he is
infinitely Wise He chose thee not for his Pleasure, for thou were defiled to a
Prodigy, and himself is happy, and was happy in himself, from all Eternity; nor
did he Marry thee by force, for he is Omnipotent; but it was mere Love, mere
Charity, mere Compassion, that he set his Affections upon thee; and by his
Marrying thee, he has ennobled thee, aggrandiz'd thy Fortune, made thee Wise,
and Rich, and Great, and Beautiful, and have not thou reason to love him with
all thy heart, and with all thy strength? And by such Meditations of Christ's
Passion, the Soul is enflamed with the Love of the Lord Jesus. Add to all this,

3. What can be a more proper preparative for this Sacrament, wherein the
Passion and sufferings of our Lord, are most solemnly remembered, than a
previous Meditation of his Sufferings; For hereby the Soul will be more
expedite in that remembrance, and remember that Death, not only with greater
facility, but with greater Sense, and greater Affections too. It is so with
Men, that are to speak in Public, they premeditate what they are to say, and
think much of the thing they are to be upon, when they come before the
Assembly; and I see no reason, but this may be a good preparative for acting in
public too. Certainly, he that actuates his Faculties thus in private, will be
better able to exercise them in public; for hereby the Heart is seasoned, and
when it appears before God in this Ordinance, the sense, which the private
Meditation has lest upon it, fits it the better for participation of Christ's
Merits. This previous Meditation softens the Earth, makes it fit for the
Master's use, and for his sowing the good Seed of Grace in it, when the Soul
comes into the Courts of the Lord. And as he, that means to Pray with good
attention, in public, must not forget his secret Prayers at home; so he that
will reflect with comfort on his Savior's Death at Church, must meditate of it
in his Closet, one helps the other; and if these go hand in hand together, it
is the way to put the Soul in an excellent Frame. These private Meditations are
the Dresses of the Soul, she puts on at home, that she may look more beautiful
and amiable, when she comes to stand in her bridegroom's Presence in the Temple.

III. How this Meditation is to be ordered, and managed, must be in great
measure lest to the Wisdom and Discretion of the Party concerned; yet I should
think, that the best way would be to lay the Holy Evangelists before us, who
all have given exact account of their Master's Sufferings, especially in the
last Scene of his Life here on Earth, and to make Spiritual Reflections, either
on the whole History in general, or on some of the principal Points contained
in it. To give the Reader an account of the Proposal, I will present him with a
Scheme of Meditations on the XXII and XXIII Chapters of St. Lukes Gospel, which
I do the rather pitch upon, because, I think this Evangelist has given us the
fullest account of the Circumstances and Particulars of Christ's last
Sufferings; and I shall go from Verse to Verse, not so much to prescribe mine
own way, as to give the devout Reader an hint, how he may improve those
Historical Passages, and enlarge upon them, according to the Gifts, parts and
abilities, God has given him.

The XXII Chapter of St. Luke's Gospel Paraphrased.
1. Now the Feast of Unleavened Bread ^rew nigh, which is called the Passover.
BEhold, O my Soul; How busy the Jews are to remove all Leaven out of their
Houses against the Passover! How loath have thou been these many years to remove
the Leaven of Vanity out of thy Heart, when thou have gone to meet thy Blessed
Redeemer! What excuses have thou framed! What Apologies have thou made, that
thou might not part with that Apple of thine Eye! What a Benjamin has it
been to thee! How unwilling have thou been to quit it! Ungrateful Creature!
Can thou name the Name of Christ, and keep that, which will render that Name,
and all the Sweets contained in it, unsavory, and insipid to thee!

2. And the Chief Priests and Scribes sought, how they might kill him, for they
feared the People.
AND has not this been thy Case, O my Soul? Have not thou feared Men, more
than God? Have not thou been more afraid of Dust and Ashes, than of the Holy
One of Israel? How often could thou have dispensed with God's seeing thy
folly, if it could have been concealed from the knowledge of Men! And when thou
have avoided and shunned a Sin, has it not been more for fear of blemishing thy
Credit and Reputation in the World, than of love to the Law of God? Has not
Temporal Interest restrained thee from Sin, more, than God's All-seeing Eye?
Think how unkindly, and unworthily thou have dealt with thy best and greatest
Friend, and act for the future upon nobler Principles.

3. Then entered Satan into Judas, surnamed Iscariot, being of the number of the
Twelve.
O My Soul! Though thou have not been guilty of the formal Act of Judas's
Crime, yet have not thou too often opened the door to thy mortal Enemy? Have
not thou given him invitations to enter into thee by carnal Security, and
taking too great liberty in thy conversation? When thou have left thy self
without a Guard, and have not watched over thy Senses, has not this been an
Item to the Serpent to creep into the Garden, and to hide himself among the
Bushes? Nay, when thou have given way to his evil suggestions, hugged his
temptations, and embraced the evil, he has prompted thee to; when thou have
harbored Malice against thy Neighbor, when thy Heart has swelled with Pride,
when thy Breast has been filled with Envy, when thou have delighted in Froth,
and idle Talk; have not these been Signs of Satan's entering into thy Heart?
When in hearing the Word, in Prayer, and in other Devotions, thou have admitted
foolish, impertinent, frivolous Thoughts into thy Mind, and kept out
Considerations suitable to the Duty thou were engaged in; was not this to give
the Devil Admittance into thy Bosom? And shall so dangerous a Guest lodge any
longer there? Oh, bid him be gone, that thy House, and all thou have, may be in
safety.

4. And he went his Way, and communed with the Chief Priests and Captains, that
he might betray him unto them.
AND what pains have thou taken, O my Soul, to betray thy blessed Redeemer,
when thou have joined with his Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil?
When thou have lain in the World's Arms, and solaced thy self with its Airy
Pleasures, in despite of all Christ's Calls and Entreaties to the contrary?
What has thy living in Strife and Variance been, but a Conspiring with the
Devil, against the Holy Jesus, that Prince of Peace? When thou have been
peremptory and resolute to satisfy the Lusts of the Flesh, and its inordinate
Desires, has not this been exposing the excellent Religion thou professest, to
the Contempt and Scorn of Men? And how much does this want of betraying thy
Master that bought thee, and thy God who redeemed thee?

5. And they were glad, and covenanted to give him Money.
HOW have thou rejoiced in Sin, O my Soul! How have thou been tickled with the
Infirmities and Reproaches of thy Neighbor! How merry have thou been in ill
Company! How glad when thou have heard of the Fall or Trouble of a Person thou
have had a Grudge against! What Pleasure have thou taken in fantastic Dresses,
in following the sinful Humors of vain Men, and gratifying thy foolish Lusts!
How have thou laughed when thou should have mourned, and sported thy self
with Actions that should have drawn Rivers of Tears from thine Eyes! How merry
have thou been among thy Cups! And how much more has idle Talk, and sinful
Lusts, and profane Jests, raised and cheared thy Spirits, than the most
affectionate Sermon! What strange Enterprises has Money tempted thee to! What
sinful Compliance, what Contempt of the Will of God, have thou been put upon by
the Hopes of Gain: And how much more real Joy have thou felt in a full Purse,
than a rich Conscience!

6. And he promised, and sought Opportunity to betray him unto them, in the
Absence of the Multitude.
HOW faithful is the unhappy Judas in performing his Promise! Yet how many
Promises have thou made to God, O my Soul; and have not regarded them! What
Promises of Love; what Promises of Obedience; what Promises of Reformation!
When thou have been sick, what Vows of Seriousness, what Protestations of
Cautiousness, and Fear of offending God for the future! Yet when God has
restored thee; when the Almighty has been so favorable to thee, as to give
thee the Desires of thy Heart; how careless have thou been of thy strongest
Promises! How regardless of the strictest Engagements! How negligent of thy
Duty! How have thou returned to thy former Vomit; and, with the Swine that was
washed, to her wallowing in the Mire.

7. Then came the Day of Unleavened Bread, when the Passover must be killed.
HOW many Easter-Days have thou lived to see, O my Soul! Days, when thou
should have risen with Christ from the Death of Sin, and applied thy self
unto a Life of Righteousness! Yet thou art the same still, thou were so many
Years ago. What Lust have thou mortified, what Corruption have thou killed,
what darling Desires have thou sacrificed for Christ? Art not thou as dull and
as dead in God's Service, as thou have been heretofore? The Sins that thou have
left, was it the Love of God, or the Change of thy Condition, that made thee
abandon them? On the blessed Day of thy Savior's Resurrection, may be, thou
have been devout and serious; but what strange Liberty have thou given thy self
soon after! How has thy Piety and Goodness died again, and thy Carefulness to
please God given up the Ghost, and expired!

8. And he sent Peter and John, saying, Go and prepare us the Passover, that we
may eat.
HOW often, O my Soul, has God sent his Spirit and his Messengers to thee,
with an Order to prepare and meet thy God by a serious Repentance! Yet thou
have either resisted his Spirit, or disobliged his Messengers, or undervalued
their Summons. How little have thou regarded the Condescension of so great a
God! How little have thou minded the Favor God did thee, in visiting so
worthless a Creature! Do not thou remember how thou have pretended that thou
had either Farms to see, or Oxen to buy, or an House to look after; and thus
have put off thy God, that would fain have gathered thee, as an Hen does her
Brood under her Wings.

9. And they said unto him, Where will thou, that we prepare?
HOW careful are the Disciples, that they may do nothing contrary to their
Master's Will! How do they enquire after the very place, where he would have
them prepare! O my Soul! How little have thou been concerned, whether thy God
were pleased, or not! Thou have been so far from observing the Circumstantials
of Religion, that thou have not minded the Substance. How have thou rushed into
Sin, as the Horse rushes into the Battle; without being sollicitous or
concerned about offending God! How little have thou enquired what thy Lord and
Master requires of thee! How contentedly ignorant have thou been of his Laws,
and how loath to know thy Master's Will, that thou might not be obliged to do
it!

10. And he said unto them, Behold, when you are entered into the City, there
shall a Man meet you, bearing a Pitcher of Water; follow him into the House,
where he enters in.
HOW strangely does Providence order things! Just at the Disciples entering into
the City, God orders this Man to meet them! How wonderfully, O my Soul, has
God made the Second Causes to meet for thy good! How has God turned such Men's
Hearts toward thee, into Mercy and Compassion! How often, when thou have been
in Trouble, has God sent thee a Deliverer! How often, when thou have seen no
probability of Help, has God come in with his Salvation: Yet how careless have
thou been of his Providence! How apt have thou been to ascribe these Events to
Second Causes! Do not thou blush to think thou should be so dull, as not to
see God in such Dispensations!

11. And ye shall say to the good Man of the House, The Master says unto thee,
Where is the Guest-Chamber, where I shall eat the Passover with my Disciples?
HOW often, O my Soul, has thy great Master attempted to enter into thy Heart,
and to make that his Guest-Chamber! And how surly, how ill-natured, how
impudent have thou been in refusing so great a Guest, whose Presence would have
enriched thee with infinite Treasures! Temporal Profit, Honor, Ease and
Pleasure have but gently knocked at the Door, and thou have listened, and
heard, and run to open to them. See where thy Love and thy Treasure lies;
Christ has stood without, knocking and calling, Open to me, my Sister, my
Spouse; for my Locks are wet with Dew: But how loath have thou been to rise from
thy Bed of State, or from thy Couch of Luxury, to let in that Heavenly Friend!
Were it not just, when thy Prayers knock at Heaven Gate, that he should fling
them back into thy Face, and say, As thou would not hear when I called, so
shall thou call, and I will not hear?

12. And she shall show you a large Upper Room, furnished; there make ready.
AND, O my Soul, has not thy Lord shown thee very often a large Upper Room,
even Heaven it self, where the Supper of the Lamb is to be kept, and to which
thou have been invited! Yet how have thou preferred this Dunghill Earth before
it! How contemptible have those Everlasting Mansions been in thine Eyes! How
have thou hugged thy Plenty here below, and how contentedly have thou lived
without any Assurance that the Eternal Riches shall fall to thy share! How
little has that Heaven affected thee! How little have thy Affections been
stirred with the Thoughts of it! How often have thou looked upon that glorious
Place, without any Longings to be there, or to feast there with thy great
Redeemer!

13. And they went, and found as he had said to them, and made ready the
Passover.
THis is the Property of God, that he cannot lie: If he says or fore-tells
things, they must necessarily come to pass: Yet how have thou lived, O my Soul,
as if thy God were false to his Word! Thou have lived in Sin, and yet have
believed that God would receive thee at last into Glory! Thou have embraced
Follies, which he has protested shall exclude thee from the Kingdom of Heaven,
and yet have fancied that thou shall be happy! What is this, but to make God a
Liar, and to hope that he will not be so good as his Word? When thou have hoped
for Heaven without Holiness, for a Crown without Conquest, for an Everlasting
Reward without bearing the Heat and Burden of the Day, and for the same
Felicity the Son of God enjoys, without imitating him in his Meekness,
Patience, Humility and Charity. Have not thou plainly flattered thy self, that
God would break his Word, and act contrary to his Promises and Threatenings?

14. And when the Hour was come, he sat down, and the Twelve Apostles with him.
SEE how the great Savior of the World disdains not to sit down at the Table
with a Company of Fishermen! Yet how scornfully, O my Soul, have thou looked
sometimes upon thy Neighbor! What high Thoughts have thou had of thine own
Worth: And how have thou undervalued the Man or Woman that have had to no other
Crime but Poverty! Thou have thought thy Inferiors scarce worth talking to. How
unlike thy Redeemer is this Pride and Haughtiness! Were Grace an Inhabitant of
thy Heart, what low Thoughts would thou have of thy self! How readily would
thou converse even with the meanest Saint! How would thou learn to esteem Men
more for their Holiness, than for their Riches! And how lovely would a Creature
that has the Image of God upon him, look in thine Eyes! Far more lovely than
the greatest Monarch, or Lady, that have nothing to recommend them, but their
outward Splendour.

15. And he said unto them, With Desire I have desired to eat this Passover,
before I suffer.
HOW does God long for our Happiness! How fervent are his Desires to do us
good! Yet how little have these Longings prevailed with thee, O my Soul!
Notwithstanding all these Desires of God to make thee happy, how have thou
longed after the muddy Waters of Sensual Pleasures! Nay, longed to be for ever
miserable, when, in despite of his Entreaties not to neglect so great
Salvation, thou have longed for the stolen Waters of sinful Delights, coveted
Death, and been enamoured with Destruction! How has God entreated thee to
close with him upon his own Terms; and how have thou grieved him with thy
Refusal! How has the Almighty beseeched thee, by his Ambassadors, to be
reconciled to him; and yet thou have stood out, and baffled the Stratagems of
Mercy!

16. For I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled
in the Kingdom of God.
CHrist rejoices that the Shadows are at an end, and that the Substance or
Antitype is approaching; for as the Passover was a Sign of the Jews Deliverance
from Egyptian Bondage, so that Deliverance was a Shadow or Emblem of our
Deliverance from Sin here, and our Exemption from all Misery and Trouble in
Heaven, which was now to be effected by the Death of Christ. But, O my Soul,
how have thou hunted after Shadows, and left the Substance unregarded? What are
the Glories of this World, but mere Shows? Yet how fond art thou of them, and
how strangely have thou been enamoured with them? These Shadows intimate, that
there are more substantial Glories in the Everlasting Mansions; yet these thou
passest by, and the other thou art delighted with. See how thou dotest on those
painted Coronets, those Butter-flies, those Airy Nothings; while, with the Cock
in the Fable, thou tramplest on the Pearl, even on the Pearl of Price; to
purchase which, the Spiritual Merchant in the Gospel sold all he had.

17. And he took the Cup, and gave Thanks, and said, Take this, and divide it
among your selves.
HOW thankful is our Great Mediator for every Mercy he received from his
Everlasting Father! Yet how ungrateful have thou been, O my Soul, to thy mighty
Benefactor! What Mercies have thou received at his Hands, and what strange
Returns have thou made for them! Thy God has been kind to thee, and thou have
been base and unworthy. How have thou fed on his Blessings, and ascribed them
to thy Wisdom and Industry! How have thou lived upon his Charity, and spurned
at his Laws! Foolish Creature, Do thou thus reward the Lord thy God? Thou
should not eat a bit, but send some Thanksgiving-Ejaculations to Heaven; yet
thou contentest thy self with a careless Grace, and never think more
afterward of God. How little do thou mind the Providence that are sent upon
thee! And while thou considerest not the Operations of God's Hands, how can
thou be thankful?

18. For I say unto you, I will not drink of the Fruit of the Vine, until the
Kingdom of God shall come.
INdeed, Heaven has the best and choicest Wine, even the Wine of Angels. This
Wine is, the ravishing Love of God: This transports the Understanding, and
wraps up the Intellect in Ecstasies of Joy and Comfort. A brutish Man knows not
this, neither does a Fool understand it. And has not this been thy Case, O my
Soul? How weary have thou been of thinking of this Banquet! How soon have thy
Spirits tired with meditating of that Love! How ready have thou been to think
of the World, and the last Night's Revel; and how backward to reflect on this
richer Entertainment! What a Weariness has it been to thee, to survey these
Glories, to walk about that Jerusalem, and to behold the Towers and Bulwarks of
it?

19. And he took Bread, and gave Thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them,
saying, This is my Body, which is given for you: This do in remembrance of me.
HEre begins the happy Institution of the holy Sacrament of Christ's Body and
Blood, and the great Command to remember the Death of Jesus; and, together with
that, an Item of the greatest Love that can be shown to poor Mortals: Yet how
backward, O my Soul, have thou been sometimes to come to this holy Sacrament!
Thou should have longed for an Opportunity to remember this Death with the
People of God. What is this Bread, but an Emblem of the Communion of Saints,
and a Representation of thy Communion with the Great Head, the Lord Jesus? Yet
how little Delight have thou taken in this Ordinance! How often have thou come
out of Formality only! How little have thine Affections been moved with that
stupendous Love! Either Sin, or Malice to thy Neighbor, or some Worldly
Trouble, has made thee stay away. The Thoughts of this Love should have thrown
down all thy Strong Holds of Iniquity, and left thee in a calm, holy, spiritual
Temper: But how have thou preferred thy little Concerns in the World before
this Feast! And what Hazards have thou run of being doomed to a Spiritual
Famine; as those Guests, against whom the Master of the Feast protested, that
they should never taste of his Supper!

20. Likewise also the Cup after Supper, saying, this Cup, is the New Testament
of my Blood, which is shed for you.
AT how dear a rate was the remission of our sins purchased! The Blood of the
Son of God was the Price! Greater Love has no Man shown, than that he lay down
his life for his Friends; but here is one that laid it down for his Enemies,
that they may be pardoned! How have thou looked upon this pardon, O my Soul,
sometimes without standing amazed at the height, and breadth, and depth, and
length of the love of God! How cold have thou been in thy desires after this
precious Blood! Thou should have stood under the Cross, waiting for the
drops that trickled down! But the familiarity of the joyful news of it, alas!
has too often wrought in thee a dis-esteem of it* Nay! how light have thou
made of this remission! and by making so light of it, thou have profaned it
too, when thou have sinned, because God is willing to pardon sinners, and have
made that pardoning Blood an encouragement to indulge thy self in thy carnal
satisfactions; has not this been counting the Blood of the Covenant an unholy
thing!

21. But behold the hand of him, that betrays me, is with me on the Table.
AND did thou never approach the Table of thy Lord with a treacherous Heart,
O my Soul! Have not thou pretended Friendship, when thou have been an Enemy,
while thou have been loath to part with a darling bosom sin, or to examine, what
secret sins thou were guilty of, that thou might not be forced to part with
them! Have not thou shown much love with thy Lips, while thy Heart has gone
astray from thy Redeemer? Thou have, it may be, confessed thy self to be a
sinner in general, and so have joined thy self to the crowd of God's People,
and come to the Supper of thy Lord! But while thou have been loath to descend to
any particular sins, have not thou thereby discovered thy secret love to sin,
and thy feigned and counterfeit love to the Holy Jesus!

22. And truly the Son of Man goes, as it was determined; but woe unto that
Man, by whom he is betrayed!
HOW dreadful a thing is it to be instrumental in a Sin! And yet thou have made
nothing of it, O my Soul! How have thou suffered thy self to be employed by
others in things, which have been apparently unlawful! How apt have thou been
to tell a Lie after another, especially for a near Relation or a Superior! How
apt has thy Conscience been to dispense with Offenses against a Gracious God,
to please those from whom thou have expected some benefit and advantage! Has
not the Word of God been Blasphemed by wicked Men through thy neglect of thy
Saviors Commands! How often have thou scandalized and given offense to other
Men by thy unchristian? And how little have thou minded the threatenings of the
Holy Ghost in this case? And while thou have not only sinned thy self, but
helped to draw others into sin, have not thou thereby made thy self liable to
the Righteous Judgment of God?

23. And they began to enquire among themselves, which of them it was that
should do this thing.
INdeed Self-examination is the only way to come to a right knowledge of our
selves: Yet how careless, O my Soul, have thou been of this Duty! How easily
might thou have found, that thou were guilty of such a sin, and did
transgress such a Command; but thou would not! How much better is it to be
acquainted with our own Hearts, than to be strangers to our selves! And what
danger do thou involve thy self in, for want of this Holy search! How do
thou prepare for Self-delusion! And how impure must thy Heart grow! what a
Dunghill, what a sink, what a stye of filthiness, where it is not purged by such
explorations! The Disease being known, it may be cured; but lying hid, it kills
and destroys, when we think all is safe! How easy a matter were it to enquire,
whether thou art that Hypocrite, that unprofitable servant, that loiterer, that
slothful Person, that busy body, which the Holy Ghost condemns! Yet thou have
shunned this search, and been afraid of it, as of Poison! Whereas it is the
only Medicine, from which thou may promise thy self an happy recovery.

24. And there was also a strife among them, which of them should be accounted
greatest.
SEE how worldly Thoughts will crowd in, if we do not watch, even when we are
engaged in the most serious acts of Worship! And have not thou found such
worldly sensual Thoughts enter into thy Mind, O my Soul, when thou have been
employed in the greatest Duties, even at the Holy Sacrament it self! And have
not they come in with thy allowance, and approbation, and when they have
surpised thee, have not thou harbored them, made much of them, and been loath
to expel them! How reverend should thy Thoughts be upon such occasions! How
free from such Extravagancies! How sequestered from a vain World! How should
they be taken up with the love of God! How should the Glory of God ingross
their strength and power! See by this, which way thy Bias leans! Behold by
this, how strongly thy Heart bends to things below! O when will it fix upon the
things which are above!

25. And he said unto them, the Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over
them, and they that exercise Authority upon them, are called Benefactors.
HOW unfit and improper is it for a Christian to conform to the Word! As
improper, as for a Man of reason to imitate Children or Madmen! Yet how fond
have thou been, O my Soul, of the pomp and glories of this World! How have thou
admired the Riches, and the Grandeur of it! How have thou wished thy self in
such a great Man's place! Though the Apostles were somewhat ambitions before
Christ's Ascension into Heaven, yet, after the effusion of the Holy Ghost, they
saw with other Eyes, and despised these sublunary Honors and Dignities, as
much as they esteemed them before. O my Soul! when will thou follow this great
example! By the Rules of thy profession, thou art to despise the World, and
though thou art in the World, yet not to love the World! Notwithstanding this
Command, how do thou hancker after these Onions and Garlic, those certain
Marks of the House of Bondage! How strong is thy Appetite to follow the
fashions of the World! And how apt art thou to make the humor of the age thy
pattern!

26. But ye shall not be so; but he that is greatest among you, let him be as
the younger, and he that is chief, as he that does serve.
AY! Self-denial is that, which does best become a Christian; that is the best
Ornament he can put on, and which makes him look most lovely in the Eyes of
God: Yet how inconsiderable has this dress been in thine Eyes, O my Soul! How
loath have thou been to deny thine Eyes such a dangerous object, thine Ears such
a Syren's Voice, thy Mouth such a delicate dish, thy Feet such vain company,
thy Tongue such a smutty jest, thy Hand such a lustful touch, and thy Mind such
a lascivious or covetous thought! How have thou thought thy self undone, when
thou have not had, what thy sensual appetite did crave! and how raging have thy
desires been after that which would ruin thee! How loath have thou been to deny
thy self in superfluities, and to bestow them on the poor! How hard have thou
thought it to shun such a place, where thou knew, thou should be tempted
and be persuaded unto Sin!

27. For whether is greater, he that sits at Meat, or he that serves? Is
not he, that sits at Meat? But I am among you, as one that serves.
HOW beautiful is Humility! The Son of God himself is enamoured with it, though
his business was to Command, not serve, yet he chooses to serve, rather than to
exercise Authority! How unlike thy Savior have thou been, O my Soul! How
Proud! How Self-conceited! How apt to prefer thy self before others! And how
apt to think better of thy self than others! How apt to despise mean services
in the Church of God! and how loath to be employed in things that make for God's
Glory; merely because thou have been afraid they would blemish thy credit and
reputation in the World! How loath have thou been to visit thy poor Neighbor, or
to dress his Wounds, or to tend him, when destitute of Friends or Kindred! What
a disparagement have thou thought it to pay respect to thine Inferiors! and how
have thou chosen the Upper Rooms at Feasts, and other Meetings, and loved the
praise of Men more than the praise of God!

28. Ye are they, which have continued with me in my Temptations.
IT is not enough to stand a blow or two, but to hold out to the end. To stay
with Christ a few Weeks or Years, and then to forsake him, is base Cowardice;
yet how weary, O my Soul, have thou been of thy Master's service! How soon have
thou been tired with Devotion! How dull has Prayer made thee! If thou have
been fervent for a few days, how soon have thou given over! What excellent
progress did thou make in Religion, when low in the World, and how art thou
changest, since prosperous fortunes have flown in upon thee! Or if thou have
believed and rejoiced in the light for a time, how have thou in the hour of
Temptation turned thy back, and like an hireling fled away! The Fruit thou have
brought forth in thy youth, how has it decayed and withered in thy riper Age!
and in trouble, how have thou laid force upon the Kingdom of Heaven, and yet
upon thy deliverance, as Flies in Autumn, how has thy Piety fainted and died
away!

29. And I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me.
WHat mighty Rewards does God give for poor and mean services! No less than a
Kingdom, for a few years patience in well-doing! How should this encourage thee
to work, O my Soul! How should it make thee strive to enter in at the strait
Gate! Yet how apt art thou to cry, There is a Lion without! There is a Bear in
the way! And what if there were? Is it not worth a being torn by Bears and
Lions, to inherit an everlasting Kingdom? What pains do Men take to get a
little Money, or to purchase a parcel of Lands, which they know not whether
they shall possess above a Month or two? And yet thou have not thought it worth
toiling to inherit a Kingdom, which fades not away!

30. That you may Eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, and sit on Thrones,
Judging the Twelve Tribes of Israel.
HOW will the Scene be changed e're long! And those poor Saints, which wicked
Men counted Slaves, how will the World wonder, when they shall see them their
Judges! Yet how little do thou think of that day, O my Soul! How apt art thou
to put it out of thy Mind, and consequently how unwilling to imitate those
excellent Men, that meditate in the Law of God Day and Night! Did thou think
seriously of their preferment in the last day, thou would write Copies after
them, and be a much harder Student in that Holiness, which makes them capable
to Judge the World, and the Apostate Angels! Thou do not thoroughly believe
that mighty alteration. Did thou open the Eye of thy Faith, and see what
Glory will be put upon them in that day, thou would certainly be inquisitive,
how to participate of the the same privileges, and consequently be earnest in
the pursuit of the same Virtues and Graces, whereby they run and obtain the
prize.

31. And the Lord said Simon, Simon, Behold Satan has desired to have you,
that he may sift you as Wheat.
HOW busy is the Devil to ruin a sincere Christian! and have not thou felt him
busy in thy Heart, O my Soul, to deprive thee of the Crown of Righteousness,
which the Lord has promised to them that strive lawfully! Have not thou felt
him busy to poison thy Graces! busy to infect thy Prayers! busy to evacuate
the Virtue of thy Holy performances! and yet thou have not resisted him. How
have all the Avenues been set open, that that King of Darkness might come in!
How have thou hugged his Temptations! suffered him to revel in thy Breast!
yielded to his evil suggestions, and been persuaded by his Arguments! He has
but beckoned to thee, and thou have run! How have thou betrayed the Citadel of
the Holy Ghost! Profaned his Temple, and suffered the Sanctuary to be robbed
by Heathens and Infidels!

32. But I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not.
THus Christ Prays for all true Believers, that God may not forsake them. Yet
how dejected have thou been, O my Soul, upon the least Storm that has fallen
upon thee! How ready have thou been to cast away thy hope! How ready to say
with Sion, The Lord has forsaken me, and God has forgotten me! Do thou
think God does not hear the great Mediators Prayer for thee? Do thou think,
he can refuse his intercessions, whom he always hears? When he heard his
Prayers for those, that Crucified him, that God would not for that barbarous
fact exclude them from hopes of Salvation, will not he hear him, do thou
think, when he Prays for thee, that thou may not be deprived of the light of
God's countenance! Therefore, why art thou cast down, O my Soul, and why art
thou disquieted within me! Hope in God; for I shall yet praise him, who is the
health of my countenance, and my God.

33. And he said unto him, Lord, I am ready to go with thee both into Prison
and to death.
A Brave Resolution! For though he miscarried in the performance, yet, I doubt
not, but he really spoke at this time what he thought! But how faint have thou
been in thy resolutions, O my Soul! How loath to resolve upon a Duty, that has
had some hardship in it! How loath to resolve upon leaving a sin, in which thy
profit has been wrapped up! How have thou humm'd and haw'd, when thou have been
to declare thy resolution to suffer for righteousness sake! How have thou been
frighted at the smallest danger! Thou have, may be, resolved to suppress Sin
for the present, but not to reform it for the future! To clip the Luxurious
branches, but not to pull up the evil Tree by the root! And what pitiful
half-resolutions have these been! How unlike St. Paul, who was ready, not only
to suffer, but to dye also, at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus!

34. And he said, I tell thee Peter, the Cock shall not Crow this day, before
that thou shall thrice deny, that thou know me.
GOD sees that, which Man cannot see: Why then, O my Soul! do not thou shun
that Rock, which God sees, and says, will split thy Vessel? Thou want such a
sensual pleasure, God sees and protests, it will undo thee; yet do thou
believe thine own Appetite more than that God, who sees all things in their
first Principles! He sees that such a Blessing will be thy bane, and therefore
wisely takes it away from thee, why then do thou grumble? Thou think much
of parting with a Child, with such a Revenue, with such an Advantage, with such
a Friend; but God sees, if thou enjoyest it, it will certainly tempt thee to
dote upon it, and seduce thee from setting thine Affections on nobler Objects;
and therefore makes thee lose it. Why then do thou find fault with his
Providence, who certainly sees best what is most proper and convenient for
thee, and gives thee that which is most wholesome, though not always what is
most pleasing and palatable? How often have thou thought that God did thee
wrong, in depriving thee of what thou lovedst most, when it was certain, that,
in doing so, he did thee a singular kindness, for he saw the hurt, it would do
thee; and therefore, like a tender Father, took away the knife, the unhappy
Instrument of thy ruin.

35. And he said unto them, When I sent you without purse, or scrip, or shoes,
did you lack any thing? They said, Nothing.
WHere Men trust God's Providence entirely, and without wavering, Providence is
engaged not to see them want; yet how basely have thou diffided this
Providence, O my Soul! Though thou have seen even miraculous Dispensations, yet
when thou have been in danger again, how has thy Faith failed again! What
anxious cares and carkings have gnawed thy Breast, when Ravens and dumb
Creatures have committed themselves to God's Wisdom and Goodness; How has God
assured thee by the various Mercies and Favors, he has conferred upon thee,
that he would not leave thee, nor forsake thee; yet how little have thou
trusted to his Promises! When God has withdrawn his hand of Bounty from thee,
only to try thee, whether thou would stay thy self upon him; and when the
Fig Tree has not blossomed, how have thou presently begun to sink, O thou of
little Faith! What great things would God have done for thee, if it had not
been for thy unbelief, which stops his hand, and will not suffer him to do any
mighty work for thee!

36. Then said he unto them, But now, he that has a Purse, let him take it,
and likewise his scrip: and he that has no sword, let him sell his garment and
buy one.
HOW like a Father does Christ forewarn his Disciples of their approaching
danger, and of the mighty change of their quiet into a very dismal and
calamitous Estate and Condition, that they may not think much of it, when it
comes! How often does the Ministers of the Gospel forewarn thee, O my Soul, of
the change of thy Prosperity into Adversity, of the change of thy Health into
Sickness, of the change of thy Life into Death, yet thou will take no warning!
How apt art thou to flatter thy self, that thy Mountain shall never be shaken,
that thy Prosperity shall never be moved, that here thou art to continue many
years, that thy health will be vigorous to the last! How grievous, and how
irksome will that change be, which foresight did not qualify! And how much
heavier will be the burden at last, which thou did not believe would come
upon thee! How soft and easy would thy fall be, if thou thought of it
aforehand! The more unexpected thy sorrows are, the more they will gall, and
that which will add to the misery, will be the remembrance of thy former
dangerous security.

37. For I say unto you, That this, that is written, must yet be accomplished
in me; And he was reckoned among the Transgressors; for the things concerning
me, have an end.
HOW rudely, and how barbarously, does this blind World handle the best of Men,
and use them like Transgressors! Wonder not at it, O my Soul, if this be thy
Lot and Portion, neither think the worse of God, because he suffers it! How can
it be otherwise, where Men are strangers to Goodness, and cannot prize it!
Providence in the mean while does no wrong; for the enemies of God shall want
no Plagues in the other Life, and the Lovers of God no Recompense. Matter not,
what Men call or count thee here: The Great Day will bring forth thy Innocence,
as the Light; and thy Righteousness as the Noonday. What, if Men call thee
Fool, for being conscientious, as long as thy God does count thee Wise, thou
losest nothing of thy reputation! How much better is it, to be one of Christ's
Fools, than of the number of the Wise Men of this World! The Children of this
World are wiser in their Generation, than the Children of Light; but then the
Children of Light will be found wiser in their Generation too, than the other,
when this life is ended. Both have their time; one here, the other hereafter.
Be content, O my Soul, to be reproached and misrepresented here, for thy
Father, that sees in secret, will reward thee openly.

38. And they said unto him, Lord, behold, here are two Swords. And he said
unto them, It is enough.
WHere the Roads are unsafe, there Men carry Swords and Weapons about them to
defend themselves against the Enemy; so is the way to Heaven; abundance of
Murderers lie in wait to snatch the unwary Passenger: Yet: O my Soul! how loath
have thou been to arm thy self against the Powers, and Principalities, and
Spiritual Wickednesses in high places, that have too often beset thee, as thou
have been traveling toward the Land of Promise! How have thou exposed thy
self to their rage and fury! What advantages have thou given them, and how
often upon that account have thou been hurled into By-ways, and dangerous Pits!
Though God has offered thee the whole Armor of the Spirit, yet how unwilling
have thou been to put on the Helmet of Salvation, and the Breast Plate of
Righteousness, and to take the Shield of Faith, whereby thou might have
quenched the fiery Darts of the Devil!

39. And he came out, and went (as he was wont) to the Mount of Olives: and his
Disciples also followed him.
THis Mount of Olives, in the days of the Kings of Judah, was defiled with
Idolatry, and therefore called the Mount of Corruption. Christ goes up to that
Mount to purge it by his Tears and Prayers. O my Soul! What has thy Heart
been, but the Seat of corruption! Yet how backward have thou been to purge that
fulsome Stable! What filth and nastiness have thou suffered to gather there,
and yet taken no care to remove it! How little have thou considered of thy
Savior's Promise, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God! What
pains have thou taken to keep thy Body clean! But, O, how careless of a
conscience sprinkled from evil Works! And is not this to be of the Pharisees
Religion, who made clean the outside of the Cup, and Platter, but within were
strangers to Faith, Judgment and Mercy, and the weightier matters of the Law.

40. And when he was come to the place, he said to them, Pray, lest ye enter
into temptation.
PRayer certainly is the best Antidote against Temptations, yet how averse
sometimes have thou been from this exercise, O my Soul! when thou have gone
into dangerous company, how loath have thou been to arm thy self with Prayer!
When thou have been in trouble, how little have thou thought of this Sovereign
Remedy, or if thou have made use of it, how cold, how faint, how superficial
have been thy Supplications! How often have thou had greater confidence in the
arm of Flesh, than in the strength of God! Prayer has chased away Armies,
turned to flight the Host of Aliens, stopped the mouth of Lions, quenched the
flames of Fire, made the Sun stand still, and the shadow go back ten Degrees,
has shut and opened Heaven; and yet, how slender, how weak, how indifferent
has thy Love been to this Spiritual Engine, which has conquered the Fort
above, and even forced the Almighty into Pity and Compassion!

41. And he was withdrawn from them about a Stones-cast, and kneeled down, and
prayed.
OUR Savior, when he means to pray most earnestly, retires from all company,
yet how irksome has retirement been to thee, O my Soul! What a burden has it
seemed, and how glad have thou been, when company, or Business, have called
thee away from that Penance, and given thee a diversion! How much more pleasing
have crowds and mulitudes of business, and people been to thee, than privacy!
In serious retirements thou might have seen the brighter goings of God, and
had larger experience of his Power and Goodness; but thou have been afraid of
meeting thy God in private, and by that means deprived thy self of the gracious
influences, which he imparts to them, that love his company! Behold, thy
Redeemer bows his knees, and kneels on the cold ground to offer up his
Supplications to his Father How strangely have thou consulted thine ease in
Prayer! How afraid have thou been to kneel, if thou have had no Cushion! How
loath to put thy flesh to any trouble in God's Service! Did the Son of God
prostrate himself upon the Grass or Earth he stood upon, and art thou afraid of
hurting thy self in Prayer, if thou have not the accommodations of Softness and
Luxury?

42. Saying, Father, if thou be willing, remove this Cup from me, nevertheless
not my Will, but thine be done.
AN excellent Example! and with the Example, a Command to resign our Will to
God's Will, even in the greatest Troubles and Calamities. And do thou observe
this, O my Soul! Art thou content with the Will and Pleasure of God, when he
lays affliction upon thy Loins! Do thou say freely, and without murmuring, It
is the Lord, let him do what seems good to him? O how have thou repined
sometimes! How impatient have thou been under thy chain! How unwilling to
submit to the hand of God! How forced has been thy Humiliation! Where has
been thy belief of God's Wisdom and Goodness! If thou believe God to be
infinitely Wise; and consequently, that what he sends on thee, is most wisely
ordered, why do thou murmur? If thou believe him to be infinitely good, and
therefore intending all that happens to thee for thy good, why do thou think,
the ways of the Lord are not equal?

43. And there appeared to him an Angel from Heaven, strongth'ning him.
IF this Blessed Minister of Heaven did comfort him with Words, we must
suppose, he humbly besought him to look upon the Glory set before him, and
reflect on the vast good, that would arrive to all Mankind by his Passion, and
that he encouraged him to go on with the great work of Redemption, O my Soul!
And has not thy God sent an Angel to thee, a Minister of his Word in thy
Afflictions, and encouraged thee by the hopes of Eternal Glory to bear up, and
to be undaunted under all the Waves and Billows that went over thee! Nay, has
not thy God himself suggested to thy mind, what benefit thy Affliction would
yield, what peaceable fruits of Righteousness, what hatred of Sin, what love to
Holiness, and what Humility it would produce! And yet none of these have been
able to keep thee from sinking! How sensual is thy Mind! How earthy are thy
Affections! What Polishing, what Refining do they want yet! And yet if
Affliction, which is the Furnace that must purify the Gold, will not do it,
what can be supposed to do it!

44. And being in an Agony, he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was, as it
were, great drops of Blood, falling down to the ground.
SEE, O my Soul! how thy Sin presses the Son of God! see how great the horror
of it is! that it forced him into Agonies, and these Agonies vent themselves in
a Bloody Sweat! He saw the Wrath of God, that flaming Sword which hung over
thee, the revenging Arm that God shook against thee! He saw the Hell, thou
had deserved! the Torments thou have merited! the Agonies, thou had
involved thy self in! He saw thy Sins in their full latitude and extent, what
encroachments they had made on the Divine Nature, what affronts they had
offered to the great Majesty of Heaven! being very sensible of the infinite
purity of God, he saw the dreadfulness, the monstrousness of thy
Transgressions, which had made War with that Divine Purity; He saw the Fire and
Brimstone, the everlasting Furnace, the burning Lake that was designed to be
thy Recompense; He saw it and trembled, He saw it and staggered; He felt it,
being infinitely compassionate, and feeling it, labored to shake it off, and
to get from under it; and as he struggles with the Load, his Sacred Body breaks
forth in a strange kind of Sweat. Did thou ever consider, O my Soul, what thy
Sins did cost? Had thou considered it, how could thou have been so merry,
so blithe, so jocular in the Commission?

45. And when he rose up from Prayer, and was come to his Disciples, he found
them sleeping for Sorrow.
STrange! Sleep should oppress People when they have Death before them! Yet,
why wonderest thou, O my Soul, when thou have slept securely at the very Gates
of Hell, in the Suburbs of Destruction? How have thou even shorted in Sin, when
the Messengers of God have cried out, Fire, Everlasting Fire! over thy Head!
How quiet have thou been, how secure, how jolly, when the Fiends have been
about thee, as the Philistines about Sampson! How have thou played, and
laughed, and smiled, when the Eternal Wrath of God has been ready to seize on
thee! How was it, that thou were not afraid! How was it, that thou did not
give a Start in the midst of thy Slumber! What if thou had awaked in Hell!

46. And said unto them, Why sleep ye? Rise, and pray, that ye enter not into
Temptation.
INdeed, Sleepiness and Idleness is the Devil's Opportunity to persuade us into
Sin. Had the Disciples prayed, instead of sleeping, it is possible they would
not have fled when they saw Danger nigh: And has not the Devil prevailed with
thee by Idleness, O my Soul? When thou have, with David, taken thy Rest and
Ease, has not Satan brought a Bathsheba to thee, and thrown some ill Thought
into thy Mind? When thou have not known how to spend thy Time, has not the
Enemy made thee swallow the dangerous Bait? When thou have stretched thy self
upon thy Couch, and indulged thy self, have not thou selt then thy Love to God
decay, and thy Affections to the World to increase, and thy Faculties to
dissolve into Vanity and Voluptuousness, and Contempt of better things?

47. And while he yet spoke, behold, a Multitude; and he that was called Judas,
one of the Twelve, went before them, and drew near unto Jesus, to kiss him.
WHat a Change is here! From Christ's Purse-bearer, to a Leader or Captain of
Thieves and Murderers! And, O my Soul, what a mighty Change has there been
sometimes in thy spiritual Condition! From a zealous Saint, how often have thou
deflected into Formality and Hypocrisy! From holy Heats, thou art fallen into
Lukewarmness. How vigorous wast thou once in prosecuting thy Eternal Happiness:
And how have thou fainted afterward! Once thou did lay Force upon the Kingdom
of Heaven: Of late thou have laid Force upon the Kingdom of Darkness, stormed
Hell, and invaded Damnation. Once thou wast a strict Observer of Religious
Severities: How loosely have thou lived of late! Once God seemed to have thy
Heart: But did not Sin and the World possess it afterward? Dull, blockish
Soul! Was God beautiful and delightful heretofore, and has he ceased to be so
now?

48. But Jesus said unto him, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of Man with a Kiss?
AND have not thou thus betrayed him, O my Soul, even with a false and
counterfeit Devotion? Have not thou too often pretended God's Glory, when thou
have sought thine own? And seemed to be zealous for Religion, when it was only
thine own private Interest thou did aim at? Have not thou professed Love to
the holy Jesus, when at the same time thou have most basely affronted him? Have
not thou drawn nigh unto him with thy Lips, when in thy Conversation thou have
denied him? Have not thou told him sometimes that thou repentest, when thou
have been loath to part with thy darling Bosom-Sin? Have not thou kneeled under
his Cross sometimes, to express thy Veneration of him, when, in good truth,
thou have conspired against him with his Enemies? Have not thou maintained thy
League with Sin, while thou have pretended, by thy bowing to the Son of God,
that that League was broken and dissolved? What Perfidiousness, what Treachery,
what Dissimulation have thou been guilty of! Can thou think of it, and not be
concerned!

49. When they which were about him saw what would follow, they said unto him,
Lord, shall we smite with the Sword?
WHat preposterous Means and Ways do Men make use of, to effect their
Deliverance! These poor Men hope to do Wonders by smiting with the Sword: A Way
neither warranted by any Command of God, nor profitable. So the Jews, in
Jeremy's time, thought there was no way for them to escape, but by fleeing into
the Land of Egypt. And, O my Soul, have thou not very often, out of Mistrust of
God's Providence, made use of wrong Means to compass thy Safety? How have thou
thought to be rid of thy Calamity by telling a Lie, or by acting against thy
Conscience! How have thou thought sometimes to redeem thy Credit with vain
People, by complying with their Sins! And when thou have been under some
Distress, how have thou endeavored to get out of it, by abusing thy Neighbor,
or by reviling those that reviled thee! When thou have been groaning under
Poverty, how has the Devil suggested to thee, to mend thy Condition by
Cheating, and thou have obeyed the Motion! What Comfort can thou take in a
Deliverance compassed by Sin? Or what Satisfaction in a Rescue effected by the
Devil's Means; at least, by doing things acceptable to him?

50. And one of them smote the Servant of the High Priest, and cut off his
Right Ear.
WHen we do things of our own Heads, without any Command from God, what
Inconveniences do we run into! These unwary Men smite, never staying for
Christ's Answer. O my Soul! Thus thou have rushed into dangerous Actions and
Enterprises, without consulting the Oracles of God; and have taken it for
granted that they were lawful, because thou did apprehend them to make for
thy Interest. Thus have thou ventured upon some Recreations, which, upon
pondering the Rules of the Gospel, would have been found contrary to the Law of
God; and have run into Play Houses, without consulting with any serious Men,
whether it be agreeable to the Will of Christ; and have made nothing of thy
vain and fantastic Dresses, and all because thou would not examine the
Particulars, which the Lord thy God requires of thee. What a Decay have thou
thereby brought upon thy Virtues! And how has thy Sense of God abated upon
this imprudent Behavior.

51. And Jesus answered, and said, Suffer ye thus far. And he touched his Ear,
and healed him.
HEre we have an excellent Pattern of doing good for evil. O my Soul, how
backward have thou been to this great Duty! How have thou studied Revenge upon
the least Affront or Injury, whether real, or imaginary! How have thou fretted
and fumed, when Men have crossed thy Humor, Will, or Inclination; and
contrived immediately which way thou might be even with the Offender! Oh,
what a Stranger have thou been to loving thy Enemies, and doing good to them
that have hated thee! When a Neighbor has displeased thee, presently thy
Kindness has ceased, and the Stream of thy Bounty has stopped; as if thy
Savior had neither shown thee an Example, nor given any Precept to the
contrary: And yet thou have pretended to be a Christian. But wherein have thou
done more than others! Wherein have thou exceeded the Righteousness of Scribes
and Pharisees; nay, the Righteousness of Pagans! If thou do good to them that
do good to thee, what Thanks have thou? For Sinners also do even the same.

52. Then Jesus said unto the Chief Priest, and Captains of the Temple, and the
Elders which were come to him, Be ye come out as against a Thief, with Swords
and Staves!
SEE how these Wretches arm themselves against Omnipotence; as if Christ, if he
would, could not, with a Breath, have broke their Swords, and snapped their
Staves in sunder. How secure have thou thought thy self, O my Soul, against the
Vengeance of Heaven, when Riches have flown in upon thee, and thy Friends have
been multiplied! How little have thou regarded Men's Threatenings, and, what is
more, God's Anger, while thy Years have been crowned with Wealth, and Waters of
a full Cup have been wrung out unto thee! This has tempted thee to sin with a
Lawless Freedom; and made thee think, God was afraid to sink thy Vessel,
because its Sails were of Silk. Alas, how easily could God have made thee know
the Vanity of these Cobwebs; and with the least Blast blown thee up, and sent
thee, with thy Riches, to the Vault of Outer Darkness! Neither Treasures nor
Attendants can keep out a Revenging Arm: And it is but a childish Attempt to
get a strong Guard about us, that God's Rods and Axes may not reach us.

53. When I was daily with you in the Temple, you stretched forth no hands
against me; but this is your hour, and the power of darkness.
DArkness, indeed, must have very great Power, where it can encourage Men to
fight against God. And, O my Soul! have not thou found such a thing as Darkness
in thy Understanding, and such Darkness as has made thee resist God's Holy
Spirit, and sin against God with a stiff Neck, and with an high ^and! What
gross Conceits have thou harbored of Almighty God! How have thou sometimes
thought him to be altogether such a one as thy self! And when thou have
obstinately continued in walking after thine own heart in despite of all, that
could be alleged to the contrary, have not thou sought against thy great
Creator, and blessed Redeemer? How ignorant have thou been of the ways and
nature of God! Nay, how pleasing has that Ignorance been to thee! How have
thou rejoiced in it, and thought thy self wise for talking at random of
Almighty God, as blind Men do of Colors! If this was not to be under the
Empire of Darkness, what could deserve that name!

54. Then took they him, and led him, and brought him unto the High Priest's
House, and Peter followed afar off.
PEter follows asar off, loath to run himself into danger: Such has been thy
following of Christ, O my Soul! Cowardly, afar off, tremblingly, with fear, and
pusillanimity! If Christ deserves not thy venturing All, even Life it self,
what do thou profess thy self a Christian for? He, that has promised to give
thee everlasting Life, does not he deserve the voluntary Loss of thy temporal
life! O, how have thou been afraid, when thy conscientiousness has drawn thee
into any inconvenience! How afraid have thou been of doing things he has
commanded, when they have seemed to be prejudicial to thy Interest! So far as
thou could safely profess, and practice the Rules of Goodness, so far thou
have ventured; but when any trouble has been like to arise upon the account of
that Goodness, O how have thou drawn back, or served thy God by halves, and
with reserves! And is this a just ground for thy hopes of Heaven! Is this a
foundation firm enough to build thy expectations of a future Kingdom on! O, be
ashamed of thy Cowardice, and take heed that no Man take thy Crown!

55. And when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the Hall, and were set
down together, Peter sat among them.
UNhappy Peter, to sit down with ill company, which were like to draw him into
sin! O my Soul, how often have thou imitated this unwary Apostle! How have thou
thrust thy self into loose company, and what have thou got by it, but Death and
Ruin! How safe might thou have been, had thou withheld thy Foot from such
society! These have made thee vain in thy Talk, frothy in thy Thoughts,
uncircumspect in thy Actions! How have thy holy Heats been cooled by such
Companions, thy Piety stabbed, thy Conscientiousness turned out of doors, thy
Seriousness lessened, thy Boldness increased, thy Modesty changed into
Confidence, and thy former watchfulness into sinful Security! This thou have
felt, this thou have seen, and yet have hanker'd after such Familiars, and
thought thy self undone, if thou could not enjoy their Friendship! This has
made holy Discourses tedious to thee, and the conversation of self denying Men,
irksom. This has made thee impatient of better Society, and wish thou might
not meet them, for fear their Sobriety should be a secret Reproof of thy looser
Carriage.

56. But a certain Maid beheld him, as he sat by the Fire, and earnestly
looked upon him, and said, This Man was also with him.
THis Maiden looks upon Peter, and knows him, and proclaims it in her
Discourse! What injuries do we do to our Neighbors, by giving our selves
liberty to censure their Actions and Behavior! Has not this been thy Sin, O
my Soul! how have thou spent thy time in talking of thy Neighbors Actions, and
while thou have found fault with this and that particular, which thy Neighbor
did, and have proclaimed his Infirmities, reviled his Weakness to the Company
thou have been in, and have found nothing to discourse of, but what this or the
other body did! How have thou wronged thy Neighbor's Reputation, and sometimes
hindered Men from doing good to him! And how often have thou told lies of him,
either aggravated his Faults, or misreported his Behavior, or put a wrong
construction on his words! And, O my Soul! How little have thou regarded the
Omnipresence of God, and how might thou have prevented all this, by Pious
Conferences! Had thy Mind been set upon Spiritual Things, how could thou have
run out into this licentiousness? And, O how careless have thou been of that
Rule of Equity! What you would have other men do to you, do ye even so to them.

57. And he denied him, saying, Woman, I know him not.
WHat Peter said falsely of his Master, has been verified too often in thee, O
my Soul! For whatever thou have pretended, thou have not truly known him? and
that which makes thy ignorance more heinous, is that it has been wilful. How
should thou know him, when thou have been loath to read his Word, to pray
fervently, and to converse with those who would have brought thee to a right
knowledge of him! Thou have contented thy self with a Superficial Knowledge,
but have not so known him, as to know the power of his Resurrection. Had thou
known him aright, thou would have felt his Operations in thy Breast, and
longed to be at Peace with him! Is it possible to know his Beauty, and not to
be enamored with him? Or his Perfection, and not to love him? Or the fullness
of Joy at his right hand, and not to cry, Lord, for ever give me to drink of
this water!

58. And after a little while, another saw him, and said, Thou art also of
them. And Peter said, Man, I am not.
SEE, how when one Temptation is off, another comes. And is not this an Emblem
of thy Warfare, O my Soul! when a Temptation to Uncharitableness has taken its
leave, another to Pride has risen; when that has seemed to be withdrawn,
another to sinful security has appeared; and when this has retired, another
to mistrust God's Providence has discovered it self; when this has been taken
away, another to envy has succeeded; or if this has made no impression,
another to neglect of thy Duty has followed; and yet how safe have thou
thought thy self, when one storm was past! How have thou suffered the next
suggestion to prevail with thee, after thou had courageously resisted the
former! How have thou sunk under the Second and Third Assault, when, in the
first, thou seemedst to be invincible! How might thou have shamed the Devil
by a continual resolvedness whereas, now he can boast of his Triumph over thee,
and thou art left to bewail thy inconsiderateness!

59. And about the space of one hour after, another confidently affirmed,
saying, Of a truth, this fellow also was with him, for he is a Galilean.
HOw peremptory and confident is Malice! How does it turn mere Probabilities
into certainties, and surmises into Realities! And, O my Soul! have thou never
dealt so with thy Neighbor! When thou have cherished a grudge against him, how
quickly have thou spied faults in his Actions? And if thou have seen but the
shadow of an Error in him, how have thou presently aggravated it, and of a
Molehill made a Mountain, and improved a likelihood into strong asseverations?
How have thou discovered thy ill Nature in such Actions! And though other Men,
perhaps, have taken no notice of thy sinister aims, yet has not thy God seen
thy Heart, and noted thy secret sin in his Book! And having set it down, will
he not produce it in the last day, (if thy return be not speedy and serious) to
thy everlasting confusion, there being nothing secret, but what will be made
manifest in that day, when God shall judge the secrets of Men's Hearts by the
Gospel?

60. And Peter said, Man, I know not what thou say: And immediately while he
spoke; the Cock crew.
WHat excellent Teachers are dumb Creatures! The Cock here teaches Peter, and
puts him in mind of his unwatchfulness! How often have thou been instructed, O
my Soul, by such Creatures! and yet thou have not been the better for it. The
Lamb has taught thee meekness, yet thou have been angry and choleric! The
Serpent has taught thee Wisdom, yet thou have continued foolish and imprudent!
The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib, yet thou have not
considered, what vast Mercies thy great Master has poured out upon thee! The
Stork, the Crane, and the Swallow, return at their appointed time, yet thou
have not returned to thy God at a time, when he has earnestly waited for thy
conversion! The Be and Ant teach thee industry, yet how lazy have thou been in
the work of thy Salvation! The Dog teaches thee Fidelity; yet how unfaithful
have thou been to God, and to thy Conscience! The Snail teaches thee slowness
to wrath, yet how have thou broke forth into unruly Passions! How many ways
has God taught thee, and yet how loath have thou been to be instructed!

61. And the Lord turned, and looked upon Peter, and Peter remembered the Word
of the Lord, how he had said unto him, before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me
thrice.
O My Soul! how often has Christ looked upon thee, and thou have turned away
thine Eyes from him! He has looked upon thee in his Word, and yet thou have
not minded him! He has looked upon thee in the Holy Sacrament, yet thou have
taken no notice of it! He has looked upon thee in thy Afflictions, and yet
thou have not seen him! Had thou observed his Looks, thou would have
remembered his Sayings, and his Precepts, and done them! Perhaps thou have
remembered his Words, but thou have not considered the Sense of them; or if thou
have considered the Sense, thou have thought it did not belong to thee! O how
willing have thou been to transfer thy Sin from thy self to others! What would
not the damned in Hell give, for such a gracious Look of the Lord Jesus, as
thou have had sometimes! And can thou make light of that, which those unhappy
Spirits would prize at a mighty rate!

62. And Peter went out, and wept bitterly.
WHat a blessed Sight is this, to see a penitent Sinner weep! How hard-hearted
have thou been under thy Sins, O my Soul! Not a Drop has distilled from the
Rock of thy Heart, even after presumptuous Sins. While other Saints have
watered their Couches with their Tears, thine has been dry. Thou have wept
upon the reading of a Romance; and can not thou weep at the true History of
thy Savior's Passion? Thou can weep for the Loss of a Father; and can not
thou weep at the Remembrance that thy Father and Redeemer died for thee? Thou
can weep under a great Burden; and cannot the great Load of thy
Transgressions make thee weep? Thy Sins are as great as other Men's; why
should not thou weep as other Men? Should thou be so unhappy as to drop
into Hell, thou would weep Day and Night; and should not thou weep now, to
prevent those vain and unprofitable Tears? Alas, my Soul! Thou have made thy
self merry with thy Sins; how is it possible thou should weep for them? Oh,
think what thy Master has said, Blessed are they that weep and mourn now, for
they shall laugh at last!

63. And the Men that held Jesus, mocked him, and smote him.
AND do thou think that those were the only Men that ever mocked the Lord
Jesus, O my Soul? What think thou of thy Mock-Fasts, and of thy
Mock-Prayers? When thou have fasted sometimes, have not thou pretended Sorrow
for thy Sins, when at the same time thou have been loath to part with them? Have
not thou professed Grief for thy Lusts, when at the same time thou have hugged
them as thy Darlings? Have not thou given God the Shell of thy Duties, without
the Kernel? And have not thou prayed sometimes to be rid of secret Corruptions,
while thou have hoped God would not hear thee? What Vows have thou made in
Trouble, and how forgetful have thou been to pay them? Thou have promsed
Hecatombs; and at last, like that foolish Merchant in the Fable, laid a few
Dates upon God's Altar: And is not this mocking of God, and in a very high
degree?

64. And when they had blindfolded him, they stroke him on the Face, and asked
him, saying, Prophecy who is it that smote thee.
WHat dreadful Sins does brutish Ignorance put Men upon! Sins that, were their
Eyes open, would make their Hair stand an end! Had these Wretches known who it
was they abused thus, it would have precipitated them into the Gulf of Sorrow
and Despair. O my Soul, how is it that thou do not quake to think of the Sins
thou did commit in thy Ignorance! How did thou laugh at Sins, which have
made other good Men weep Rivers of Tears! How bold have thou been in the
Affronts of the Divine Majesty! Affronts, at the Thoughts of which some Saints
have swoon'd, and yet thou can think of them at this time without
Indignation. Thou would, indeed, commit them no more, it is like; but how
should the very Remembrance of them strike Terror into thy Mind, and make thee
wish for Fountains of Water to bewail them!

65. And many other things blasphemously they spoke against him.
HOW restless is Sin! It cannot stop, it must roll on from one Precipice to
another. One would think these desperate Men had done enough when they had
mocked him, but they cannot hold; the Master they serve, leaves them not, but
prompt; them on to greater Villainies and Abuses: And do not thou remember
something like this in thy self, O my Soul? When thou have engaged in a Sin
that has been heinous and dreadful, has not that Sin wanted Support from
other Sins? And has it not forced thee to call in other Follies to maintain
it? How have thou defended thy Theft or Uncleanness with a Lie, and that Lie
with another Lie, and the second Lie with an Imprecation, and that Imprecation
with a constant Asseveration of the same Falsehood! How has one ill Word
brought in another! And how has the Neglect of Charity provoked thee at last
to Malice and Injuriousness!

66. And as soon as it was Day, the Elders of the People, and the Chief
Priests, and the Scribes, came together, and led him into their Council.
WHat Haste do these Men make to ruin their immortal Souls! For fear they
should not dye their Souls with a Guilt deep enough, they get up early. And do
not these Men's Proceedings put thee in mind, O my Soul, of the Haste thou have
made to Everlasting Destruction! How early have thou got up to offend thy God!
How often have thou begun the Day with vain and sinful Thoughts! How often has
the first Word thou have spoken in the Morning been an ill Name, or an angry
Expression! How often have thou made it thy first Contrivance in the Morning,
how to be revenged on such a Person; and, as soon as it has been Day, have
gone and executed thy premeditated Malice! And have not thou done so as to
other Sins? How early in a Morning have thy Lusts engrossed thy Thoughts, as if
thy first Thoughts and Actions had been the Devil's Due, and that God were to
have his Leavings!

67. Saying, Art thou the Christ? Tell us: And he said unto them, If I tell
you, you will not believe.
AND has not this been thy Temper, O my Soul? How often has God told thee
that thou art in danger, and yet thou would not believe! How often has he
assured thee that thou can have no Share, no Benefit in Christ's Merits,
except thou repentest; and yet thou would not believe! How often have thou
been told, that Christ died, that thou might die to Sin; and yet thou
would not believe! How often has the Spirit of God endeavored to convince
thee, that except thou do examine thy self, whether thou art in the Faith, or
no, thou can not be sure of Salvation; and yet thou would not believe him!
Oh, how often has it been proclaimed in thine Ears, that thou can not love
God, except thou prefer his Will before thy Gain or Pleasure; and yet thou
would not believe! And whom could thou blame, if God should condemn thee as
an Unbeliever, who have resisted the known Truths of his most holy Oracles?

68. And if I also ask you, you will not answer me, nor let me go.
THus have thou dealt with thy Conscience, O my Soul! Thou have neither
permitted it to censure thy Actions, nor suffered it to ask thee any Question.
When thou have done something amiss, and it has checked thee, how have thou
dashed its Reprehensions! When it has condemned thy Pride and Censoriousness,
how have thou bid it meddle with its own Business! How often would it have
asked thee, which way thou hopest to be saved; and thou have turned away from
the Motion! How often has it been ready to demand of thee, whether the Courses
thou take are agreeable to the Rules of the Gospel; and thou have presently
diverted the Suggestion! Nay, how often has it actually expostulated with
thee, why no Warning, no Threatening, could prevail with thee; and thou have put
it off, like Felix, to come and discourse with thee another Day, when thou art
more at leisure!

69. Hereafter shall the Son of Man sit on the Right Hand of the Power of God.
O My Soul! Thou have been, in a manner, as confident of thy sitting at the
Right Hand of God, as Christ himself; yet without any solid Ground. Oh, how
ready have thou been to apply the Promises of the Gospel, without regarding
whether thou did fulfill the required Conditions! How often have thou
flattered thy self, that thou shall see God in Glory, when, at the same time,
thou have lived in Sins which exclude Men from the Kingdom of Heaven! See,
through what Sufferings the Son of God enters into his Glory: And can thou
think thou shall reign with him, except thou suffer with him? Before he took
possession of his Kingdom, he fought his Way through all Opposition: And can
thou hope to be conformable to him in Bliss, except thou art content to be
conformable to him in his Work and Labor of Love?

70. Then said they all, Art thou then the Son of God? And he said unto them,
Ye say that I am.
THis Question, which the Priests and Elders among the Jews put captiously to
our Master, the Lord Jesus, I have reason, O my Soul, to put to thee in good
earnest: Art thou a Child of God, or not? If thou art, what mean the Vanities
thou doatest upon? What means that Fondness of the World, that fills the
Channels of thy Heart? What means thy Averseness from imitating the Primitive
Saints in their Self-denials? If thou art a Child of God, why wilt not thou be
governed by the Spirit of God? Why has thy sensual Appetite so much power over
thee? And why art thou so loath to be holy, as thy Father in Heaven is holy? If
the Actions of a Child of God are no part of thy Life, how dwells thy Heavenly
Father's Nature in thee? And when all the Children of God must strive to have
the same Mind in them, which was in the Son of God, how comes thy Mind to be so
carnal, and so wedded to Things below?

71. And they said, What need we any farther Witness? For we our selves have
heard it of his own Mouth.
What these Men say maliciously of Christ, God may too truly say of thee, O my
Soul! What need is there of any farther Witness, when thine own Mouth bears
witness against thee? Were thou to appear before the great Tribunal at this
Instant, how justly might God condemn thee by thine own Confessions? How justly
might he say to thee, Thou did confess that Heaven is not to be got with a
Wish: Why then would not thou bestow more Care and Pains about it? Thou did
confess, that thou can do any thing in the World for Profit sake, sit up at
Night, work hard, go tedious Journeys, put thy self to a great deal of Trouble
for a Sum of Money: Why then would not thou bestir thy self for far greater
Profit, even an Eternity of Joy and Glory? Thou did confess, that he that
would not work, deserved not to eat: And how then can thou expect to enjoy
the Bread of Life, even my Everlasting Kingdom, when thou did not care for
working; and could do more for Twenty or Forty Shillings, than for the
Everlasting Riches?

The XXIII Chapter of St. Luke's Gospel Paraphrased.
1. And the whole Multitude of them arose, and led him to Pilate.
AMong this Multitude, no doubt, were some who formerly cried Hosannah to the
Son of David: But how variable is Mankind in their Devotion! And, O my Soul;
Do not thou see thy self in this Glass? How fickle and inconstant have thou
been in thy Religious Temper! Sometimes Fire, then Ice again; sometimes hot,
then cold again; sometimes diligent in Prayer, then careless and supine again:
And is this agreeable to thy great Master's Temper, who loved thee to the End?
Should thy God love thee at this rate; love thee to Day, and forsake thee to
Morrow, where would thou hide thy Head in the Day of Battle?

2. And they began to accuse him, saying, we found this Fellow perverting the
Nation, and forbidding to give Tribute to Caesar; saying, That he himself is
Christ, a King.
THis was nothing but a downright Lie; for he had not only paid Tribute for
himself and Peter, but charged the Spies that were sent unto him, to give to
Caesar the Things that were Caesar's: But their Interest is maintained by the
Untruth, and therefore they make nothing of the Sin. O my Soul, how little have
thou stood upon a Lie, when thy Interest has seemed to require it! And to
clear thy self, how regardless have thou been of speaking Truth of thy
Neighbor, and thy self! How little have thou regarded the God of Truth, whose
Eyes were upon thee, and who saw the Falsehood and Perverseness of thine Heart!
Thou had need, for the future, redeem thy Time, and speak the Truth from thy
Heart, whatever thou suffer and losest by it. And let a good Conscience be
ever dearer to thee, than the Breath and good Opinion of Men; For mark the
perfect Man, and behold the Upright; the End of that Man is Peace.

3. And Pilate asked him, Art thou the King of the Jews? And he answered him,
and said, Thou say it.
HOW often, O my Soul, has Christ asked thee this Question, Am not I thy King?
Thou have, indeed, answered with thy Lips, That he is: But how far has thy
Heart been from him, and how loath have thou been to be governed by him? How
boldly have thou sometimes thrown off his Yoke, and how unwilling have thou
been, that this Man should reign over thee? Can thou have a better Prince to
rule thy Thoughts, and Words, and Actions? Did ever any miscarry under his
Rule? And can thou think, thou shall?

4. Then said Pilate to the Chief Priests, and to the People, I find no fault
in this Man.
AN Heathen finds no Fault in Christ Jesus: Yet, Have not thou, O my Soul,
found fault with him, when thou have disputed his Precepts, thought them hard
and troublesome, and his Commandments grievous? Have not thou blamed him in so
doing, when thou have thought that he has not consulted thine Ease, nor
considered thy Circumstances, and tied thee up to hard Meat; has not this been
harboring strange Thoughts of him? Can he that is the Fountain of Wisdom, do
any thing that is irrational? Or can thou think he did not design thy Good,
when he commanded that which crosses the Inclinations of Flesh and Blood? And
ought not this to make thee say to him for the future, Speak, Lord, for thy
Servant hears?

5. And they were the more fierce, saying, He stirs up the People; teaching
throughout all Jury; beginning from Galilee, to this place.
AND must thy stirring up the Souls of Men to love their God, my dearest Lord,
be called Sedition! Oh, then let there be such Sedition, and such Uproars, in
my Soul. Let there be a perpetual Contrariety betwixt the Flesh and the Spirit
in me, that my Spirit may never yield to the evil Motions of the Flesh: Stir up
my Soul, to stand up for thy Honor and Glory: Commence a War within me,
whereby I may be engaged to fight for him, who has redeemed me from the Power
of the Grave, and given me a Title to Immortality.

6. When Pilate heard of Galilee, he asked, whether the Man were a Galilean?
A Galilean was a Nickname: And when the Jews called one a Galilean, they
meant an inconsiderable Person How meanly does Pilate speak of thee, my Blessed
Jesus! But he knew thee not. Had he been sensible of thy Divinity, he would not
only have spoken of thee with the highest Respect and Veneration, and fallen
down before thee; but wondered at the Mystery, that the Creator should thus
suffer himself to be abused by his Creatures; and be content to be made an
Object of their Scorn, whose Souls and Bodies he might have lashed with Eternal
Fire. Ignorance wanders in the Dark, and passes by that Medicine which is of
greatest Use, and yields the greatest Comfort. Oh, drive that Darkness from my
Mind; and let me know nothing with that Delight and Satisfaction, as I do thee,
my Jesus, thee my Crucified Redeemer.

7. And as soon as he knew that he belonged to Herod's Jurisdiction, he sent
him to Herod, who himself was also at Jerusalem at that time.
PIlate intended to have Herod's Opinion of Christ. Which was just as if two
blind Men should judge of Colors, or pretend to guide one another; by which
Attempt they both fall into the Ditch. O Jesu! What could Herod judge of thee,
that knew not thy glorious Designs, nor had any Knowledge of thy Spiritual
Kingdom! The Things of the Spirit are Foolishness to the Natural Man. So they
have been to me: Before I knew what the Riches of thy Grace were, I had strange
Thoughts of Holiness, and looked upon it as a needless thing. I prize it now;
Thanks be to thee, who have opened mine Eyes, and not suffered me to continue
in the Shadow and Valley of Death.

8. And when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad; for he was desirous to see
him of a long Season, because he had heard many things of him, and he hoped to
have seen some Miracle done by him.
SUre, this Man knew not what a Miracle was, nor the End for which those
wonderful Works were wrought. Could the vain King think, my blessed Lord, that
thou did work Miracles, to make Men Sport; which were the Seals of Heaven,
affixed to thy sacred Doctrine? O Lord, I long not to see thy former Miracles
wrought over again; only one Miracle I beg thou would work in me, and turn my
Heart of Stone into an Heart of Flesh, and expel the Leprosy of Sin out of my
Soul; which if thou will grant, I will speak of thy mavelous Acts, and my
Mouth shall show forth thy Praise: In the Congregations of the Saints will I
bless thee.

9. Then he questioned with him in many Words; but but he answered him nothing.
NO doubt, the Questions were trivial, and below the Gravity and Holiness of my
Savior. Had he asked, What he should do to be saved? None would have given a
speedier Answer. O my Jesus! How would thou have embraced the Opportunity,
and received the inquisitive Man with the same Tenderness that thou did the
humble Publican! But the Questions, no doubt, were mean and ridiculous, and
such as Men put to Fortune Tellers: They deserved no Answer. By thy Silence, O
my Lord, thou teach me how to behave my self upon the like Occasions; when
Men ask impertinent Questions about Religion, with an Intent rather to cavil,
than to be edified: In such Cases, let me keep my Mouth as with a Bridle; but
let my Lips be ever open, and ready to give an Answer to every Man that does
ask me a Reason of the Hope that is in me, with Meekness and Fear.

10. And the Chief Priests and Scribes stood, and vehemently accused him.
What could they accuse thee of, O thou King of Saints! All that they could
charge thee with, was, That thou had healed their Sick, and cured their
Blind, and dispossessed their Demoniacs, and taught them the Way to Eternal
Happiness. And was this a Crime, which Men of Ingenuity would have thought the
greatest Mercy? But Envy draws the Goodness it sees in others, with a very
black and sour Face; and because it self springs from Hell, derives the
sweetest Actions of its Neighbors from the same Original. O my Lord, do but in
my Soul what thou have done in Judea* and I will own thee as the Author and
Fountain of my Happiness. Let Envy and Strife die in my Soul, that Confusion
and every Evil Work may die there too; and my Heart may become an Habitation of
Peace, for the Prince of Peace to rest in for ever.

11. And Herod, with his Men of War, set him at naught, and mocked him, and
arrayed him in a gorgeous Robe, and sent him again to Pilate.
GReat Indignity! To dress him like a Fool, and then to send him, with the
Noise and Hissings of the People about him, through the Streets, back again to
Pilate! What Patience was here! Who, among the Children of Men, that had Power
in his Hand to be revenged on such Contempt, would have born this with
Equanimity? For there goes nothing nearer the Heart, than Contempt; especially,
in Persons innocent and great: But not the least Discontent is seen or heard in
thee, under all this Mockery, my dearest Lord. It was to show me an Example;
and to let me see, that there is no walking to Heaven on Carpets, and a
Footcloth. It was an Act great and heroic; and Heaven, that judged of thy
Patience and Contentedness, saw greater Valor in that Act, than in all the
Martial Enterprises of Herod and his Soldiers. Lord, make me ambitious of the
same Conquest: And let me never think my self to be like thee, till my Passions
be subdued to Faith and Reason.

12. And the same Day Pilate and Herod were made Friends together; for before
they were at Enmity between themselves.
A Strange Friendship, which is made by dishonouring God, and has Sin and
Impiety for its Foundation! Such Friendship the World is acquainted with; and
Men become Friends one to another, because they agree in committing Sins much
of the same nature and size. This makes Drunkards kind: And one ill Man takes
the other to be his Friend, because he wills and nills the same. Two Carnal
Humors are alike gratified; each counts Virtue needless or burdensome, but
Sin and Extravagance is the Diversion and Business of both. O my Soul, come not
thou into their Secret: Unto their Assembly, mine Honor, be not thou united.
But thy Friendship, sweet Jesu, is that my Soul longs for: If thou be my
Friend, I need no more. Thou art more than all the Friends I have in the World.
Wherever I am, be thou my Friend; while I live, when I die, when I leave this
World, and when my Soul must appear before thy Tribunal; and I shall never be
confounded.

13. And Pilate, when he had called together the Chief Priests, and the Rulers,
and the People,
HE calls both Priests and People together, because they were of one Mind. Men
agree more in Sin, than in Goodness; and Wickedness unites them more than
Religion. O Jesu! If all Men would tread in thy Steps, and follow thy Precepts,
what an happy World would there be! Yet, even those that pretend to be of thy
Religion, hate one another, and are divided more than Jews and Infidels. Oh,
when shall that happy Day come, that we shall all be of one Heart, and of one
Soul! No Religion gives greater or better Rules for Charity and Union, than
that which thou have taught Mankind. Oh* give me that Charity which bears all
things, and endures all things: Unite my Heart unto thee, that I may fear thy
Name: Plant thine own sweet Temper in me, that I may reign with thee for ever.

14. Said unto them, Ye have brought this Man unto me, as one that perverts the
People: And behold, I have examined him before you, and have found no fault in
this Man, touching those things whereof ye accuse him.
HOW does this Man labor to convince the wicked Jews of their Error! O my
blessed Master! What pains have thou taken with me, to convince me of my
Faults, and I have, notwithstanding, been loath to know them! What Checks have
thou given me for my Pride and Passion; and I have drowned them, and passed
them by, without taking notice of them! When I have neglected a Duty, how have
thou, by Suggestions, and setting the Examples of thy Saints before me,
endeavored to withdraw me from my Omission! Oh, let me frustrate thy Pains no
more: Let it not be said, that I was deaf to thy Admonitions. When thou drawest
me, let me follow thee: When thou leadest me, let me walk in the Way thou
chusest for me; that I may come at last to enjoy thee with thy Saints, and
those who through Patience have inherited thy Promises.

15. No, nor yet Herod; for I sent you to him, and lo, nothing worthy of Death
is done of him.
O Blessed Savior! Even thine Enemies must justify thee. Thy Innocence was so
bright and illustrious, that Impiety it self could not charge thee with any
Error. And when even thy Foes do vindicate thy Cause, I, that pretend to be
thy Friend, must not be backward to assert thy Honor and Glory. Let me
justify thee by mine Actions; and believe, that I cannot honor thee more,
than by adorning thy Doctrine in all things. Let my good Works bear witness
that I honor thee; and, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation, let
me sanctify thee in my Heart and Life; that whereas Men speak evil of me, as
of an Evil-doer, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse my good Conversation
in Christ Jesus.

16. I will therefore chastise him, and release him.
HE had not deserved so much as Chastisement; yet the Judge, being desirous to
save him from the creator Danger, inflicts this upon him, for a Show, rather
(...) out of Malice. Even wicked Men sometimes have good Desires and Purposes;
so had I before I knew thee, my dearest Lord; but those Purposes came to
nothing. I purposed often to mend my Life, but Temptations were stronger than
my Purposes; and when they came, I fell. This Sickness, Lord, I am still apt to
fall into; and though by thy Grace I act sometimes according to my good
Intentions and Resolutions, yet how often do I miscarry in this point! Lord,
give me not only good Inclinations, but Courage to perform them too. Oh, let me
not think it enough to entertain good Wishes in my Soul; but make them so
strong, that the Good I intend and purpose, may break forth like the Sun from a
Cloud, into a perfect Day.

17. For of necessity he must release one unto them at the Feast.
When the Paschal Lamb was to be killed, the Jews had a Prisoner released, to
confirm the Memory of their Deliverance from the House of Bondage. O Lamb of
God! When thou diedst, thou openedst the Prison-door, for all Mankind to come
out: Thou did proclaim Liberty to all Men, captivated by Sin and the Devil. O
wonderful Release! This makes me admire how Men, after this Liberty procured
for them by thy Death, should yet be fond of their Prisons still, and delight
in Slavery, and the Bondage of Iniquity. Oh, Bring my Soul out of Prison, that
I may praise thy Name: The Righteous shall compass me about, when thou shall
deal bountifully with me.

18. And they cried out all at once, saying, Away with this Man, and release
unto us Barabbas.
A Monstrous Choice! To prefer a Man before God, a Son of Death before the Lord
of Life, a Malefactor before Innocence it self, a Murderer before the Savior
of the World, Darkness before Light, a Villain before the Son of God! Yet,
blessed Jesu, such a sad Choice I have made too often, when I have preferred
the Cares of the World before the better part; and while I have condemned these
wicked Men, and been in a kind of Passion to see and hear of their Impiety,
have unawares sunk into this Sin my self, by preferring a Trifle before thy
Will, and a foolish Satisfaction before Rest in thy Bosom, and an Interest in
thy Favor; and the Things of this World, before a more glorious Reversion in
another Life. Pardon my desperate Choice: And let me henceforward prefer thee,
who art fairer than the Children of Men, before all that my Flesh does promise,
or the World give. For one thing is needful, even thy Love of Complacency; and
if I have that, it shall not be taken away from me.

19. Who for a certain Sedition made in the City, and for Murder, was cast in
Prison.
PRisons are fit Places for Malefactors, not only upon the Account of securing
Humane Societies from Enemies; but also because such Sinners, being removed
from Temptations and Objects that enticed them to do ill, and under pressure,
may think of God, and reflect upon their wicked Lives, and come to a sincere
Repentance: Yet when they are delivered out of their Durance, their Lives very
often are the same that formerly they were. O my dear Redeemer! Thou have made
me a Prisoner sometimes by Sickness, and other Disasters, in hopes that the
Affliction might work upon me, and the Fire I was in would make me a new Man;
yet when thou have freed me from this Prison, I have reassumed my former
Liberty in sinning: Oh, let it be so no more. And seeing I am made whole, let
me take heed, and sin no more, lest worse things happen unto me.

20. Pilate therefore, willing to release Jesus, spoke again to them.
HEre I see greater Charity and Tenderness in an Heathen, than in those who had
the lively Oracles of God. What a strange Sight is this, to see Uncircumcision,
which is by Nature fulfilling the Law, judge them who by the Letter and
Circumcision do transgress the Law! How many excellent Acts of Virtue do I see,
and read of, in mere Pagans, that had nothing but the Light of Nature to direct
them; Acts which I do not come up to, that have the Light of Heaven to shine
upon me! O Jesu, make me ashamed of my Backwardness; and let my Righteousness
exceed that of Men which do not call upon thy Name, lest it be more tolerable
for Tire and Sidon in that Day, than for me.

21. But they cried, saying, Crucify him, crucify him.
THis was the most infamous Punishment that any Man could be condemned to. Ah,
Wretches! Did not your Hearts smite you when you said so? Will nothing serve
you, but the most ignominious Death; a Death, which none but Slaves were
destined to? What a brutish thing is Wrath and Anger! It stops its Ears against
all common Ingenuity and Reason: It does things in haste, which must be
repented of by leisure. Lord Jesu! I remember what unreasonable things I have
done when my Passion has been up, things I am ashamed of now. Oh, leave me not
to these Winds and Tempests! Oh, let me learn of thee, for thou art meek and
lowly in Heart, that I may find Rest for my Soul.

22. And he said unto them the third time, Why, what Evil has he done? I have
found no Cause of Death in him. I will therefore chastise him, and let him go.
O Jesu! It Is very true, thou have done no Evil, neither was Guile found in thy
Mouth: When thou wast reviled, thou did not revile again; when thou
sufferedst, thou threatnedst not: Thou wentest about, doing good; no Man could
convince thee of any Sin: Thou wast good, and did good, even to those that
now cried Crucify him: Thou came to discourage Men from Evil; it was thy
Province to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to make Men Partakers of the
Divine Nature. Goodness was in thy Nature, and all thy Actions breathed of it.
Thou wast tender of Men's Good, of the Good of their Souls and Bodies: Oh, make
me conformable to thy Goodness! Let me abhor that which is evil, and cleave to
that which is good. Let thy Goodness be my Pattern, and let me ever rejoice in
thy Goodness. Make me steadily and invincibly good, good unto Death, that I may
receive a Crown of Life. Thy Goodness endures for ever: Give mine the same
Duration: Oh, touch it with thy Light, and it shall burn bright for ever.

23. And they were instant with loud Voices, requiring that he might be
crucified; and the Voices of them and the Chief Priests prevailed.
THE Devil was let loose in these Sinners; and see how he rages! He makes them
leap Bogs and Ditches, and a Thousand Precipices, to get their Wills
accomplished. The Damned in Hell were not more outrageous than these Men. Lord
Jesu! What are we, when left to our selves, or to the Power of the Enemy! Thou
came to redeem me from this Power: Oh, let me come under it no more. Once I
dwelt under that Tyranny: I now serve a gentler Master. Oh, let me serve thee,
not with Eye-service, as a Man-pleaser; but as a Servant of God, doing the Will
of God from the Heart.

24. And Pilate gave Sentence, that it should be as they required.
THese Brutes threaten to accuse him to the Emperor, of Mis-government, and of
Unfaithfulness to his Master; and that turns the Scale, and tempts him to
change his Resolution. In this Misdemeanour, Lord, I read mine own. Thus has
Profit and Gain, and Fear of losing the Favor of Men, changed my good and
pious Purposes, When I have thought to reprove a Person greater than my self,
Fear of drawing his Frowns upon me, has made me give over those Religious
Thoughts. When I have resolved not to comply with a sinful Design or Proposal
made to me, how has the Temptation of a considerable Advantage turned the
Bias! Oh, make this Fickleness and Inconstancy very odious to me! And let me
count nothing Gain, that is accompanied with the Loss of thy Favor: Let that
be dearer to me than Gold; yea, dearer than fine Gold; and let me hate every
false Way.

25. And he released unto them him who for Sedition and Murder was cast into
Prison, whom they had desired; but he delivered Jesus to their Will.
HOW pleased is sinful Nature, when its wicked Desires are gratified; when it
obtains its Wishes, and gets possession of what it craved with Eagerness! It
fancies it drinks Nectar and Cordials, though, in good truth, it is nothing but
Poison. No doubt, the Apple, or Fruit, our first Parents ate of, seemed very
delicious; but it appeared soon after, that they had swallowed Death, and God's
Indignation. Such Sweetness have I dreamed of, in committing Sin! And how have
my Senses been tickled, when I have enjoyed the dangerous Meat my Appetite
longed for! But it has proved very bitter in my Bowels. Thus the unwary Fish
swallows the Bait, but knows not that the Hook, which will certainly kill it,
lies under it. O Jesu! My Desires never move more orderly, than when they move
within the Sphere and Circle of thy Law. Oh, charm them to that Circle; and I
shall never perish!

26. And as they led him away, they laid hold upon one Simon a Cyrenian, coming
out of the Country, and on him they laid the Cross, that he might bear it after
Jesus.
HAppy Man! that was counted worthy to bear the Cross with the Lord Jesus! How
light did the burden seem to him^ when Jesus was at one end of it! So thy Holy
Apostles, my dearest Lord, thought themselves blessed, that they were counted
worthy to suffer shame for thy Name. How contented should I be under any
affliction, did I believe, that thou art with me, and helpest to bear my load!
Surely, thou art not far off, when the Cross is laid upon my Shoulder. In all
my afflictions, thou art afflicted, O let me think of it and be cheerful under
it! I know thou layest it on me for my good, and art touched with the feeling
of my infirmities! Let me have no hard thought of any trouble, for I suffer in
thy Company! Shall I think much of the burden, when thou enduredst far greater
for my sake? In all my distresses be thou with me, and convince me, that thou
art so; that I may never repine, never murmur, never fret, but may bear thy
yoke with a willing Mind, being confident I shall not be a loser by it; but
when I am tried, receive the Crown of Righteousness, which thou have promised
to all that love thy Name!

27. And there followed him a great company of People, and of Women, which also
bewailed and lamented him.
TEnderness and Compassion to persons in distress, is a Tribute, that nature
requires; And to have denied it thee in thy sufferings, my Blessed Lord, had
been barbarous! Those that followed thee, and wept, did not know, how great and
good thou were. If they had, their Tears had been turned into Blood. They
believed thee innocent, that makes them wet their Cheeks; but had they known
that thou were the Son of God, the dearly beloved of the Eternal Father, they
would have wished, that their Heads were Fountains of Water. O that I could
never think of thy Cross without Tears in mine Eyes! O that I could never
behold thee bleeding in the Holy Sacrament without deep compunction! Lord!
Touch the Rock of my Heart, that the Waters may flow to the everlasting comfort
of my Soul!

28. But Jesus turning unto them, said; Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for
me, but weep for your selves, and for your Children.
LOrd Jesu! Thou saw, what miseries were coming upon that Nation, and art
concerned for them more than thou art for thy self! In all thy sufferings thou
did not consult thine own welfare so much, as ours! It was for our sakes, it
was for my sake, that thou did endure the Torments, which fell upon thee!
Thou wast loath I should perish, and therefore would rather dye, than I should
be undone! Thy Father's wrath was levelled at me, and thou stepst in, and
tookest the blow, that I might escape! The curse of the Law was pronounced
against me, who was the Offender! Thou wentst into the midst of the Fire, that
I might not be burnt! The Floods went high, and their Commission was to drown
me; thou venturedst into that Sea, and did divide the Waters, that I might go
through the midst and be safe! and if this Mercy does not melt my Affections,
and make them thine, how unexcusable must I make my self! O let these Thoughts
for ever dwell in my mind, that I may live as becomes the Gospel of Christ, and
may think no service so sweet as thine.

29. For behold, the days are coming, in the which they shall say: Blessed are
the barren, and the Wombs that never bare, and the Paps which never gave suck.
THese were the days of Jerusalem's destruction, than which never worse times
were seen, and Men and Women wished, that they had never been born, Lord, thou
would have me prepare for the worst of times, that when they come, I may not
be surpised, but know where to flee for refuge! Sweet Jesu! Teach me how to
prepare for the evil to come, that it may not touch me, or if it touch me, it
may not hurt me. To be always good, always watchful, always doing thy Will, is
the way to be always safe, even then when the Earth is moved, and all things
are turned upside down, when the Sea rages, when the Waters thereof roar, and
be troubled, and the Mountains shake with the swelling thereof. Let me ever
preserve a pure Heart, and a good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned, that however
thou disposest of things in this World, I may not lose the felicity of that
which is to come!

30. Then shall they begin to say to the Mountains, fall on us, and to the
Hills, cover us.
When Men have forsaken God, and his Judgments break forth upon them, how do
they lay hold on every bull-rush to save themselves from ruin! What good can
Hills or Mountains do, when God is angry? They cannot hide from the wrath of
God* Thus it will be in the great day of Judgment, of which the Destruction of
Jerusalem was an Emblem! When Men shall see the frowning Judge, whom they have
offended, what tremblings will invade them! How will they quake for fear! What
pitiful shifts will they betake themselves to! but all in vain. O let that
dreadful day be ever before mine Eyes! Let the future shrieks and groans of
impenitent Sinners, even now in this my day, sound in mine Ears, that I may be
frighted from Sin; O let me think, what their ways will end in, and turn my
feet away from their Paths! O let me not follow their pernicious ways, that I
may not be condemned with the World!

31. For if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry?
JUdgment must begin at the House of God; and if it first begin at us, what
shall the end be of them, that obey not the Gospel of God? And if the Righteous
scarcely be saved, where shall the Ungodly and Sinner appear! God is resolved
to judge the World, and even the best shall have a taste of his Justice. The
Afflictions, that befall the good in this World, are but the beginnings of his
indignation against Sin, and by the Blood of Christ they shall be saved from
the wrath to come. But if these be the beginnings of God's anger, what will the
progress of his Justice be, and where will it end? O blessed Savior! How
fearful will the end of all ungodly Sinners be! If I must be afflicted, O let
me have my share of it in this World, that I may not sink under the burden of
thine indignation hereafter.

32. And there were also two other Malefactors led with him, to be put to death.
What an opportunity had these wretches to save their Souls, even at the last
moment of their Lives! An opportunity! the like of which never was before, nor
ever will be. Here was an happy day for them, to have secured Christ's Favor,
who would not have denied his Grace to them, had they been but willing to
accept of it, upon this extraordinary occasion. Kings and Princes bestow
extraordinary Acts of Grace at their Coronation, or upon some remarkable
Solemnity. Now had been the time for these Malefactors to have laid hold on
Eternal life, which they never had any hope of before. But how do Men let slip
the opportunities God puts in their hands! So have I, my Blessed Jesus, many a
time, when I have been in a good frame, when thou have put good Thoughts and
Resolutions in my Heart, what opportunities had I to to make my self for ever!
But I have returned to the love of the World, despised these opportunies of
Grace, and justly deserved, thou should deny them me for ever! Dear Savior!
visit me once more with thy Salvation, with the Dayspring from on high, and I
will admit thy Beams into my Soul, that I may be enlightened, edified,
sanctified, and preserved for ever!

33. And when they were come to the place, which is called Calvary, there they
crucified him, and the Malefactors, one on the right hand, and the other on the
left.
HEre begins the act, at which Heaven and Earth stood amazed! What a spectacle
was here! The Son of God nailed to the Cross, and hanging betwixt two Thieves!
Did not the hands of the Soldiers, that nailed the Savior of the World to the
Cross, tremble? Did not their Hearts fail them, when they tied him to the Tree!
No, their hearts were flint and adamant. No other could have been engaged in
the Service. O wonderful stupidity! they knew not, what flesh they touched.
They knew not it was a Body framed by the Holy Ghost, and the fruit of the
Virgin's Womb! Here, O my Soul, here the work of thy Redemption is commenced! O
look upon the Heavenly Creature that hangs here, and think what Riches are
treasured up in his Cross! Here he showed himself a Mediator indeed, hanging in
the middle, betwixt a Penitent and a Prodigal, betwixt Heaven and Earth,
betwixt the Living and the Dead! They crucified him! What did the Angels think,
to see their Lord and Master thus used! What do thou think of it, O my Soul!
Job's Friends seeing the greatness of his misery, sat silent by him in the
Dust seven Days. Look, O my Soul, upon this object, sit silent, and admire, for
thy Lord's grief is great.

34. Then said Jesus, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.
LOrd Jesus! What a Miracle of Mercy do thou work here! I know not, which is
the greater wonder, those thou did formerly, when conversant on the Earth, or
that which I see now performed on the Cross. To pray for Men, who had abused
thee to a Prodigy! To beg of thy Father to forgive their Insolences, and not
to exclude them from the possibility of Repentance! Can I think of this, and
not believe, that this was to teach me, how I must behave my self toward those,
that have done me wrong? Can thou forgive such injuries, and shall not I
forgive them that trespass against me? One would have thought, that these
affronts and indignities, which were offered to thee, would never have been
forgiven! yet they are no sooner offered, but thou intercedest for their
Remission! O let no injury, that is henceforward offered me, seem too big for
pardon! O let me freely pass by the offense committed against me, that my
Father which is the Heaven may forgive me my Trespasses.

34. And they parted his Garments, and cast Lots.
What a rich Spoil did these Soldiers get, and they knew it not! If a good
Christian, that understood the great Mystery of Godliness, had got such a
Treasure, how would he have valued it! what Joy, what Comfort, would it have
been to such a Soul! Not that there is any great virtue in the Clothes of the
Son of God; A Man might have kept them, and yet, by leading an ill life, have
perished Eternally; but Who would not have preserved these precious Relics, if
he had known what Person it was that wore them! It would have done him good to
have looked upon them; and admirable Reflections he might have made upon them!
But to Men that knew not God, these things were of no value. O my Soul! Thou
have not prized the good Things, thy God has bequeathed to thee. How little
have thou valued the Means of Grace, thy Savior left behind him! Henceforward
learn to make a better Use of them, that they may be Health to thy Navel, and
Marrow to thy Bones.

35. And the People stood, beholding; and the Rulers also, with them, derided
him, saying, He saved others: Let him save himself, if he be Christ, the chosen
of God.
IT could not but cause strange Admiration, to see him who had been known to be
a Prophet, mighty in Word or Deed, come to such a doleful and dreadful End! But
for any Man to be so impudent, as to deride him in his Misery, this was
extraordinary bold and insolent. Yet, Men that have done a very ill thing,
think themselves obliged to justify it by their Gestures and Actions; partly
to keep themselves from Reproach, and partly to quiet their unruly and
tumultuous Consciences. O my Soul! Dread these things, as Hellfire; and let
not Sin reign in thy mortal Body, lest thou be tempted to stand in it, and to
think well of it, and defend it, and by that means make thy Case desperate, and
thy Disease remediless and irrecoverable.

36. And the Soldiers also mocked him, coming to him, and offering him Vinegar.
TO give a dying Man Vinegar, is, to increase his Torments, and mocking of his
Misery. To add Affliction to Affliction, has been counted inhumane by most
Nations. How like Beasts and Brutes does Want of Religion make Men! Nothing
makes them act more rationally, than Religion. Religion is the Image of God;
and he that practices it, cannot but be like God. O my Jesus! Give me such a
Sense of it, that it may shine through my Actions, and People may see whose
Child I am. Oh, when shall my brutish, my beastly Affections die! When shall I
imitate my Father which is in Heaven; and act like a Person who has a Soul
infused from above, the Gift of the Father of Lights, with whom there is no
Variableness, nor Shadow of Turning!

37. And saying, If thou be the King of the Jews, save thy self.
A Frothy Humor, to what Inconveniences does it lead Men! It makes them speak
ill of God before they are aware; and while they give way to their Jests, they
very often affront Religion, and Holiness, that is its individual Companion. O
my Savior! Give me a serious Temper, Gravity of Behavior, Sobriety of Speech,
Discretion in my Words, and Considerateness in my Carriage. Let me not dare to
offend thee, to please Men; nor attempt to make the Company I am in merry, with
breaking Jests upon things, at which the holy Angels tremble.

38. And a Superscription also was written over him in Letters of Greek, and
Latin, and Hebrew, This is the King of the Jews.
HOW does God concur with the Actions of sinful Men, contrary to their Designs,
and Purposes! Pilate, when he writ this Title over the Cross, in all these
Languages, perhaps did it only to gratify his Humor; but God so directed it,
that all Nations, intimated by those Languages, might read there that this
Jesus was the Savior of all the World; and that no Nation was excluded from a
Title to the Merits of his Cross and Passion. O Jesu! Thou art no Respecter of
Persons: But in every Nation, whosoever serves thee, and works Righteousness,
is accepted of thee. As poor, as mean, as inconsiderable, as I am, yet if my
Heart be upright toward thee, thou will receive me, and love me. Oh, give me
such an Heart, as thou delightest to dwell in: And if thou art in me, I shall
possess a Treasure, which the Moth cannot corrupt, and Thieves cannot steal
away.

39. And one of the Malefactors, which were hanged, railed on him, saying, If
thou be Christ, save thy self.
WHat Rudeness was this! Strange! That his Misery should not make the Wretch
more modest! But his Concern was only for this present Life: All that he
desired, was, to be free from his present Pain, that he might pursue his
Sensual Inclinations, as formerly. How may a Man's Sensuality be known by his
Talk! O my Soul, look well to thy Words and Discourses. If thy Heart be touched
with a Sense of a future glorious Life, thy Tongue will delight to speak of it.
If thou have an Aversion from such Discourses, all thy Professions of Eternal
Life will be mere Wind and Air: From the Abundance of the Heart, the Mouth
speaks. If Heaven and a glorious Eternity has possessed thy Heart, thou will
find Opportunities to utter thy inward Feelings of those things with thy Tongue.

40. But the other answering, rebuked him, saying, Do not thou fear God,
seeing thou art in the same Condemnation?
FRiendly Reproof is a great Duty! Yet, O my Soul! how loath have thou been to
give it; and how loath have thou been to take it, when this precious Balm has
been poured out upon thy Head, by a charitable Neighbor! How have thou looked
upon it as Gall and Wormwood! And what hard Thoughts have thou entertained of
the kind Monitor; calling him either faucy, or meddling with things that did not
concern him! And how often have thou let thy Neighbor sleep and rest in his
Sin, when thy Fraternal Correption might have rouzed him from his Slumber! Oh,
be humbled for this great Omission: And when a Malefactor on the Cross thinks
himself obliged not to suffer Sin upon his Neighbor, be not thou backward to
save a Soul from Death.

41. And we, indeed, justly; for we receive the due Reward of our Deeds: But
this Man has done nothing amiss.
AN humble Acknowledgment of our Sins, and Demerits, is the Way to God's Bosom.
This is the first Discovery of this poor Man's Repentance: and he begins with
the noblest Act of it; which is, seeking to draw others to a Sense of better
things. In this, O my Soul, thou have been very remiss and neglectful, even in
propagating Religion, and exhorting others to seek God's Face. Henceforth be
more diligent in gaining Proselytes to Christ Jesus: And what if thy Admonition
prevails not; thou have discharged a Duty, and may rejoice in having acted
according to the Will of God.

42. And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy
Kingdom.
HEre is a Mind set upon Heaven, and despising the World; than which, nothing
is more acceptable to God. He is content to endure Shame, Pain, Tortures,
Prickings, Aches, and all the Indignities that Man can offer to him, so Christ
will but remember him in his Kingdom. O Jesu, Son of God! give me such a Mind,
and Temper, which may be content with any thing, so I may but obtain a Share in
the Pleasures at thy Right Hand. Let even Sword, and Famine, and Hunger, and
Thirst, and Nakedness, seem nothing to me, so I may but enjoy thy Embraces in
the End. Asure me, and convince me, that the Afflictions of this present Life,
though never so great, never so painful, never so lasting, never so bitter, or
piercing, are not worthy to be compared with the Glory which ever long shall be
revealed in me.

43. And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, To day thou shall be with
me in Paradise.
HOW ready is Christ to cherish the Penitent, that abhors himself for his
Deformity, and sees greater Beauty, and Excellency, and Satisfaction, in the
Ways of Holiness, and a Spiritual Life, than in all the Comforts of this World.
Blessed Savior! How ready art thou to stretch forth thine Arms to such humble
and contrite Spirits! Thou art readier to grant, than they to ask; and even
before they cry, thou hear them! Oh, let this be an Encouragement to me, to
deplore my Sins, and to bewail mine Offenses; to detest what I have been doing
against thee, and to seek first thy Kingdom, and its Righteousness; that now
that thou art in thy Kingdom, thou may remember me; and when I leave this
World, may bid me enter into my Master's Joy.

44. And it was about the Sixth Hour, and there was a Darkness over all the
Earth, until the Ninth Hour.
THE Sun loses his Splendor at Noon! The Deed was black, and Heaven draws a
Curtain over it! Yet, notwithstanding the Miracle, the greatest part of the
Spectators continue obstinate! When Men's Hearts are set upon Sin and the
World, how little do even Miracles prevail! O my Soul, How many strange
Providence have thou seen, and yet thou have not mended thy Life upon it! Thou
have seen Miracles of Judgment and Mercy, yet thy Heart has been hard. Oh,
learn to take more notice of God's Dispensations; and believe, that the strange
things that happen to thee and others, are Calls from Heaven, to the
Inhabitants of the World, to learn Righteousness.

45. And the Sun was darkened, and the Veil of the Temple was rent in the midst.
WHat a Motive was this to Men, to rend their Hearts! This was a Sign that God
would lay the Enclosure open, and that Christ was to break down the
Partition Wall, and make both Jews and Gentiles one. To this Rent thou art
beholden, O my Soul! Thy Father was an Amorite, and thy Mother an Hittite; thy
Ancestors were Heathens, and Idolaters; by this Rent they were brought to the
Light of the Gospel, and upon that Account thou enjoyest the Gospel now.
Remember, how unworthy of this Favor thou have walked many Years; and how thou
have dishonored this Gospel with thy Life. Oh, learn to bring forth Fruits, as
become the Doctrine which is according unto Godliness; and let thy Conversation
be such, as may promote God's Glory, and thine Eternal Happiness.

46. And when Jesus had cried with a loud Voice, he said, Father, into thy
Hands I commend my Spirit. And having said thus, he gave up the Ghost.
NOW the Sacrifice is offered; and this Death reconciles God to the sinful
World! This Death, which had been so often foretold, both by the Prophets, and
Christ himself, is at last accomplished; and Pardon of Sin, and the Possibility
of Men's arriving to Eternal Life by a true Repentance, is hereby purchased!
This Death puts an End to the Curse of the Law: And from this Death, O my Soul,
date thy Happiness. Though wicked Men, who had an Hand in it, were the Means
whereby it was effected, yet the Son of God would die; and his voluntary Death
is the meritorious Cause of thy Eternal Life. Oh, look upon it with Wonder and
Admiration! And while thou stand amazed at it, see withal, how thou thy self
may end thy Days. If thou live like a Child of God, thy Father in Heaven
will receive thee when thou die: Thy Father will not send thee to Hell; but,
being a Father, he will stretch forth his Almighty Arms, and receive thee to
himself, like a faithful Creator.

47. Now when the Centurion saw what was done, he glorified God, saying,
Certainly this was a righteous Man.
TO make a right Construction of Things, is the Way to Spiritual Wisdom. This
Man justly concluded, that Heaven could not possibly show it self so much
concerned about a Person, if he were not an extraordinary Favorite. He judged
rationally, and this brought him to a true Knowledge of Christ, and to an open
Confession and Declaration of the Sufferer's Innocence. O my Soul, Consider by
what Miracles and Testimonies, that Truth thou professest, has been confirmed,
and conclude it is Divine. No Religion has those Evidences of its Divinity,
and Celestial Original, that the Christian has; and coming from God, thou have
the greatest Reason to believe, that all its Promises and Threatenings will be
fulfilled; and seeing that all these shall be fulfilled, what manner of Person
ought thou to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness?

48. And all the People that came together to that Sight, beholding the things
which were done, smote their Breasts, and returned.
SMiting their Breasts was a Sign of their Grief and Anger; of their Grief,
because so excellent a Person had been so inhumanely butchered; and of their
Anger, against those bloody Men that had condemned and executed him. See here,
O my Soul, what Entertainment thou art to give thy Sins! In looking upon them,
divide thy Affections betwixt Grief and Anger. Grieve, that thou have offered
so many Indignities to thy Blessed Master. Be angry with thy self, for being so
base and ungrateful. Grieve, that thou have forgotten the End for which thou
wast created; and be revenged upon the Sins that caused it: And the best
Revenge is this; to see, and take care, that thy Degrees of Sin be truly
answered by thy Degrees of Sanctification and Heavenly-mindedness.

49. And all his Acquaintance, and the Woman; that followed him from Galilee,
stood afar off, beholding these things.
THough it is some Ages since Christ was crucified, yet, in imitation of these
Religious Women, thou may stand afar off, O my Soul, and behold the
Spectacle still: When the Circumstances of it are left thee in Writing, and the
doleful Story stands upon Record; thou can ascend Mount Calvary, and see
those things acted, as if thou had been present! And, Oh, little do thou
think, how much this Sight will edify thee! Look often upon the Cross, and
thou will find, what a Damp it will strike upon all thy sinful Pleasures, and
how little reason thou have to hancker after those things, whereof so many good
Men, after they have been sensible of their Errors, have been ashamed!

50. And behold, there was a Man, named Joseph, a Councillor; and he was a good
Man, and a just.
IN the midst of Temptations, God preserves this Man, though his Riches,
Greatness, Reputation, and Friendship of the Grandes, did strongly entice him
to consent to the Death of the Lord Jesus, yet he would not; and was resolved
rather to hazard all, than have an hand in the Condemnation. This was an
Argument of a generous Spirit, to bear up under the strongest Assaults and
Enticements in the World; and to keep an incorrupt Soul, in the midst of Dirt
and Filthiness. Thou live in a very evil Generation, O my Soul! Dare to
preserve thine Integrity, in the midst of all the Floods of Ungodliness, that
surround thee. And the more thou art discouraged from Goodness and
Righteousness, the more vigorously stand up for it, and maintain it; and thy
God will be with thee.

51. The same had not consented to the Counsel and Deed of them: He was of
Arimathea, 4 City of the Jews; who also himself waited for the Kingdom of God.
TO wait for the Kingdom of God, is the Way to resist, and to overcome
Temptations. He that is resolved not to lose his Share in God's Kingdom
hereafter, will not stand upon his Losses and Crosses here; for he knows that
the future Kingdom will recompense all. No Nan will venture so much for Christ,
as he that firmly believes the Kingdom of God, and fixes his Eye of Faith upon
it. O my Jesus! Give me a clearer Sight of that Kingdom, that the Kingdoms and
Glories of this World may not beguile or tempt me to love the World! If I love
the World, the Love of the Father cannot be in me. Represent the Beauty of thy
future Kingdom to my Mind in lively Characters, that my Admiration of this
present World may decay, and I may be content to sell all, for the Pearl of
Price that is before me.

52. This Man went unto Pilate, and begged the Body of Jesus.
IT is base to forsake a Friend, when he is under a Cloud: Then to show our
Respect to him, when he lies unjustly under Contempt and Disgrace, is true
Affection. It was bold, and great, and like a Friend, to beg the Body of Jesus,
when it was counted a Disgrace to be any way concerned for him. How have thou
deviated from this admirable Example, O my Soul, when a Person whom thou have
courted and admired in the Day of his Prosperity, has, through the Venom of
malicious Tongues, and more malicious Practices, fallen from his Glory and
Respect! How have thou withdrawn thy self from him, been afraid to speak the
Truth of him, and to give him that good Character which thou knew he
deserved! As thou dealest with Man, so, it is to be feared, thou will deal with
thy God, and Religion, when it becomes dangerous to own them. Up, and be
earnest with thy God, to give thee invincible Integrity, which may mock all
Storms, and be the same to God, and to thy Neighbor, in all Conditions. Stick
close to God, and to thy Friend; and rejoice in a good Conscience, for that
will bring thee Peace at last.

53. And he took it down, and wrapped it in Linen, and laid it in a Sepulcher
that was hewn in Stone, wherein never Man before was laid.
REligion is an insignificant thing, if it cost us nothing! Good Men love to be
at Charges for their God, and the Good of their own Souls. O my Soul! How loath
have thou been to let those Persons reap thy Carnal Things, which have sown
unto thee Spiritual Things! When thou have thought nothing too much for thy
Luxury, and Pride, and Ease, how has it gone against the Grain, to be
expensive for Religion! Thou have loved to serve thy God cheaply: How loath have
thou been to express thy Gratitude to God, by being liberal to his distressed
Members, and thy Spiritual Guids! Oh, learn by this Example, to prize thy
Spiritual Good more; and let thy bountiful Actions show, that thou have the
highest Value for the Concerns of Eternity.

54. And that Day was the Preparation, and the Sabbath drew on.
O My Soul! How little Preparation have thou made for the Everlasting Sabbath,
and thine Eternal Rest! Do thou hope to rest for ever among the Flowers of
Paradise, and is it not high time to prepare for it? Do thou think to rest at
last under the Wings of thy Everlasting Father; and is it not time to rise, and
work, as it were for thy Life, that thou may find Repose in the Everlasting
Tabernacles? Was ever any admitted there, that would not sweat and labor here?
Oh, labor against thy Corruptions, wrestle with Temptations, fight with thy
Spiritual Enemies, live in Contemplation of the highest Good, embrace thy
Savior with the warmest Love, strive to do much Good in thy Generation, and
thy Rest will be sweet.

55. And the Women also, which came with him from Galilee, followed after, and
beheld the Sepulcher, and how his Body was laid.
TRue Goodness is never weary of following Christ: It follows him to the very
Grave. It may meet with Stops and Rubs in its Way, but it gets up again, and is
not tired with Running the Race which is set before it. O Blessed Jesu! Thou
have not been weary of working and suffering for me! Let me never be weary of
loving thee. When my Flesh would make me give over running after thee, assist
me with new Strength and Courage, that I may hold out to the End. And, since
none shall sit at thy Table in thy Kingdom, but those that have continued with
thee in thy Temptations; Oh, let my Soul feel the Power of thy Spirit, which
may lift me up, that I may mount up with Wings, as Eagles; may run, and not be
weary, walk, and not faint, till I am within the Gates of Heaven.

56. And they returned and prepared Spices and Ointments, and rested the
Sabbath Day, according to the Commandment.
MY dearest Lord! though I have no opportunity to prepare Spices and Ointments
for thy Burial; yet thou have shown me, how I may offer an Odor of a sweet
Smell, a Sacrifice acceptable and well-pleasing to God. This is a life fruitful
in good Works! No Incense smells sweeter in thy Nostrils: No Persume casts a
nobler scent in Heaven, than this. Enrich the ground of my Heart, fatten it
with thy Blood, water the Furrows thereof with thy Heavenly Dew, and shine upon
it with thy Gracious Beams, and bid the Tree of my Life advance, and Bud, and
Blossom, and bear fruit, even the Fruit of Charity, of Meekness, of Humility,
of Patience, of Goodness, of Faith, of Love, of Temperance, of Sobriety, of
Watchfulness, and of contempt of the World, that I may have my Fruit unto
Holiness, and the end everlasting Life!

The Preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. HOw justly after this prospect, may God say, What could have been done more
to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it? St. Bernard Sermon. de diligend. Deo.
has an Elegant Discourse upon this Subject, to show, what force the serious
consideration of Christ's Incarnation, and of what he has done for us, and
particularly of his Sufferings and Death, has, to kindle the Fire of
reciprocal Love in our Hearts. God, being desirous, says he, to restore Man,
who had lost himself, and to rescue him from the clutches of the Devil, said
within himself, If I should force this wretched Creature against his Will and
Choice, to the Duties he is to discharge and perform, I should make a Beast or
an Ass of him, instead of a rational Man; nor would he come to me voluntarily
of his own accord, and with a good Will; nor would he be able to say, I will
freely sacrifice unto thee; Therefore to make his coming to me a matter of
choice and rational freedom, I will terrify and fright him, to see, whether
that will drive him to Repentance, and accordingly he threatened him with
misery, which no Mortal is able to express, with everlasting Darkness, and a
never dying Worm, and unquenchable Fire. But stubborn Man nothing terrified
with all these Thunders, God was resolved to try what Promises would do, and
since naturally he is desirous of Riches, and Honor, and Pleasures, and long
Life; God accordingly promised him infinite Treasures of Glory, unexpressible
Dignities in Heaven, and such Pleasures, as the Heart of Man is not able to
conceive, they are so big, and large, and overflowing, and a life free, not
only from all evil, but from any end, or period, and abounding with all manner
of Felicities. But seeing that even this would not prevail, there is but one
thing more, said he, that can be tried. And seeing there is in Man, not only a
Fear and Desire, but a Principle of Love too, than which nothing is stronger to
draw and incline his Will to Action: Accordingly he came himself and appeared
in Flesh, and carried himself so lovingly toward the Sinner, and proceeded to
so great an excess of Charity, as to lay down his Life to save him. And
therefore, he that after this, continues hard and impenitent, says the Father,
will not turn to him, nor offer his Heart, and Love to him, deserves most
justly to hear this unwelcome voice, O man, what could I have done more for
thee, to gain thy Love and affection, than I have done? Indeed, what can we
desire he should do more for us? What can we desire more after his spilling his
Blood, and enduring for us more, than any Man ever did? There is no greater
Testimony of Love. If he had had a better thing than his Blood, he would have
bestowed it upon us. But Love cannot go beyond this; and therefore when Christ,
just at the moment of his Death, cried It is finished; We are not only to
understand by that saying, That the Shadows of the Old Testament, the Desires
of the Patriarchs, the Figures and Prophecies, which went before of him, were
at an end, and accomplished, or that the malice of the Jews, the sury of the
Devil, the captivity of Sin, and the reconciliation of the World were finished,
and consummate, but the meaning withal is, that all the Arts, and Methods, and
Stratagems of Love, had now received their accomplishment, and that beyond
this, there was nothing could be supposed capable to allure, or entice Men to
express their Love and Affection to their God, and that beyond this he knew of
nothing else that could draw, or gain their Affection, than to be made Man, and
to die for them. And if God be come to the utmost bounds of condescension in
this attempt, and prevails not; judge, O Sinner, judge, whether thou art not
most deservedly cast into Eternal Darkness.

II. There is a great difference betwixt bare reading of Christ's Passion, and
meditating of it. The former makes little or no impression, the later touches
and affects. The former is no more, than looking on the Wine, but the other is
drinking of it. He that reads, may have his Thoughts all that while in the
Indies upon his Business, or the affairs of his Calling; and when he comes from
reading, may be able to give but a very small account of his pains, except it
be some general Notions, and an imperfect draught, and that is no better, than
taking up water in a Sieve, which runs out, as fast as it is put in. But
Meditation fixes the Thoughts, and takes notice of the weight and importance of
the History. This examines the end and designs of the various passages. This
takes a view of every circumstance, and finds, there are greater Mysteries in
the particulars, than at first sight appeared. This finds out new Mines, and
makes that shining Gold, which was but Oar before. I have heard of some ill
Men, that have been able to rehearse the whole New Testament word for word; but
he that meditates but upon one Verse of the Book, shall receive greater
advantages by it, than the other by repetition of the whole Bible. But all
Persons have not Heads, and Understandings, fitted for Meditation; and
therefore those that have not, must either make some short Remarks, or
Reflections, upon what they read, according to the Directions and Method before
laid down, or make use of the Conceptions and Meditations of other Men, which
may possibly affect them, as much as Thoughts of their own. However, by
applying the Meditations they read, and reading them attentively, they make
them their own; and though they sharpen their Shears and Coulters, at other
Men's Shops, yet that is no hindrance to their Spiritual profit, and
Edification; nay, some are of that temper, that they like other Men's
contemplations better than their own, partly out of a natural mistrust of their
own Abilities, partly out of respect to the Names and Persons of Learned and
pious Men. But whatever Meditations are made use of in this Case, seriousness
must give them Life, and an intent to quicken our Souls, and inward Man, must
be the impulsive Cause; and from hence the Thoughtful Christian may expect very
Blessed Effects and Consequences. Yet,

III. When I urge this Meditating on Christ's Death, and Passion, by way of
Preparation, and draw out this Meditation to so great prolixity, for fear of
being misunderstood, I must add these following Rules and Cautions.

1. It is chiefly intended for such, as have time and leisure, from whom God
justly expects more, than of those who are forced to employ their time early
and late in hard labor for a livelihood; not but that the way to Bliss is one,
and both Rich and Poor must observe the same substantial Duties, upon which the
future Reward is promised, and both are obliged to be Just, and Sober, and
Temperate, and Meek, and Humble, and Kind, and Tenderhearted, and lovers of
God, and devout; but as the Rich have more time and leisure, so God expects
they should exceed the other in Goodness, and employ that time, which the other
are forced to bestow in the sweat of their Face, upon Contemplations of Nobler
Objects, whereby they may become shining and burning Lights; and, by their
Example, supply the use of Books to the poorer sort, who, in their Actions, may
compendiously view their own Duty, and be encouraged to follow their good
example with Humility, and Godly Fear.

2. This prolix Meditation may lawfully be forborne, upon urgent occasions, when
a person either is to receive the Holy Communion on his sick Bed, or is on a
sudden called out to communicate with a Person, who is sick. In these Cases,
shorter Reflections and Ejaculations, coming from an Heart set and fixed upon
the Love and Will of God, are acceptable; because, upon such occasions,
Christ's Rule holds; I will have Mercy more than Sacrifice.

3. Nor is it necessary to tie our selves to the length of it. As to this, we
may use Liberty; and Discretion must guide every Christian, who know best, what
he is able to bear, and what not. Sometimes only a few Verses of the before
mentioned Chapters may be pitched upon for our Minds to expatiate upon,
sometimes a greater and larger Field may be set before us; and whereas, from
the variety of managing our Directions, being sometimes short, sometimes
prolix, this scruple is apt to arise, that this is a sign of weariness, and
inconstancy, and unsteddiness in God's Service, that scruple must be removed by
consideration of Christ's and the Apostles example, the former praying sometime
all night, and sometime using only some few Ejaculations, to his Heavenly
Father; the other sometimes exercising themselves in Devotion till Midnight, at
other times working day and night for the support of themselves, and
Companions; which we must suppose was not consisting with great prolixity in
set Meditations.

The PRAYER.
O My God, and Savior! I am very sensible that I have great Obligations to
love thee, upon the account of my Creation, Preservation, and daily Blessings,
I receive from thy liberal Hand! But that which even forces me, works upon me
powerfully, and, as it were, pushes me forward, and compels me to love thee, is
the bitter Cup of thy Sufferings, which for my sake thou did drink off, and
the mighty work of Redemption, which renders thee altogether lovely to my Soul!
That admirable and incomparable Testimony of thy Love, is a stronger
attractive, makes a greater impulse, and it a sweeter, and a softer Cord to
bind any Heart to thy Service. To effect this Work, thou have taken more than
ordinary pains! When thou did first create me, it cost thee no more, than a
Word speaking; but to reinstate me in that Bliss, I had lost, and forfeited,
thou wast at the greatest expense and charge imaginable! Of the Sovereign Lord
of the World, thou becamest a Servant; of Rich, extremely Poor; of the Eternal
Word, a Man; and of the Son of God, the Son of Man! so that though I was made
of nothing, yet I was not Redeemed by nothing. Thou spentest but Six days to
Create, and frame the World; but Three and thirty Years were spent to
accomplish my Ransom, and Restitution to God's Favor; and O what trouble, what
misery, was this thy Life filled withal! Thou did humble thy self to Flesh,
to Death, to the Death of the Cross, and, to effect this Glorious Work, wast
content to be clad in Flesh, to be punished with Death, and to be disgraced by
the Cross for this miserable Worm! Thou did do much, and suffer much, that I
might love thee much; and because the Facility of my Creation did not move me
much, thou, therefore wast content to be at an excessive trouble in my
Redemption, thereby to charm my Soul the more, and to plant in me greater
Resentments of thy Charity! To this end thy Side was opened with a Lance, that
all Men might look into thy Wounds, and into thy very Heart, and see how it
bled for Love! To this end thy Sacred Head did bend to the East thy Feet were
extended to the West, and thine Arms spread' to the North and South, to let
People in all parts of the World see, how much thou lovedst them, and thereby
to draw their Hearts, and unite them to thy self for ever! O let not mine be
cold under this wonderful sight; and while I see my God buffeted, my God
crowned with Thorns, my God struck on the Face, and my God giving up the Ghost,
let all that is within me be touched, and quickened and enlivened, and
encouraged to cleave and to cling to thee for ever. Amen, Amen.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Self-Examination, the Second Act of Preparation for this Holy Sacrament.
The CONTENTS.
A wonderful thing, that this Sacrament works no greater Effects! One great
Reason of it, Want of Self-Examination. The Necessity of Self-Examination
proved by three Reasons. How it must be managed. The Rule of it, the Word of
God. A Catalogue of Sins and Duties. These to be considered, with respect to
our Temper and Inclination. The great Objection about the Intricacy, Difficulty
and Tediousness of this Task, answered; and a Way laid down, whereby it may be
made facile, and easy, and delightful. Some Rules to be observed in the
Practice of this Self-Examination, that it may become effectual. The Error of
some Churches in the Primitive Times, who gave this Sacrament to Children and
Infants. As soon as Persons are able to examine themselves, they are bound to
come to this Sacrament. Another Man's examining of us is not enough, without
Self-Examination. The Prayer.

I. ONE of the most wonderful things in the Christian World, is, that such a
Sacrament, as that of the Eucharist, should be instituted by the Great Savior
of Mankind: A Sacrament, wherein the most stupendous Blessings are offered to
Men; and that Men should receive it so often, and no greater Effects should
appear upon their Lives and Tempers, after their Participation of it: Which is
as much as to say, that Fire gives no Heat, and the Sun no Light, Health
affords no Cure, Abundance keeps Men poor, and the most wholesome Meat produces
no Nourishment. That which makes the thing the more strange and astonishing, is
this, That God makes nothing, no, not the least Drop of Rain, nor the least
Grain of Sand, but for some excellent End; and therefore must be supposed to
have ordained this Sacrament for the most noble Ends imaginable. And if the
Effects he designs by this Ordinance, be such as our Liturgy tells us, For then
we spiritually eat the Flesh of Christ, and drink his Blood; then we dwell in
Christ, and Christ in us; we are one with Christ, and Christ with us: If these
be the designed and intended Effects of this Ordinance, as certainly they are,
it must be Matter of Astonishment to see so little of these Effects produced in
the many Communicants that appear at this holy Table. And what can we ascribe
these Defects to, but to Men's Indisposition? In Natural Things, Philosophers
tell us, the Causes of Things, how excellent soever, are determined in their
Effects, by the Disposition of their Subjects: For which Reason we see, that
the Sun melts Wax, and hardens Clay; makes some things pure and white, and
others black; and the same Meat, being eaten by different Persons, causes
Health in one, and Sickness in another. And, no doubt, the same Rule will hold
in Grace too; and therefore, that this Sacrament works not those admirable
Effects, intended by Christ, in abundance of Persons, must be for want of a
suitable Preparation. Vessels hold more or less Water, according to their
Capacity; if the Vessel be little, it will hold but little: And according to
the Disposition of our Souls, so we receive much, or less, or nothing at all,
in this Sacrament. And one of these excellent previous Dispositions, is,
Self-Examination, expressly enjoined by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 28. But let a
Man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup.

II. Though it be in a manner needless, after I have laid down the Apostle's
Command, to prove the Necessity of this Self-Examination; yet, for a ^uller
Satisfaction of the Reader, I shall enquire into the Reasons of the Necessity;
which are these following:

1. All great Actions require Deliberation. This is a Maxim, all Mankind agrees
in. It Is a common Principle: And we count that Man a Fool, that attempts an
Action of great Concernment, without it: And Christ himself has taught us to
do so, Luke 14. 28, 29. For, Which of you, says he, intending to build a
Tower, sits not down first, and counts the Cost, whether he have sufficient to
finish it; lest happily, after he has laid the Foundation, and is not able to
finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him, saying, This Man began to
build, and was not able to finish. And if Deliberation be necessary before any
great Enterprise, Self-Examination must needs be so before Receiving of the
holy Eucharist: For, Who knows not, that Receiving the holy Communion is one of
the most solemn, most weighty, and important Part of our Religion? And if
Deliberation be necessary, as a Preparative, Self-Examination must be so too;
because Deliberation cannot be duly performed without it: For, he that
deliberates before he comes to this Sacrament, must necessarily consider the
Majesty, Grandeur, and Infinite Power, Splendor and Excellency of the Master
of the Feast; the Kindness, Mercy, Compassion, and Excesses of Charity he
expresses in it to miserable Creatures; and whether himself has those
Qualifications, Desires, Inclinations and Resolutions, which that magnificent
Master of the Feast requires of the invited Guests; and whether those Virtues,
those Ornaments, those Ingredients of true Repentance, that Hatred of Sin, that
Love to Goodness, which God expects of the Persons that render themselves at
his Table, be in him. And what is this, but Self-Examination.

2. Want of Self-Examination is the Mother of Ignorance. He that does not
examine himself before he receives the holy Communion, (having never done it
before) must necessarily continue a Stranger to himself. It Is true, for ought he
knows, he may receive as worthily as the best: But, for ought he knows too, he
may eat and drink Judgment and Damnation to himself. Want of Examination leaves
the Soul blind, makes her Understanding useless, and charges God with having
given the Man a Reflexive Power in vain. Examination must acquaint him with
himself; and discover to him, whether he have the Marks of a Penitent, the
Character of a Soul laden with a Sense of Sin, and whether he be a fit Subject
to receive Reconciliation; whether his Errors be strong, or do abate; whether
he feels the Operation of God's Spirit upon his own, whether the Things unseen
make any Impression upon his Soul, and whether he has that Faith and Love,
which, in the Sight of God, is of great Price. To be ignorant of all this, what
is it, but to grope in the dark, and, instead of coming like a Rational
Creature to this Ordinance, to approach with the Inclination of a Brute? And
though it is granted, that he who neglects this Self-Examination, may
understand the Design of this Sacrament, and the Mercies tendered to the Soul,
in general; yet still, without this Search, he cannot tell whether those
Mercies belong to him, whether he has a Share in them, or whether he may
rationally expect them at Christ's Hand. It is observed therefore, that when
Christ spoke of the Disciple that should betray him, he does not mention his
Name; thereby to give the Disciples Occasion to enquire whether they found any
Inclinations in themselves to so great a piece of Ingratitude. So that Want of
Self-Examination, as it propagates Ignorance in the Soul, so it is to act
directly against the Design of the Gospel; which is, to fill us with Spiritual
Knowledge and Understanding, Col. 1. 9. And to make us know the things which
are freely given us of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12.

3. All the Blessings of the Gospel are promised conditionally; and
consequently, the Blessings which are the genuine Concomitants of this holy
Sacrament. And how shall any man take Comfort in these Blessings; if he enquire
not whether the Conditions, upon which these Blessings are promised, be
fulfilled in him; or whether it be the Desire and Endeavor of his Soul to
fulfill them? If a Prince should set out a Proclamation, that on such a Day he
intends to bestow some Jewels of great value on all Persons that have found any
Secret of Nature, which may be of public Use; how ridiculous would that Man
make himself, that should appear among the Candidates, without enquiring
whether he was ever Master of an Invention, whereby the Public might be
advanced. Those that enquire, and find upon Enquiry, that what they have done,
is agreeable to the Condition the Prince requires, may approach cheerfully, and
have their Expectation gratified. So it is here; The Blessings promised in this
Sacrament, are, as I have often hinted in the preceding Discourse, Remission of
Sins: But that is promised upon the Condition of Turning from Darkness to
Light, Act. 26. 18. Peace with God: And that is promised upon the Condition of
a Lively Faith, which is active; as that of Abraham's was, Romans 5. 1. A Right
to the Everlasting Inheritance: And that is promised upon Condition of Fighting
the good Fight, 2 Timothy 4. 7. Comfort in Tribulation: And that is promised upon
Condition of Trusting and relying upon God, 2 Cor. 1. 9. The Assistance of
God's Spirit: And that is promised upon Condition of Walking as the Children of
God, and Willingness to be led and guided by him, Romans 8. 14. Union and
Communion with Christ: And that is promised upon the Condition of Walking in
the Light of Good Works, 1 John 1. 7. Increase of Grace: And that is promised
upon Condition of an humble Temper, Jam. 4. 6. Strength against our
Corruptions: And that is promised upon Condition of Putting on the whole Armor
of God, Ephesians. 6. 10, 11. Assurance of God's Love: And that is promised upon
Condition of our sincere Love to Christ Jesus, Joh. 14. 21. That all these
Blessings are promised to us in this Sacrament, is evident from hence, because
Christ himself is promised to be given into our Bosoms, and we cannot receive
Christ without his Benefits; and these Benefits are those I have mentioned.
But, since these Blessings are not to be had without an hearty Consent and
Agreement to those Conditions; and it is impossible to take Comfort in these
Blessings, except we know we have a Right to them; and it is as impossible to
know whether we have, or not; without Self-Examination; it must necessarily
follow, that Self-Examination is a necessary Duty and Preparative for this holy
Sacrament.

III. How this Self-Examination is to be managed, is the next thing we must
discourse of; and that which we are to consider here, is, partly the Rule
whereby this Examination must be made, partly the Things that are to be
examined, and partly our Temper and Disposition with respect to Things, about
which Enquiry is made.

1. The Rule; and that, without doubt, must be the Law of God, as it is either
contracted and reduced to a few principal Heads in the Decalogue, and the Ten
Commandments; or, as it is explained and spread into various Branches in the
Body of the Gospel; and particularly, in Christ's Sermon upon the Mount: And
this Law, as it is set forth and explained in the Gospel, is that which we
Christians are to stand and fall by. This Law, as it is most suitable and
agreeable to Reason, and intended to perfect Humane Nature; so is it the
standing Rule of our Thoughts, Desires, Words and Actions, and of our Behavior
and Deportment in our several Capacities, and is called the Law of Faith, Romans
3. 27. i. e. a Summary of those Duties which a sound and serious Belief of
another Life, and of the Promises and Threatenings of the Gospel, inforces and
binds upon the Soul. This Law, as it is given for the nonce, so Christ expects,
his Followers should observe the Particulars of it; and protests, that he will
take none for his Friends, but such as do whatsoever he commands them, Joh. 15.
14. and compares all those to very foolish Men, and pursuing their own Ruin,
that hear these Sayings of his, and do them not, Matthew. 7. 26. And protests,
that he will look upon none as Sheep of his Flock, but those that hear and obey
his Voice, Joh. 10. 26, 27. And for the Performance of this Law, he is ready to
assist us with his Spirit, if we earnestly seek it: And that we may not pretend
Impossibility of keeping it, he allows of a sincere Repentance, if, through
Inadvertency, at any time we run counter to any Particular of that Law; and
promises to accept of that Repentance, if it be not a Matter of Form, but a
serious Purpose to observe them better for the future. And therefore,

2. The Things that are to be insisted on in this Self-Examination, are, partly
the Sins and Breaches of this Law we have been guilty of, and partly our
Duties; both which, because they lie dispersed, as I said, through the whole
Body of the Gospel, it will not be amiss, for the Reader's Ease, to reduce to a
certain Catalogue; that, looking over the Catalogue, he may see, which of these
Sins he is, and has been, prone to; and in what Duties he has been defective.

A Catalogue of SINS forbid in the Gospel.
1. TO deny the Being of God, Romans 3. 11. 2. To believe or worship more Gods
than one, 1 Cor. 8. 6. 3. Not to believe God's Omniscience and Omnipresence,
Act. 17. 2. 4. Not to believe the Truth of the Gospel; and particularly, that
Jesus of Nazareth, who was crucified by the Jews, is the Son of the Living God,
and the Savior of the World, Mark 16. 16. John 3. 36. 5. To give Religious
Worship, or Worship of Devotion, to any Creature, Matthew. 4. 10. 6. To tempt
God, or to desire he should work a Miracle for us, either to gratify our Lust
or Curiosity, when he has given sufficient Means to compass our lawful
Desires, Matthew. 4. 7. 7. To mistrust his Providence, Matthew. 6. 25. 8. Not to
worship God by Prayer and Praises, 1 Timothy 2. 1. 9. To blaspheme and speak Evil
of God, 1 Timothy 1. 20. 10. To repine and murmur at any Affliction God sends upon
us, Heb. 12. 5. 11. To speak reproachfully or jestingly of his Service, or
Word, or Ordinances; or to make Sport with any part of Scripture, or with holy
Things, Act. 17. 18. 12. Sacrilege, i. e. either to take away what is
consecrated to God's Service, or to convert it to a profane Use, Romans 1. 22.
13. To fancy God to be a Man, or of Humane Shape, John 4. 24. 14. To swear by
God's Name, or to use any other Oath, in common Discourse, or familiar
Communication, Matthew. 5. 34. 35. 15. Perjury, and Forswearing our selves,
either in private, or in a Court of Judicature, Matthew. 5. 33. 16. Filthy,
wicked, frothy, and lascivious and injurious Speeches and Discourses, Ephesians. 4.
29. 17. To prefer our own Ease, Profit, Honor, Pleasure, and the Favor of
Men, before God's Favor, and his Will, when a known Duty is to be performed,
Luke 10. 41. 18. To love the outward Comforts of the World better than God,
Matthew. 10. 37. 19. To profane the Lord's Day, either by Playing, or Tippling, or
Idleness, or Lying a bed, or Neglect of public and private Devotion, Act. 20.
7. 20. Not to be attentive to the Word of God, when it is preached; and to be
careless of doing the Will of God, which is delivered to us, Matthew. 13. 19. 21.
To stare about in the Church, when we are engaged in Prayer and Devotion, 1
Cor. 11. 10. 22. To use any immodest Gesture, Posture, or Behavior, in the
House of God, 1 Cor. 11, 22. 23. To revile or speak Evil of the King, and the
Rulers of the People; to resist them, or to plot against their Life and
Welfare, Romans 13. 1, 5. 24. To neglect and disobey the lawful Commandments of
our Superiors, when they require our Compliance, 1 Pet. 2. 3. 25. To abuse,
affront, or laugh at the Ministers of God's Word, or at their Doctrine, if true
and agreeable to the Word of God, 1 Timothy 4. 11, 12. 26. To curse Father and
Mother, and to be unkind and disrespectful to them, 1 Timothy 1. 9. 2 Timothy 3. 2.
27. To laugh at any Person, or to abuse them for their natural Infirmities, and
which they cannot help; such as Blindness, Lameness, Distraction, etc. 1 Pet.
3. 8. 28. To murder our selves, or others, whatever the Provocation or
Temptation be, Jam 2. 11. 29. To hurt, or maim, or wound our Neighbors, Matthew.
5. 38, 39. 30. To revenge an Injury or Affront offered to us, Romans 12. 19. 31.
To challenge our Neighbors to fight with us, and to answer that Challenge,
Romans 12. 21. 32. To envy our Neighbor's Parts, Gifts, Abilities, or Happiness
and Welfare, Jam. 3. 16. 33. to speak Evil of Men, out of Hatred, Malice, or
Ill Will, Tit. 3. 2. 34. To harbor secret Grudges in our Hearts to our
Neighbors, Jam. 5. 9. 35. To be implacable, unmerciful, and unwilling to
forgive Injuries from our Hearts, Jam. 2. 13. Matthew. 18. 32, 33. 36. To fly out
into a Passion upon any slight Offense or Distaste given us; and to call Men
Fools and Rogues, and other ill Names, Matthew. 5. 22. 37. To be peevish,
pet^ish, impatient, touchy, apt to take Exceptions at trifling Things and
Actions, and little Dis-respects shown us, 1 Cor. 13. 4. 7. 38. To cheat,
wrong, defraud, or undermine our Neighbors in any thing, or to steal things
from them against their Will, either secretly or openly, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. 39. To
judge and censure our Neighbors rashly, merely to divert our selves, or to
make the Company merry, without sufficient Ground or Reason, Matthew. 7. 1, 2, 3.
40. To commit Adultery, or Fornication, or any Act of Uncleanness and
Lasciviousness, either upon our selves, or others, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. 41. To
cherish lustful Thoughts, Desires, Passions, Looks Gestures, Postures, and
Glances, Matthew. 5. 27, 28. 42. To give our selves to lascivious Jests, Songs,
Ballads, and Answers, which may make the Company smil^, Ephesians. 5. 3, 4. 43. To
go in to a Woman, though a lawful Wife, in the time of her Separation, Gal. 5.
19. 44. All unnatural Lusts and Affections, and such things against which the
Apostle speaks, Romans 1. 26, 27. 45. To frequent Stage Plays, and such
Theatrical Shows, where Sin and Vanity are encouraged, Romans 12. 2. 46. To
delight in filthy Sights, and looking upon Objects which raise evil Thoughts in
us, Matthew. 5. 29. 47. To try Experiments in Lust, and to act our Lewdness over
in our Minds again, Ephesians. 4. 19. 48. To go into Company, where we are sure to
be tempted, and persuaded to that which is evil, Matthew. 5. 30. 49. Drunkenness,
or Drinking and Tippling to the Disorder of our Reason, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Ephesians.
5. 16, 18. 50. To flatter our Neighbors, and to have their Persons in
Admiration, because of Advantage, Jude 1. 16. 51. To lie unto our Neighbors;
and to speak that to them, which we know is not true, Ephesians 4. 25. 52. To
dissemble with God, and with our Neighbors, and give them fair Words, while we
hate them in our Hearts, Romans 12. 9. 53. To bid our Servants, or Friends, or
others, to tell Lies for us, Heb. 3. 13. 54. To follow a Multitude to do evil,
and to do ill things, because they are done commonly, Ephesians. 5. 11. 55. To be
greedy and covetous after the Things of this World, to the Neglect of our
Souls* and Spiritual Welfare, Ephesians. 5. 3. 56. To delay our Repentance, and to
drive off our Seriousness, from time to time, Heb. 3. 15. 57. To do Wrong to
our Neighbors; and particularly, to a poor Man, or Stranger, or to an Enemy,
Ephesians. 4. 32. 58. To glory in bad Actions, Philip. 3. 19. 59. To aim at the
Praise and Applause of Men in good Actions, Matthew. 6. 1, 2. 60. To mis-spend
our Time by Idleness, and Laziness, and Gaming, and immoderate Recreations,
Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. 61. Gluttony and Intemperance in Eating, or eating more than
Nature requires, 2 Pet. 1. 6. 62. To delight in gaudy Clothing, and Fondness
of imitating of every Fashion, 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4. 63. To render Evil for Evil, and
Reviling for Reviling, 1 Pet. 2. 23. 64. To be ashamed of the Gospel, and of
Religion, or of Religious Duties, or of doing the Will of God, Mark 8. 38. 65.
To be weary of Well-doing, or of any commanded Religious Duty; and to give over
our Seriousness, Gal. 6. 9. 66. To be uncharitable, and to harden our Hearts
and Bowels against the Distressed and Needy, 1 John 3. 17. 67. To scandalize
others, or to give Offense by Actions, either needless, or sinful, Matthew. 18.
6, 7. 68. To follow an unlawful Profession, that necessitates us unto Sin,
Matthew. 18. 8. 69. To entice, and encourage, and draw others into Sin, by our
ill Example, or Solicitation, Romans 1. 22. 70. To comply with other Men in
their Sins, because they urge or press us to it, 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. 71. To be
proud, haughty, self-conceited; and to entertain an high Opinion of our selves,
Parts, Abilities, and Accomplishments; and to despise others, Luke 14. 10, 11.
72. To neglect the Service of God for every Trifle, and every little Business
that would draw us from it, Luke 2. 49 and 10. 41, 42. 73. To use needless
Asseverations in common Discourses, an^ in trivial Matters; such as, I vow, I
protest, I swear, etc. Matthew. 5. 37. 74. To reveal our Neighbor's Secrets,
which they in love communicate to us, Philip. 2. 4. Matthew. 7. 12. 75. To
rejoice in our Neighbor's Fall, or Misfortune, or Misery, Romans 12. 15. 76. To
be careless, negligent, slovenly, or superficial in any part of God's Service,
Romans 12. 11. 77. To presume upon God's Goodness, or to sin, and go on in Sin,
because God is merciful and patient, Romans 2. 4, 5. 78. To despair of God's
Mercy; or to think that he either cannot, or will not pardon upon our sincere
Repentance, Matthew. 12. 31. 79. To fancy that a customary Faith, without
suitable Works, will save us, Jam. 2. 26. 80. To be morose, surly, ill-natured,
and give rough and imperious Language to our Neighbors, 1 Pet. 3. 8. 81. To
let our Neighbors and Friends go on in their Sins, without reproving them,
Ephesians. 5. 11. 82. to set our Hearts and Affections upon the Riches and Comforts
of this Life, Mark 10. 24. Col. 3. 1, 2. 83. To mourn and take on under any
Cross and Loss, like Men without Hope, 1 These. 4. 13. 2 Cor. 7. 10. 84. To be
careless and neglectful of a faithful Discharge of the Duties of our several
Callings and Relations: As, 1. For Husbands to be churlish, bitter and unkind
to their Wives, Col. 3. 19. 2. For Wives to be froward, talkative, brawling and
injurious to their Husbands Goods and Name, 1 Pet. 3. 1, 4. 3. For Magistrates
to suffer Injustice, Oppression, Murder, Irreligiousness, Atheism and
Profaneness to go unpunished, Romans 13. 3. 4. For Subjects to raise ill Reports
of their Magistrates, and mis-conster their Actions, to the Disturbance of the
Government, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. 5. For (...) to show their Children bad Examples,
to indulge them in their Sins, or to suffer them to do what they list, without
Correction, Ephesians. 6. 4. 6. For Children to be disobedient to their Parents
lawful Commands; or to deny them Maintenance when they are in want, and the
Children able to relieve and assist them, Ephesians. 6. 1, 2. 7. For Masters to
keep back the Hire or Wages of their Servants; and to suffer them to neglect
God's Service, and the Concerns of their own Souls, Col. 4 1. 8. For Servants
to grumble or mumur at their Masters lawful Commands; or chiding of them, to
answer again; to be unfaithful, to disparage their Masters and Mistresses, and
to discover to others what their Superiors would have kept secret, Tit. 2. 9,
10.
85. To neglect or defer our Baptism, in case we were never baptized before;
and to forbear bringing our Children to be baptized, Matthew. 28. 19. 86. Not to
come to the Lord's Supper, after we come to Years of Understanding and
Discretion, Matthew 26. 26, 27. 87. To eat and drink unworthily at the Lord's
Table, 1 Cor. 11. 29. 88. To neglect thinking of good things, Philip. 4. 8. 89.
Idolatry, Witchcraft, Seditions, Schisms, Heresies, Gal. 5. 20. 90. Whispering
to our Neighbor's prejudice, Backbiting, Despightfulness, Boasting, Inventing
of evil Thing, Covenant Breaking, and being without Natural Affections, and
delighting in other Men's Sins, Romans 1. 29, 30, 31, 32. 91. To do Evil, that
Good may come of it, Romans 3. 8.
If any Sins are left out in this Catalogue, they are such as may be referred
to those which are mentioned: And though some that are mentioned as distinct
Sins, may very well go for one; yet the Reason why a distinct Number is allowed
them, is, merely because Vulgar Capacities might thereby get a clearer
Knowledge and Apprehnsion of them.

A Catalogue of DUTIES Commanded in the Gospel.
1. TO believe that God is One in Three, and Three in One, and that the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are that one God, 1 John 5. 7. Joh. 10. 30. 2. To
believe that the Son of God was incarnate, and came into this World, by his
Holy Life and Death, to save Men from their Sins, Joh. 3. 16, 17, 18. 3. To
believe that Jesus of Nazareth, who appeared in Days of Pontius Pilate, and was
Crucified, is that Son of God, and our Redeemer and Mediator, and is both God
and Man in one Person, Act. 10. 38. Romans 1. 3, 4. 4. To believe, that without
Faith, Repentance, and an holy Obedience to the Commands of the Gospel, we have
no interest in Christ's Death, and the Benefits of it, Heb. 5. 9. 5. To believe
that there is an Heaven and Hell, and Eternal Rewards and Punishments after
this Life, according to the good or evil Lives of Men, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10. 6. To believe that the Dead Bodies of Men shall Rise again in the Great
Day of Judgment, 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18. 7. To believe that the assistance of God's
Holy Spirit, in order to a sound Faith, and true Repentance, is a Gift which
may be had by earnest Prayer, Luke 11. 13. 8. To love God with all our Hearts,
and with all our Souls, and with all our Minds, i.e. with great Sincerity,
Matthew 22. 37. 9. To rely upon God, and trust in him in all dangers and
necessities whatsoever, and firmly to believe, that all things will work for
our good, if we love him, Romans 8. 28. Heb. 13. 5, 6. 10. To believe, that the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are the revealed Word of God, and to
read, and search, and meditate in these holy Scriptures, in order to know we
must do to be saved, John 5. 39. 11. To prefer the Will of God, before the Will
and Favor of Men, when these two come to clash or interfere one with another,
Act. 5. 29. 12. To live and walk in a lively sense of God's Omniscience and
Omnipresence, Act. 23. Luke 1. 75. 13. To have great, high, and reverend
thoughts of God, and conceptions suitable to his infinite Wisdom, and Goodness,
and Power, 1 Pet. 3. 15. 14. To let our Speech be always with Grace, seasoned
with Salt, that we may know how to answer every Man, Col. 4. 6. 15. To be
frequent, and serious, and attentive in praising of God, and praying to him for
his Help, Assistance, and Protection, especially Night and Morning, Luke 2. 37.
Ephesians. 6. 18. 16. To walk worthy of our Baptism, even in newness of Life, Rom 6.
3, 4. 17, To make great Conscience of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, to
come often to that Holy Table, and to prepare and examine our selves, in order
to our worthy receiving of Pardon and Remission of sins, 1 Cor. 11. 26, 28. 18.
To express willingness and alacrity in God's service, and to be ready unto good
Works, Tit. 3. 1. 19. To have pure aims and designs in Holy Duties, and good
Works, viz. The glory of God, and the good of others, Matthew. 6. 22. 1 Pet. 4.
11. 20. To be zealous and fervent in Devotion, and in expressing our love to
God, Tit. 2. 14. Rev. 3. 19. 21. To bring a very serious mind with us to the
House of God, and to behave our selves there with all decency, and gravity, 1
Cor. 11. 22. 22. To be not only a hearer of the Word, but a doer of it also,
Jam. 1. 22. 23. To fix our Thoughts upon God in the public Prayers of the
Church, and to offer to God the desires of our Hearts, in joining with the
Congregatian in their Prayers, Romans 15. 6. 24. To sanctify the Lord's Day,
both in private, and in public. Acts 20. 7. Rev. 1. 10. 25. To be subject to
Principalities and Powers, and to obey Magistrates, Tit. 3. 1. 26. To obey our
Pastors and Teachers that have the rule over us, and to submit our selves to
them, as those that watch for our Souls, Heb. 13. 17. 27. To maintain our
Ministers, and to communicate to them in all good things, Gal. 6. 6. 28.
Faithfully to discharge the Duties of our respective Relations. As, 1. Husbands
to love and honor their Wives, Ephesians. 5. 25. 2. Wives to be obedient and subject
to their Husbands, Ephesians. 5. 22. 3. Parents to provide for the Souls and Bodies
of their Children, 1 Timothy 5. 8. 4. Children to honor their Parents all their
days, Ephesians. 6. 1. 5. Masters to encourage their Servants to Goodness, and to be
just in paying them their Wages, Ephesians. 6. 9. 6. Servants to serve their Masters
in singleness of heart, fearing God, and to please them well in all things,
Col. 3. 22. 7. Ministers to be patterns of good Works, Tit. 2. 7. 8. Widows to
trust in God, and to continue in Supplications and Prayers night and day, 1 Timothy 5. 5. 9. Virgins to mind those things that may please the Lord Jesus, 1
Cor. 7. 32.
29. To learn to be very meek and humble upon all occasions, Matthew. 11. 29. 30.
To hunger and Thirst after Goodness and Righteousness, Matthew. 5. 6. 31. To
purify the Heart, or inward Man, from evil Desires and Affections, and to
season it with holy Thoughts and Contemplations, Matthew. 5. 8. 32. To labor to
make Peace among dissenting Neighbors, and to be peaceable our selves, and, as
much as in us lies, with all Men, Matthew. 5. 9. Romans 12. 18. 33. To rejoice in
being reviled and persecuted for Righteousness sake, Matthew. 5. 11. 12. 34. To
be merciful, kind, tenderhearted, and charitable, and ready to forgive, Ephesians.
4. 32. 35. To edify others by our Conversation, and to preserve them, as much
as in us lies, from Sin and Damnation, Matthew 5. 13, 14. 36. To love our
Enemies, to bless them that curse us, to do good to them that hate us, and to
pray for them which despitefully use us, Matthew. 5. 44. 37. Rather to lose our
Right, than quarrel and go to Law about small things, Matth^ 5. 39, 40. 38. To
use great simplicity in our Speeches and Answers, Matthew. 5. 37. 39. To give and
to lend to our poor Neighbor what is reasonable, Matthew. 5. 42. 40. To humble
our selves sometimes before God by fasting Matthew. 6. 16. 41. To be confident
God will provide for us in the use of honest and lawful means, Matthew. 6. 31.
42. To seek God's Kingdom, and its Righteousness, with more earnest Affections
than temporal Things, Matthew. 6. 20, 33. 43. To reform our selves, before we
seek to reform others, Matthew. 7. 5. 44. To do to others, what we would have
others do to us, Matthew. 7. 12. 45. To enter in at the strait Gate, and to deny
our selves in our Honor, Ease, and Pleasure, for a better Life, Matthew. 7. 13.
46. To confess and own Christ, and his Religion, before Men, Matthew. 10. 32. 47.
To be industrious in the discharge of the Duties of our Calling, Romans 12. 6, 7,
8. 48. To love without Dissimulation, Romans 12. 9. 49. To be patient in
Tribulation, Romans 12. 12. 50. To rejoice with them that do rejoice, and to weep
with them that weep, Romans 12. 15. 51. To condescend to Men of low Estates, Romans
12. 16. 52. To provide things honest in the sight of all Men, Romans 12. 17. 53.
To overcome the Evil with Good, Romans 12. 21. 54. To bear with the infirmities
of the Weak, Romans 15. 1. 55. To avoid familiarity with Sectaries, and such as
disturb the Peace of the Church, Romans 16. 17, 18. 56. To practice the Rules of
that Charity which are set down, 1 Gor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. 57. To bring forth
those Fruits of the Spirit which we find specified, Gal. 5. 22, 23. 58. To
learn to be wise unto Salvation. 1 Cor. 3. 18. 59. If a Man be overtaken in a
fault, to restore him in the Spirit of Meekness, Gal. 6. 1. 60. To redeem the
Time we have lost, by our greater diligence in God's Service, Ephesians. 5. 6. 61. To
resist Temptations to Sin, with all our might, Ephesians. 6. 13, 14, 15. 62. To study
Modesty and Decency in all our Actions, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3, 4, 5. 63. To esteem the
faithful Teachers of the Word, very highly for their Works sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
12, 13. 64. To comfort the feeble-minded, to support the weak, to be patient
toward all Men, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. 65. To rejoice in the Lord always, Phil. 4. 4.
66. To use and show Moderation to all Men, Phil. 4. 5. 67. To give Thanks in
every thing, and to give God the Glory, whether we Eat or Drink, or whatever we
do, 1 Cor. 10. 31. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. 68. To abstain from appearances of Evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. 69. To prove and try things by the Word of God, and to hold fast
that which is good. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. 70. To be conteut with Food and Raiment, if
God does not think fit to give us more, 1 Timothy 6. 6, 7, 8. 71. To be steady and
constant in our Duties, without fainting, Rev. 2. 20. 72. To study great
sincerity and simplicity in our Actions, 2 Cor. 1. 12. 73. To be rich in good
Works, where God ^a^h blessed us with Riches in this World, 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18.
74. To use great Temperance in Eating and Drinking, 1 Cor. 9. 25. 75. To use
great modesty in our Apparel, 1 Timothy 2. 9. 76. To visit the Fatherless and
Widows in their Afflictions, Jam. 1. 27. 77. To bridle our Tongues, Jam. 1. 26.
78. To be easy entreated to that which is good, Jam. 3. 17. 79. To say of
things we intend to do, If the Lord will, and we shall live, Jam. 4. 15. 80. To
call for the Elders or Ministers of the Church when we are sick, and to let
them pray over us, Jam. 5. 14. 81. If we are cheerful, to sing Psalms, Jam. 5.
13. 82: If we have done any thing prejudicial to our Neighbors, to confess our
faults to them, Jam. 5. 16. 83. To endeavor to convert others to the love of
God, Luke 32. 32. 84. To have our Conversation in Heaven, and to look more at
the things which are not seen, than at those which are seen, Phil. 3. 20. 2
Cor. 4. 18. 85. To be sober and vigilant over our Actions, 1 Pet. 5. 8. 86. To
grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18. 87.
To use Hospitality, and to be kind and obliging to Strangers, Heb. 13. 2. 88.
To lay down even our Lives for our Brethren, if it be for the good of the
Church, 1 John 3. 16. 89. To use the World, as if we used it not, 1 Cor. 7. 31.
90. To give diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 7. 10. 91.
To imitate the good Examples we see before us. Heb. 13. 7. Phil. 3. 17. 92. To
be courteous and affable in our Discourses and Behavior, 1 Pet. 3. 8. 93. To
repent of the Sins we have fallen into, and to forsake them, 2 Cor. 12. 21.
These are the Duties we find Commanded in the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and by looking over these two Catalogues, we may soon perceive, what we have
been doing against God, our Neighbor, and our selves, and wherein we have been
defective. But then,

3. This Self-Examination will not be complete, except we consider these Sins
and Duties, with respect to our present temper, and inclination. and therefore,

1. As to the Sins, which upon a survey of the Catalogue, we find our selves
guilty of, or prone to, our hearts must be asked whether we have an aversion
from them, whether we are resolved to show our dislike and hatred to them for
the future, whether we do think it worth our pains to exercise our selves in
the mortification of them, whether our real purpose is, whenever we are tempted
to any of them, to oppose the Temptation, and to keep our selves unspotted from
the insection, whether the bent of our Soul is, wittingly and wilfully, to
allow our selves in the Commission of them no more, whether we do in good
earnest intend to enquire and take advice, and to use the proper remedies to be
rid of them, whether we are resolved to shun the apparent occasions of them,
and whether, in case we do through incogitancy run into any of these errors, to
get up again presently, and endeavor to bring our selves to an habit of
cautiousness of offending God, and whether we will pray much, and work hard, to
shake these Vipers from our bosoms.

2. As to the Duties, which, upon a view of the aforesaid list, we find we have
neglected, enquiry must be made, whether we see and taste the sweetness of
them, whether we do heartily believe, that the perfection of our nature
consists in them, whether we do earnestly resolve, whatever comes of it, to be
possessors of them whether they ingross the desires of our hearts, whether we
have any ardent longings after these Spiritual accomplishments, whether we
prefer an holy fruitsulness in these Virtues before Temporal felicities,
whether we have a sense of the great necessity, beauty, and excellency of them,
whether we do not content our selves with bare wishes after them, but are fully
purposed to take the way, whereby we may obtain them, whether we are resolved
to improve the single and accidental Acts, into a lasting habit and
disposition, and whether we will be earnest with God for the assistance of his
holy Spirit, that they may take root in us, and solicit the Grace of God to
prosper our endeavors; whether we think them worth having, and will act like
persons, that do think so; whether if we have done them imperfectly, the
purpose of our Souls is to perform them with greater sincerity; whether, if
foiled at any time in the pursuit of them, we mean to take fresh courage, and
to fall on again, till we arrive to a facility in the practice, and if gentler
means will not prevail, whether we will use the severer, and more rigorous ways
of mortification, and offer even violence to our desires, rather than go
without them. If our hearts can and dare answer in the affirmative, and say,
Yea, to these Queries, we are safe, and may believe, God has mighty blessings
in store for us, and will bestow them upon us in the use of this Holy
Sacrament. In such a method, this Self-Examination must proceed, and then it is
like to produce the effects, we desire, and God expects at our hands.

IV. But still you will say, That is a very operose and laborious Business, and
full of intricacies and difficulties, and scarce possible to be done, every
time a Person receives the Holy Communion; especially, if accidentally a
Christian is to Communicate with a sick, or dying Neighbor; nor can Ministers
themselves be supposed capable of doing all this, when they are on a sudden
called upon, to administer the Holy Sacrament to persons, that send for them.
But to give a satisfactory Answer to this point, it will be necessary to lay
down the reply in these following Positions.

1. The Trouble is imagined to be greater than really it is. If People are
unwilling, it is an easy matter to pretend Difficulties and Impossibilities.
All that I have mentioned, may be done in an Hour's time, or less: For it is to
be supposed, that every Person is not guilty of all the Sins, nor guilty of the
Neglect of all the Duties in the preceding Lists: And how easily may a Person
spy those Sins and Neglects he is prone to; and then, by the Rule of Queries,
mentioned before, see how his Heart stands affected! But, suppose it were a
Task of some difficulty, Is Heaven worth nothing? And is the Labor for the
Body of that Consequence, that the Soul deserves to be neglected? What if God
would not part with an Interest in his Love upon cheaper Terms? Will ye refuse
it, and choose to be miserable? Sure, you would not think so, if you had been
but one Moment in Hell. However, as I said, the Task is not so laborious, as is
imagined by Persons who have an Aversion from Goodness.

2. It is confessed, that the Command about Self-Examination is general, and
concerns both the Good and Bad, both Worthy and Unworthy Receivers; both those
who are void of Grace, and those that are filled with the Spirit. But, though
the Command is general, and obliges the Serious, as well as the Profane; the
Complete, as well as the Half-Christian, equally; yet, in the manner of the
Performance of it, there cannot but be a very great difference, because the
Persons concerned do differ much in their Tempers, Progress in Goodness, and in
their Wants and Necessities; and consequently, to the one it must be more
laborious, than to the other; and the one has reason to spend more Time in
this Self-Examination, than the other; as he who has suffered his House to
become very full of Filth and Dirt, must be at greater Cost and Pains to
cleanse it, than he that every Day takes care to keep it swept. And therefore,

3. A Man who has led an ill Life, and thinks of coming to the Table of his
Lord and Master; or if he have communicated formerly, and, after that, is
fallen into any grosser Sin, and gone on in it, whenever he approaches, had
need set all the particular Sins God has forbid in his Gospel, and all the
particular Duties commanded in that Book, before him, and ransack all the
Actions of his Life, he can remember; to see how far he has been from the
Kingdom of God, and how his Heart is now resolved, and disposed: As to his
particular Sins, and Neglects; whether he intends to take up, and to set his
Face against them; and whether it be his unfeigned Desire, Purpose, and
deliberate Resolution, to submit his Neck to the sweet and easy Yoke of
Christ; of whom he expects Pardon and Salvation, both in this Sacrament, and in
the last Day. And as tedious as this Self-Examination may appear to such a
Person, yet he may thank himself, that his long Continuance and Boldness in a
sinful Life has made the Task so laborious to him. And, indeed, till such a
Man's Love to Sin, and a sinful Life, does signally abate, and the Bias of his
Soul be changed, and turned, it will be necessary for him, for some time at
least, as often as he receives the holy Sacrament, to iterate and repeat this
larger Self-Examination, to see what Advance he makes in Holiness; and whether
there be not some Sins lurking in his Breast, he took no notice of before. But
then,

4. If he find that, after Receiving several times, his Faith, and Love to the
Lord Jesus Christ, does signally grow, and his Relish of a sinful Life dies,
and a nobler Taste of the Goodness of God insinuates into his Breast, as his
Sins grow fewer, so his Self-Examination before the holy Sacrament need not be
so laborious, as before it was. Finding he has gotten a settled Hatred and
Abhorrency of several Sins he formerly delighted in, instead of examining
himself about them, he has reason to break forth into Praises and Admiration
of the Goodness of God, who has delivered him from the Power of Darkness, and
led him to his Mavelous Light. In a Word, The holier, the more melting
toward God and Goodness, the more spiritual, the more obedient to the Commands
of the Gospel, a Man or Woman grows, the less Self-Examination will serve turn;
for, as he grows in Grace, so his Errors and Infirmities abate; and those
which remain against his Will, may be easily known, and he may easily take a
View of them; nor will it cost him so much Time to take them into
Consideration, as the greater Heap of them formerly did; and let him separate
those Sins he has left, and got the Mastery and Conquest of, from those
Infirmities which yet, against his Desire or Approbation, cleave to him, and
the Remainder will soon be examined, and he may soon satisfy himself, whether
he be resolved to labor more and more to exterminate them from his Soul; and
upon that Account come to the holy Sacrament, to get greater Strength and
Courage against them, by contemplating the Love of God, and the Cross, the
Agonies, and the Tremblings the Lord Jesus endured for them. The Sins a Man
has actually left, need not be examined over again, every time he Receives;
but those only he is yet very prone to slip into, and would fain be rid of, to
become more conformable to the Lord Jesus. So that,

5. He that makes it the Business of his Life to please God in all Places, and
in all the Conditions and Concerns of his Life, and is arrived to a Cordial and
Practical Love of Goodness, may very Conscientiously, after a very small
Examination of his Life and Actions, especially if he be straightened in Time,
come to the holy Communion; for the Sins he would fain be rid of, he may soon
run over, and see whether he goes to this holy Ordinance with a Design to
become more spiritual, and take a final Leave of his Sins at the awful Sight of
the Cross of Christ. And for this Reason, not only a serious Minister of the
Gospel, who endeavors to lead a very Exemplary Life, and to practice what he
preaches; but even a Conscientious Layman, who carries about him a constant
Zeal and Desire to advance the Glory of God, and his Everlasting Salvation,
may, upon a very short Examination, receive this holy Sacrament, either with a
sick Friend, or dying Neighbor, and upon a very short Warning too; though at
other Times, when he has more Time, it will be necessary and convenient to
enlarge his Self-Examination and Preparation, thereby to give greater Life to
his Faith, and Hope, and Love, and Charity.

6. A Christian may very much save himself the Labor of a tedious
Self-Examination before he comes to the holy Sacrament, by a daily
Self-Examination. And he that every Night surveys the Actions, and Discourses,
and Desires of that Day, and sets his Accounts even with God, and searches what
Temptations have assaulted him that Day, and how he has resisted them; how he
has spent his Time, and what good Thoughts he has entertained, what Good he
has done; whether he has watched, and been Conscientious in the Discharge of
his Duty, will by this Means come to a true Knowledge of himself; and by
breaking the Task thus by little and little, a very short Self-Examination will
be requisite when he is to come to this Ordinance. This daily Self-Examination
brings him to a Sense of the Corruptions which do most easily beset him, and
thereby he comes to know what it is he must bend his chief Forces against, and
therefore has not much to do when he comes to the Supper of the Lord.

7. Self-Examination being properly a Labor of the Mind, I do not doubt, but a
poor Day-Labourer, or a Servant, or any Man that is obliged to get a Livelihood
for himself and Family by working hard, may, in the midst of his lawful
Employment, while he sits or walks in his Shop, or is busy with his Hands,
apply his Mind to a Survey of his Sins, and Errors, and Defects; and examine
himself about his Repentance, whether it be sincere, or not; and about the
Particulars of his former Life, and whether he be sincerely resolved for
Spiritual Wisdom, and a Spiritual Mind, and examine himself very acceptably:
For it is a great Mistake, that this Self-Examination cannot be performed, but
in a Chamber or Closet, and by spending so many Hours in the Exercise. It may
be performed as we are walking, as we are about our Work; in the Field, as well
as at home; at the Plough, as well as in a Study: Though I still urge, that
where God has given a Person a quiet, sedate and easy Life, free from the
Encumbrances of the World, there he justly expects that Men should take
different Measures in this Self-Examination. A Man, in Case of Necessity, can
live upon Bread and Water, and think it to be very good Fare; but being in his
House, and all Conveniences about him, he gratifies his Appetite with greater
Variety: And that shows the difference betwixt Laboring People, and those that
can take their Ease at home. It Is very pleasing to God, to see the poor Man
take pains with himself in this Self-Examination, even in his busy Hours, and
toyling Employment: But of the other, who are not necessitated to lead such a
Life, he expects they should perform the Task suitably to their Leisure, and
Time, and quiet Hours; and thereby express in some measure their Gratitude to
God, who has made this difference between them and the meaner sort. Yet,

8. Though I have told you, that the Sins we have left and forsaken, need not
be repeated over again every time we receive the Sacrament; yet it is of very
great Use in our private Fasts and Humiliation-days, to take every one of those
Sins we have abandoned, and shaken hands with, into fresh Consideration;
thereby to engage our selves to a greater Admiration of the Mercy of God, who
has freed us from those Shackles; and of his Patience, that did not cut us off
in the midst of those Sins we formerly doated on, but has spared us, and so
ordered things, that we should come to a Sense of our Danger; and vouchsafed
unto us Means and Opportunities, whereby we might escape the Pollutions we once
wallowed in. So Men who have been delivered from running in the Night upon a
Precipice, visit the fatal place sometimes, to see what a Concatenation of
Mischiefs they have been preserved from by an Almighty Providence; and thereby
supply themselves with new Arguments, both to magnify the unspeakable
Protection, and to improve and enlarge their Gratitude, and to testify their
Sense of the Mercy, by charitable Actions, and warmer Devotions for the future.

V. But because Errors may be committed in this Self-Examination, as to the
manner of the Performance, it will be very expedient, in the last place, to
give some Rules, how this Self-Examination ought to be qualified.

1. It must be an impartial, no flattering Self-Examination. As there is
nothing more common to Men, than to run into one Extreme or other, so it
happens very often in the Duty before us. Some examine themselves so strictly,
that they even confound themselves, and run upon the very Brink of Despair.
Others do it with that foolish Tenderness to their Lusts, that they make the
Colors too fine, in which they are to draw themselves: Whence it comes to
pass, that when they have done sitting, the Picture looks mighty well, but is
not to the Life; and as themselves were the Painters, so it is too evident,
that they favored themselves too much in the Drawing. To take either the
little Resemblances of Virtues we find in our selves, for real Virtues; or to
satisfy our selves, that the faint Inclinations we have to practice the
substantial Duties, are unfeigned and strong Purposes, must necessarily prove
deceitful Work. Our Business here must be, not to skin the Wound, but to heal
it; and therefore, where we are apt to think too well of our selves, it would
not be amiss to ask either Divines, or Persons we are familiar withal, what
they think of our Religion; and that Question our Savior does ask his
Disciples, Matthew. 16. 13. Whom say Men, that I am? may not be improper to be
put to our Acquaintance, What Men abroad do think of us? And though the
Censures of Men, if apparently vain and groundless, ought to be slighted; yet
from the Verdict that other Men give of us, much may be learned sometimes: And
if they count us proud, or censorious, or bitter, or sensual, etc. it may serve
as a Motive to enquire what there is in us, that may give Occasion to others to
think of us as they do; and whether we do not give them too much Ground for
those Censures.

2. This Self-Examination must ever have a truly spiritual End; and that End
must be, to wash our selves, that we may be clean. If it be only to favor a
present Damp upon our Spirits, or to satisfy the Terrors of an unquiet
Conscience, or to comply with the Custom and Formality of Preparation, the
Self-Examination will lose its Virtue and Sweetness: The End must determine its
Acceptableness, Soundness, and Sincerity: And he that examines himself, without
Reserves, out of a Christian Simplicity, and with an Intent to become more like
God, and more like that Savior, whose Death is remembered in this Eucharist;
and more like the Friends of the Bridegroom, the holy Apostles; acts like a
Person, for whom is prepared a Feast of fat Things, a Feast of Wines on the
Lees; of fat Things, full of Marrow; of Wines on the Lees, well refined; as it
is said, Isa. 25. 6.

3. With this Self-Examination must be joined Earnest Prayers to the Father of
Lights, that he who sees in secret, would give us the Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding, whereby we may see the Errors that creep in the Dark, and are
not so palpable as others are. And he that has Courage to tell his God, Lord,
thou know my Heart, and triest my Reins; and thy piercing Eye is a Discerner
of the Thoughts and Intentions of my Inward Man. Thou know, I do not
wilfully hide any thing from my self; and I am so far from harboring any
secret Lust, or Vanity, or Corruption, that it is the ardent Desire of my Soul,
that thou would discover to me what Impurity, what Error, what Fault lies
lurking in my Breast. I am not afraid, blessed be thy Name, to know the worst
of my self. Let down, I pray thee, some of thy gracious Beams into my Heart,
whereby I may see the Defects which, by reason of my Blindness, I cannot as yet
discover; whatever it be, O Lord; though it be incorporated with my Profit or
Pleasure, or with my very Heart, I am resolved to tear it from my Soul. Let me
but see it; and, with that Sight, give me Strength, and Spiritual Courage, and
it shall not stay in that House which thou have pleased to choose for thy
Habitation. He that thus dares address himself to God in his Self-Examination,
discovers the Sincerity of his Soul.

The preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I IF it be necessary to examine our selves before we eat and drink in this
holy Sacrament, then certainly the Churches heretofore were in an Error, that
gave the holy Communion to Children. They did it already, in St. Cyprian's
Time: Innocent I. Pope of Rome, established it. It continued down to St.
Austin's Days; and the Custom was, as soon as the Children were baptized, to
give them the holy Communion. Under Charles the Great, about the Year 800.
after Christ, they did not only admit Infants to Communicate in the Church
after Baptism, but kept part of the Eucharist at (...), to give it to dying
Children. To this purpose, ^^segisu of Leig^ tells us of a Canon made about
that ^^e, viz. That the Presbyter, or Priest, should always have ^^charist, or
Sacrament, ready, that in case a Person fell sick, or a Child should be taken
ill suddenly, they might receive, and not die without the Communion. Among the
Ethiopian Christians, the Custom continues at this Day; and they give the
Sacrament to Infants, as soon as they are baptized. The Christians in Moscovy
give it to Children of Seven Years of Age, because they think, that about that
time Children begin to commit Actual Sins. And Hospinian tells us of a Custom
in Lorrain, Hospin. Hist. Sacram. lib. 2. cap. 2.
which continued yet in the last Century, amongst some Papists, as a Relick of
that ancient Practice of Communicating Infants. The Priest, when he had
baptized the Infant, would fetch from the Altar a Consecrated Wafer, and,
having taken it betwixt his two Fingers, show it to the People; when he had
done, put it up again in the Box, and then wash his two Fingers with Wine, and
put some Drops of that Wine in the Infant's Mouth. But, as ancient, and as
common as this Custom was, to give Infants the holy Communion; yet the Church
of Rome it self was at last ashamed of it, and abolished it by a Canon in the
Council of Trent. Conc. Trid. Sess. 5. cap. 4.
That which moved some of the Primitive Churches to begin this Custom, was,
that Saying of Christ, Joh. 6. 53. Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man,
and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you. This made them think it absolutely
necessary to Salvation; and, that Children dying in their Infancy, might not
perish, they gave them the Sacrament. But their Mistake lay here, That they
took the Spiritual Eating of Christ's Flesh, and Drinking his Blood, by a
lively Faith, spoken of in that Chapter, for Sacramental Eating and Drinking,
or Eating and Drinking in the holy Sacrament. It Is evident, that Christ
instituted this Sacrament, with an Intent, we should use it in remembrance of
him; which Children are not capable of, much less of Self-Examination: And
therefore, even under the Law, though Infants were circumcised, yet they were
not admitted to eat of the Passover, till they came to the Use of their Reason.
Not to mention, that this Sacrament being designed also for Reformation of our
Lives, which Infants have no Occasion for, at least, no Sense of, during that
State of Innocence; they can receive no prejudice by not Receiving the holy
Communion, seeing there is not that Necessity for it in them, in point of
Amendment of Life, that there is in the Adult.

II. Yet, from the Necessity of Self-Examination before this Sacrament, we may
very rationally infer, that as soon as young People are able to examine
themselves, they ought to come to the holy Communion. There is an Emphasis in
the Apostle's Words, mentioned before; But let a Man examine himself, and so
let him eat and drink: Which imports, not only that a Person who has examined
himself, may come; but withal, that when he is capable of examining himself, he
ought to do it, and so come to this holy Ordinance. I reckon, that as soon as
young Men and Women are able to understand what Sin, and what Holiness is, what
the Design of Christ's Death is, and what Heaven and Salvation means, they are
capable also of Self-Examination; and consequently, of coming to the holy
Communion: And if the Creator be fit to be remembered in the Days of our Youth,
the Redeemer of Men can be no improper Object of that Remembrance. It must be
admitted, indeed, that the Word (...), used by the Apostle, in the Precept of
Self-Examination, is taken from Metallaries, and Lapidists, or Jewellers, that
make a very strict Examination, whether the Precious Stone be truly Oriental,
or no; and whether there be no Flaw in it: And though it (being a Word of such
Import) implies a very accurate Search into our Ways, and nice Care to be found
worthy; which Young Men of Fourteen, or Fifteen, or Sixteen, may be supposed,
not so very capable of performing; yet they are able to discern such Sins as
they find forbidden in their Catechism, and have been taught to avoid by their
Parents, from whom they have learned their Duty to God and Man. And, as the
Sins of that early Age cannot be supposed to be very numerous, and a great many
of those they have been guilty of before that Age, were committed out of
Ignorance, so the Examination is more easily performed; and as their Age and
Religion advances, so they will know more. Their early Self-Examination makes
way for early Gravity, and helps to ripen their Understandings, and is the only
Way to prevent their falling into the Vices of the Age; and if any thing, next
to the Grace of God, can be a Charm against Infection from a debauched and
irreligious World, this is most likely to be it; I mean, this Self-Examination,
joined with the holy Sacrament, for which it is intended, as a proper
Preparative.

III. It is not enough, that another Person has examined us, or does examine
us; but we our selves must take pains in it. Ministers, and Parents, and
Friends, by examining of us, may be able to give us very good Directions, and
excellent Instructions, how we are to order our Conversation; but to all this
must be added our own Labor and Diligence, to see whether we observe those
Directions, whether they are acceptable to us, how we relish them, and whether
we intend to act accordingly. Up then, Christian, and try thy Ways: Be not
afraid of Labor. Labor and Food, says Philo, have the same Virtue; for, as
upon Food a Man's whole Life depends, so upon Labor also depends all that a
Man can call good. Therefore, as they that will prolong Life, do not neglect
their Food; so he that desires any real or solid Good, must not be afraid of
Labor. As Meat is very troublesome and burdensome to a weak Stomach, that
has but little Natural Heat; so to him that has but little Love to Christ,
this Labor of Self-Examination will be burdensome. But, Christian, as thou
have the greatest reason to love the Lord Jesus; so, if thou love him to any
purpose, both this and other Labors will appear very easy; for Love will make
them so. See therefore, and enquire, how Concerns stand betwixt God and thine
own Soul. Shall thy Reason lie useless? Shall that excellent Faculty be
employed in searching into the Accounts of thy Shop, and not into the State of
thy better Part? Is it not worth knowing whether thou art of God, or a Child of
the Devil? And whether thou had rather grovel in the Dust, like a Muck-worm,
or elevate thy thy Soul, and fix it upon Objects, which Angels desire to pry
into? Has God given thee Power to examine thy self, and will thou neglect that
Power? Though thou can not Read nor Write, yet thou can think, and think
whether thy Life be according to the Holy Rules, which are observed by other
conscientious Christians. Through this examination thou may come to see, what
God has done for thy Soul; and if he has planted there an abhorrency of that
which is evil, and a strong affection to that which is good, how joyfully may
thou come to this Holy Table, and expect, that God will pour Water upon him,
that is Thirsty, and Floods upon the dry Ground, and that thou shall spring up,
as among the Grass, and as the Willows by the Watercourse, Isai. 44. 3. 3. He
that comes to be acquainted with himself, at the same time comes to be
acquainted with God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ. This is true Policy;
and as he is the greatest Politician in Temporals, that sees afar off, and
considers the events of things, and upon what causes they depend, and gives
counsel accordingly; so he is the greast Politician in Spirituals, that studies
himself, acquaints himself with his own heart; for such a person looks further
than his present profit, and, sensible how this self-acquaintance will be
valued one day, counsels himself to be expert in that Wisdom; For it is
certain, that in the last day not the great Scholarship of Men, not their
improving of Arts and Sciences, not their skill in various Languages, not their
Ability to Discourse well, not their volubility of Tongue, not their Rhetorical
and Eloquent Speaking, not their profound Philosophy, nor their Diving into the
secrets of Nature will be much admired. These things did well for this World,
and might be serviceable to various Sorts and Degrees of Men: But if Persons,
with all these Accomplishments about them, overlooked their own Hearts,
cherished Weeds and Vices there, and would take no notice of them, their Parts
and Learning will not stand them in great stead in that Day of Retribution. The
poor Christian that ransacked his Soul often, turned over the Leaves of his
Conscience, that spiritual Book, on purpose to see his own Spots and Stains,
and wash himself clean, out of an holy Emulation of the Purity of the Lord
Jesus, he will be counted at last the most prudent Man, that had the quickest
Eye, and a Sight sharper than an Eagle; for, as this gives him a Title to all
that Christ has purchased, and the rich Blessings laid up for him in this holy
Sacrament; so, in the last Day, it gives him full Possession of all the
Trophies of Christ's Victory.

The PRAYER.
O God! Thou see the secret Recesses of my Soul! Though I may hide my self
from my self, yet I cannot hide my self from thee, whose Sight is not darkened
by the Night, nor stopped by an Object intervening, nor hindered by Walls of
Brass, nor weakened with the greatness of the Distance. O Lord! Thou have
commanded me to examine my self, and to search into the Sins and Errors of my
Life! What Foes I have, and how many there be that rise against me, that would
swallow up my Soul, and devour it; that I may secure my self against their
Rage, by taking Sanctuary at the Death of my ever blessed Redeemer, the Lord
Jesus! O Lord, I am very apt to do thy Work negligently; I am apt to do it by
halves, and superficially, and without any regard to its weight and moment!
Thou that know my Dullness, my Backwardness, and my Hypocrisy, deliver me, I
beseech thee, from my self; and make me Partaker of that Light, whereby thou
meanest to discover the Sins of Men in the last Day, when they come to appear
before thy Tribunal. By that Light they will see every Deformity, every
Enormity, every Exorbitance of their Outward and Inward Man. That will discover
to them, what they have long ago forgotten; and manifest to them, what, for
many Years, they have not thought of. That will show them every Error of their
Lives, to their Confusion and Amazement. That will make them see their Faults
so evidently, and so distinctly, that they will not be able to deny them, but
be forced to render themselves Prisoners to thy Justice. That will undeceive
them in their fond Opinions of their Sins, and pull away the Varnish they have
put upon them, and make them appear in their native Hue and Blackness. Oh,
vouchsafe me that Light in some measure now, that I may not deceive mine own
Soul: Make me Partaker, withal, of the Zeal of thy Justice, and of that Hatred
thou bear against Sin, that I may hate my Sins, as thou do hate them. I
desire to do all things in thy Name, and by thy Assistance. I would willingly
come to that Sincerity thou so much delightest in. Oh! Guide my Steps; and if I
take false Measures, put me in the right Way again. Oh! Let me not swerve from
thy Commandments. Let my Confusion be continually before me, that I may humble
my self under thy mighty Hand, and may be exalted in due time, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen*

CHAP. XXIV.
Of judging our selves, the Third Preparative Duty, in order to our worthy
Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament.
The CONTENTS.
Judging our selves, contains three Acts; Confession of Sin, Self-Condemnation,
and inflicting Judgments on our Selves. The Nature of these Acts explained.
This judging our selves, proved to be pleasing to God. What it is that makes it
so. Confession of Sins, if rightly performed, is a great Work. Men are loath to
confess those Sins, which they are loath to leave. Carnal Men wonder at the
great stir, that some Penitents make. In inflicting Judgments on our selves,
the Word of God must be made our Rule. The Prayer.

I. I Mention this Judging of our selves, as a Duty preparatory for the Holy
Sacrament, because it is certain, that St. Paul makes it so. 1 Cor. 11. 31. If
we would judge our selves, we should not be judged. God's judging of us, or
proceeding to Judgment against us, has in all Ages appeared very terrible to
good Men, because it speaks his Anger, and it is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God. Heb. 10. 31. And therefore David does so often
deprecate God's Judgment, particularly, Psalm. 143. 2. Enter not into Judgment
with thy servant, for in thy sight no man living shall be justified: And Psalm.
119. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments.
And, Psalm. 66. 3. How terrible art thou in thy Works, or Judgments! And though,
Psalm. 26. 1. he prays, Judge me, O God; yet, by that, he means no more, than
that God would plead his Cause, and vindicate his Innocence, which was abused,
bespattered, and oppressed, by his Enemies. God's judging of us, differs very
much from judging our selves; and when we are exhorted to judge our selves, it
is not to oblige us, to beg of God to send Judgments upon us; but it is to do
something, whereby the Judgment of God, we have deserved, may be prevented and
averted; and upon attending to the scope and drift of the Apostle in that
Advice, we shall find, that it consists, partly in accusing our selves, and
confessing our faults, partly in condemning our selves for the faults we have
committed, and partly in exercising acts of Justice, and executing Judgment
upon our selves, of which we are to speak in order.

II. The First Act of judging our selves, is, confessing our Sins, and accusing
our selves, and Act very proper after Self-Examination; confessing, I mean,
such Sins, as, upon strict examination, we find our selves to have been guilty
of, without being afraid of giving our selves Names too harsh, and too
reproachful. It Is true, no Man is obliged to accuse himself of Sins he was
never guilty of; and to charge our selves with the guilt of Fornication, or
Adultery, or Murder, or Blasphemy, or Theft, etc. which, through the
restraining Grace of God, we never thought of, and have been strangers to, is,
to tell God a lie, except we understand those Sins in a Spiritual Sense; and,
in this case, a Man or Woman may say, they have been guilty of Adultery, by
departing wickedly from their God, whom they were solemnly Married, and joined
to, in Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, and by doting upon a miserable
transitory World, which St. James calls Spiritual Adultery, Jam. 4. 4. And,
upon this account, a Man may say, he has been guilty of Blasphemy, in
dishonouring the Gospel by his vain and wicked Life, whereby he he has given
occasion to the Enemies of the Lord to blaspheme him, and speak evil of
Religion; and, after the same manner, he may justly accuse himself of Murder,
if he have often stabbed his Neighbor's Reputation by Slanders, Reproaches,
and evil surmises against him, and disparaging of him to those, from whom he
expected signal kindnesses: But, set aside this Spiritual Sense, a Man is not
obliged by any Law of God, to confess, that he has been formally guilty of
sins he never committed to his best remembrance; but in those he has actually
run into, either wilfully, or by surprise, he ought to be his own severe
accuser, especially to God, whom he has thereby grievously offended; and he
truly judges himself, that, upon a deep search of his Heart, finding what
Precepts of the Gospel he has wittingly acted against, cries out, Lord! I have
been that rotten Sheep of thy Flock, which, by my ill example, has infected
other! I have been that Viper thou have put into thy Bosom, and which has
threatened death to those Bowels that gave it life; and been a Rebel, by my
monstrous ingratitude, to my Father which is in Heaven! I have been that
Prodigal, that has run away from his Father's House, and traveled into a far
Country, as far as Hell it self! I have been that Fool, that mad Man, that has
said to his Soul, Thou have Goods laid up for many years, eat and drink, and be
merry! I have been that Satan, that Adversary, that have savoured the things
that be of Men, more than the things which be of God! I have been that
bewitched Creature, that have begun in the Spirit, and thought to end in the
Flesh! I have been that Judas, that have betrayed the Son of Man with a kiss! I
have been that brutish Man, that, by my careless life, have as good as said,
The Lord sees not, neither will the God of Jacob regard is! O that I had Wings
like a Dove, for then would I fly away, and bewail my folly in some Wilderness!
But in this Confession, or Self-accusation, some necessary Rules must be
observed.

1. A Man must not content himself with general Confessions, but, in the
Accusation, descend to particular Errors and Neglects of his Life. General
Confessions do well in Public Liturgies, and Offices of the Church, in which a
whole Congregation is to join; but in private, the case very much alters. The
Church, according to the old saying, non junicat de occultis, judges not of
secret things, and knows not what particular Sins every Man is guilty of, and
one may have stained his Soul with certain Sins, which another has not; and
therefor, wisely prescribes only general acknowledgments of Offenses, that the
whole Assembly may comply with the Duty; but in private every Man knows, or may
know, where the Shoe does most pinch him, and therefore, here particular
Confessions are necessary: He that in private contents himself with General
Confessions, shows no great desire to be better; and notwithstanding his
Confessions, may allow himself in abundance of Sins, and miscarry, and perish,
for all his general Confessions. But he that in his Confessions specifies the
particular Acts, wherein he has walked contrary to God, discovers an earnest
desire to grow in Grace; and, in this, St. Paul shows us an example, 1 Timothy 1.
13. where he does not say, I have been a great Sinner, but a Blasphemer, spoke
ill of the way to Life, a Persecuter, afflicted, oppressed, and made havoc of
the Churches of God, injurious, done great injuries to St. Stephen, and to
abundance of other Christians. In a word, such a person, by his particular
Confession, deals faithfully with his own Soul, and, by mentioning the
particular Diseases that annoy him, manifests his earnest desire of a Cure,
whereas General Confessions leave the Soul ignorant, dull, careless, and
unaffected with the great Concerns of Salvation. And though a person, every time
he accuses himself, or confesses his Errors, is not bound to enumerate all the
particular Sins of his Life he can charge his Memory with, yet if he never did
it before, it is fit he should do it, at least when first he receives the Holy
Sacrament, and at other times, confess such fins, as he finds himself most
inclined to, and most apt to harbor in his Bosom.

2. These Confessions must be accompanied, especially the Confessions before
the Sacrament, with aggravations of our Offenses, and with shame and confusion
of Face. I join these two together, because aggravating of them is the cause of
that confusion, and he that reflects in his Confessions, what light, what
knowledge, what checks of Conscience, what motions of God's Spirit, what
goodness of God, what mercy, what patience, what promises, what threatenings, he
has sinned against, what time he hathlost, what opportunities he has
neglected, what a gracious, what a merciful God he has offended, even love it
self, and sweetness, and beauty it self, and what blessings, what privileges,
what advantages, what offers he has slighted, will find himself obliged, to
have very low and mean thoughts of himself. This was the Publican's case, Luke
18. 13. Who standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his Eyes to Heaven,
but smote upon his Breast, saying, God be merciful to me a Sinner. He was
ashamed, and confounded. His Conscience told him, how unworthily he had dealt
with his Creator, how strangely he had carried himself to God, his best and
greatest Friend, how unthankful, and how base, he had been to his most gracious
Benefactor, and how strangely he had carried himself to the best of Beings. He
was confounded with the thoughts of his vileness, and conscious of his guilt,
he ^ast his eyes to the ground, unable to look his offended Father in the Face.
His Heart was full of grief, Sorrow fate heavy on his Soul; and though his
Tongue could not express his particular acts of injustice, oppression, pride,
anger, and greediness after the World, yet his Mind confessed them, thought of
them, his Heart was ready to break at the dismal sight, and this was a very
acceptable Confession.

3. These Confessions must be joined with invincible purposes, to endeavor
after a better and more Spiritu-Temper. So the wise Man tells us: He that
confesses his Sins, and forsakes the^, shall find mercy, Prove. 28. 13. Without
this Qualification, our Confessions are mere Lip-services, and rceive not one
gracious Look from above, nay, are accounted no better than Israel's Devotion,
Hos. 10. 1. Israel is an empty Vine; He brings forth fruit unto himself: Why
unto himself? The reason is, because, in that fruit, he aimed not so much at
God's Glory, as his own Profit: Nor was any Person the better for it, the
design was selfish, it was just to satisfy the present terror within, no love
of God lay at the bottom, the ground of all was self-love, and God had nothing
to do with it. The same may justly be said of him that confesses, but is not
concerned, whether his Flesh be subdued to the Spirit, or not. Such a
Confession is his own invention, it is not that Confession which God requires.
If he confesses, it must not be to himself, for God regards it not; and indeed,
till this actual endeavor to forsake them is added to the Confession, our Sins
continue still in God's Books of Account, look still as black as ever, not one
of them is blotted out, for the enmity against God is still maintained, and
whilst that lasts, it naturally follows, that God and we cannot be friends.

III. The second act of judging our selves, is, upon this Confession to condemn
our selves. And indeed, if the Soul be truly awake, and the Heart sincerely
sensible of its errors and miscarriages, the Penitent cannot but condemn
himself, and acknowledge, that the Judgments threatened in the word of God, are
due to him, and cry; Ah! my God, and my Lord! Who shall deliver me from the
Body of this death, from this confluence of Misery! I have deserved with Adam,
to be thrown out of Paradise, and to be for ever forbid eating of the Tree of
Life! I have deserved to drowned with the first World, or to be consumed for
ever as Sodom and Gomorrah. I have deserved the sudden and unnatural death of
Nadab and Abihu; to be stoned with Achan; to be struck with Leprosy, as
Miriam; to be swallowed up ^live by the Earth, as Dathan and Abiram. I have
deserved Manasseh's Prison, and Zedekiah's Chains, and, what is worse, the
everlasting Chains of Darkness. I acknowledge, that I have deserved, it should
be more tolerable for Infidels in the Great Day, than for me; for I have seen
the mighty works of God, and continued a stranger to Repentance. I have
deserved to be called upon at Midnight, as that careless Man, Thou Fool, this
Night thy Soul shall be required of thee, and whose shall be, which thou have
provided? To this Wretch, that is before thee, belongs nothing but Wrath and
Indignation. On this Head of mine, thou might justly discharge the Ordinance
of Justice, and pour out the Vials of thy Wrath! On me, thou might justly
rain snares, and Fire, and Brimstone. I have deserved to be plagued with
Diseases, tormented with grievous Pain, haunted by panick Terrors. If any of
these Judgments do not fall upon me, it is thy Patience, not my Goodness, and
I may wonder I have escaped them all this while. I have deserved to be made a
Prey to that Devil, whose Temptations I have swallowed with Greediness. Instead
of rejoicing over me to build me up, thou might justly rejoice over me, to
destroy me. Justly, O Lord, thou might send upon me trembling of Heart, and
fainting of Eyes, and sorrow of Mind. I have deserved, that my Life should hang
in doubt before me, that I should fear day and night, that, in the Morning I
should say, Would God it were Even, and at Even, Would God it were Morning.
Mercy, Lord, I have deserved none. The Crumbs that fall from thy Table, are
Blessings too good for me; if I deserve any thing, it is thy Rod, thy Scourges,
thy Waves, thy Billows, and a horrible Tempest. To condemn, is the proper act
of a Judge, and he that thus condemns himself, judges himself.

IV. The third act of Judging our selves, is, to inflict Judgments upon our
selves. By which, I do not mean maiming or wounding our selves, or cutting off
an Arm, or a Leg, or whipping our selves, but inflicting such Judgments on our
selves for the Sins we have been guilty of, and so often fallen into, as are
neither hurtful to the Body, nor unprofitable, nor prejudicial to the Soul, but
serve rather to bring the Soul into an excellent temper. These Judgments,
though the design of them is to meliorate the Soul, yet they are in a great
measure to be inflicted on the Body, because the Body tempts the Soul to great
extravagancies, and by presenting a thousand pleasant Objects to her, leads her
into Nets, and Snares, and Dangers. The Judgment therefore must be laid upon
that part, which is the tempter, and that being under restraint, the Soul may
more freely move toward her Center, God blessed for evermore. It Is true,
naturally, no Man hates his own Flesh, but cherishes it, and makes much of it;
but Grace, and the Gospel, teaches us to treat it with greater rigor. To be
too fond of the Body, in St. Bernard's sense, is a Charity which destroys
Charity, a Mercy which is full of Cruelty, for this is to serve the Body, in
order to kill the Soul; Is this Charity, says he, to tender the Body and to
neglect the Soul? To caress the Handmaid, and to let the Mistress starve? Let
no Man think, that for being thus merciful, he will ever obtain mercy. So that
the Flesh and Body are to be treated as a wild or unruly Horse, if we curb him
not, he will give us a fall. Our Bodies are greater Enemies than we are aware;
they are friends too, but the hurt they do too often to our Souls, shows, they
are greater Enemies than Friends, and therefore the Fathers do so often call
the Flesh, the Grave of the Soul; a Prison, where we are held Captive; and a
Dungeon, where we sit in Darkness. The Platonists used to say, that our Souls,
deriving their Original from Heaven, are sent into this World to show forth the
Praises of God here on Earth, as the Angels do in Heaven: but the Body, the
Soul is in, is a kind of Enchanted Castle, in which the Soul, through the
flatteries of the Flesh, forgetting too often her nobler Extraction, is
diverted from her glorious Designs, and debased to vile Employs: And to this
purpose, Seneca, That the Body is the weight and punishment of the Soul, lying
heavy upon it ready to link it, and putting Shackles upon her, if Philosophy do
not make a Reformation. The Body therefore, being such a treacherous Servant,
must feel the effects of our Justice, as it has been the great instrument of
the Sins we have committed, that it may be more modest in its Desires. And
accordingly we find, that good Men in all Ages, when they have sat as Judges
upon themselves, to show their detestation of the Sins they have been guilty
of, have inflicted Judgments on that part, which is most sensible of any thing
that is uneasy, not out of any ill will to it, for it is God's Creature, but
to preserve both Body and Soul unto Salvation. So David punished himself for
his Sins, sometimes by mingling his Drink with Weeping, Psalm. 102. 9. Sometimes
by making Sackcloth his Garment, Psalm. 69. 11. Sometimes by weakening his Knees
with Fasting and Prayer, Psalm. 109. 24. Sometimes by making his Bed swim with
Tears, Psalm. 6. 6. Sometimes by great acts of Self-denial, as overcoming
Shimei' s Malice with Patience and Meekness, 2 Samuel 16. 10. And delivering him,
that without cause was his Enemy, Psalm. 7. 4. And keeping Fasts and Humiliation
Days, for the recovery of those that were his Enemies, Psalm. 35. 13. Sometimes
by lying all Night upon the Earth, or Floor, 2 Samuel 12. 16. Sometimes by rising
at Midnight to praise God, Psalm. 119. 61. So the Penitent Publican punished
himself by a violent smiting his Breast, Luke 16. 13. So Mary Magdalen punished
her self, by washing the Feet of the Lord Jesus with her Tears, and wiping them
with the Hair of her Head, Luke 7. 37. So Zacheus punished himself, by giving
the half of his Goods to the Poor, and by fourfold Restitution, Luke 19. 7. So
St. Paul punished himself, by keeping under his Body, and bringing it into
subjection, 1 Cor. 9. 27. By making himself a Servant to all, that he might
gain the more, 1 Cor. 9. 19. By laboring Day and Night that he might not be
chargeable to the Church, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 9. By denying himself in Marriage, 1 Co.
9. 5. So Daniel punished himself for his own and his People's Offenses, three
Weeks together, by eating no pleasant Bread, by avoiding Flesh and Wine, and
forbearing to anoint himself, Dan. 10. 2, 3. So the Primitive believers
punished themselves by various Self-denials in the Pleasures, Satisfactions,
and Recreations of the Flesh, and of the World, thereby to express their Anger,
either against Sin in general, or against some particular Sins they had run
into. But the most usual Judgment that good Men have ever inflicted on
themselves, as a Testimony of their Displeasure against themselves, for
offending God, has been Fasting and Prayer, or chastening their Flesh by
frequent Fasts spent in deprecations of God's Judgments, and in other exercises
of Humiliation, and when Men have said to them, Why are you so cruel, as not to
spare your Flesh? They have answered, We spare, or use it, as we do the Earth,
which we plough and cut with Coulters, that it may bring forth more Fruit.

V. This judging our selves in all its acts, is certainly very pleasing to God,
especially before we come to the Holy Communion, else St. Paul would never have
told us, in the passage mentioned in the beginning of this Chapter, that, by
doing so, we do put a stop to God's judging of us. So that we have reason to
believe, that God, upon our accusing our selves, or humble Confessions, stops
the mouth of the Accuser of our Brethren, which is open against us; who this
is, we may learn from Rev. 12. 10. even the Devil, who brings severe
Accusations against us before God night and day; and as he wants neither Wit
nor Malice to do it, so we have an instance of it in the History of Job, Chap.
1. Ver. 9. Where appearing among the Sons of God, whether wrapped up in a dark
Cloud, or in the form of an Angel of Light, is not said, but among the Angels,
that gave an account of their Negotiations here on Earth, to God, he appeared;
and as those Ministering Spirits were commending Job for his exemplary Virtue,
so he, displeased at the fair Character, immediately seeks to blast and sully
it, by aspersions and misconstructions; and thus, we must suppose he deals with
other persons that have the same inclinations to Virtue, for those Examples are
recorded in Scripture, not only to tell us what happened just at such a time,
but what will happen in future Ages, under the same Circumstances. And
therefore, though our actions be never so innocent, nay, though our good Works
be never so sincere, yet they shall not want his false Glosses, and Comments,
and Misconstructions; and where our Actions are ill, we must expect, he will
aggravate them, make them worse, and blacken them, to an high degree. But where
the Penitent says all the ill he can of himself, gives as bad a description in
a manner of himself, as the Enemy can do; prostrates himself before God, grants
all that is brought against him by the Devil, with any color of Truth, is so
for far from palliating his Follies, that he unfolds and lays them open before
God, and makes as full a Narrative of them as he can, pleads guilty to all that
is laid at his door. This ingenuous accusation or confession, dashes the
Devil's attempts, and at the sight of it, the Bowels of Almighty Mercy yearn
and melt, and the Enemy is bid to spare his pains; and the Accusations that
drop from the Penitent's Mouth, are much sweeter in the ears of God, than
those, which the base Foe brings forth from an envious and malicious Breast.
This self-accusation, in the Penitent, is pleasing Rhetoric in Heaven; God
hears the humble Orator, is delighted with his sincerity, and charges the Enemy
to hold his Peace. And as this self-accusation renders the accusations of the
Devil against us ineffectual, so our condemning our selves blots out the
Handwriting that is against us, and makes void the sentence of Condemnation
our Sins have deserved, and this is to conform to God's Justice, as well as to
his Precepts; God looks upon our Sins, as having deserved unquenchable Fire;
and, by his Conscience, tells the Sinner, Thou art an Heir of Damnation, and a
Child of Wrath; and where the Sinner eccho's the Thunder of God, and answers in
the same Voice and Language of Condemnation, is both sensible, and owns, that
he has deserved the Punishment that Rebels do; this makes admirable Music in
Heaven, Music so delightful, that God changes the voice of Terror into a still
one, and the Accents of Wrath into softer strains of Mercy. In this
Self-condemnation, if it be hearty, God has his end; for when he threatened the
Sinner with Condemnation, it was to oblige him to condemn himself; the End
being gained, God's Condemnation cease, and, as it was at Athens, a free and
ingenuous confession of a fault saved the Malefactor's Life; so this condemning
our selves and throwing a black Stone into the Box against our selves, renders
God so favorable, as to let us draw out a white one, the sign of a gracious
Absolution; our adjudging our selves to the everlasting Prison, frees us from
it, and our sentence against our selves, makes so great an alteration in God's
Sentence against us, that Justice gives place to Mercy, the Judge descends from
the Tribunal, gives us his hand, and talks of nothing less, than gathering us
with everlasting kindness. The same must be affirmed of inflicting Judgments
upon our selves. It is of that power, that even the Temporal Judgments, which
were designed against us, are either withheld, or removed upon it; or if not
all, yet such as would have been most afflictive and painful, and most durable;
in doing so, we do that which God would have done, and doing it voluntarily,
and of our own accord, we escape the Judgment of God: For God having a mind to
stop us in our sinful career, intended to deprive us of our ease, either by
Sickness, or by Losses, or some other trouble and disaster; and since we
voluntarily deprive our selves of our ease and quiet, and sensual satisfaction
and repose, by inflicting something that is irksome to Flesh and Blood upon our
selves, God looks, as it were, upon his Judgment, as needless, and supersedes
it. The King of Israel 1 King. 21. 27. makes but an external show of afflicting
himself, and he got the fearful Judgment threatened him by Elijah, transferred
from himself to his wicked Posterity; what then may we think of these Acts of
vindictive Justice upon our selves, if the Heart join with the outward Man, and
the Soul bear her share in the Mortification, as well as the Body. How the
Pagan King of Niniveh, his Nobles, and his People, punished themselves for
their sins, is graphically described, Jon. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9. And what follows, v.
10. God saw their Works, that they turned from their evil ways, and God
repented of the Evil he said he would do unto them, and did it not.

VI. That which renders this judging our selves so acceptable to God, next to
the merits of our ever blessed Jesus, with whom alone God is well pleased, and
for whose sake it is, that he is kind and favorable to us, as to any thing we
do: That which, next to this, renders this accusing, condemning, and inflicting
Judgments upon our selves, so acceptable to God, are,

1. The Humility that appears in it. That Is the pleasing sight, and the
glorious thing, which the high and lofty One delights in. That Is the Flower God
loves to smell to, the beautiful Garment he loves to see the King's Daughter
in, the sweet Frame he has made so many gracious Declartions to: He sees the
Soul abominating her self for her Abominations; an huge sense of her own
vileness over speads all that is within her. He beholds, what lowly thoughts
the penitent Creature has of himself, and how despicable he is in his own
Eyes, and what strong apprehensions he has of God's Greatness, and his own
vileness; That attracts the Divine Favor, that inclines and draws that
Sovereign Benevolence, that, in a manner, compels the Almighty into thoughts of
Peace toward him. This Humility is the Image of his own Son, and with that Face
he is ever pleased. The Soul having no opinion of her self, God conceives the
greater of her. The Waters of Heaven stay not upon the tops of Mountains, but
roll down into the humble Valleys, there the Rain gathers, and causes
Fertility, and a nobler Verdure.

2. There appears in this judging our selves, a willingness to do any thing to
be reconciled to God, and that is another thing, which very much takes with the
Father of the Spirits of all Flesh; He that accuses, condemns, and inflicts
Judgments upon himself, discovers a longing desire to be received into God's
Favor upon any terms, and shows, That he cares not whatever it cost him, so he
may be but so happy, as to enjoy that Sunshine. His great concern is, how he
shall be pardoned for what is past; as for the future, he will make no bargains
with his God, but is content to hear his Voice in all things that he shall say
unto him. He is willing to run upon what errand soever God shall think fit to
send him? willing to be advised, counseled, and directed by him; willing to
forego all Interests, so he may but have one in his love, and kinder smiles,
and may have leave to call him Father, and to look upon him as his God, as his
Lord, and as his reconciled Father; and this willingness is the Plant, God
loves to water with Celestial Dew. Indeed it is a Plant of his own planting,
and an effect of his writing his Law in the inward Parts, and upon that, it
follows, I will forgive their iniquity, and remember their Sins no more, Jer.
31. 33, 34. But this does properly belong to the fourth preparatory Duty, which
is Self-resignation, whereof more in the following Chapter.

The Preceding Considerations reduced to farther Practice.
I. COnfession of Sins is no such trivial, slight and easy thing, as Men
commonly make of it. The Confession, that a great many Men make to God, in
Public especially, while their Thoughts are wandering, their Eyes staring upon
sensual Objects, their Souls feeling no compunction, no remorse, no grief, and
their minds without any lively apprehension of God's Holiness, and their own
Vileness; such Confessions, instead of obtaining God's pardon and forgiveness,
are preparatives and attractives of his Indignation. Alas! Sinner, that is no
Confession, where thy Lips only speak thy Sorrow and Offenses, and thy Heart
still goes after Covetousness. In this case, thou do but speak into the Air
whilst thou confessest not with shame, and confusion of Face, and with purposes
strong and Masculine, strong as Mount Sion, to offend thy God wilfully no more;
such Confessions reach not the Throne of Grace and Mercy, but, like Smoke, are
dispersed in the ascent, and cause no delight, but in the powers of Darkness,
who are glad to see thee play with Religion, and jest with Devotion.

II. It is a certain Rule, where Men are loath to forsake their Sins, they will
be loath to confess them too. There are diverse Actions of Human Life, which
being very pleasing to the Flesh, and suited to the humor of the Age, and such
as preserve our Credit and Reputation with Men, which we overlook, take to be
no Sins, indeed are loath to be deprived of them, and therefore, do not so much
as mention them in our Confessions. Search thy Heart, Christian, and take a
serious view of thy Dress, thy Habit, thy Looks, thy Behavior, thy Speeches,
and thy Conversation, and see, whether thou have not reason to suspect many
things, of being contrary to the stricter Rules of the Gospel, yet thou art
loath to know them, loath to own them, loath to confess them, as Sins, and all
because thou have no mind to part with them. Thy wanton looks and glances; thy
lascivious gestures, and postures, and dresses; thy striving for places, and
discontent at other Men's omitting to give thee the Honor thou fanciest to be
due to thee; thy despising and scorning thy Neighbor in thy Heart; thy
touchiness at Trifles; thy secret Injustice; thy careless and unprofitable
Talk; thy gaudy Attire, which feeds thy Pride; thy delight in imitating the
looser and more wanton sort of People; thy mispending thy Time in dangerous
Sights and Recreations; thy neglect of reading the Word, and praying with thy
Family; thy easy exceptions at thy Neighbor's Actions; thy wilful
misconstructions of Men's words; thy hidden things of dishonesty; thy doing
evil, that good may come out of it; thy extenuations of Sin, thy putting
favorable names upon what thou art loath to leave, etc. What Man of sense, and
who reads the Word of God, but must suspect, that these things, and such like,
are disagreeable to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ? And yet, because thou
would fain preserve and keep all these, or some of these, or others, that are
not unlike these, thou art willingly ignorant of their sinfulness, or wilfully
forgettest them, or do carelessly pass them by, and confessest only such Sins,
as thou can not well avoid acknowledging. Thou think; if once thou
confessest these things to be Sins, thou must be forced to leave them; for
indeed, it is perfect impudence to tell God, that I sin against him in such
things, and yet to go on in committing of them. And therefore, the only advice
that can be given in this case, is this, Look upon Heaven as worth doing any
thing to gain it, and thou will not be afraid, either of knowing thy particular
Sins, or of confessing of them, or of bending the force and powers of thy Soul
against their insinuations.

III. We may easily guess at the reason, why a carnal Man wonders at the stir,
a Penitent keeps to be reconciled to God; He sees not, he knows not, what
Poison there is in Sin. A Person, who never troubled his Head much about
Religion, seeing a Man or Woman take on for their Offenses, accuse themselves,
condemn themselves, and inflict Judgments of Fasting, of Mortification, and of
Self-denial, upon themselves, no doubt, will admire what ails the Fool to keep
such a whining and howling, and put himself to such needless troubles to
recover the favor of God, which, he fancies, is to be had at as easy a rate,
as Children's Smiles, and Infants Tears. Indeed, if the love of God may be had
with a wish, and a Man could no sooner send for it, but have it; or were it a
thing we could command to attend us at a minute's warning, prostrations and
lyings on the Ground, and Sackcloth, and Almsgiving in larger proportions, and
all the rigorous Ceremonies of Repentance, would be Fantastical, and a mere
distemper of the Brain; but when the Men, whom God favored much, vouchsafed
his Inspirations to, and who conversed with the fountain of Wisdom, with him,
that is the Way and the Life, did all this, and much more, and recommended the
same Acts of Mortification to their Successors, and God himself expresses the
welcome Dress of Repentance, as to the External part, in such things as these,
Jer. 6. 26. Jer. 7. 29. There we must give Men leave to laugh, to wonder, and
to think us distempered for doing so. Stange! Men should not see the necessity
of denying their Bodies in that ease and latitude, they are so apt to take, in
order to a better Life, when is evident, that the Flesh, in the Circumstances
it is under naturally, is in a continual fermentation of evil desires, and
covets altogether sensual satisfactions, without considering, whether they are
agreeable to Reason, or no; and, like Salomon's Horse-leech, cries still, Give,
Give; And if a Man give his Eyes, or Taste, the pleasure they desire to day, to
morrow they shall still crave more; so that if a severe Mortification do not
stop, and cast them off, especially if he intends to be saved, he will continue
a carnal Man to his dying day. It has been the practice of all the Primitive
Saints, to inflict seasonable Judgments on themselves; not one, but the
greatest part, have taken that way, and the reason is clear, for we must become
Saints by the Spirit of the Cross, which is evidently a Spirit of Mortification
both of Soul and Body; The design of Holiness is to make us conformable to the
temper of our Savior; and if his Spirit be in us, we shall be desirous to dye
to the World, and have great inclinations to suffer with him; and this is not
to be done, but by bridling both Soul and Body, through a severe Mortification.

IV. In inflicting Judgments upon our selves, the Word of God must be our
guide. He that should use all the Mortifications he meets with in
Ecclesiastical History, especially in the Fourth and Fifth Centuries after
Christ, might run himself into great Errors and Inconveniences. The Scripture
is ever the safest Rule, which, when Men have forsaken, and thought to do more
than is commanded, or recommended by Examples in that Book, they have been
often lest exposed to great Temptations. He that follows an Example of
Penitential rigor, recorded in Scripture, though some imprudence may mingle
with the imitation, yet it is an error of the Right Hand. There have been
excesses of Devotion in all Ages, and even good Men have sometimes run beyond
the bounds prescribed them by Almighty God, into superstition, especially in
things relating to voluntary affliction of the Body; and from hence have grown
those abuses in Popery, where Penances have swallowed the measures of
substantial Piety, and Men's inflicting of Judgment upon themselves, has been
a means to make them neglect Faith, Judgment, and Mercy. This shows the
necessity of keeping close to the Rule of Scripture, which, besides the
Precepts, has thought fit to Record such Examles, as are sufficient to
instruct us both in the nature of Repentance, and the Rigors that in some cases
are to bear it company. It Is certain, that in some persons, strong habits of
Sin will not be dissolved or broke, but by Corrosives, and violent Remedies,
and where a Man sees, that the corruption, which cleaves to him, baffles all
softer Applications, he must needs save himself, from being undone, by lancing
the wound; Maimonides, the learned Jew, in his Rules of Ethics, (...)
gives this advice to his Disciples, that would arrive to any considerable
degree in virtue. He, says he, that has been guilty of one extreme, i. e. He
that finds an habit of a certain sin in himself; to become good, must, at first
at least, run into the opposite extreme of the Virtue, which is its contrary,
till he be qualified to walk in the middle way without danger; i. e. He that
finds himself very choleric and passionate, to arrive to an habit of meekness,
must at first run into an excess of meekness, and be patient, and silent, and
contented, even under injuries and actions, that, in some measure, deserve his
anger, and continue thus for some time, till his Soul be quieted like a weaned
Child, and then he may abate of that excess, and use his meekness with greater
discretion; so he that has been proud, to mortify that ill habit, or extreme,
must apply himself to the other, and be humble, even to contempt and reproach,
so long, till his stubborn affection be subdued, and then he may use his
humility with greater moderation. We see, by this, that Jews as well as
Christians, are sensible, that, without a rigor and severe Discipline, there is
no arriving to any height of Goodness, and Religion; yet as this inflicting
Judgments upon our selves, is a thing of great use in the weighty Work of true
Repentance, and in the support of a serious Life; so care must be taken, that
all opinion of Merit be laid aside in the practice of it, for if such a Worm
get into the Timber of the Sanctuary, it soon rots it; nor must we think, that
after we have exercised such Acts of Justice upon our selves, for the Sins we
have committed, we may, upon the credit of it, take fresh liberty to offend
God. The design of it, is, to mortify our Appetite to Sin, an therefore, must
not prove fuel of that Fire. To this must be added Discretion and Moderation
in the management of these Acts of Justice, and, as by inflicting upon our
selves the Discipline of Fasting and Humiliation before the Holy Sacrament, not
a few Christians find much Comfort, if their Bodies be able to bear it; so in
times of Sickness, or bodily Weakness, this inflicting of Judgment on our
selves, becomes useless and unnecessary, for, in these cases, God inflicts
Judgments, and therefore we need not: All we have to do at such times, is, to
kiss the Rod, and to bear God's gentle Corrections, as things we have both
deserved, and are intended for the renewing of our inward Man. Our English
Histories tell us of two Men, in the time of Popery, one, who, upon his
Deathbed, when the Priest came to him with the Holy Sacrament, would be
dragged like a Traitor out of his Bed, Willam de Raley, and Will. Longspe.
to the place where the Priesthood; and another, who, hearing the Bishop was
come to Administer the Sacament to him, would needs crawl out of his Bed half
naked, with an Halter about his Neck to receive it: But as I know not, what
Motives or Impulses they might have for these Actions, so I am loath to judge,
whether they did ill, or not.

The PRAYER.
MY Lord, and my God! my Shepherd, my Master, my Helper, and the Lifter up of
my Head, my Light, my Way, my Wisdom, my Righteousness, my Sanctification, my
Redemption! O, how I could be revenged on those Madnesses, Follies, Vanities, I
have been guilty of! I do not only confess them unto thee, O thou searcher of
all Hearts! but I could even bruise, and wound, and tear my self, for being so
basely, and so monstrously ungrateful to the best of Masters, if that were a
Sacrifice pleasing unto thee! How stupid, how senseless have I been! How averse
from that, which is my greatest interest! Ah! how like a blind Creature have I
groped in the dark, and thought my self secure and safe, while I have stood
upon the brink of destruction! How bold and daring have I been, and what pains
have I taken for Pleasures and Recreations, which, besides the
unreasonableness, and transitoriness, and inconstancy of them, could not be
expiated neither, O dearest Savior, but by thy Blood and Death! O, how heavy,
how dreadful, must my Sins be, that require so costly a satisfaction! O Eternal
Father, To see what thou have done for my Salvation, To see how, for my sake,
thy Son, thine only Son, is in a manner left destitute, without Help, without
Assistance, without Comfort, what can I think but that in some respect thou
did love me more than him? That I might rejoice, he must be sorrowful to a
Prodigy; that I might be healed, he must be wounded; that I may be cleansed, he
must spill his precious Blood! O, how faithful art thou to forlorn Man! Thou
have piomised to restore him, and behold, Thou give the richest Treasure of
Heaven to effect it. Ah! how can I see my dear Redeemer weep, and not weep my
self! He grieves not for his own Sins, but for mine; he bewails not his own
faults, but my Transgressions; he never sinned, but I am he that has offended
thee a thousand times! I beseech thee, accept of the Oblation of thy dear Son,
and blot out all my Transgressions! Accept of that incomparable Sacrifice, and
forget the Injuries I have offered thee! I should be afraid of being sent away
empty from thy Throne, (my Sins are so many and so great) but that I know thy
Sons Merits are greater than my Sins! If my Sins and his Goodness, my
Transgressions and the Merits of his bitter Passion, were laid in a Balance
together, these would weigh for heavier than mine Offenses! What Crime so
great, that such a Sorrow, such Affliction, such Obedience, such Humility, such
invincible Patience, and, what is more than all this, such infinite Love,
cannot expiate? What Iniquity can there be in the World, above which the Death
of Christ does not preponderate! O Heavenly Father! I have nothing of mine own
to offer thee! But I offer thee my Savior, my Redeemer, thine only Son, with
all possible Devotion and Gratitude! Accept of his unspeakable Grief and
Anguish, known only to him, and to thy self, for my Sins, and that Grief I
should have, and do not feel! Accept of his bloody Sweat and Tears, for want of
my Tears! Accept of his most fervent Prayers, for my dullness and deadness in
Prayer! Accept of all that ever he did, and suffered, for my great and
multiplied Transgressions! I accuse my self for my Carnality, I condemn my self
for my backwardness to serve thee, I am willing to inflict Judgments upon my
self for my innumerable Follies, yet even these Services will look dull, and
weak, and imperfect, except thou art pleased to look upon them, through the
Merits of thy dear Son! O blessed Jesu, who can comprehend thy Charity! O, pour
into my Heart true Contrition, soften my hardened Heart into true Compunction,
give to mine Eyes abundance of Tears, that I may bewail the many Indignities I
have offered to thee! Deal not with me after my Sins. Let thy bitter Passion
step in betwixt thy Father's Anger, and my miserable Soul! And whatever mine
Iniquities have deserved, let thy Death atone for them, and let thy Blood wash
them away! O thou, who have overcome the World, and the Prince thereof,
overcome all my rebellious and inordinate Affections! Let nothing separate
betwixt thy Love and me! Remove, and conquer, that Disagreebleness, that is
betwixt my Nature, and thy Holiness; and as thou wast obedient to thy Father,
even to the Death of the Cross, so make my Soul obedient to thee in all thing!
O let me see, and feel, that there is nothing so vile, so abject, so unworthy,
as I am; and, in this sense, let me admire thy Love, that it may appear great
and wonderful to me, and dash all those Excuses and Delays, I have pretended
too long, to cloak my unwillingness to please thee; What can melt my heart, if
thy Love cannot melt it? O melt it by that Fire, and purge away all my Dross,
and all my Tin, that, being purified by thee, I may enjoy the Comforts of that
Purity for ever. Amen, Amen.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Self-Resignation, the Fourth Preparatory Duty, in order to a Worthy
Receiving of this Holy Sacrament.
The CONTENTS.
What Self-Resignation is, and wherein it consists. What makes it necessary.
Upon what Account it comes to be a Duty, preparatory for the Holy Sacrament.
God likens himself to a Potter; and why. Our Perfection proved to consist in
this Self-Resignation.

1. WHat this Self-Resignation is, and wherein it consists, is no hard matter
to guess. It Is, in short, to resign our Will to God's Will, not only in being
ready to do what God will have us do; but, in being contented to suffer
whatever he shall think fit to lay upon us. It Is St. Anselm's Observation, That
God alone, who is the Creator of all things, can will and do what he pleases,
having no Will superior to his own, to which he ought to submit: But when Man
will do his own Will, he robs Almighty God, in some measure, of his Crown; for
as the Crown is only the Privilege and Prerogative of a King, so to do what he
pleases is God's only Property: And, as a Subject that should fly at the Crown
of his Prince, and take it off his Head, would commit Treason, and do his
Sovereign the greatest Injury; so a Man that will have his own Will, attributes
that to himself, which is a Privilege appertaining only to Divinity it self.
And, indeed, this Self-Resignation is nothing but an Effect of sincere and
cordial Love; Love being the Bond that ties and unites the Person loving to him
that is loved, as Hatred dissolves and unties that Bond. This Love consists
chiefly in the Will; and if it be right, it must necessarily oblige him that
loves God, to will what he wills, and take his Pleasure and Will for his Rule,
whereby he governs his own Desires and Affections.

II. That which makes this Self-Resignation to the Will of God very necessary,
are these important Points.

1. Hereby the Glory of God is signally advanced: It is the most excellent
Sacrifice we can offer to Almighty God. The Glory of God consists in having his
Will fulfilled: And since we are both created and redeemed to advance God's
Glory, we commit a very great Error in having a different Will from God's
Will; for we deprive him of the Honor due to him, and which we are obliged to
advance, not only by our Obedience, but by our Troubles and Dangers too. And if
it be such an Advancement of God's Glory, to do what he will have us do, and to
follow him where he leads, it can be no less Glory to our selves, to have the
Honor to fulfill his Will in all things. That God, who is far above us, so
infinitely exalted above our frail Natures, should make use of such poor,
miserable Creatures, to glorify him; and employ, in the compassing of his
admirable Designs, such vile Worms, when he might make use of far better, is no
small Dignity and Advancement. If a King were to give Battle to a fierce and
numerous Enemy, and should quit or lay by a bright and Two-edged Sword, and
take a rusty Dagger, with no Point or Edge, to fight the opposite Army; as it
would be a Mark of his greater Courage, so the Victory he gains by that means
would be more renowned and glorious. We are in the Hand of God, no otherwise
than obtuse and blunt Daggers are; and that by such contemptible means he will
compass his Glory, is not only the Way to promote his own Honor, but ours too.
When the Disciples of Socrates had all made their Masters very noble Presents,
Aeschines, who was very poor, came to him, and told him, Sir, I have nothing to
give you, that is worthy of you; and therefore, take the only thing I have to
give; that is, my self. Socrates was extremely pleased with this Offer. And
Seneca adds, that by this Present Aeschines exceeded all the rich Gifts, not
only of Alcibiades, whose Gifts were equal to his generous Mind, but all the
Presents of the rest. A Man can give nothing to God, that is more pleasing to
him, than his Will; and in giving him his Will, he gives him all his Content,
his Love, his Honor, his Health, and his Wealth; for he leaves all these to
his Disposal.

2. Nothing comes to pass without God's Providence. Our Sicknesses, Poverty,
Exile, Losses, Crosses, Troubles, Accidents, which foolish Men are apt to
ascribe to Chance, are all governed by his Almighty Hand, and sent by his
Order: So that, not to conform our Wills to his Will in these Cases, is a tacit
Denial of his Providence. Nay, though the Afflictions and Miseries which may
befall us, may be inflicted by wicked Instruments, the Devil, and evil Men; yet,
as God has no Hand in their Sins, so he has certainly an Hand in the
Affliction: And this is one great Design of the Holy Ghost, in Scripture, to
direct us how to refer all things, even the most displeasing, and the most
disagreeable to Flesh and Blood, to God's Providence. Job therefore, though the
Chaldeans and the Devil were the External Instruments, whereby his Calamities
were sent upon him, yet he acknowledges God in all; and, in his Confession,
ascribes his Losses, not to the Devil, not to the Chaldeans, but to God; The
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the Name of the Lord, Job
1. 21. It was therefore a very wise Answer which Lupus, the Bishop of Troy,
gave to Attila, the King of the Huns, who, with an Army of Five Hundred
Thousand Men, had burnt, and destroyed, and laid waste abundance of Countries:
Coming at last before Troy, the Bishop and his Clergy, in their Robes, went out
to meet him; and as they came into his Presence, the Bishop craved Leave to ask
him, who he was? Attila, with a fierce and stern Countenance, told him, I am
the Scourge of God. Are you so, says the Bishop? Who then is able to resist
you? And, since you are so, pray come, and beat and scourge us as you think
fit, and as God shall permit you. An Answer, which Attila was so well pleased
with, that he spared the Town, and passed through it, without doing the
Inhabitants the least hurt. This good Man saw the Providence of God in it, and
conformed his Will to God's Will; and thereby teaches us, that this
Self-Resignation is the Way to see an happy Issue of our Afflictions.

3. As nothing comes to pass without a special Providence, so whatsoever befalls
us is governed by infinite Wisdom, and comes upon us wise and holy Ends, though
for the present we cannot see to the Bottom of them; and that is a very great
Motive to this Self-Resignation. As the whole World is governed by the Inflnice
Wisdom of God, so Man in a particular manner, and more especially those that
fear him; and whether God commands us any thing, or will have us suffer any
thing, it is still for the noblest Ends, even his Glory, and our own Eternal
Salvation. And, to say the Truth, a Man can give no better, no greater
Demonstration of his Wisdom, then in denying his own Judgment and Will, and
submitting them to the Wisdom of God: For, take the greatest and most exact
Wisdom that is in man, or ever has been, even the Wisdom of Solomon, if it be
compared with the Wisdom of God, it is mere Darkness and Ignorance; so that, to
resign our selves to the Wisdom and Will of God in all things, must be the
greatest Wisdom. If a Man that is born blind, should restise to take a wise
Guide with him, and particularly, his own Father, who entirely loves him, a
prudent Man, and who knows the Way perfectly; all would take him for a Madman,
and blind in Soul, as well as Body. And how are we better than such a Man, if
we are afraid to follow our Heavenly Father, even then when he leads us over
Rocks, and Precipices? For we have reason to trust the hand that guides us,
whatever Reasons offer themselves to our minds to the contrary, nor can we be
deceived in our Trust, for he that guides us, is infinitely Wise. The Wisdom of
God is to be seen in inequalities, as much as in any thing: A Body would not be
beautiful, if all the parts were of an equal bigness, some parts standing out,
and others being depressed, some, being big, and others little, make up the
Beauty of the whole; as in the Fabric of the Earth, Mountains, and Hills, and
Dales, Rocks, and fruitful Fields, being mingled one with another, make the
Fabric more stately than otherwise it would be: the same may be said of our
Lives, which being chequered with Adversity and Prosperity, with Light and
Darkness, with good Report, and evil Report, declare at once their Beauty, and
God's Wisdom, so that we may confidently affirm, That the Sovereign Reason,
which is God, can do nothing contrary to Reason, in things that concern us,
even then, when sometimes they seen to be contrary; so that this makes
Self-resignation a necessary Duty.

III. But here a Question will arise, Why this Duty of Self-resignation is to
be exercised and practiced, particularly before we receive the Holy Sacrament
of the Eucharist; and how comes this to be a Preparative for this Ordinance,
and the Worthy Receiving of it? To which I must answer as follows.

1. This is to imitate our Blessed Savior, who, before he went to dye,
resigned his Will to his Holy Father's Will, Luke 22. 42. Father, if thou be
willing, remove this Cup from me, nevertheless, not my Will, but thine, be
done: And what more proper, than before we remember this Death, to use the same
Self-resignation. To imitate him in all his Actions, except the Miraculous, is
our Duty and Glory. We cannot imitate a better Pattern; nay, the desin of the
Gospel is to plant in us a conformity to his Temper, and to oblige us to tread
in his steps. If we do no not, it is as much as our Lives are worth, and he will
not own us for his Disciples; The very name Christian imports so much; and as a
Pythagorean is one, that believes, and lives as Pythagoras lived; so a
Christian is he, that believes, and lives as Christ did live; and therefore,
learn of me, Matthew. 11. 26. contains the whole Duty of a Christian. Of this,
the late famous Antonette Baurignon, (if it be true, what is said in the
History of her Life) had very early apprehensions; for when she was but a Girl
of four years of Age, having heard of her Parents and Friends, what Christ had
taught, and how he lived, and that by him we must enter into Eternal Life, she
was exceedingly desirous to go into that Country, where Men lived as Christ had
taught them, and as he lived. Her Friends telling her, that she lived in a
Christian Country, and that all that were about her were Christians, she shook
her Head, professing that she could not believe them, for those she saw lived
not as Christ had taught them, or as he lived, but rather directly contrary;
For Christ (said she) was voluntarily poor, and we love Gold and Silver; he was
humble and lowly, but we affect Dominion and Greatness; he was always in
Affliction, we hunt for Carnal Pleasures. The wisest Person living could not
have spoken greater sense; and if Christ's Actions were intended for Patterns,
it will naturally follow, that as he entirely resigned himself to his Father's
Will, before he went to dye, so it is very fit, that his Disciples, when they
come to remember his Death in a most solemn manner in the Sacrament, should
follow him in that Self-resignation, the rather, because, like him, we resolve
in this Sacrament, and promise for the Glory set before us, to run with
patience the Race which is set before us, for which, this Self-resignation is
absolutely necessary, as will appear more fully from the following Paragraph.

2. Without this Sel-resignation, one great End, for which we pretend to come
to this Sacrament, is not to be obtained, which is, to learn to imitate Christ
Jesus in his Patience under all sorts of Sufferings, which can never be done
without a holy Self-resignation. He that does not resign his Will to God's Will
in all things, must necessarily fall into discontents, when any trouble does
surprise him, especially if it be of the greater sort; for he will either look
altogether upon the second Causes, whereby his misery comes, which will make
him quarrel, with the Dog, at the Stone thrown at him; or he will imagine, that
he might have prevented it, and that it was nothing but his own carelessness and
imprudence that caused it, and that will make him fret and fume; or he will
fancy, that he has not deserved such an Affliction, and that will make him
repine; or he will compare his present afflicted State with the more happy
condition of his Neighbors, and that will occasion great murmurings and
complaints; or he will do little, but pore upon his wretchedness, and that will
fill him with melancholic Thoughts; or he will measure his Felicity by Worldly
Prosperity, and that will unavoidably bring the Sorrow of the World upon him;
but a Person that has resigned his Will to the Will of God, can think nothing
strange; This one thing, that his Affliction is the Will of God, will hush and
quiet all, compose his Thoughts, lenifie the bitterness and grievousness of his
wounds, lessen his grief, cause cheerfulness in his Soul, fortify his Mind,
and make him say with David, I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou
did it, Psalm. 39. 9. not to mention the Sweetness our Souls would taste, and
be sensible of, in this Holy Sacrament, if they came with this Self-resignation
to the Will of God, for this would be a preparative for greater Gifts, for
larger Effusions of the Holy Ghost, and richer Communications of inward
Comforts.

The Preceding Considerations reduced to Practice.
I. GOD, Jer. 18. 2. does very fitly compare himself to a Potter, who, by the
motion of his Wheel, and the activity of his Hand, gives the Clay what form and
shape he pleases; and the reason, why he makes use of that similitude, is,
because himself formed Man of the Clay of the Earth; and from hence it is very
easy to infer, that if we suffered our selves to be managed by his powerful
hand, as easily, as the Clay does by the Potters, we might become most
beautiful Vessels. Nothing in Nature resists the Will of God. The Heavens
readily conform to his pleasure, and all the Stars move and shine by his Order
and Appointment; the whole Creation does exactly and punctually submit to his
Law, and Night and Day do not make a false step, in obeying the Constitutions
of the great Architect; if they should, what confusion would the whole Universe
fall into? So our Will, if it suffer it self to be entirely Governed by the
Divine, every Member, and every part in this little World, Man, would move in
excellent harmony; their motions would be circular and orderly, for nothing
causes greater confusion in the Frame, than when we are loath to leave our
selves to his Conduct. This is the way to arm our selves against all danger.
This abates their force, and enfeebles their violence when they come. This
checks our needless Curiosity; and while we enquire, for what reasons God sends
such things upon us, this one, answers all Objections; It is the Will of God.

II. We see here by what standard we are to measure Christian perfection, even
by this Self-resignation of our Wills to God's Will. The more we advance in
this, the more perfect we are; and though an absolute perfection is not to be
obtained in this life, yet to come as near that absolute Conformity and
Self-resignation, which shall be in Heaven, as we can, is counted Christian
Perfection, even on this side Heaven. It was therefore wisely said by Alphonso
King of Arragon, when one of his Familiars asked him, Who it was, that he
counted the happiest Man? His Answer was; Him, who receives all things, whether
sad or pleasant, as coming from a kind and wise Father's hand, with an even
mind. And we are told of a Man, that had the Power of Miracles conferred upon
him, and being asked of his Friend, How he came by that Power? He Said, He knew
not, except God should like one thing in him, which was, that he was never
lifted up by Prosperity, nor cast down by Adversity, and whatever happened to
him, still he looked higher, to the Origin and Spring from whence it came, and
that ever day he made it his business, to desire nothing but what God desires,
and all his Prayers tended that way, that God's Will might be entirely
fulfilled and accomplished in him. Even the Heathen Philosophers placed
Perfection in following God, i. e. in a cheerful submission to every thing that
God would have done; and therefore, we have a notable address of the Heathen
Epictetus to his great Creator, an address fit to be imitated by every
Christian. Arrian Epict. l. 2. c. 16.
Great God, (says he) use me henceforward according to thy pleasure. I am
altogether of thy mind. It is indifferent to me, how thou dealest with me. I
refuse nothing, if thou see it good for me. Lead me where thou think it
convenient. Cloth me in what Garment thou please, whether it be whole or
torn, either shall be welcome: Whether thou will have me bear the Office of a
Magistrate, or lead a private Life; whether thou will have me stay in mine own
Country, or let me be driven into exile; whether thou will have me rich or
poor; In all this, by my equanimity, I will justify thee before Men. This
Prayer from the mouth of an Heathen, is astonishing, and the rather, because we
see few Christians arrive to this Self-resignation, that have far greater
helps; and had we no express Command for this Self-resignation in the Bible,
yet that general Precept, of considering and doing whatever things are true,
and just, and honest, and lovely, and of a good report, would oblige us to
imitate the very Heathen Philosophers, in so lovely and reasonable a Duty. But
we need not have recourse to this general hint, the express Precepts and
Examples, that tend to the inforcement of this admirable qualification, are so
many, that there is no room left for Excuses and Evasions. Whether the story of
the Lady of Soncino be true, I know not, but the Moral intended by it, is
agreeable enough to the word of God. The Story says, That being, in a Vision,
carried up to view the various Mansions of Glory, She saw some Holy Soul
mingled with the Quire of Seraphims, and the highest Order of Angels, and
demanding, who they were, Answer was made her, That they were persons, who here
on Earth did entirely resign their Wills to the Will of God: A thing so
rational, that, in omitting it, we condemn our selves; for the sick Man leaves
himself entirely to the Conduct of his Physician; an oppressed Person, to the
wisdom and discretion of his Advocate; and the Blind, to the guidance of his
Dog; and therefore, it must be strange obstinacy, not to resign our selves to
the Conduct of a most wise God; who orders our Affairs far better, and with far
greater advantage to us, than we do, or can do our selves. The more tractable
any instrument is, the more perfect it is: If a Painter were to draw the
Picture of an Emperor, and the Pencil in his Hand should resist the motions of
his Fingers, make no strokes, and be dull to any impressions, form no line, and
cast no color, or should warp, and flinch to the left hand, when he would
direct it to the right, it would be worth nothing, for its greatest perfection
lies, in yielding to the hand that manages it, and in expressing all the
strokes the Workman does intend to make. We are instruments in the hand of God,
which he has made on purpose to serve him in the promoting of his Glory, and
therefore are obliged to suffer our selves to be handled by him, and to leave
our selves entirely to his power to turn and wind us, and to employ us in such
things as he thinks convenient, without any resistance. The natural desire of
Mankind, is, to arrive to Peace and Rest, but the generality take very
preposterous ways to obtain it, when they involve themselves in a thousand
anxious Cares and Troubles, which, instead of conducting them to that end,
drive them farther and farther off; whence it comes to pass, that though they
desire it, yet their desires are never accomplished. But this Self-resignation
to the Will of God, is the proper means, and he that lets his own Will dye, and
makes God's Will to live in him, comes safely to the City of Peace and Rest.
All our Inquietude rises from our resisting the Will of God, from hence flow
all the tempests that molests us, and while we are loath to do what God would
have us do, and unwilling to suffer what he will have us suffer, it cannot be
otherwise, but that Peace must be a stranger to our Breasts. Whatever happens
in the World, is nothing but the accomplishment of God's Designs; and the Soul,
that would always have that done what God will have done, can wonder at nothing
that happens to her, for it is her Will, as well as God's Will. However, if we
are loath to resign our selves to his Will, we have reason to fear his Anger;
and if we resist his Will, or are unwilling to submit to it, he will do his
Will upon us, whether we will or no. If we cheerfully submit, he will treat us
as his Children; if not, he will use us as his Slaves: And therefore, the
advice of Eliphaz, Job 22. 21, 22. is the safest Rule we can follow. Acquaint
now thy self with him, and be at peace, thereby good shall come unto thee.
Receive, I pray thee, the Law from his Mouth, and lay up his Words in thy
Heart. If thou return to the Almighty, thou shall be built up, thou shall put
Iniquity far from thy Tabernacle; yea, the Almighty shall be thy defense, and
thou shall have plenty of Silver, i. e. as much content as if thou had plenty
of Silver, for then shall thou have thy delight in the Almighty, and shall lift
up thy Face to God. Thou shall make thy Prayer unto him, and he shall hear
thee, and thou shall pay thy Vows, thou shall also decree a thing, and it shall
be established unto thee, and the light shall shine upon thy ways.

The PRAYER.
O My God, my Lord, my Savior, God of infinite Power, who do not only govern
thy Creatures by thy greatness, but by thy goodness, who can do no wrong, and
have used me in particular with that respect and tenderness, even in the midst
of all the afflictions that have come upon me, that thou have been more a
Father to me than a Judge, and have rather embraced me than corrected me.
Behold! I am going to remember, what my dearst Lord has done for my miserable
Soul on the Cross; and as I am going to remember the unspeakable Blessings he
has purchased for me, so I desire to remember my Duty of imitating him in his
Self-resignation to thy Divine and incomprehensible Will. And here, Lord, I
humbly consecrate my Will to thine, I prescribe thee no Rules, no Methods, how
to govern me, but leave my self entirely to be disposed of according to thy
Will, which way soever thou shall think fit to lead me to Heaven, and Eternal
Happiness, whether by Hunger or Thirst, or Poverty, or Infamy, or the rage and
envy of Men, or by other miseries; whether by sickness, or by health; whether
by losses, or unkindness of friends; whether it be through good report, or evil
report; whether thou will have me live, or dye; whether thou will have me dye
this Year, or the next, or ten Years hence; whether my Death shall be sudden,
or slow; whether natural, or violent; whether honorable, or dishonorable;
whether upon my Bed, or in a Wood; whether in Fire, or Water: I am resigned,
and content to go where thou biddest me, and to endure what, in thy Wisdom,
thou shall think fit for me. Thy Commands are reasonable. In Wisdom have thou
made them all. I take exception at none. I embrace them all. They are the Light
of mine Eyes, and while they be my Guides, I cannot go astray. Thy Providence
also are the effect of Eternal Wisdom. Nothing happens by chance, Thou rulest
all Events. Thou governest all the World; whatever befalls me, is either
decreed, or permitted by thee; and when thou do permit things, thou
permittest them for weighty and pregnant Reasons. Give me an Heart devoted to
thy fear. Let me neither murmur at thy Laws, nor repine at thy Dispensations.
Let every thing be welcome and pleasing to me, which thou know to be for my
good. Let me not judge of things by outward appearances, but by thy Will, and
unsearchable Wisdom. Give me Wisdom out of thine own Store, Wisdom, which may
resemble thine. and agree with thine. And then I shall be wise indeed, when I
shall learn to submit my self to thy infinite Wisdom; then shall I know thee,
the only true God, and him, whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ; to whom, with
thee, O Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, for ever and ever,
Amen.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Preparatory Devotions and Aspirations, fit to be used in Private, before we
come to the Holy Sacrament.
The CONTENTS.
The convenience of using Devotions suitable to this Holy Sacrament, the Week
before we Receive. Prayers and Aspirations relating to the Afflictions of
Christ, to Christ's readiness to comfort Persons diseased, and in distress, to
his Praying for his Disciples, and those that should believe in his Name, etc.

THough all the preceding Prayers are nothing but preparatory Devotions, and
may be used as such, yet, for varieties sake, which may be as delightful in
spiritual, as it is in temporal Things, I shall add some other aspirations and
breathings of the Soul after God in this Chapter, as preparatives for the
Worthy. Receiving of the Holy Communion. Extraordinary occasions, as I have
said often, and short warnings, when a Friend of Neighbor is indisposed, and
requires our presence and help, and joining with him in the devout use of this
Ordinance, may oblige us to alter our method; but where no considerable
impediment straitens us in Time, it will be convenient, the Week before we
Receive, besides our standing Devotions, to address our selves to God in
Supplications, as both relate, and are subservient to the great Work we intend
for: And such are the following Aspirations, whereof one or two may be used
together with our daily Devotion.

I.
O wonderful Savior! What Afflictions have thou suffered for me! Heat and
Cold, Hunger and Thirst, Labor and Miseries! Give me an Heart to receive from
thy hands cheerfully all kind of Adversity! Give me that excellent temper,
which was in thy Apostles, whereby they rejoiced in Tribulation, and counted it
Honorable and Glorious, that they had any thing to lose for thy sake! I intend
to look upon thy sufferings in the Blessed Sacrament! O let the sight work upon
me, that I may be contented to suffer joyfully for thy sake!

II.
Great Prince of Peace! Who in thy Converse with Men, tookest all opportunities
to comfort the distressed, and did most mercifully cure their Diseases! Give
me a great sense of the Afflictions of my Neighbors, that I may have as great
a feeling of their miseries, as if they were mine own, and be ready to help
them according to my ability! I am going to behold in the Blessed Sacrament,
what Miracles thou have wrought for me, O let me not come away from thence,
without working a Miracle upon my Soul!

III.
Great Counselor of my Soul! Who, at thy leaving the World, did in Prayer
recommend thy Disciples, and those that, through their means, should believe in
thy Name, to thy Heavenly Father's Care! Let me find the benefit of thy
intercession! Preserve me from this evil World, and keep me by thy Truth! Take
care of my Soul, that I may not be lost in the Wilderness of this World! in the
Holy Sacrament, which I mean to be partaker of, assure me of that care, and
that thou will not leave me, nor forsake me!

IV.
O thou who art Alpha and Om^ga, the Beginning and the end! Who did suffer
thy self to be laid hold of, by the Sacrilegious hands of thy furious Enemies,
and when they bound thee, did not revenge their injuries, but spoke mildly to
them! Give me Grace to show my self loving and mild to all mine Enemies, to
pardon them from my Heart, and to look upon them as Ministers of thy Will, and
promoters of my Salvation. To this end, let the Holy Sacrament I intend to
take, strengthen my Soul, that I may become conformable to thee, in doing good
to them that hate me!

V.
O Thou, who art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck, who did
seck me when when I was a stranger to thee, and calledst me when I knew thee
not! Now I know thee, let nothing satisfy me but thy self. Give me a flaming
Heart, a cheerful Mind, and an enlightened understanding! O give me thy self,
for nothing less will content my weary Soul! I will seek thee in the Holy
Sacrament, O let me find thee, and say to me, In the day of Salvation have I
succored thee!

VI.
O my compassionate Savior! whose Bowels yearn over the Penitent! My Soul is
miserable, if it loves thee not, or if it continues to love the World! O let my
Soul rest in thee, and contemplate thee, and show forth thy Praises, and be
thou my Song in the House of my Pilgrimage! O thou, who art rich in Goodness!
Redeem this poor Captive, give Meat to my hungry Soul, even the Meat which came
down from Heaven! In the Holy Sacrament let me find it, that I may live, and
not dye!

VII.
O thou, who art the only life of my Soul! I invite thee to my House* I
confess, a shattered, a broken, and a ruinous House! But be thou entreated to
rebuild and beautify it with thy Salvation! Set up thy Kingdom in it, and make
my Flesh obedient to my Soul, my Soul to Reason, my Reason to Faith, my Faith
to thy Will. Enlarge my Mind, loose me from my bonds, and let the effects of my
coming to the Holy Sacrament, be, that I may become a Servant of Righteousness
and may relish no Wisdom, but what is from above.

VIII.
O my Redeemer! kind, unspeakable kind, to poor Sinners! I am going to remember
the great Mystery of thy Death and Passion! Establish my Mind with the
sweetness of thy Presence! Let my Soul feel, that thou enterest into her, and
rejoice before thee. O Sacred Fire, which always burnest! O Love, which always
shinest! shine in my Soul, and Sanctify that Vessel. Empty it of Vanity, fill
it with thy Grace, and keep it full, till it be made worthy to Receive the
fullness of Joy at thy right Hand for evermore!

IX.
O powerful Mediator! Thy Love is sweeter than Honey! more nourishing than
Milk! Rule my Soul, direct my Understanding, animate my Love, attract my Heart,
and let it thirst after the Rivers of thy Pleasures! Appease the tumults of my
Flesh, hush the noise of my Worldly Affections, and let my participation of thy
Love in the Blessed Sacrament give me confidence, that where my Head and Master
Reigns, and Lives, there shall I Reign and Live for ever!

X.
Great lover of Mankind! To love thee, is a great thing! Even so to love thee,
as to think of thee with delight, to relish nothing like thee, and to be
conformable to thy Will. O! Let this Love dwell in me! Let this Love captivate
my Soul! By this Love, let me be united to thee! Let this good Angel visit me!
In the Holy Sacrament, let this Love be settled in me, that my angry, turbulent,
covetous, mistrustful and impatient, Thoughts may cease, and I may feel that
calm which those, that do entirely love thee, feel!

XI.
O Savior! Gentle as the Spirit, that in the shape of a Dove lighted on thy
Sacred Head! Teach me that Meekness, which looked so amiable in thy Life! Expel
the evil Spirits of Wrath, Anger, and Pride, and Envy, out of my Soul! Speak
the word, and these Winds and Waves will obey thee. Let thy gentleness make me
great. When I shall have overcome my wrathful and proud Inclinations, (and, O!
let the Sacrament, I am going to, help me in the Conquest) then shall I be
great and glorious in thy sight!

XII.
Great Shepherd of my Soul! whose Wounds are full of Sweetness, full of Mercy,
full of Charity! Let thy Wounds prove the most powerful Remedies, to rid me of
my Corruptions! When any impure Thoughts rise in me* let thinking of thy Wounds
crush them; when sluggishness in Religion assaults me, let thy Wounds, and the
remembrance of them make me vigilant in thy service, and when, in the Holy
Sacrament, I think of thy Wounds, let all my vain imaginations expire!

XIII.
Great Friend of my immortal Soul! Such a friend is not to be found in all the
World, as thou have been to me, for thou have laid down thy Life for me; O let
me make much of thy friendship, and cherish it, by being meek, and humble, and
merciful, and patient, as thou were, that thou may be my Friend, when I dye,
and, after Death, receive me to thy self. O, confirm and seal thy Friendship to
my Soul in the Blessed Sacrament, and let the same Spirit move in me, which
raised thee from the dead!

XIV.
O Thou, who have washed me from my Sins with thine own Blood, choose, I beseech
thee, my Heart, for thy Dwelling place, adorn and replenish it with thy Gifts
and Graces, make me to loath all transitory things, make me poor in Spirit,
cure in me the itch of Self-love, throw down all pride and eagerness after the
Riches of this World, and make the Holy Sacrament, I am going to, a mean to
adore thee in Spirit, and in Truth, and to persevere in Goodness to the end!

XV.
Great Comforter of all weary and laden Souls! Circumcise my Heart from all
evil Thoughts, and Words, and Actions, and Comunicate thy self unto me, that I
may never be separated from thee, or ever be deprived of thy Comfort! Draw my
Soul after thee in the Holy Sacrament, and let that Blessed Ordinance
powerfully stir up my Heart to love thee!

XVI.
O Thou, who art the door of thy Sheepfold! By thee let me have access to thy
Father's Love! And as, in the Holy Sacrament, thou openest thy Bosom to me, so
let me run, and seek shelter there! Chain me to thy self by Bands of Love; and
let no Temptation defile me. O keep me, that I may never cowardly faint at any
adversity!

XVII.
Thou who have endured contradictions of Sinners against thy self! Be thou ever
in my mind, and teach me to bear Calumnies and Reproaches with great
tranquillity of Mind; Let me refer all difficulties to thee, and with silence
expect thy Grace and Comfort; and let the Blessed Sacrament so influence my
Soul, that I may fear none but thee!

XVIII.
Great Captain of my Salvation! I am going to learn to fight the good fight in
the Blessed Sacrament of thy Love! Let thy great example there encourage me to
fight against all Ambition and Ostentation, against Censoriousness and
Uncharitableness, against all Intemperance and Gluttony, against all proud and
covetous Thoughts, against Guile and Hypocrisy, against discontentedness and
misitrinst of thy Providence. Against such Enemies give me grace to fight, over
these let me triumph, that, having striven lawfully, I may at last be admitted
to the Glorious sight of thy Sweet Self, and be charmed with thy Love for ever.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the proper Acts of Devotion, when we come to the Holy Table.
The CONTENTS.
Private Acts of Devotion must be forborne, while the Congregation joins in
common Addresses to Almighty God. General Acts of Devotion, relating to the
wonderful Love of Christ, and our Love to him. Particular Acts of Devotion at
the Consecration, and Receiving of the holy Symbols.

I. THE following Acts are fittest to be used, before the Prayers of the
Church, usual at the Communion, do begin, or before the Minister of the
Ordinance comes to us with the sacred Symbols, and while others are
Communicating.

II. While the Minister of the Ordinance is engaged in the Prayers of the
Church, these Ejaculations must be forborne; our Duty, during the public
Devotions, being, to join with the Congregation in their common Addresses to
God. These Acts of Devotion are either General, or Particular. The General, I
call those which respect the Love of the Lord Jesus. The Particular, those
which are to be exercised at the Consecration and Receiving of the Consecrated
Bread and Wine.

General Acts of Devotion at the Lord's Table.
I.
GReat Savior of the World! Thou art infinitely amiable; worthy to be loved by
all, to whose Ears the joyful Message of thy Love does come. I rejoice in the
Knowledge of thy Love. I count my self happy that I am born under the Shadow of
thy Gospel, in which thy wonderful Love to the Children of Men is manifested! I
desire no other Knowledge: It Is enough that I know thou have loved me beyond
Example. I desire to count all things Dross and Dung, for the Excellency of the
Knowledge of Christ.

II.
O my Jesus! I am not worthy to love thee! Yet, because thou biddest me love
thee, and have told me, that my Soul was created on purpose to love thee, I
cheerfully resign my Love and Affection to thee! I desire to love thee! I wish
for nothing more, than that I may passionately love thee! Whom have I in Heaven
to love, but thee? And there is none on Earth, that I desire to love more than
thy self: For thou art altogether lovely, and thy Love surpasses all the Love
of Friends, and the dearest Relations I have.

III.
O my blessed Redeemer! I desire to love thee with all my Heart, and with all
my Strength! Thou gave me this Heart, and this Strength: And on whom can I
bestow it better, than on thee, the Author of it? Oh, that all that is within
me might be turned into Desires, and Inclinations, and Sighs, and Languishings,
and Breathings after thee! For I cannot express what thou have done for me.
What thou have done for me, is beyond all the Kindness that the greatest Men
ever did, or can do, for the meanest and poorest Creatures!

IV.
Great Advocate of my Soul! Thou see my Desire to love thee! Make it strong
and powerful! Take a Coal from the Altar, and give it Fire, that nothing may
hinder the Flame from mounting up, that nothing may weaken this Desire, nothing
may break it, nothing may tire it, nothing may mingle with it that is unclean,
or contrary to thy Love!

V.
Great Object of my Desires! Make me a Martyr of thy Love! Make me willing even
to die for love of thee! Raise a mighty Hunger and Thirst after thy Love in my
Soul! Such an Hunger and Thirst, that I may be unsatisfied with any thing, but
thy Love! Let thy Love work upon me with that Efficacy, that I may think my
self afflicted, and poor, and miserable, till I love thee fervently!

VI.
Blessed Jesu! Who would not love thee! Who would not wish to be enamored with
such Charity as thine is to the Sons and Daughters of Men! If we love thee not,
it is because we do not know the Vehemence and Power of thy Love. Had we a
clear Sight of it, our Souls would run after thee, and nothing could stop them
from clinging to so amiable an Object. Lord, give me that lively View of thy
Love, that nothing may charm me more than thy Love!

VII.
Great King of Saints, pity me! I would love thee, but thou see what
Impediments come between thy Love, and my blockish Heart! Innumerable
Temptations, my perverse Will, my Self-love, my Passions, and my other
Imperfections! Oh, how these hinder me from loving thee! O my Gracious Master!
Let me detest and abhor all these Enemies, that would hinder me from loving
thee! Stretch forth thy mighty Arm, and destroy these Foes, that I may entirely
love thee!

VIII.
O Jesu! Thou art all Love, all Goodness, all Charity! And, Oh, what Opposition
do I find in my self to love thee! O Love Divine! Where is thy Strength, thy
Force, and thy uncontrollable Power! O my Lord! Why do not thou show it? Why
do not thou exert it for my Help? Why do not thy Celestial Flames consume in
me all that is contrary to thy Love? Oh! When will thou establish the Life of
Love, even that Divine Life, in my Soul?

IX.
O Omnipotent Love! I leave my self to thy Management. Enter, enter into this
frozen Heart, and erect thy Kingdom, and thy Empire there. Undo what thou
please, and build up what thou please. Let every Desire of my Soul become
subject to thee. Subdue every Imagination that would refuse to be at thy
Command: And make me willing to submit to any thing, so I may but love thee.

X.
Most lovely Savior! Shall any thing hinder me from loving thee? Shall my
Body? I will subdue that Beast. Shall my Sins? I will drown them in thy Blood.
Shall the World, or the Creatures here below? No, no; I will renounce my Love
to them, I will despise them all: They have too long excommunicated thee from
my Soul. I will make no more Account of my Praises, of my Pleasures, of my
Vanities. I will look upon them all as Dreams, and Smoke; and I will hate them,
as much as they have hated thee, Great Center of my Soul!

XI.
Great Sovereign of my Love! Thou have sent me into the World, on purpose to
love thee! What a noble, what an excellent, what an holy End is this! Think of
the Honor, think of the Favor, think of the Dignity, O my Soul, that God has
laid upon thee! That he that could have eternally enjoyed himself in his own
Love, should speak a Creature into Being, and ordain that Creature to love him!
Oh, how happy am I, that God has given me an Heart to love him! O my Jesus!
Let me die a Thousand Deaths, rather than lose thy Love.

XII.
O Love Divine! Be thou the Life of my Life, the Soul of my Soul, the Spirit of
my Spirit! Let me think of thy Love, and speak of thy Love, and do Acts worthy
of thy Love, and let all my Conversation savor of the Love of Jesus. Whatever
I do, let me do it for thy sake. Let thy Love put me upon Acts of Charity; and
let every Virtue I exercise, be the Product of thy Love.

XIII.
O Jesu! Thou art my All! All other things are nothing, in comparison of thee!
And I would love nothing, but in thee, and for thee! I would see thee in all
things, and love thee in every thing I do! Thou art my greatest Friend, my only
Friend. Thou art my Brother, my Father, my Husband, and my Chief. Thou art All
in All to me: And, Oh, that my All might be consecrated to thy Service!

XIV.
My dearest Savior! There is nothing in Heaven, or in Earth, so worthy to be
loved, as thou. Oh, how amiable art thou! Yet the World does not so much as
think of thee: They think of nothing, but offending thee. They hope to be saved
by thee, and yet do what they can to dishonor thee! Let this very
Consideration inflame my Love to thee! Oh, that I could love thee, as the whole
World ought to love thee!

XV.
Great Son of God! I was bound to love thee as soon as I came to the Use of my
Reason: Yet how long has it been, before I thought of loving thee! O my Lord,
how late do I begin to love thee! How long have I hated thee! How many Years
together have I despised thy Love! When I think of this, I have reason to wish
for a Sea of Tears; nay, for Tears of Blood, to wash away my monstrous
Ingratitude!

XVI.
O Beauty Eternal and Infinite! If I were to live eternally here on Earth, I
were bound eternally to love thee: How much more then, during my short Stay
here on Earth! O my Lord, consecrate my Life to thy Love! Let every Day and
Hour of my Life be employed in thy Love; and make me ambitious of nothing more,
than to love thee to all Eternity.

XVII.
O thou Everlasting King! At the Price of thy precious Blood thou have bought
every Moment of my Time, that I might employ it in loving thee! How much of
that Time have I employed in loving the World, and the Creatures! How much of
that Time have I lost, in loving things I should not love! It Is time that I
begin to employ my Hours about that, for which they were designed: And since
they were given me to love thee, Oh, transform all my Desires into Aspirations
and Breathings after thee!

XVIII.
O my Jesus! Thou art so perfect, and so lovely, that if all Creatures in
Heaven and in Earth should join their Forces together to love thee, they could
not love thee sufficiently; and if I had a Thousand Hearts, they would all be
little enough to sacrifice to thy Love. O then, how am I obliged to employ that
little Strength I have to love thee! Oh, that all Mankind might love thee! Oh,
fill them all with a Sense of thy Love! Draw them, attract them, unite their
Hearts, that they may love thy Name.

XIX.
O God of my Life! Thou have been always employed in loving me! Thou did
create Heaven and Earth, to testify thy Love to me! All that thou ever did
in this World for me, was, to show how thou love me. All the Spiritual and
Temporal Blessings thou have sent upon me, tell me that thou love me. But
what greater Testimony of thy Love can there be, than thy Dying for me! As thy
Love is perpetually exercised toward me, so let mine be continually exercised
toward thee: And let me glory and rejoice in nothing so much as in this, that
I love thee.

XX.
O my bountiful Savior! O my loving Redeemer! When, when shall it be, that I
shall love thee perfectly? Here on Earth, I must not hope for this Happiness;
but in Heaven I shall. O Heaven, Heaven! How desirable art thou! Where the Love
of Jesus shall eternally reign in my Soul! Where my Love shall be perfectly
pure, perfectly Seraphick, perfectly Extatical; and Eternal Ages shall not
alter it. At present I am in Prison, encompassed with a Mortal Body, and must
sojourn in a wicked World. Oh, when will that Day, that Hour, that Minute, that
happy Time come, that I shall be delivered from this Dungeon, and translated to
that place, where Love is all in all, where Love knows no End, no Decay, no
Period; where it is pure, without Mixture; invariable, without Changes;
eternal, without ceasing. Come, Lord Jesu! Come quickly!

Particular Acts of Devotion at the Acts of Consecration, and Receiving of the
Consecrated Bread and Wine.
At the Minister's pouring out the holy Wine into the Cup.
O Jesu! Who can think of the flowing of thy Blood, without being desirous to
be washed with it! Or,

I fancy, I do at this present stand under thy Cross, and see thee bleeding for
my Sins! Or,

Oh. Let thy Blood flow upon my wounded Soul, that I may become a sound Member
of thy Mystical Body!

At the Minister's laying his Hand upon the Bread.
O Blessed Savior! Lay thy Hand upon my Soul, that all my Distempers may
depart from me! Or,

Oh, lay hold on my Soul, as the Angel did on Lot! Save me from the Flames, and
let me escape into the Mount of God, that I perish not!

At the Minister's Breaking the Bread.
Lord Jesu! In suffering thy Body to be broken for my Sins, I see the
Vehemence, the Strength, and Fervor of thy Love: Oh, make me all Love, all
Fervor, all Charity! Or,

Oh, break the united Forces of my Sins; scatter them by thy mighty Arm. Gather
the broken Planks of Virtue in my Soul; unite them, make them whole, and
strong, and secure against the Fury of Winds and Tempests.

At the Minister's pronouncing the Words, This is my Body.
Lord! Let me look off from these material Things; and show me Things
invisible, and Heavenly! Or,

O Lord! The Benefits of thy wounded Body, my Soul longs for. Oh, say, They
shall be thy Portion!

At the Minister's touching the Cup.
Lord! Touch my Soul, that it may feel the Power of thy Super-abundant
Charity!Or,

Oh! Touch me, as thou did the Blind of old, that I may see the Bowels of thy
Compassion, and rejoice in the glorious Sight!

At the Minister's pronouncing the Words, This is my Blood.
Lord! My Soul wants Wine of another nature, than is in this Cup: Oh, wash it,
and cleanse it, and purify it in thy Blood! Or,

Lord! Speak thou to my Soul, and say, I will, be thou clean!

At the Receiving of the Bread.
Lord! Let thy Death be my Life! And the Bread, represented by this Bread, feed
me into Everlasting Life! Or,

Lord! As thou have provided Food for my Soul, so give me a Taste, and Relish
also, of this Food, and a Tongue to praise thy Name for ever. Or,

Lord! As thou have given thy Body for me, so I freely offer my Soul and Body,
as Living Sacrifices, to thy Majesty!

At the Receiving of the Cup.
Lord! Nothing is more precious, than thy Blood! Oh! Let it warm my Heart, that
it may comply with thy Will, wlthout wavering! Or,

Lord! Bid me look upon thy Blood; and in thy Blood, upon the Reconciliation
wrought by it, to the Comfort and Edification of my Soul! Or,

O Lord! I am heavy laden, and my Pollutions are great! And as thy Blood alone
can remove that Burden, so free me from those Spots and Wrinkles which make me
look deformed in thy Sight!

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the proper Acts of Devotion, after we have Received.
The CONTENTS.
The Time that is left after our Personal Receiving, before all have
Communicated, not to be spent in Gazing or Looking about. Acts of Devotion to
be used after Receiving, and relating to the Wisdom, Mercy, Liberality, Love,
Goodness, Greatness, and Majesty of God, to our own Vileness, and Unworthiness,
etc.

IT falls out so often, that when we have Communicated, and our Souls have been
fed at this Table, a considerable Space of Time remains, before the united
Praises and Thanksgivings of the Congregation begin again. This Time, be it
more or less, must not be spent in looking about, or in sitting still, or in
thinking of what Objects our Fancy is pleased to offer and present to us; but
in holy Aspirations. And that the Communicant may know how to employ himself in
that Interval, it may not be amiss to set down some pious and proper
Ejaculations, whereby he may exercise his Mind according as Time will permit.

I.
O God! Thy Love in Christ Jesus deserves to be praised, admired, and
magnified! There is all that in it, which can engage a Soul to break forth into
Praises, and Hallelujahs! There is Beauty, Wisdom, Condescension, Mercy,
Liberality, Sweetness, Power, Greatness, Majesty in it, and all these in the
highest Degree; which would force even a dumb Man to speak of thy Glory!

II.
I adore thee, O Holy, Blessed and Glorious Trinity, for that infinite Care of
my immortal Soul, which I see in all thy Proceedings, and Transactions; and
particularly, in the Cross of my dearest Redeemer! Here thou seem to empty
all thy Stores, and pourest out thy Grace abundantly upon the Heads and Hearts
of thy Servants. Behold! Bless ye the Lord, all ye Servants of the Lord, which
by Night stand in the House of the Lord! Lift up your Hands in the Sanctuary,
and bless the Lord. The Lord that made Heaven and Earth, has blessed us out of
Zion!

III.
O Charming Son of God! I alone am not able sufficiently to praise thee; and
therefore I wish that every Drop of the Ocean, every Grain of Sand, every Leaf
of the Trees of the Field, and every Sprig of Herbs, and all the Creatures that
ever were, or are, or shall be, might be turned into Seraphick Tongues, to
praise thee!

IV.
O Jefu! When I behold thy wonderful Love, how it has bowed, how it has
stooped to so mean a Creature as I am, the Thoughts of it force my Soul into
the humblest and deepest Prostrations. Thou art Beauty, I am Deformity; Thou
art Wisdom, I am Ignorance; Thou art Light, I am Darkness; Thou art
Omnipotence, I am feeble; Thou art Purity, I am Filth and Dung; Thou art rich,
I am Poverty it self; Thou art happy, I am Misery it self; Thou art Perfection,
I am Weakness; Thou art All in All, I am nothing!

V.
O Blessed Savior! When I see how Men fall in love with a mortal and fading
Beauty, which to Day shines bright as the Sun, to Morrow, by Sickness or Death,
is all tarnish'd and decayed, how do I blame my self that I do not love thee
better, whose Beauty, like thy Crown, is immarcessible; Ages cannot change it,
neither Heat nor Cold can alter it. Thou art beautiful in thy Body, beautiful
in thy Soul, but infifinitely beautiful in thy Divinity. Nothing deserves to be
loved, or praised, if thou do not.

VI.
Oh, how blind are poor Mortals, who are so very fond of Honors, Riches,
curious Palaces, Gardens, Pleasures, Music, Rarities, Colors, Herbs, Flowers,
Stones, and Minerals! Great Conqueror of my Soul! Thou art more honorable,
more amiable, more sweet, more pleasant, more agreeable, more delicious, more
harmonious to my Soul, than all these! Thy Excellency cannot, by searching, be
found out!

VII.
O Lamb of Gd! With the Four and Twenty Elders, I fall down before thy Throne,
and cry, Blessing, and Praise, and Honor, and Wisdom be unto the Lamb for ever
and ever; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God, by thy Blood, out
of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation!

VIII.
O God of Glory! I beseech thee remove from me all those things which would
hinder me from glorifying thee! Remove from me an unsteady Mind, that I may
glorify thee in Poverty, as well as in Plenty; in Adversity, as well as
Prosperity; in Desertions, as well as in Consolations; in Disgrace, as well as
in Honor. Let me look upon both Conditions, as coming from the same good Hand
of Providence; and let that be an everlasting Motive to me to show forth thy
Glory.

IX.
O God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! I desire to glorify thee in this
World, and in that to come, with Men here, and with Angels hereafter. Give me
the Grace of Continuance in magnifying thy Name, thy Goodness, and thy Charity,
while I am in this barren Wilderness, that I may not fail of being admitted to
the Regions of the Blessed, where I may praise and magnify thee, World without
end.

X.
O Jesu! Why art thou so lovely, so beautiful, so amiable, but that I might
love thee! But I cannot love thee of my self. Thy Love must give me Power, and
sow the Seeds of Reciprocal Love in my Soul. O Love! O Desire of my Soul! Oh,
do not do that Injury to thy infinite Perfections, as to let me live without
being passionately enamoured with thee!

XI.
O God, who have promised that the Needy shall not always be forgotten; that
the Expectation of the Poor shall not perish for ever! Look upon me, a poor,
needy Wretch; and give me those Riches I desire, and without which, I must ever
count my self most miserably poor, even the Riches of thy Love; which whoever
does enjoy, has enough, and more than the richest Princes can pretend to.

XII.
Who would not praise thee, O thou great Redeemer of Men! Seven times a Day
will I praise thee, because of thine infinite Charity. Morning and Evening, and
at Noon will I praise thee, because thou have bought me with Blood. Oh, that
Men would praise the Lord for his Goodness, and for his wonderful Works to the
Children of Men. The Lord lives, and blessed be my Rock, and let the God of my
Salvation be exalted. He delivers me from mine Enemies; yea, thou liftest me up
above those that rise up against me: Therefore will I give Thanks unto thee, O
Lord, and sing Praises unto thy Name for ever.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the Life, we are to lead after we have received the Holy Communion.
The CONTENTS.
The Life to be led after Receiving, a Reasonable Service. Wherein that Service
consists. The necessity of it. Men that are in an unconverted State, live below
their Reason. The Generality of Men very rational in Temporal Concerns, but
very unreasonable in Things, belonging to their Everlasting Peace. The Prayer.

I. THough from the Premises any Man may guess, what life it is, that a
Christian, who has engaged himself to God in this Sacrament, and vowed Faith
and Allegiance to the King of Saints, is to live after it, yet to make these
instructions complete, I shall briefly add some Memorandums, that are to be
observed in our future Conversation, and though in the foregoing Discourse I
have often occasionally mentioned such a thing, as a REASONABLE SERVICE; yet
it is time I should now press it with great earnestness, there being nothing
more proper, nothing more equitable, after such solemn engagements, than this
Service; and if we examine what it is, it will be found to consist In these
following particulars.

1. In an happy agreement of our profession and actions, of our belief and
practices of our Principles and Conversation; where our Profession is of one
color, and our Practice of another, where our Tongues speak one thing, and our
Lives another, there I need not tell you how we involve our selves in a
palpable contradiction. Things contradictory mutually destroy each other. A
thing that is cold, cannot at the same time be hot, and what is black, at the
same time, and under the same respects, cannot be white; and consequently,
where the Actions contradict our Principles, the Actions destroy our
Principles, and, in God's account, we deny the Principles too by denying the
consequences, which are the actions, that should natural issue from those
Principles, and he that has very good Principles, but allows himself in bad
Actions, cannot be partly good, and partly bad, but is wholly bad, which makes
the Holy Ghost call all those Unbelievers, which profess the true Worship of
God, and dishonor it by their Lives. Heb. 3. 17, 18, 19. But where I do
believe, that God is my Supreme Governor, and therefore prefers his Will and
Favor, before the Will and Favor of Men, when these two interfere, and are
contrary to one another; Where I do believe, that neither Fornicators nor
Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Revilers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God, and therefore will
not be persuaded, by all the gain and profit of the World, to venture upon any
of these Sins; If I believe, that my Soul is worth more, than a whole World,
and therefore will not wrong my better part, though I might have the Riches of
the Indies for doing it; If I believe, that if I am ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, and of observing his Laws, the Son of God will certainly be ashamed of
me in the last day; and thereupon take courage to act like a Man that believes
it, and stand up for the Glory and Honor of my God, with Humility and Modesty
in despite of all the reproaches, and contempt of the World. If I profess and
believe, that if I love not the Lord Jesus Christ, so as to testify my Love in
my obedience to him, I shall be for ever banished from the Glorious Presence of
God, and thereupon express my Love in thinking of him, in Honoring and
Esteeming him within and without; if I believe, that except my Righteousness
exceeds the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, I shall in no wise
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and thereupon actually shun those Sins, which
the Pharisees made nothing of, there my belief and actions go hand in hand
together, and if I hate to profess one thing and to do another, then my service
is truly reasonable, and I have not received the Sacrament in vain.

2. In subjecting our Flesh and Bodies to our reason. This is to make our
Members or Bodies, instruments of Righteousness, as it is said, Romans 6. 13. And
what can be more reasonable than that the Slave should be subject to his Lord,
the servant to his Master, the base and ignoble part to the more excellent, the
flesh to the Spirit, and the Law of the Members to the Law of the Mind? I have
seen, says Solomon, Servants upon Horses, and Princes walk as Servants upon
the Earth, Eccl. 10. 7. The Moral of it is, that it is unnatural, unreasonable,
horridly monstrous, to make our Reason a slave to our Interest, and to suffer
the Brute to ride the Man; when Reason is only made use of to cater and provide
for the ease and satisfaction of the Flesh, it is as dismal a sight, as to see
a King brought to the Block, and an excellent Prince Murdered by his Subjects.
And therefore, where Reason enlightened by the dayspring from on high, and by
the Lanthorn of the Word of God, points at the Will of God, and the Eye will
not look upon vanity, and dangerous shows, and lustful objects, because Reason
says, that gazing upon them is unlawful; and the Ears will not hearken to
corrupt Communications, nor to filthy jests and talk, because Reason says, that
this becomes not the gravity of Saints; and the Tongue will not speak any
thing, but what may Edify and administer Grace unto the Hearer, because Reason
says that this is the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus; and the hands
will touch nothing, that may raise unclean Thoughts or disorderly Desires,
because Reason says, that this is to shun the occasions of evil; and the Body
will eat and drink moderately, and will not pamper it self, because Reason
says, that Moderation is the Christians Motto, and the want of it grieves the
Spirit of God; there the Service is reasonable, and an argument, that we have
not received the Sacrament in vain.

3. In worshipping God with the understanding and inward Man; If a Man talks
with his Neighbor, his Understanding ordinarily is fixed upon the subject he
discourses of; and what is Praying and Praising, but speaking to God? And
surely no rational Creature will think, that God deserves less attention than
Man. If with my Lips I pray, and my Mind is at Rome, or Constantinople; if my
Mouth Sings, and my Thoughts are in my Shop; if I read or hear the Word of God,
and my Thoughts are upon my Trade, or Worldly business, it is a brutish, not
reasonable service. This the very Heathens have taken notice of, as were an
easy thing to prove Cato, Epictetus, Plato, and Antoninus, if there were
occasion. The Understanding must bear a principal part in the Devotion, and I
must not only understand the thing I pray for, but my Understanding and
Thoughts must keep pace with my Prayer, and fix upon the tremendous Majesty, I
address too; and though there are very few Men so happy, as to fix their
Understanding upon a Spiritual object, in Devotion, without the least
variation, or wandering of the Thoughts; yet he, that means to offer God his
reasonable service, must hold his Understanding to it, as much as lies in him;
and, if at any time it declines from that point, reduce it, and bring it back
again to the Center, from which it has swerved; and though the service be
thereby somewhat interrupted, yet, as long as the interruption is not wilful,
God will still accept of it, as of a reasonable service.

II. Nor need we wonder, why this should be necessary; For,

1. The service must ever resemble God, to whom it is offered, and God being
the highest reason, and the Fountain of it, the service must be answerable. To
worship the most reasonable Being, with unreasonable offerings, is a thing so
absurd, that the very sound of it is enough to fright us from it. To worship
God with our Bodies, while our Souls do adore and admire something else, is to
make God a sensual Being, and therefore our Savior from the notion of God's
being a Spirit, enforces the Duty of Worshipping him in Spirit and in Truth,
Joh. 4. 24.

2. It is necessary for our own sakes. If it be not reasonable, we can take no
comfort in it, and besides, cannot avoid running into Hypocrisy. Hypocrisy is
to seem to be good, and not to be so, as a false Pearl seems to be Oriental,
but is not. It Is this reasonable service, which must give our Devotion its just
weight and goodness; where this is wanting, a Man seems to please God, but does
not, and from hence must necessarily arise great delusions, and deceptions; and
the Soul that has long flattered her self with external services, when before
the great Tribunal it shall find, how woefully and wilfully it has mistaken the
nature and design of the Gospel, must fall into everlasting Grief and Torment.

The Preceding Considerations reduced to farther Practice.
I. TO be in an unconverted estate, and to live below ones reason, are one and
the same thing. Look upon a poor sensual Wretch, that is yet a stranger to the
life of God; He rejoices in those Sins, which will make him infallibly
miserable; He stands upon the brink of Destruction, and Laughs; God is angry
with him, and he is pleased with it. He prefers a Stone before Bread, a Serpent
before a Fish. He glories in his Shame, Triumphs in his Fetters, breaks the
Laws of the great Thunderer, and justifies his actions, and what is this, but
madness and distraction? And, O Sinner! Is this a condition to sleep another
Night in? Is this a State to continue in one Moment longer? Awake, awake thou
sluggard, lest the Revenger of Blood overtake thee?

II. What pity is it, to see Men so rational in their Temporal Concerns, and so
unreasonable in the things, which belong to their everlasting Peace! They would
not make a false step, nor do an imprudent action, in the management of their
Estates and Fortunes, yet manage the greatest concerns of their Salvation so
sillily, so foolishly, so irrationally, that one would think, they were
intended for no higher life, than that of Bees and Butter-flies. O Christians!
Is there such a thing, as a life to come, and an immortal Life, purchased by
the Blood of the Son of God, and is it not reasonable to look after it, with
the greatest application of your minds and understandings? What will all your
Wisdom, in getting provision for the Flesh, profit you, while you are Fools in
the things of God, of Heaven and Eternity! O Sirs! Think of this reasonable
service, without which, it had been better, that you had never been born!

The PRAYER.
O God, Great and Glorious, I have too long measured thy service by mine own
ease, more than by thy Will and Precepts. Give me understanding, that I may do
that which is most agreeable to thy holy Nature, and the interest of my
immortal Soul. O let thy Grace awaken my Reason, that I may exercise my self
for the future, more in things Spirtual, and invisible! Thy Gospel is so true,
The Miracles recorded there so convincing, the Doctrine so weighty, the beauty
of Holiness so charming, thy promises so gracious, thy threatenings so terrible,
thy Laws so equitable, that I wonder at my backwardness to offer unto thee my
reasonable service. Thou art my Father, how reasonable is it, that I should
love thee! T^ou art my Master, how reasonable is it, that I should obey thee!
Thy Rewards are infinite, how reasonable is it, that I should contend earnestly
to get them! Lord, thou know my weakness, and the stubbornness of my Heart.
O adjure me by the mercies of God to present unto thee my Soul and Body, as a
living Sacrifice, that whether I live, or die, I may live and die in the Lord
Jesus, Amen.

CHAP. XXX.
Of the Ceremony or Posture of Kneeling at the Holy Sacrament.
The CONTENTS.
Want of Charity the great Cause of Men's separating from a Church, sound in
her Doctrines and Morals, in point of Ceremonies. Essential Things, in the
first Institution of this Sacrament, must be separated from Circumstantial. The
Posture Christ used, was not Sitting, but Leaning, or Lying on one Side. No
Churches ever used that Posture. Several Reasons, why Kneeling is the most
proper Posture in Receiving. The Prayer.

I. IT is observed by Eusebius, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 23.
that when Polycarp, the famous Bishop of Smyrna, came to Rome, though he
differed from Anicetus, the Bishop of that See, in Points of Ceremony, and
Customs, he had received from St. John, yet they communicated together; and did
not think it Christian-like, to break Communion for any Difference in Things of
that Nature. An excellent Temper! and which I could wish had been observed by
our Dissenting Brethren, who have been overscrupulous about the Posture of
Kneeling at the Holy Sacrament. It Is a lamentable thing, to see how Men divide,
and separate one from another in Religion, upon the Account of little External
Formalities; and neglect the Substance, for a Circumstance; and the great Duty
of Charity, because the Ornaments and Decencies of a Church are not modeled
according to their Humor. What Account can such Men give of themselves to God,
who leave a Church, by their own Confession, sound in Doctrines and Morals, for
a few External Things, which are not agreeable to their Fancy? Is this a Cause,
worth suffering for? And can they imagine, that God will reward them for
neglecting a greater Duty, for a less? Into what Passion and Bitterness have
some been transported, that they have even ventured to call this Kneeling at
the Communion, Idolatry and Superstition! When the Children of Reuben, Josh.
22. 27. protested, that the Altar they had erected, was not for Sacrifice, or
Burnt-Offering, but only as a Witness that they were part of the Tribes of
Israel, the whole Congregation of the Children of Israel acquiesced, and were
satisfied. Our Church protests publicly against any Intent of Paying
Adoration, by this Ceremony, to the Consecrated Elements, which would make it
Idolatry; and yet so dis-ingenuous are some, that, notwithstanding this
Protestation, they fill both their own, and other People's Heads with Fears,
that Popery and Idolatry may be hid under that fair Outside. In which
Proceedings, there is so little Charity and Ingenuity, that it is a Shame Men
should pretend to Conscience, and show so little of it in their Censures.

II. That which has betrayed too many into these uncharitable Verdicts, has
been, their not distinguishing betwixt the Essentials and Circumstantials of
this Sacrament; betwixt things barely related, and commanded: And while they
have thought themselves obliged to keep exactly to every occasional Action, or
Gesture, used by Christ, but not commanded in this Sacrament, they have led
themselves and others into very palpable Mistakes and Delusions. And yet, when
all is done, even these Persons that plead against Kneeling at this Sacrament,
under a Pretense of keeping close to the Letter of Christ's Actions, do at the
same time neglect several Circumstances, observed in the first Institution; for
it was celebrated in an Upper Room, administered only to Twelve, to Men, and not
to Women, and at Night, etc. None of which Circumstances are observed by these
Men. And if one Circumstance may be neglected, why may not another, such as
Sitting, be forborne? That Christ and his Disciples sat at this Sacrament, is
the common Allegation; and we render the Greek Words, (...), and (...), by He
sat down: And the Reason why we render it so, is, because Sitting comes nearer
to the Posture Christ used, than Standing, or Kneeling. But any Man that is no
Stranger, either to Greek, or to the Custom of the Jews, must needs know that
these Words do properly import Leaning, or Inclining, or Lying on one Side: And
this the Jews express by their (...), as Sitting by (...), making a great
Difference betwixt these two. This Leaning, or Lying, the Jews used at their
Passover: Whether they borrowed this Rite, or Posture, from the Grecians,
Romans and Persians, who used to Sup in that Posture, I will not determine. But
the manner was this; they leaned, or lay, on their Left Side, upon little Beds,
made for that purpose, called in their Language, (...) Mittoth; by the Greeks,
(...); and each Bed held three Persons. The Law had commanded Standing at the
Eating of the Passover; but the Church looked upon that Posture, as Servile,
accommodated only to those Times, when they were in Egypt; and therefore
changed it into the Posture of Leaning, which they thought was a Badge of
Liberty: Nor does Christ find fault with their Church, for making this
Alteration in a commanded Posture; for himself practiced it; knowing that
Circumstantial Things are left to the Discretion of the Governors of Churches,
to keep or abolish them, as they shall see convenient. And this was so
universally believed by all Churches of the Christian World, that none I could
ever hear or read of, has kept to the posture of Leaning, or Lying on one
Side, in the Use of this Holy Sacrament; which they would not have presumed to
do, if this Posture had been Essential to the Receiving of the Sacrament. And
whereas it is commonly said, that this was a Table-posture, to which Sitting
succeeded; still this shows, that Men have varied from the Posture, Christ
used: And since he has commanded no Posture, all Churches are at their liberty
to order what Posture they think fit; and he is a contentious Man that opposes
it. What Posture the Primitive Church used at the Receiving of the Sacrament,
Antiquity has not left upon Record: That they stood at their Public Prayers
on Sundays, and on other Days too, from Easter to Whitsuntide, we know; but
whether they observed the same Posture at the Sacrament, is uncertain; though
if they used Standing, still it was their Posture of Worship and Adoration. St.
Chrysostom, indeed, tells us, that the Priests in his Time stood at the Altar,
waiting for Communicants; but how they received the Symbols, he does not
mention. Dionysius of Alexandria, speaking of a Person unlawfully baptized,
tells us, that he stood at the Table of the Lord when he was to Receive: But
Ruffinus interprets that, of the Act, not Gesture of Receiving; it being common
among the the Ancients, to express their Public Worship, by Standing, or
Stations. It Is like, that when the Apostle had reproved the Corinthians, for
not distinguishing the Lord's Table from their common Suppers, in point of
Reverence and Seriousness, the Christians bethought themselves of a more humble
and suitable Posture, than they used at their common Meals. There is no Man, I
hope, so wicked, as to exclude Prayers and Praises at the Receiving of the Holy
Symbols: And what can be a more proper Posture for these Devotions, than
Kneeling? Kneeling has in all Ages been accounted the proper Posture of
Prayers and Praises: And who can think of the Love of God, represented to us in
this Sacrament, without them? And if these be proper and necessary here, why
should the humble Posture, in which they are offered, be counted superstitious?
The Heathens themselves have condemned Irreverence in the External Performance
of God's Service: And shall Pagans and Infidels out do us in Humility of
Worship? Whenever Sacrifices were offered heretofore, the Officer bowed himself
to his God: And shall we offer the Sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving to our
Crucified Redeemer, in this Sacrament, without bowing? We come before God, in
this Sacrament, as Beggars, as Sinners, as indigent Worms: And what can be more
suitable to Persons under those Circumstances, than the humblest Postures? Here
we come to receive a Pardon from the Great King of Heaven: And does a Man
receive a Pardon of a Temporal King upon his Knees, and shall he refuse to
receive a Pardon of far greater Consequence, and of a greater Prince too, in
that Posture? We believe, that at such Times we receive Christ into our Souls:
And shall our External Humility be less than the Centurion's, who did not think
himself worthy that Christ should come under his Roof? Or, if we have the same
Apprehensions of our own Unworthiness, shall not we express them by proper
External Postures? Where the Soul has a great Sense of the Love and Gracious
Presence of God, it will even force the Body into humble Postures: And it is to
be feared, where People are loath to kneel, they are Strangers to this Sense in
the Holy Sacrament. What is urged, that Pope Honorius, in the Thirteenth
Century, did first bring in Kneeling at the Sacrament, is evidently false; for,
all that he ordered, was, that the Body should be decently bowed, when the Holy
Symbols were lifted up by the Priest; which is nothing to our Kneeling at the
Sacrament. The Primitive Church, though they do not mention Kneeling at the
Sacrament, yet they exhort their Hearers to Grief and Sorrow, and Confessions,
and an humble Sense of Sin, in the Act of Receiving; and we may rationally
infer, that they did not do this with out Kneeling, or Prostration. And since
the Ancient Writers make frequent mention of the Word Adoration in Receiving,
we cannot but conclude, that they used a Posture proper, and expressive of that
Adoration. And why should we scruple to express our Adoration of God, by
Kneeling in this Sacrament, when we see the Church Triumphant in Heaven, at
their singing the Praises of the Lamb that was slain, fall down before the
Lamb, and say, Worthy is the Lamb, that was slain, to receive Power, and
Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing; as St.
John informs us, Rev. 5. 8, 12.

The PRAYER.
O Thou Eternal Wisdom of the Father! Who being in the Form of God, thoughtest
it no Robbery to be equal with God, but made thy self of no Reputation, and
tookest upon thee the Form of a Servant, and wast made in the Likeness of Men;
and being found in Fashion, as a Man, did humble thy self, and becamest
obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross: Wherefore, God also has
highly exalted thee, and given thee a Name, which is above every Name; that at
the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in
Earth, and things under the Earth; and that eveey Tongue should confess that
Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father. O Lord of Glory! Overawe
both my Outward and Inward Man, with a Sense of thy astonishing Mercies, that
both may bow, and both may express their Gratitude. Let my Body, as well as
Soul, worship thee, love thee, admire thee, and humble themselves before thee,
who art the Image of the Invisible God, the Firstborn of every Creature; for
by thee were all things created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth;
visible, and invisible; whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers; all things were created by thee, and for thee. To
thee be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS Contained in this BOOK.
Chap. I.OF the Name of this Ordinance, and why distribution and Participation
of Bread and Wine usual in Christian Assemblies, is called the Lords Supper.
Page 1. Chap. II.Of the Mystery of Christ's Instituting the Sacrament, that
very Night in which he was betrayed. page 13. Chap. III.Of the place where the
Lord's Supper is to be Eaten, the Church, and of private Communion. page 24.
Chap. IV.Of Eating the Lord's Supper, the nature of it, and how it is to be
Eaten. page 36. Chap. V.Of the various abuses of this Holy Sacrament. page 48.
Chap. VI.Of Reciving the Lord's Supper Fasting, and how far it is necessary.
page 60: Chap. VII.Of the Elements in this Sacrament; and first of the Bread
Christ made use of, and of the nature and design of it. page 71. Chap. VIII.Of
Consecration, and what Consecration Christ used. Of his Thansgiving before he
broke the Bread, and our imitation of him in that particular. page 85. Chap.
IX.Of Breaking the Bread, and the Mysteries of it. page 102. Chap. X.Of taking
the Consecrated Bread with our Hands, and the Mystery of it. page 116. Chap.
XI.Of these words, This is my Body, whether they import a Transubstantiation;
and how the Bread is Crist's Body, and how Christ's Body may, and is to be
eaten. page 126. Chap. XII.Of Remembering Christ in this Sacrament, or doing
what we do here, in Remembrance of him. page 148. Chap. XIII.Of the other
Element, or part of this Holy Sacrament, viz. The Wine, and the Cup, Christ
made use of in the Institution of the Eucharist. page 168. Chap. XIV.Of the
Covenant represented by the Cup in this Holy Sacrament. page 198. Chap. XV.Of
frequent Receiving the Holy Communion, and the necessity of it. page 228. Chap.
XVI.Of the Perpetuity of this Ordinance, and the Necessity of its continuance
to the Worlds End. page 250. Chap. XVII.Of Eating and Drinking unworthily in
this Ordinance, and the Guilt the unworthy Receiver incurs thereby. pa. 269.
Chap. XVIII.Of the sad Effects and Consequences of unworthy Eating and
Drinking, in this Holy Sacrament, and first of Temporal Judgments. page 343.
Chap. XIX.Of Bodily Sickness, Weakness, and untimely Death, which are
sometimes, by way of Judgment inflicted on unworthy Receivers of this Blessed
Sacrament. page 360. Chap. XX.Of Spiritual Weakness, Sickness, and Death, the
second Temporal Judgment, inflicted sometimes on the unworthy Receivers of this
Holy Sacrament. page 375. Chap. XXI.Of Damnation, which the unworthy Receiver
Eats and Drinks to himself. page 393. Chap. XXII.Of Preparation, and first of
Meditation of Christ's Passion. page 408. Chap. XXIII.Of S^lf-examination, the
Second Act of preparation for this Holy Sacrament. page 496. Chap. XXIV.Of
Judging our selves, the Third Preparative Duty, in order to our worthy
Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament. page 531. Chap. XXV.Of Self-resignation,
the Fourth Preparatory Duty, in order to a worthy Receiving of this Holy
Sacrament. pa. 553. Chap. XXVI.Of Preparatory Devotions, and Aspirations, fit
to be used in Private, before we come to the Sacrament. page 566. Chap.
XXVII.Of the proper Acts of Devotion, when we come to the Holy Table. page 573.
Chap. XXVIII.Of the proper Acts of Devotion, after we have Received. 582. Chap.
XXIX.Of the Life we are to lead after we have Received the Holy Communion. pa.
587. Chap. XXX.Of the Ceremony, or posture of Kneeling at the Holy Sacrament.
page 594.
FINIS.

