Imprimatur.

C. Alston R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sacris Domesticis.

THE First Fruits OF REASON: OR, A DISCOURSE Showing The Necessity of applying
our selves betimes to the serious Practice of Religion.

By Anthony Horneck D. D. Preacher at the Savoy.

LONDON: Printed by F. Collins, for D. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible
without Temple Bar; and are to be sold by John Weld at the Crown between the
Temple-gates in Fleet Street. 1686.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE following Discourse was occasioned by a young Man's being unfortunately
killed in Bartholomew Fair, whose Friends, led partly by natural Affection,
partly by love to the young Man's Virtues, were pleased to desire me to preach a
Sermon at his Funeral, and because they would thereby be serviceable to the
living, and more especially to men of the same age with the Deceased, entreated
me to pitch upon the Text which appears in the front of the ensuing Treatise.
Having gratified their desire in that particular, they gave me some Motives and
Arguments to publish it, which I could not well resist. But the Discourse, as
it was delivered at St. Sepulchers Church on the 20 of September being too
short to make any thing like a Book of it, I resolved upon second thoughts to
enlarge it, and with these enlargements and additions it comes now abroad;
though in an age so fertile of excellent Sermons, I might be discouraged from
adding any of mine own, yet since every man in his station is bound to
contribute to the common Interest of Religion; having this opportunity, I was
willing to embrace it, because it is possible, that some or other who lights
upon these Papers, may think of the Contents, and by the assistance of the
divine Spirit, be persuaded early to consecrate himself to unfeigned and
impartial Devotion. The great debauchery and looseness of the Youth of this
Age, is enough to oblige us, and a sufficient call to do all we can to stem the
flood of Impiety, which rages so much in the younger sort, and proves too often
the occasion both of their temporal and eternal ruin. All I shall add is this,
to entreat the Reader to become a Supplicant with me at the Throne of Grace,
that both this and other men's endeavors of this kind, may prove effectual to
recall both young and old from the errors of their ways, and that God (as it is
our Liturgy) would shortly accomplish the number of his Elect, that we with all
those who are departed in the true Faith may have our perfect consummation and
bliss in his Eternal and Everlasting Glory.

THE First Fruits of Reason.
ECCLES. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.


THis Book of Ecclesiastes is generally looked upon as Solomon's recantation
Sermon, in which he renounces his former Follies, and having seen the vanity of
the world, and the pleasures of it, like a man come to himself again, aspires
to nobler delights, and after a woeful fall, lifts up his sinking head, and
beholds, and re-embraceth the true and glorious liberty of Gods Children.
Curiosity had led him not only into a search of Nature, but into that of Sin
and Impiety too; and while Greatness, and Riches, and a sawning Court flattered
him with power to do what he pleased, he at once forgot the baseness of his
slavery, and over-looked the heinousness of his Iniquity: As if it had been too
mean for a Sovereign Prince to commit puny sins, he transgressed above the
ordinary rate of Mortals, and if it be true what the Jewish Rabbis say, that
his inquisitive humor made him even venture upon the mystery of the black art,
it is like, that, together with his fondness of Heathenish Women, enticed him to
Idolatry. If this Book be his penitential Monument, we may believe his
Repentance was great, and signal, and that after this, his Clothing was
Sackloth, and he mingled his drink with weeping. Sins of a deep dye require
profound Contrition; and it is impossible to be truly sensible of monstrous,
and unparalleled Ingratitude, and not to express that sense by very visible and
eminent Humiliations. One great Character of true Repentance, is a hearty
endeavor after the Conversion of others, and this excellent sign we find in
this Convert or returning Prodigal. For not to mention the Counsel he gives to
all degrees of men in the foregoing Chapters; in that before us, his kindly
Calls and Admonitions to young men, speak a (...) Koheleth, or a Soul earnestly
desirous to gather all men into the Sheepfold of Grace and Mercy. And of these
Calls that in my Text, is not the least: Remember now thy Creator in thy days
of thy youth.

By way of Explication, I shall only tell you First, That what we render here
in the days of thy youth, (...)
is in the Original in the days of thy Choice. So youth is called.

1. Because in that Age man chooses his Employment, and when he first enters
upon the Stage of the World, after he comes from under Tutors and Governors,
he determines, what Calling, or Profession he shall take to.

2. Because in that Age particularly, when Reason exerts its full strength, God
sets the Tree of Life, and the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil before us,
Heaven and Earth, Paradise and the World, Righteousness and Sin, Life and
Death, and leaves us to our choice, according to which our portion and reward
will be, when the Soul appears before Gods dread Tribunal.

Secondly, As our youth is the Age wherein a Choice must needs be made, so the
Wiseman here bids us choose, remembering our Creator. Which the Chaldee
Paraphrast expounds, Remember thy Creator so as to glorify him in the days of
thy youth, which Paraphrase is so sound, that we need not search out for
another interpretation; for as the serious practice of Religion is meant by
that Remembrance, so that practice, is in a manner nothing else but glorifying
God in our Souls and Bodies, called so by the Apostle 1 Cor. 6.20. And Herein
is my father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, says our Savior, Joh. 15.8.
Nor need we wonder how God can be glorified by Fruits of righteousness that we
bring forth* For as these point at the Sun which warms them into being, or at
God, by whose Word, and Power, and Influence they grow, and ripen, and come to
perfection, so they proclaim the glory of his Grace, and discover how kind, how
merciful, how bountiful, and how liberal that Supreme Being is in bestowing
such gifts on men, gifts which Nature cannot confer, nor Angels distribute, nor
the greatest Monarchs impart to their Favorites. And hereby the happy person,
whose life bears such Fruits is encouraged to glorify the spring and Fountain
of them. Others also, that see them, and receive comfort or benefit by them,
cannot but adore and admire the Divine Goodness, which is pleased to display
its glory in such communications of his Holiness; and as Angels rejoice at a
sinners Conversion here on earth, so they cannot but magnify and glorify God
for the fruits, and good works which after their Conversion such men bring
forth. Those ministering Spirits are entirely intent upon Gods Glory, and the
greater the number is of those that contribute to Gods Glory, the greater is
their joy, and with their Joy, their Praises, and celebrations of the Divine
Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness, are advanced.

This being premised, it will be easy to guess at the subjects of the ensuing
Discourse, which if we follow the Text close, can be no other than these.

1. What it is to remember God; for that is implied here.

2. What force there is in remembering God under the notion of our Creator.

3. Why the strict observance of these two Lessons is particularly necessary in
the days of our youth?

First, What it is to remember God.

1. So to remember his Omniscience and Omnipresence, as to stand in awe of him:
For this is no speculative, but a practical Remembrance. The Name of God speaks
his being present in all places, and knowing whatever passes in Heaven and in
Earth. A truth which even the wiser Heathens were sensible of; and when they
said, that Jovis omnia plena, that all places were full of the Supreme Deity,
no doubt they meant, that God was present in Heaven by his Glory, on Earth by
his Providence, and in Hell by his Justice; that above us he stands as Judge,
under us as our Supporter, and on both sides of us as an Assessor and
Speculator of our actions whether they be good or evil. So that he who
remembers God, must necessarily remember his Omniscience, and Omnipresence; and
in vain are these remembered, except we stand in awe of him. And this was it,
which God thought fit to put among the first Lessons he gave to Abraham his
friend, Genesis 17.1. I am the Almighty God, walk before me and be perfect. i. e.
Behave thy self in all places, like a person sensible of an all-seeing Eye
above him, like one who believes God sees him, and hears him, and is not far
from him; that knows his down-sitting and his uprising, and understands his
thoughts afar off! This Remembrance is a necessary and essential part of the
fear of God, and he that lays this Remembrance by, will stick at no sin he can
commit with safety, without exposing his Credit, or Honor, or Interest. This
Remembrance is a bridle for our Lusts, and he that sees God, where ever he
walks or sits, or stands or lies, will not be easily taken with the beauty of
sin and vanity. It was therefore an ingenious, as well as a religious reply,
which St. Ephrem made to the Harlot, who enticed him to be naught with her, and
was very urgent with him to assign her a place where she should meet him. In
the Marketplace, says he, tomorrow at Noonday. Fie, answered the Harlot, are
not you ashamed to be taken notice of of men, that will pass by, and see us. To
this, St. Ephrem: Art thou ashamed to be seen by men, and do thou not blush
to venture upon this villainy in the sight of God? Can the eyes of men make thee
afraid, and is the revenging Eye of God no disswasive from thy wickedness?

2. To Remember God, is so to remember his Goodness, his Mercies, and gracious
Providence, as to live a life of love and gratitude. We cannot name God, but
we must understand by that expression, one from whom every good and perfect
gift descends, by whom all creatures are fed, maintained, and cherished, and
preserved; who opens his hand, and fills, the desire of every living thing,
and to whom we in particular are beholding for all the necessaries,
conveniences, accommodations, and superfluities we enjoy. But this remembrance
is insignificant, and like sounding Brass and a tinkling Cymbal, except it
touches the Heart, with a strong desire and endeavor of gratitude. Kindnesses
like fire must give heat, and as among men he is supposed not to remember what
such a great man has done for him, that shows him no respect, or does what is
prejudicial to his Honor and Interest, so God looks upon him as a person that
remembers neither him, nor his Mercies, in whom this remembrance works no
earnest care to please him. And whatever the pretenses of remembering may be,
where it does not influence the life, nor produces love in the inward and
outward man, it is Contempt, not Remembrance, Hypocrisy, not Gratitude. He
properly remembers God, that takes notice of his Works, and the operations of
his Hands, sees his Finger in the blessings he enjoys, and clings to his great
Benefactor with ardent affections, that never thinks of his goodness without
admiration, and whenever he considers how kind God has been to him, ruminates
in his mind with David, What reward shall I render unto the Lord for all his
benefits? Psalm. 116.12. It was therefore with respect no doubt to this
practical acknowledgement that the same Psalmist gives this exhortation, Psalm.
105.5. Remember ye his mavelous works, the wonders and the judgments of his
wrath. They that heretofore painted the Graces with hand in hand, intimated,
that one good turn requires another, and to neglect such returns among men,
has ever been counted odious Monster has been the best name that has been
given to such persons in all Ages, and therefore none can suppose, that the
neglect of them with respect to God, our kindest friend, will pass for a
tolerable infirmity. He that does not return acts of love upon the remembrance
of Gods preservations, deliverances, and munificence, will have the whole World
and his own Conscience to boot for his accusers, and the crime is inexcusable,
because the wretch eludes the force of the greatest charms, and the strongest
motives to Love and reciprocal Affection.

3. To remember God, is so to remember his Laws, and injunctions, as to yield
actual obedience. He that acknowledges a God, must acknowledge him to be the
governor of the World, and consequently that he governs by Laws agreeable to
his greatness, and Holiness; and therefore when God tells the Israelites, how
they should remember him, he chooses to word it thus: Remember ye the Law of my
servant Moses, which I commanded him in Horeb, with all the statutes and
judgments. Mal. 4.4 Gods Laws would signify nothing, if they were not
intended, as a rule for his Subjects, and the impertinency of remembering God,
as our Lawgiver, without suitable obedience, is sufliciently shown in that
expostulation of Christ, Luke 6.46. Why call ye me Lord, and do not do the
things which I say. Wonderful was the care God took, that the Jews should
remember his injunctions. They were not only to be in their Frontlets and
Wrist-bands, but the Fathers of their respective Families, were commanded to
teach them diligently unto their Children, to talk of them when they were
sitting in their houses, and when they walked by the way, and when they lay
down, and when they rose again. They were to write them also upon the Posts of
their Houses, and upon their, Gates, Deuteronomy. 6.7, 8, 9. And what could be the
design of it, but to show, that in vain we remember him, except we remember his
Laws so as to be ruled and governed by them. And therefore we may justly
conclude, that he who being tempted either to uncleanness, or drunkenness, or
lying, or injustice, or dissembling, or Pride, or ill-language, or neglect of
Alms, and Prayer, and consideration of his ways, remembers the words of the
Lord, and what God has said in his Gospel, and trembles at it, and bids the
Devil depart from him, will be applauded in Heaven for an admirable Memory
more, than if with Themistocles he could tell all the names of the Citizens of
Athens; or with Mithridates remember two and twenty Languages. To arrive to
such a remembrance, there is no need of studying the art of Memory. The Laws
are generally known: The application is all in all; and he that knowing his
Masters will applies the rules of it to the particular actions of his life, and
by them regulates his thoughts, and desires, and words, and actions, is the
happy man that remembers God to the comfort and edification of his Soul. And to
all this, he will be engaged more readily if he remembers that God is his
Creator, which brings in the second point.

Secondly, What force there is in remembering God under the notion of our
Creator.

1. To remember God as our Creator, is to think of him as the Author of our
being and well being, that we have nothing we can claim as our own, and that
all we are and have is his charity; that originally he did frame us of nothing,
and by and in him we live and breath, and move in the sphere appointed for us.
That we as well as the vast Fabric of the world, are the product of his
exuberant goodness, and that all things in Heaven and in Earth were formed by
the word of his power. He that seriously thinks of this, will think no service
too costly, no Incense too sweet, no Present too great, no Sacrifice too
precious to lay upon his Altar. He that raises a Slave out of dust, and
advances him to an honorable employment, expects he should think nothing too
good for the promoting of his interest, who has so generously lifted him up
from the Dunghill, much more may he, that speaks a creature from nothing into
being, and gives him a view of all the glorious things, his powerful hand has
wrought, which he must have been forever ignorant of, if he had continued in
the shades of nothing. He that creates gives all that the Creature has; and
it is hard, if he that makes the Tenant and gives him Lands and Houses, may not
reserve to himself a quit-rent, or a Pepper-corn rather, as an acknowledgement,
that the Creature is the Usufructuary of his possessions. All the service man
can do, or that God requires of us, is nothing but a small and inconsiderable
Rent, our great Landlord reserves, whereby we may own him the Maker and Author
of our welfare. Creation imports, that we are made for his glory, and a
wonderful dignity it is, that God will make use of such poor worms to promote
and advance his glory. To be made for his glory, and to dishonor him; to
receive our breath on purpose that we may show forth his praise, and to act, as
if we had no relation to him, are things inconsistent, and imply a
contradiction. He denies that he has his being from God, that will not
consecrate himself to do him service, and is an Infidel under the divine
influence, while he refuses to hearken to his Counsels. It was therefore a very
rational inference which David made, Psalm. 100.2, 3. Serve the Lord with
gladness, come before his presence with singing. Know ye that the Lord he is
God, it is he that has made us, and not we our selves, we are his people and
the sheep of his pasture.

2. To remember God as our Creator, is to be importunate with him to create in
us clean hearts, and to renew right spirits within us, that we may be capable
of conversing with him forever. The innocence which the first creation gave us,
was lost and tarnished by the Fall. The glory of righteousness and holiness in
Paradise, the joy of Angels, and the envy of Devils, went off, and vanished
with our Apostasy, and only some ruins of it do remain, to show how bright and
splendid our Souls were in that state. Hence comes a natural proneness to evil,
and that sinful inclination prompts us to greater contempt of God. Hence it is,
that an aversion from goodness sits heavy on our Souls, and when we would do
good, evil is present wi^h us, and in this state we cannot please God; this is
the bar which forbids access to his Throne; and the Soul that continues in this
condition to the end, is out of all hopes of ever enjoying his beatifick
presence in Heaven. This misery discovers the necessity of a new Creation, the
rather, because with God neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but a new creature, Gal. 6.15. When I say, a new Creation, I do
not mean it of new Faculties, but of new Qualities and Endowments of a new
bias, and bent, and inclination of our better part; and this is the work of
God, and to effect it, the same power must be employed that spoke the World
into being; for as there, so here the Chaos and the shapeless matter must be
separated and divided, the power of darkness dissipated, and a new Light must
(...) our Understandings, a Light whereby spiritual things and th^^^
excellency, necessity, and t^^^^^endency above sublunary comforts may be
discerned, and the Soul look into things that are not seen. The Spirit of God
must move here too, and upon waters too, even on the waters of repentance, and
penitential Tears. This Spirit must supple, and warm, and cherish the feeble
parts, make the Soul brisk and agile, and ready unto every good word and work,
and a new face of all things must appear, new Thoughts, new Desires, new
Breathings, new Notions, a new Language, new Delights, and new Affections too.
The sins that were loved before, must be hated now; and the Follies which
caused laughter, must now cause grief and sorrow. And this new Creation God is
ready to bestow, if our earnest Addresses knock at Heaven Gate. The Soul that
watches at his door, shall not be sent away empty; he that is able to create
this new Heart, has promised it too, if our laziness and love of the world,
and contempt of the mercy, does not discourage him. So that to remember our
Creator, is not only to reflect upon his power, but our duty too.

3. To remember our Creator, is to think, that he who has created a Heaven for
the tractable and docile, and sincere, has created a Hell too, where he means
to lash the stubborn and impenitent man. This Solomon alludes to in the last
Verse of this Chapter, where he tells us, that God shall bring every work into
judgment with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.
Tophet is ordained of old, says the Prophet, Isai. 30.33. And when God
provided Mansions sweet and pleasant for his Favorites, it was but necessary
to create and make a Goal too, where the despisers of his grace might to
eternal Ages bewail the loss of infinite and eternal mercy; Mercy which now
entreats, and courts them, and comes to them in all the soft dresses of
comfort, and sues to them in the still voice of a tender Father, offers them
Crowns, and Empires, and an endless Felicity, lies weeping at their feet, runs
after them, pulls them by the sleeve, and beseeches them not to neglect so
great Salvation. He that seriously thinks of this, surely cannot run into the
Devils arms, nor be in love with the broad way, where so many thousands post
into Perdition. These thoughts must needs be great motives to prevent the
accomplishment of Gods threatenings, who will not let that Prison he has
created stand empty, when so many do deserve it, and in despite of all his
endeavors to the contrary, run into it, and make haste to be miserable. The
Creator of all things beholding every thing that he had made, saw that all was
very good, and therefore you will say, surely he did not create a Hell, for that
cannot be reconciled to the Standard of goodness. But it is one thing what
Sufferers or Malefactors, and another what Magistrates and Wise men do say.
There is scarce a Prisoner but finds fault with his confinement. But does any
wise man therefore judge that Prisons are not for the common good, or that they
are needless in a Commonwealth? If God were to take advice of men, that make
themselves Vessels of his wrath, not one but would condemn him for making or
ordaining a place of torment; but his Justice requires other things, and that is
a good Attribute as well as his Mercy, and punishment makes for his Honor and
Glory, as well as his gentleness and compassion. He that remembers God as his
Creator, must view the everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels,
as well as the house made without hands eternal in the Heavens; and if he do
both, he is in the greatest probability of entering into invincible resolutions,
to shake off the yoke of Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, that he may be capable,
of entering into his Masters joy. But then these resolutions, if they shall be
to any purpose, must be made in the days of his youthful vigor, which leads me
to the last particular.

Thirdly, Why the strict observance of these two Lessons is particularly
necessary in the days of our youth.

1. Because sin is more easily mortified, when these motives are applied early
in the days of our youth. The load that hinders us from entering in at the
strait Gate, may then be thrown off with greater facility than afterward. The
tenderer the Branch is, the sooner it is bowed; and the softer the Rust is, the
more easily it is scoured away. Sin in the youthful age, is but in its bud as
it were, and therefore more easily nipt; and Corruption not being come to any
great hardness yet, is the sooner dispersed, and discountenanced. The Devil
does but then begin to act his part in the Soul, and therefore is more easily
dislodged; and though one or two evil Spirits may have already taken up their
habitation there, yet the number not being advanced to a Legion yet, they may
be crushed with greater ease. But sin being by age, as it were, caked and baked
together, mocks the Fullers-earth, and the help of Soap and Snow-water. The
blackness becomes purely Ethiopian, and the spots turn into tokens of the
Leopard, which makes the change more difficult, if not impossible. It Is true,
some that have streamed out their golden days in voluptuousness and luxury,
have yet at last proved eminent Saints; but as this is an argument of the
extraordinary Grace of God, so no consequence can be drawn from it, that what
God does for special reasons for some, he will do for all. Some few grow rich
after fifty, but that gives but small encouragement to men that do not thrive
in the world before; and whatever lucky hits some may have, that makes but few
expect the like: The sooner the Antidote is applied, the greater hopes there is
that the power of the Poison will be weakened; and the longer it lies in the
bowels, the more difficult grows the cure. This stands to reason, when sins are
young, the children of Edom may soon be dashed against the stones; but being
become men of War, they defy all opposition. Habits become a second nature,
and when follies are become natural, and mingle with the complexion and
Spirits, they are over looked as harmless, or men despair of rooting of them
up. The horror of any sin goes off by custom, and when men are used to it,
they are so far from repenting that they are apt to look upon themselves as
innocent; when Lions are not yet used to range abroad for prey, they may be
tamed; but being become lusty and strong, all endeavors of cicuration are
vain; and though we are told of Androdus his Lion, that grew tame when he was
of full age, yet as one Swallow does not make a Summer, so neither is it
advisable to venture into the Sea without skill in swimming, because one or
two, ignorant of the art, have been saved from drowning by a Miracle. Men give
God but little encouragement to employ his miraculous power to convert them,
when during the vigor of their age, they have mocked all his Stratagems, and
defeated his Methods of Compassion, and whatever God has done upon
extraordinary occasions, and under extraordinary circumstances, we are assured
by the Psalmist that he swear in his wrath, that they who had grieved him Forty
years in the Wilderness should never enter into his rest, Psalm. 95.10, 11.

2. Except a man remember his Creator in the days of his youth, he is not in a
likely way to compass all those graces which are fit and proper for a Candidate
of Eternity. The virtues which the Holy Ghost faith, are necessary for a
Christian, are not to be acquired or purchased but by long striving, frequent
encountering of Temptations, assiduous labor, and constant endustry, and
indefatigable circumspection. Shadows of Graces are compassed in a shorter
space, but habits of Goodness are the work of time. One Virtue may possibly be
got this year, another the next, another the third. Of Ammonas we read, that he
was fourteen years conquering his anger and passion, and others have labored
many more before they arrived to a habit of meekness and patience. Before a man
can say that he is master of such a Virtue, he must have several trials, and
those trials, occur not all in one week, or in one month. He that is free from
a temptation this year, may have enough of it three years hence. By little
conquests way must be made for greater, and he that overcomes his little
peevishnesses for some time, prepares for overcoming bigger affronts and
injuries. We read of no Ex tempore Saints, and those who have arrived to
qualifications which have made them fit for the bliss of another world, have
spent many years to bring themselves to a spiritual relish of the power of
godliness. Heaven is not to be gained by a single virtue, but there must be
adding unto our faith virtue, unto virtue knowledge, unto knowledge temperance,
unto temperance godliness, unto godliness patience, unto patience brotherly
kindness, and unto brotherly kindness charity, 2 Pet. 1.4, 5. He is no
Christian that knows not what it is to grow in grace; and when we are to labor
after perfection, it is evident that we must begin betimes. So that if a man
does not begin this practical remembrance of his Creator in the days of his
youth, he has not time enough to become master of this art, or to commence
Graduate in this piece of Philosophy.

3. This early remembrance of the Great Creator invites the early
manifestations of Gods love, and is the Key to the choicest comforts and
consolations. Of all the Apostles St. John alone is called the Disciple whom
Jesus loved. He loved them all, but this with greater tenderness than ordinary,
because, as most Divines observe, he was the youngest, and in the days of his
youth remembered his Masters will and his own duty. When Israel was a child, i.
e. when in his tender age he followed me with all his heart, studied my Laws,
and walked with God, I loved him, that is with a higher love of complacency
than others, faith God, Hos, 11.1. The youthful David, when in the wilderness
he lived retired from the world, contemplated things celestial and sublime,
made the Creator of all things the darling of his Soul, and found no such
delight any where, as in meditating of Gods testimonies, felt what the kinder
influences of Gods Spirit were, and what was the exceeding greatness of his
power, whereof that extraordinary assistance he speaks of to King Saul, was a
signal testimony: Thy servant kept his fathers sheep, and there came a Lion and
a Bear and took a Lamb out of the flock, and I went out after him, and
delivered it out of his mouth; and when he arose against me I caught him by his
beard, and smote him and slew him, 1 Samuel 17.34, 35. When Joseph's innocence
and tender years led him to the fear of God, and made him have that aversion
from sin in himself and others, that he told his Father of his brethrens
faults; God favored him with more than ordinary tokens of his love, which
appeared afterward more visibly, by his making him Viceroy of Egypt. Early
Fruit is ever most acceptable, and an early remembrance of our Creator comes
before him as Incense, smells sweets as the morning Sacrifice, and vies with
the morning Rose for fragrancy.

Practical Inferences.
First, Though we allow not of the Platonic notion, that all our knowledge is
nothing but reminiscence, yet Religion may justly be called a Remembrance of
things we knew and heard of before. The lines of good and evil are engraven
upon our hearts. The Finger of God has written them upon our Souls, and
education together with the various Sermons we hear, make these Characters much
brighter. So that if at any time we are to abhor that which is evil, or to
cleave to that which is good, if we are tempted to actions doubtful and
uncertain, whether they be agreeable or disagreeable to the will of God, it is
but remembering what an Almighty hand has imprinted on our hearts, or what
formerly we have treasured up there, and thus we may by the Grace of God resist
and overcome the temptation. Nay, if we remember how at such time our
Consciences checked us for such actions, and what reluctancies we felt, when
prompted to the commission. If we remember how at another time our pious
Neighbor reproved us for such a fault, told us, it was as affront offered to
God, and a snare to ruin our immortal Souls. If we remember how vehemently the
Minister of the Ordinances of God declaimed against such a sin, what Arguments
he alleged against it, what disswasives he produced, what obtestations and
entreaties he used to discourage us from the Offense, all this will signally
help to restrain us from yielding to the evil motion. For this we need no
extraordinary memories we make use of in our civil affairs, when we remember
what we did or what happened such a year, will serve to put us in mind of our
duty. It Is love to a thing that makes us remember what may contribute to the
promoting of it. And if our love to Religion were but as strong as it is to our
Riches, we should very easily remember the arguments that God and his Ministers
have given us to dissuade us from the sins we are inclined to. Were we truly
concerned for our Souls we should soon remember what we have heard out of the
Word of God, and which makes for the practice of the virtues, necessary to
salvation. When we are tempted to Pride or Anger, if we did but remember how we
have hated these sins in others, and how odious they have appeared to us, when
we have seen our Neighbors fall into them, it would be a sufficient
discouragement from the commission. That we have no memories in this case, is
not so much a defect of nature, as our will. We are wilfully forgetful of our
duty, and that makes us excuse the neglect of it; we will not remember our
sins, and that tempts us to impenitence. Thus we cheat our Souls, and that is
but an ill preparative for the tremendous audit at the Bar of Gods Justice. The
day will come when we shall remember our offenses and neglects whether we will
or no. There is not a sinner now, who willingly forgets what he has been going
against God and his own Soul, but will be forced to remember it to his cost and
sorrow, when an angry God shall look him in the face. And is it not our
greatest interest then to remember now in this our day the things which belong
unto our peace; to remember our Errors, that we may turn from them; to
remember our duties to God and man, that we may conscienciously discharge them;
to remember what our Creator, our Father, our greatest Benefactors requires of
us; to remember the Exhortations, the Entreaties, the Expostulations, the
Adjurations of a merciful God, that the Great Jehovah may remember us in that
day when he makes up his Jewels, and spare us as a man would spare his Son that
serves him?

Secondly, There is hardly any place of Scripture that is more vulgarly known
than this I have discoursed of; our very Children learn it almost as soon as
they can speak, and imbibe it with the ordinary questions, Who made you? Who
redeemed you? Who sanctifies you? But when men are grown up to just strength,
and vigor of Age, it fares with this Motto as it does with Scripture Sentences
written upon Walls in Country Churches; not one in forty minds it. Youth ( thus
pleads the Age) must have its swing; and what should the sprightly Lad do, but
follow his Amors and Vanities? The blood that dances in his Veins prompts him
to gayety; and to restrain him in his frollicks, would be to torment him before
his time, and looks like an intolerable affront offered to his blooming years.
Young men must be merry; and though that mirth for the most part is nothing but
licentiousness, yet as extravagant as it is, it is but a trick of youth.
Religion is generally accounted only as a proper attendant of the aged and
feeble; and when men are unfit for any business in the world, they then think
themselves fit to think seriously of the Kingdom of Heaven. But surely this is
no Gospel-Divinity, but a Doctrine taught by the Father of lies the Prince of
Devils. Those that can think so, never considered the import of Christ's Law,
nor the pains the Primitive Believers took to arrive to happiness. The whole
Bible is against these dangerous positions, and the Holy Ghost knows of no
other Repentance, but what is begun betimes, and prosecuted by a strict
obedience. There is not a word of comfort in all the Scriptures for men who
have been baptized into Christ and never begin to remember their Creator
seriously, till either old Age or a Deathbed refreshes their memories. We read
indeed of fruits brought forth in old Age, and those highly commended too; but
then it is in such men as have been early planted in the House of the Lord, and
flourish in the Courts of our God, like Cedars and Palmtrees, that discovers
their early verdure and fragrancy, and continue it to the last, Psalm. 92.12,
13, 14. And let no man tell me here, that this is to drive old Penitents into
despair. No, it is rather a motive to double their pains, to redeem their time,
and to give all diligence to make their Calling and Election sure. What should
men do who have lost much time, but husband the remainder to the best
advantage? And indeed if they seriously consider what opportunities they have
lost, how many years they have thrown away upon things that do not profit; what
Calls they have rejected, what checks of Conscience they have baffled, what
Mercy, and Love, and Pity they have despised, and how refractory they have been
under the most powerful arguments that have been suggested to them, they have
no reason to loiter much, nor to cry a little more sleep a little more slumber
in the ways of sin. They had need pray harder than other men, and labor more
than others, and give greater demonstrations of love and charity than their
Neighbors, who have been wise much earlier, that if they cannot arrive to any
high degrees of Glory, they may however save themselves from the wrath to come,
and from everlasting burnings.

Thirdly, Hear this all ye, in whose Veins healthful and vigorous blood does
slow. Fancy you hear the deceased Party here call to you from his Grave, or
rather from the Regions of (...), from the other world. Fancy you hear him say,
O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn your glory into shame, how long will ye
love Vanity and seek after leasing? In this other world, where my Soul is now,
the Scene is changed, and all things look with another face. Here all things
appear big and dreadful, and in amazing shapes. Here is a glorious God, that
will not be put off with Forms and Schemes, and little complemental Devotions,
but expects conformity to the Image of his Son, even to the same mind, and
temper, and contempt of the world, which was also in Christ Jesus. O flatter
not your selves with hopes of easy accounts, or fancies that God will not be
so cruel as to condemn a company of poor Sinners to the bottomless Gulf. Rest
assured he is no respecter of persons. He is not frighted by crowds, and
numbers, and multitudes from making them feel the weight of his anger. Be
advised, be entreated, be persuaded to remember your Creator in the days of
your youth. O do not put the evil day far from you! Let the great Creator be
ever in your minds. Wherever you are carry his Image in your Bosom, that you
may do nothing unworthy of his goodness and holiness. Make him your dearest and
your greatest treasure. Cling to him as your only refuge in the evil day. Make
it your business to be guided by his Eye, and to be instructed and governed by
his Counsel. Be ye not as the Horse and Mule that have no understanding. Be not
afraid of any troubles that may befall you upon the account of your obedience.
Be confident, he has rewards infinite, unspeakable, incomprehensible rewards,
to recompense all your losses, though you should lose life it self for his
Names sake. Remember your Reason was given you on purpose to remember him.
Remember that therefore he distinguished you from Bruits and Beasts, that you
should think of his will and do it. Remember you are his Creatures, and he your
Lord, your Master, your King, and your Supreme Governor. Remember you have not
a better friend in all the world than him. Remember with what tenderness and
gentleness he uses you, what offers he makes you, and how dreadful it will be
to undervalue such expressions of love. Remember the thousand Deliverances,
Preservations, and gracious Providence he has sent you. Remember the danger
you are in. The Devil like a roaring Lion walks about seeking whom he may
devour. You have Enemies on every side of you: All lie in wait to devour you.
Remember the veracity of God; he will not vary one tittle from his word. O do
not trespass upon his patience any more. Abuse his Mercy and Long-suffering no
longer. But let his goodness lead you to a serious, speedy, and universal
Reformation. The Judge is at the door, and seeing that all these things shall
be dissolved, What manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation,
and godliness! Should the person deceased appear to you at this time, and
preach these Lessons to you, would not you tremble and fear, and stand
astonished, and go home, and take care that you might not be barren nor
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ? Why Sirs? these things
are as true, as if a Ghost from the other world did repeat them to you. And if
they be eternal Truths, O foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you, that you
should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently
set forth, crucified among you? And therefore

Fourthly, If the Remembrance of your Creator cannot melt your hearts, O let
the remembrance of your Redeemer make you wiser. Remember what the Son of God
has suffered for you. Remember what Agonies, what Torments, what bitter Scoffs
and Reproaches he endured to rescue and free you from the bondage of sin and of
the Devil. Remember you are brought with a price, with the precious blood of
the immaculate Lamb. Remember you were bought to be his peculiar people, and
bought that you should be your own no more; that you should not live to your
selves, but to him that bought you at the expense of his Blood and Labor.
Remember he bled for you. Remember he laid down his life for you. Remember,
greater love can no man show than that he lay down his life for his friends.
Remember he died for you when you were enemies. Remember he thought nothing too
good for you. Remember who it was that did all this for you, even the King of
Kings, the Lord of Lords, the eternal Son of God, that could have glorified
himself in your endless misery, but would no; and to let you see the exceeding
riches of his Grace, humbled himself to the death of the Cross, that the
astonishing Mercy might work in you a loathing of every weight, and every sin,
which does so easily beset you. Can you remember all this, and feel no
resolutions within, to show forth the Praises of him who has called you out of
darkness into his mavelous light. Can you remember all this and forbear
crying out with the Apostle, I count all things dross and dung for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord?

Fifthly, Would we know, how we may lay a foundation for a long and healthy
life. The principle here laid down is it. Remember thy Creator in the days of
thy youth. In youth we commonly lay the Foundation of future Diseases, which
shorten our days, and fill our lives with various Distempers; and while people
trespass upon the vigor of their Age, and offer violence to Nature when young,
they consider not how by this means they give death an opportunity to enter,
and the blood in that age is commonly so corrupted, that all the Medicines
afterward cannot abolish the corruption, or eradicate it out of the Bowels.
This early remembrance of God will help to restrain that extravagance, and as
it contributes to the soundness of the Body, so it cannot but be an excellent
preparative for the long continuance of it. Set aside some distracted persons,
the desire and endeavor of mankind is to live long. To this end they use
Preventives, Preservatives, Catharticks, Diuretics, Emeticks, Restoratives,
shun all things that they apprehend noxious, and hearken to every little story
that directs them how to free themselves from too early approaches of fullen
death, that King of Terrors. Indeed under violent Pain, or extreme Poverty, or
intolerable Disgrace, some do wish for death, but that is only a sudden passion
caused by the present pressing misfortune, but if that were once over, they
would be content with the Collier in the Fable, to carry their burden, even
the burden of their flesh about them a little longer. We are told of strange
endeavors used in India by the Pagan Kings, and the Grandees in their Courts
to prolong life. Some do even spend their Patrimonies to find out the Universal
Medicine, and an Antidote against death; some with Pearls dissolved in the
purest Dew of Heaven seek to lengthen out our days; but this remembering our
Creator in the days of our youth, will do more than all Drugs and Medicines,
more than all the Cordials and Julips in the world, and whatever either the
Wisdom or Folly of man has invented to procure longevity. It Is evident, that
by this remembering our Creator is meant nothing but the Fear of God, for thus
Solomon explains himself, v. 13. of this Chapter; where to reinforce the
admonition v. 1. he only changes the Phrase, but means the same thing, Fear
God, and keep his commandments, for that is the whole duty of man; and to assure
us, that this early remembrance of God in the way to long life, he adds, Prove.
10.27. The fear of the Lord prolongs days. But because this truth is believed
but by very few, it will not be amiss to give such demonstrations of it as may
convince any rational man of the weight. and moment of it. And

1. The Duties Religion enjoins, if seriously and conscientiously practiced,
tend to health and prolongation of life, as will appear from an induction of
particulars. Religion enjoins Temperance in eating and drinking; and all the
world agrees in this, that Temperance is not only the best Physic, but the
best Physician too. Gluttony, and Drunkenness, and Excesses in meat and drink,
are fruitful Parents of Diseases, and how men do thereby precipitate themselves
into Gouts, Dropsies, Surfeits, Fevers, etc, which are great promoters of an
early death, none can be supposed ignorant. Religion forbids all extravagant
Passions, which being let loose hugely debilitate Nature. It enjoins Meekness,
Patience, Contentedness, and a reasonable service; and where the Passions are
kept in good order, in all likelihood the temper and frame of the body will be
preserved in health, and a sweet and admirable harmony. From letting the
Passions run beyond their just bounds and limits, innumerable mischiefs flow;
some by immoderate and inordinate love have killed themselves, others by
inordinate Anger have fallen into Epilepsies: Some by immoderate grief consume
the marrow in their bones; and History tells us of several, such as Leo X, Pope
of Rome, and some Roman Ladies, that have in fits of immoderate laughter
expired, and given up the ghost.

Religion forbids all anxious and tormenting cares, and carkings, great enemies
certainly to health and life; for they not only make the Blood stagnate, clog
the Spirits, hinder a free circulation, but too often have been, and are, the
causes of men's laying violent hands upon themselves. This administers
Ingredients which make up a good Conscience, and that is a perpetual Feast. It
bids us rejoice in the Lord always, and a constant cheerfulness cannot but be a
very great preservative of health, and the vital flame within. It forbids all
Fornication, Adultery, Lasciousness, and exorbitant Lusts; prescribes the
modest and moderate use of Marriage, or commends perpetual Virginity; all which
is very conducive to health and longevity; and this we need not doubt of, when
we see men, who give themselves liberty in hankering after strange Flesh, what
work they make for Surgeons and Physicians, how they poison their Blood, and
are so many walking Graves. Religion prescribes frequent Fasting, and
Abstinence, and how beneficial this is to health and a long vigorous life, The
examples of the ancient Hermits, and since their time, of other religious men,
are ample testimonies. Simeon Stylites by this means arrived to the age of 109.
Anthony the Great to 105. Paul the first Ascetick to 103. Arsenius to 120.
Venerable Bede to 92. Remigius the famous Archbishop of Rhemes (who enjoyed his
Bishopric 70 years, which is more I think than can be said of any man in
public Office for a thousand years) to 96. Epiphanius (not the Cyprian Bishop,
but another) to 115. Not to mention any more, and most Historians agree in it,
that one great means to prolong their years was their spare diet and frequent
abstinence, and Fasts in obedience to Religion. Besides, Religion commands
Obedience, Respect, and Tenderness to Parents, and to that a special blessing
of long life is affixed by promise in the fifth Commandment. Honor thy Father
and thy Mother, that thy days may be long, in the Land which the Lord thy God
gives thee. It bids us also shun all apparent occasions of mischief,
particularly of evil company, where great rudenesses, insolences,
debaucheries, and many times Murders are committed, to the endangering both of
health and life. Add to all this, that Religion does peremptorily prohibit all
ill language, which is too often the unhappy cause of quarrels, strife,
fighting, blows, duelling, and assassinations, which signally shorten the life
of man; in allusion to which David tells us, Psalm. 34.12, 13. What man is he
that desires life, and loves many days, that he may see good? keep thy tongue
from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile. So that if a man remembers
his Creator betimes, makes Conscience of the duties Religion prescribes, and
continues in doing so, he lays a foundation for a long and healthy life.

2. This early remembrance of God, gives a man a title to Gods special
Providence, and what the effect of that is, the Psalmist will inform us, Psalm.
91.14, 16. Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him,
with long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation. That there is a
special Providence attending those who fear God, is the unanimous voice of all
the inspired Writers; and they all agree in this, that the eyes of the Lord run
to and fro through the world, to show himself strong in the behalf of those
whose heart is upright toward him, as it is said, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. And with
respect to this special Providence it is that Solomon gives this advice to the
Disciple of wisdom, Prove. 3.1, 2. My son forget not my Law, and let thy heart
attend unto my commandment, for length of days, and long life, and peace shall
they add unto thee. By this special Providence a man is preserved from
numberless dangers, which otherwise would crush both health and life. Its this
blesses his meat and drink to him, be it more or less, wholesome or unwholesom,
removes from it what is noxious and pestilential, gives it a nutritive power,
and many times preserves him without meat and drink; for man does not live by
bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, as we are
told Matthew. 4.4.

However, this serious remembrance of our Creator, or which is all one, the
fear of God makes a man immortal, more effectually than Books and Monuments, or
Pillars, or Tombstones, or Fabrics, or Pyramids. For these only keep up an
empty name; but this conscientious fear makes the man himself immortal. Such a
person leads a happy life here, and his natural death makes no other alteration
in that happy life, than that it gives it greater brightness, greater
splendor, greater luster, and adds to it higher degrees of happiness. And of
this Fear, or serious Remembrance of God, it may be said, as it was of the
Bread which came down from Heaven, that it is Meat indeed, and Drink indeed,
and he that feeds upon it shall never die. For such a man's Soul, which is the
principal part of him, at the end or period of his days here, is only
transplanted into a richer ground, and conveyed to a nobler Soil, to better
Land, to a larger House, to more pleasant Mansions, and to a more ample
Theater: And being removed from hence, it does not change its nature, but only
her abode; from a Prison, from a Cave, from a Cottage, from a Dungeon, to a
more spacious Palace, where she has more Elbow-room, and like a Bird freed
from her Cage, acts with greater liberty, and sings with greater cheerfulness.
And her Body too, sleeps only for a few years, lies down upon a bed of Turf,
till the Soul is thoroughly settled in her new Habitation, and then even that at
the sound of the Archangels Trumpet shall awake to a happy immortality, as
Christ assures us, Job. 11.26.

And though it is true that many who sincerely remember their Creator, and fear
him, are cut off in the prime and flower of their age, and live but a short
time in this world, yet that early removal contradicts not the natural tendency
of the Fear of God. Still this is the natural course of that stream, and if it
met with no extraordinary stop, it would certainly prolong life even here upon
earth. But God for special reasons puts a stop sometimes to its natural course,
as he hindered the Sun from going down in Joshua's time, and from shining out at
noonday in our Savior's time, and the Iron from sinking in Elishah's time,
and the Fire from scorching in Nebucadnezzar's time, and the greedy Whale from
consuming or devouring Jonas. These creatures, had they been left to their,
natural course, would have acted otherwise; but an Almighty hand interposing
its power and influence, they were restrained in their natural bent and
inclination. So the Fear of God, though its natural tendency be to prolong
health and life, yet God does not so tie himself to the natural course of
things, but that sometimes, for reasons best known to himself, he may and does
make an alteration in that natural tendency: nor is that alteration any just
discouragement from the Fear of God, no more than a man's being sometimes
disappointed in his designs is a discouragement from prosecuting his Trade, or
Calling, or Profession. So that when God makes an alteration in the natural
course or tendency of this holy Fear, and cuts off men that conscientiously
remember him, in the prime and slower of their age, it may be either to advance
his own Glory, or to accelerate their happiness, or to keep them from the evil
to come, or to chastise their Relatives, who were too fond of these outward
Comforts, or to wicked men, who as they are by the death of such persons
deprived of examples and monitors, and means of grace, so through just
Judgment of God, thereby hardened in their sins, which brings on their
everlasting misery. Though if we consider the happiness of the next world, in
conjunction with this present, as it makes one entire thread or web in a person
that truly fears God, still there can be no greater truth than that the Fear of
God prolongs life, for it prolongs it to all Eternity. Not to mention that
abundance of persons who seem to fear God, do fear him very imperfectly, or not
exactly according to the Rules before laid down, which may be the reason, why
they do not see this promise fulfilled to them in all the measures of its
latitude.

It is confessed, that even men that do not trouble their heads about Religion,
Swearers, Drunkards, Atheists, Blasphemers, Beasts and Brutes, live to a
prodigious age sometimes without the Fear of God, yet is not therefore the
conscientious man that lives long in the world a loser by his fear; for though
he that fears God, and he that lives in contempt of his Laws, do both enjoy the
same blessing, even long Life, yet there is a vast difference in the causes of
this Blessing; for in the former Blessing comes from a Father's hand, in the
other from a Judges In the former it is a gift of love in the other of mere
generosity In the former it comes by promise, in the other by a large and
diffusive bounty. To the former it is given, that he may be a blessing to his
Neighbors, to the other, that he may be a Scourge and Rod to those who live
near him. In the former it is an effect of virtue in the other of natural
constitution. The former receives it because of his universal Obedience the
other has may be done some little inconsiderable service to Gods Church or
Servants, which God scorns to leave unrewarded, and as the service will bear no
bigger reward, so God puts him of with a blessing of his left hand.

And from hence it follows, that there must be a great difference in the
comforts of this blessing. In the former this long Life is in order to greater
Mercy; in the other, in order to his greater condemnation. In the former, like
a gentle River, which has run many miles and enriched the neighboring
Grounds, it mingles at last with the vast Ocean of Glory; in the other, though
like the River Jordan it has extended its course a great way, yet falls at
last into the dead Sea, into endless howlings. In the former it is a spiritual
Blessing as well as a temporal; in the other only a temporal. In the former it
is a sign that a great deal more is to be added to it; in the other, that after
that, all his Blessings are at an end, and that he shall have no more.

By all which it appears, that this Remembrance of God is no useless thing. It
is profitable to the Body as well as the Soul; and by what I have said, it
should seem it is the best Physic in the world. So wisely has God ordered his
Laws and Precepts, that they signally advance the welfare not only of the
inward, but outward man too. O the blindness of poor Mortals that will not see
this truth! How calmly, how sweetly, how contentedly may a man live with the
Fear of God, while sin, and pleasing his extravagant Lusts hurries the sinner
on to a thousand troubles and inconveniences! Nay, the unwary man sees how his
sinful courses, his drinking, and keeping ill Company breaks his Estate, his
Body, and his Health, and perhaps the Heart of his Wife and Children. The Fear
of God would preserve all these, yet the heedless wretch will take no warning.
Do these men believe another life do you think? No, if they did, they durst as
well eat fire, as we say, as venture upon sins, to which the Almighty Judge
has affixed damnation by an irreversible Decree. But what do we talk of
another life? If their temporal interest, and the interest of their Bodies, and
Estate, and health cannot make them wiser, I know nothing but feeling the
flaming anger of a just God, that will do it. To see men run into death and
misery, and diseases, as if they were angry with their lives, and took it ill
that God has given them a being in the world, what can a man think but that
they are distracted and out of their wits? But it were well if their madness
were invincible, and that they could not help it; but now have they both seen
and known, and might prevent their danger and will not; therefore their sin
remains.

But I will not stand upon the long and healthy life, which the Remembrance of
God or a holy Fear of his name procures in this life. I will carry this motive
farther, as this long Life relates to everlasting and endless life. Behold
Christians, this prize, this mighty Commodity we set before you in his Name who
has sent us to be Ambassadors for Christ Jesus. Men, Fathers, and Brethren,
and ye that fear God, give audience: The God of our Fathers, the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has raised his Son Jesus
from the dead, who has brought life and immortality to light. This immortal
Life he offers you, and by us entreats you to accept of it. He does promise
you, that you shall live eternally in his Bosom, in the Sunshine of his Favor,
in the Beams of his inaccessible Light. He does promise you, that you shall
live eternally without Fear, without Want, without Poverty, without Trouble,
without Sickness, without Care, and without Anxiety. He does promise you, that
vou shall live eternally in all the Ease, and Plenty, and Prosperity that
reason can desire. He does promise you all, this, not that he stands in need of
you, or is in distress for your company, or that this eternal Life lies like a
Drug upon his hands, or that he knows not what to do with it. No, but his
Almighty, Immense, and infinite love moves him to offer all this; and by way of
exchange, he requires not an Oblation of the Beasts of the field, or of a
thousand Rivers of Oil; but all he expects at your hands, is this early
Remembrance of your Creator; a Remembrance without which you cannot live happy
here, without which you can never relish that eternal Life he does promise you,
without which you are incapable of conversing with him, and without which it is
impossible you should ever be his Friends and Favorites. And have you no
ambition to live as long as Angels live? Are you so low-spirited that you have
no desire to live eternally? Ye young people, ye are loath to die, behold, this
conscientious Remembrance of your God will make your days like the days of God,
whose Years do not fail, and who endures from one Generation to another. Ye
that are stricken in age, as old as ye are, ye are unwilling to die. If you are
loath to die, behold here is a Tree of Life, if you stretch forth your hand and
eat of this Tree, you shall live for ever. This Remembrance of God, this Fear
of his Name, is the true Antidote again Death, aye, and the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against you. And will ye refuse so great a Mercy, and a Pearl of
that inestimable value? Did any of the damned see you loath and unwilling to
embrace this offer, what strange Creatures would they take you to be? O then,
see that ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not that refused
him who spoke on Earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him
that speaks from Heaven, Heb. 12.21.

Sixthly. It is rational to believe, that if God were always in our thoughts,
we should not dare to sin. We put him out of our minds, are loath to reflect on
him, loath to think of him; or if he thrust himself into our Understandings, we
force him out again, and that is the reason why we venture to offend him. God
has done all that was fit for a wise Creator to do, to make us always
remember, and always think of him: His Impress and Stamp is upon every visible
and created Object. We see him in Heaven and in Earth. How can we look upon the
Sun, and not behold him by whose order he shines, and warms this Netherworld?
How can we view the Moon and Stars, and not see him that calls them all by
their names? He is to be seen in every Flower, in every Tree, in every sprig of
Herb, in every Shrub, in our Souls and Bodies; and whatever we touch or handle,
we may see him in whom, and for whom, and through whom are all things; and then
surely here are great opportunities to think of him, to have him in our minds,
and to keep him in our thoughts, and with that remembrance to banish all things
that are contrary or offensive to his Nature! But so stupid are the generality,
that though God as it were thrusts himself upon them, and has made the way to
forget him in a manner unpassable, yet they look not upon him, see him not,
pierce and dive no farther than the Shell or outward Rind, think only on the
Effect, and dis-regard the Cause, fix their eyes on what is before them, but
mind not him that is invisible. They can do it, but they will not, they have
reason given them to take notice of him, but they use it not. And while God is
not in all their thoughts, how should they fear, how should they stand in awe,
how should they be restrained from doing ill? Not thinking of him, they dread
him not. Taking no notice of his Majesty, and Greatness, and Power, and
Goodness, they pay him not that respect which is due to that everlasting Being.
Banishing him out of their minds, they reflect not on his Laws, do not mind his
threatenings, and remember not what the consequences of this neglect will be,
which makes them rush into sin, as a Horse rushes into the Battle. This is to
have eyes, and not to see; which as it is at first a man's sin, so it becomes
afterward his punishment, as Pharaoh's induration was first his crime, but
came to be sealed upon him afterward by a Decree from Heaven What a
Philosophical, or rather Angelical life might we lead if we would taste and see
in every thing, how sweet and how gracious the Lord is! This would not only
fright us from breaking his holy and wholesome Laws, but become a Treasury, a
Repository of admirable Comforts. This would qualify every affliction, give an
allay to our sorrows, mitigate every trouble, support us in distress, relieve
us in our wants, and direct us in perplexities. This would make us submit to
the divine Will in all things, and say with him, I was dumb and opened not my
mouth, because thou did it, Psalm. 39.9. This is to converse with God, and
never to want company. This way solitude may be improved, and he that wherever
he is, beholds the divine Wisdom, Goodness, and Power, which he may see in
every Animal, in his Meat, and Drink, and Clothing, but chiefly in his Reason,
can never be in distress for want of Company. For God is always with him, and
by seeing him in the various Objects before him, and admiring his powerful Arm,
and the excellent designs he has in these Dispensations, he does as it were
speak to him, address himself to him, and gets assurance that God is pleased
with him: For whosoever is wise and will observe these things, even they shall
understand the loving kindnesses of the Lord, Psalm. 107. ult.

Seventhly, Remember Now thy Creator. Sinner, it must be now or never. Thou
have no time but the present time. What is past and what is to come is out of
thy power. This is all the stock thou have: If thou neglect this, thou art not
sure thou shall have any more. Now when thou read these things; Now, when
thou hear these truths; Now, when these admonitions are suggested to thy
mind; Now, when the voice of God sounds in thine ears; Now is the time to give
earnest heed unto the message of Grace and Mercy. Now thy Memory serves, now
thy Reason is strong, now every thing invites thee to close with thy God, dare
to do it. Now is God ready to seal thy Pardon. Now he is willing to give thee
an Interest in his love. Now he calls, now he entreats, now thy Conscience
checks thee; Now thou have good inclinations, now thou may make thy self now
thou may be advanced to heavenly places. Now work, now labor, now resist,
now fight, now strive, now contend, now bestir thy self, now rise; now take
pains. now secure Gods loving kindness, and thy happiness.

After this life there is no Purgatory, no middle state, where the Prayers of
the living, or Masses said by Priests can atone for your past or former
Errors. They that can feed themselves with such Popish Dreams, or have any
opinion of these fancies of Nuns and Friars, must be woefully forsaken of God
and of their Reason. Neither St. Francis's Girdle, nor St. Simon Stocks, his
Scapulary, nor the Rosary of St. Dominick, nor all the Trinkets and Rellicks
the Roman Church does boast of, will do ye any service here. To hope for such
helps, contrary to Scripture, and ridiculous in the eyes of rational men, is an
argument of a distempered Brain, and unaccountable stupidity. Thou confessest
the Scripture to be the Word of God, and to contain the perfect Will of God;
and if so, God having revealed not one syllable of his intent of being
entreated by the Prayers of the living, or thine own after thy departure, why
should thou feed thy self with Wind and Air, or believe that when thy Now
has been neglected, thy Hereafter will save all. This is to play with
Religion, not to believe it, if now thou remembrest not the great work thou
have to do, thou only art, but live not. Thou have only a Being in the
world, but art a useless thing. Thou live not, except thou live in a sense
of the future account, and securest Gods favor, and the safety of thy Soul, by
departing from the way that leads to destruction. And if the Roman in Dio
thought no years part of his life, but those he had spent in retirement, and
conversing with God and himself, and therefore caused it to be engraven on his
Tombstone; Here lies Similius, who has been Seventy six years in the world,
but lived but Seven, what must be written on thy Monument who regardest not the
example Jesus, nor the lives of Saints, nor the Precepts of the Gospel, now in
this thy day? What must be written I say, on thy Monument, but that thou have
lived pondus utile terra; That thou have been a dead weight in the world, and
have not lived one day to the comfort and welfare of thy immortal Soul? This
present time is the, time that God prescribes thee to watch against sin, to
resist temptation, to get the ornament of Grace and Virtue. If thou fanciest
any other time may do better, thou reckonest without thy Host, buildest Castles
in the Air, and only deceivest thy self with pleasant Illusions. Who should
know it so well what time is fittest for this work as the all-wise God? Shall
thy shallow brain pretend to know better than he who made thy frame, or
considers and ponders things in the Balance of his eternal Wisdom? Can thou
imagine that a God bent so much upon thy good, would prescribe any thing
prejudicial to thy interest? Does he affirm, and protest, that the present time
is the best and only time, and dare thou contradict him, or act as if he were
mistaken, and thy choice were best? What insolence, what rudeness is this? and
if it were no sin, can any thing be more contrary to good manners? What time
would thou set apart for this necessary work? What! the age of infirmity, of
sickness, or of dotage? Go and offer it to thy Governor, and see whether he
will accept of such weak endeavors? Nay, art thou so fond of weak services,
that thou would expect none from thy Servant but when his strength fails
him? Will thou give that to God, which Man would scorn, and thy self do not
care for? Has thy God deserved so little at thy hand, that thou can serve
him so? Is this the return thou make him for the thousand Mercies he bestows
upon thee? Does he take care of thy Soul and Body with all his strength, and
shall such a crawling Worm refuse to offer him that which is found and whole?
Has he given his Son for thy ransom, broke down the Gates of Hell to free
such a slave as thou art from the Prison, and shall thou think much of
remembering him with all thy heart? Will thou make Bargains with him, as Pharaoh
did with the Children of Israel, and limit him how much he shall take at thy
hands? Can thou think so and be fearless of his anger! is Vengeance asleep,
or is his Justice, do thou think, sunk into a fatal slumber? Can God see
thee thus refractory, and forbear preparing his Arrows upon the Bow against
thee? Need he court his Servant to do his work, who has Flames enough to force
him to it? Will thou deal so basely with him who has acted so generously for
thy good? What mighty purchase does he get by thy remembering of him? Is it any
advantage to him when thou workest in his Vineyard? Is it not thy profit he
seeks? and shall he after all be scorned and under-valued for his pains? Have
thou any spark of Reason left, and do not thou blush at these doings?

What vanity, or what frenzy rather has possessed thy mind, that thou talkest
of being serious hereafter? Might not thou as well say, that thou will
forbear wholesome Food some years, and eat and drink hereafter? If thou would
not cheat thy Body in this manner, what hurt has thy Soul done thee that thou will wrong it thus? Must thy Body feed, and thy Soul be starved? Has not that
need of nourishment, as well as thy corruptible Flesh? Or do thou think that
thy Soul will be contented with the trash thou feedest thy Body with? Thy Soul
stands in need of the love of God, as much as thy Body does of meat and drink;
That Is her food as much as Bread is of the ignobler part? If she wants this she
dies, and falls a Prey to Wolves, to ravenous Birds, even to hellish Furies.
And shall so noble a Creature be undone for want of a little care?

Sinner! Do thou know what Salvation means? Is being happy for ever nothing?
Is it so light a thing that thou need deliberate, whether thou shall prepare
for it? When the Saints of old have left Father and Mother, and Lands and
Houses, and lost Life it self for it, do thou stand musing whether thou shall
accept of it upon the conditions of the Gospel? Art thou afraid of remembering
thy Creator, when everlasting Treasures depend upon the choice? Do thou
believe Salvation is the confluence of all Felicity, and do thou dread an
early consideration how thou shall arrive to it? Is it the Mercy that ever was
Mankind, and do not thou think it worth accepting upon any terms? Was it
purchased by the Blood of God, and shall thou think any thing too dear for it?
It is that which Angels wonder at, that God should condescend to take a handful
of dust and ashes into his bosom, and do not thou think it worth while to
enquire what thou shall do to be saved? Salvation! which to get, and to attain
to, St. Paul runs through Fire and Water, through Honor and Dishonor, through
a good Report and an evil Report, and counts all things dross and dung in
comparison of it, do thou prefer dross and dung and a sinful careless life
before it?

What a contempt do thou put upon God in valuing that so little which he
prizes at the highest rate? Do thou contemn God, and hope to escape? Do
thou make nothing of his Promises, and Threatenings, and think to go unpunished?
If thou allowest God to be a greater Prince than thy King, will he sit silent
do thou think while thou tramplest his Authority under thy feet? A temporal
Prince will not suffer himself to to be baffled thus, and can thou imagine
that a jealous God will connive at it? It Is true, God is merciful, but art thou
a fit Object of Mercy, that despisest the riches of his goodness? Will he have
mercy on a sinner, that had rather wallow in mire and dirt, than be washed, and
justified, and sanctified in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the
Spirit of our God? Why should he show mercy to a person that thinks his mercy a
buthen, and his kindness troublesome? It is Mercy that calls thee to remember
thy Creator now. It Is Mercy that would save thee from perishing in the Deluge
with ungodly men. It Is Mercy that would draw thee away from thy Vanities, from
thy admiration of the world, and from sinful compliances. It Is Mercy that
invites thee now to choose the better Part, and to lay up thy Treasure in
Heaven. If this Mercy be counted a drug, and instead of being prized, looked
upon as a thing needless, and impertinent, how shall Mercy plead for thee in
the last day? Or what apologies can Mercy make for a person that had rather
have the wrath of God than that Mercy for his portion? How must this please the
enemy of mankind, to see a Creature whom God would love, run away from him, and
instead of remembering his Creator, forget him and his Laws, which are his
Cordials and Restoratives? God surely cannot be pleased with it. He protests
against thy refusal. He complains of it, he sees the wrong thou do to thy
Soul, and seems even at a loss for a reason why thou will do so. He that puts
thee upon the neglect of this early and serious remembrance of thy God and
Creator, he it is that rejoices at it: His Agents thy evil Companions, may
rejoice at it; men as senseless as thy self may rejoice at it, but Angels
mourn, and all good men grieve to see thee so obstinate. The Devil only takes
delight in it: It does him good to think that the number of his Infernal
Companions will be increased by thy company. He lays Snares for thy Soul, and
is glad when thou art taken. His envy is gratified to see thee averse from this
early Fear of God. He was afraid thou would choose the Wisdom which is from
above; and to see thee choose that which is earthly and sensual, that is it,
which is some ease to him in his torments.

Why? will thou be worse than other Creatures? All other Creatures betimes
prosecute the end for which they are created, and will thou alone forget the
end for which thou came into the world? The end for which thou were created
was to seek the things which are above, and will thou directly contrary to that
design, and in that age too, which is most proper to do it in, like a Beast
seek the things which are below? Sure thou must take God to be some strangely
tame and easy Deity, that can see thee cross his Designs, reverse his
Intentions, and walk opposite to the scope of all his wonderful Works, and set
thy self against his Purposes in thy Creation, and sit down quietly under these
abuses.

Thou believe some persons in the world, why should not thou believe good
men, who have tried this early remembrance of God, found the greatest comfort,
and the strongest support in it, and can testify by experience, that nothing
is so beneficial, so pleasant, or so useful, as an early self-denial; such men
are too honest to deceive thee, they dread lying, as thou do the severities
of Religion; and they would not for a world assert and affirm these things, but
that they know these ways to be ways of pleasantness, and these Paths end in
peace. Indeed that is the happy Exit of these ways, and when so many thousand
wise men have said, and do say so; O Remember them which have spoken to you in
the Name of the Lord, whose faith follow, knowing the end of their conversation.

Eighthly, Our Remembering our Creator here is the way to have God remember us
hereafter. It is not with him as with Pharaoh's Butler, who being lifted up to
his former place, forgot what Joseph had done for him. His turn was served, and
the others kindness signified nothing to him now. God remembers what has been
done here for his Honor and Glory, and this Remembrance he will at last
express in rewards suitable to his Greatness and Majesty. Darius, before he sat
on the Throne of his Ancestors, had received a Garment, as a Present from
Syloson. He remembered it when he was King, and made him Governor of Samus.
Thus God will remember our remembrance of him here. Not that we ascribe
gratitude to God, which would suppose him indebted to man, a thing impossible;
For Who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed to him again? Romans
11.35. but his remembrance of our Services is gratuitous: He remembers them,
not because they deserve it, but because he will, not that they merit it, but
that he is pleased to do so. It is not their worth, but his goodness; not their
intrinsic value, but his abundant Mercy that moves him to this remembrance.
The last day, the great day of Judgment, is that day of remembrance, and even
a cup of cold water given to a Disciple in the name of a Disciple, shall be
remembered then, Matthew. 10.42. Rejoice Christians, for God is not unrighteous to
forget your work and labor of love, which ye have showed toward his Name, in
that ye have ministered to the Saints, and do minister, Heb. 6.10. Your Tears,
your Prayers, your Alms, your Feeding the Hungry, your Clothing the Naked, your
Visiting the Sick, your going to Prisoners, will all be remembered one day, not
one of these works shall be forgotten. God sets them down in his Book, and they
shall be proclaimed in the last day. The Chronicles shall be opened, and the
faithful Mordecai shall be remembered; though for many years his good works have
lain dormant, yet at last they shall be brought forth as the light, and his
Righteousness as the noon day. There is nothing that Christ seems to remember
in the last day more effectually than our bounty to the poor and needy, and the
way and manner of his remembering it, is lofty and great. Come ye blessed of my
Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world,
Matthew. 25.34. He remembers our Charity here, if it be great and signal, and
from a cheerful heart, For the liberal Soul shall be made fat, and he that
scatters in a charitable way, increases; and of this, experience is a
sufficient witness; so that it may well be said, that Almsgiving is the
gainfullest art, and the right course to thrive. But after death God remembers
it more solemnly. I shall not lay any great stress here upon the Examples of
Stephen King of Hungary, and Oswald sometime King of England, of whom it is
reported, that their Right hands after after their death never putrified; but
while the rest of their Bodies mouldred into dust, this part was preserved
sound and entire, because in their lifetime they had made much use of their
Right hand in bestowing their Goods on the indigent. These may be reckoned
among Gods miraculous Providence, which though they appear but seldom, yet may
serve to confirm our Faith, of Gods remembering hereafter what we do here for
the household of Faith. Of this nature is the famous story of Euagrius, Vid.
Mosch. prat. Spir. c. 195.
recorded by credible Witnesses. This Heathen Philosopher, being a great
acquaintance of Synesius Bishop of Cyrene, the Bishop frequently argued with
him about the truth of the Christian Religion, and was often at him to receive
Baptism, but all in vain. One day the Bishop being very earnest with him to use
no further delays or excuses, the Philosopher told him, there were several
things in the Christian Religion which his reason could never digest, and among
the rest these two, That men shall rise at last with the same Bodies that they
carried about them here on earth; And that what a man gives to the poor here,
God will repay it him in the other world. The Bishop told him that all this was
very true, and that they had all the reason in the world to believe it;
insomuch, that what with the Bishops confidence, and what with the Arguments he
used, the Philosopher at last was persuaded to be baptized; and though he
wavered much in his belief, yet the Bishop thought it convenient to wash him
with Water in the Name of the Lord Jesus, not doubting but in a little time he
would come to a full assurance of Faith. Some weeks being past, the Philosopher
comes to Synesius and deposites three hundred pounds in his hand, ordering him
to distribute it to the poor; yet with this Proviso, that Synesius should give
him a Bill under his hand, that Christ should repay it him in the other world.
The Bishop cheerfully writ him a Bill, and subscribed it, and Euagrius goes
home. Not long after the Philosopher falls sick, and finding death approaching,
calls his two Sons to him, charging them to put the Bill Synesius had given him
betwixt his fingers, and so bury him, which was done accordingly. Three days
after his death a Ghost in Euagrius's shape appears to Synesius by night, bids
him not be afraid, but gives him thanks, assuring him, that the Bill was
abundantly paid, orders him to go to his Grave, and in the Coffin he should
find his Receipt subscribed with his own hand. Synesius astonished at the
sight, and more at the Spirits words, immediately repairs to the Philosophers
Sons, asks them what they had done to their Father? They replied, that they had
performed his will, and according to his order put a Bill he named to them
betwixt his fingers. The Bishop desirous to know the utmost of it, causes the
Grave and Coffin to be opened, and there finds the Philosophers acknowledgment
of having received what Synesius had promised him, and his name Euagrius
written under it. The Spectators wondering at the mighty Providence, run
presently to Church, and sing a Kirieleison or Lord have mercy upon us.

Though this passage may be of some use; yet we have a surer word of Prophecy
to establish our belief of Gods remembering our acts of Charity in the life to
come. He that is the Truth, and the Life, has given us so many promises of it,
that there is no room left to doubt of it.

Nor is it only our Alms that God will remember in the next life, but all the
good we have done: Our Repentance, our turning from our evil ways, our contempt
of the world, our contemplations of the future Inheritance, our love to God,
our Prayers and Praises, our Obedience, our watchfulness over our Hearts, our
endeavors to convert and comfort our Neighbor, the Admonitions and
Exhortations we gave them, the Mortifications we used, the pains we took to
subdue our Lusts, our attempts to follow the best Examples, our self-denials,
our Temperance, our Meekness, our Humility, our Sighs and Groans under the
burden of our sins, our hunger and thirst after Righteousness, our
peaceableness, our sufferings for Righteousness sake, our doing his Will, our
self-resignation, our affection to his Ordinances, our delight in the House of
God, our relish of his Word, our frequent use of the holy Communion, and our
readiness to every good word and work. There is a Register kept in Heaven of
all these performances: Men may forget them, and our Neighbors may take no
notice of them when we are dead and gone, but God does not forget them. He
takes notice of them here, and he will take notice of them hereafter. He Will
remember them, to crown them, to reward them, to glorify them.

In the Parable of Barlaam and Josaphat there is mention made of a Country,
Damasc. Hist. Barl. and Jos.
where every year the people choose a new King, and whoever is chosen reigns for
a year, and after that is banished into some howling Desert, or barren Island
where he perishes with hunger. A silly fellow being chosen one year, surprised
with the sudden alteration of his fortune, gave himself over to all manner of
debaucheries, and spared no cost, no pains to satiate his lustful desires and
brutish appetite; the present plenty made him forget the years of sorrow, that
were to ensue, and when his year expired, he was sent according to custom to
the unfortunate Island, where he spent and ended his days most miserably.
Another year a wiser man than ordinary being elected by the multitude, he began
to use his Royalty with great moderation, and the thoughts of the dismal years
that were to come, made him reflect how he should live when all the present
pomp and grandeur should vanish. Having therefore a Counselor of great
prudence about him, and demanding of him what he should do to make his future
solitatary life easy to him, he received this advice, To engross what
treasures he could during his splendid Fortune, and send it away by trusty
Officers to the place he was to be in till he died. He did so, and when he was
forced to quit all his magnificence, and commanded away into a desolate
Country, his Exile proved his happiness, and he lived in great content to his
dying day.

He that remembers his kind Creator here, sends his goods away before him into
another world, makes provision for his Soul, when it enters into Lands unknown
and invisible, and by the Carriages that arrive there, the man is known and
remembered by God and his holy Angels. His good works mount up to Heaven before
him. These keep him from starving when he quits his accommodations here. These
are the food he lives on when he leaves this world; not that their natural
strength and virtue is so great, as to give him eternal Life, but being
perfumed with the merits of the Son of God, they are remembered by God with
Praises and Commendations, and made everlasting food.

Ninthly, Notwithstanding all these encouragements, we cannot but with grief
behold how little God is remembered by young and old; and though he be in the
midst of us, and by his Providence upholds and supports us every moment, how
wretchedly he is forgotten by most men. It Is true, he is not so forgotten that
his Name is never so much as mentioned; some will do that if it were only in
their Oaths and Imprecations. But how few will or have courage to remember him
in their actions, and think; This God has forbid, and I must not do it; this
is against his Law, and I must not venture upon it; this clashes with his Word,
and I must avoid it; this will displease his purer eyes, and I must abhor it;
or this is acceptable to him, and I will embrace it; this is to act like the
Children of God, and I will follow them; this is my great Master has expressly
commanded, and I will obey. All other remembrances without this are
Complements, not Devotions. This Remembrance God values more than a thousand
formal Devotions, repeated as Papists do their Ave's. This is to remember him
rationally, like persons who understand the right use and end of their reason.
He that does not so, forgets him; and whatever his pretenses may be of
remembering him, God looks upon it as oblivion while in his conversation abroad,
and at home his greatness and holiness is not thought of; and those that forget
him thus, cannot expect God should remember them in the day of Recompense as a
Father does his Children. Great will be the terror, when the thoughtless Soul
comes to appear before an all-seeing God, and greater yet, when to such
forgetful sinners he shall say, I know you not; for so we are told Matthew. 7.23.
Then will I profess unto them, I never knew you; Depart from me ye that work
iniquity. How! I never knew you? How can any thing be hid from him, when it is
expressly said, Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the
world, Acts 15.18. True, he knows them as his works, but not as his Friends. He
knows them as Traitors, but not as faithful Subjects. He knows them as
Creatures, but not as his Children. He knows them as Prodigals, but not as
Heirs of Heaven. He knows them as Strangers, but not as Domestics. How should
he know them when they have lost the Character of his Sheep, the mark whereby
the Flock must be distinguished, which is to hear his Voice? And what a dismal
condition must that man be in, whom God will take no notice of, and whom he
does not remember, that ever he was of his Family! If God knows him not, no
Angel in Heaven will know him, no Saint, no Spirit made perfect will know him.
He is shut out from Heaven, excluded from the best and noblest Company; no
Society will receive him, but that of hellish Spirits. You may laugh at these
Terrors now, but when they come to pass, what wise man would be under your
circumstances? As a Father plagued with a disobedient Son, forgets that ever he
had such a Child, so God will forget that ever you had any relation to him. He
will remember your sins indeed, he will remember how you have fought against him,
how you have doted upon the world, how you have pleased your Flesh, and counted
his Laws as strange things, how you have slighted his thunders, and looked upon
his offers of Mercy as words in course; How you have enslaved your Souls to
your Lusts, and made the Mistress wait upon a pitiful Hagar; how you have gone
on in sin when your hearts have smitten you for it, and thought your jolly life
would never be at an end; how you have loved unrighteousness more than
goodness, and turned the truth of God into a lie; how you have thought the
duties of Religion below you, and put off God with the lame and with the blind
for sacrifice; how soon you have been weary of serving him, and how you have
looked upon your duties, as things needless and unprofitable, how you have had
men's persons in admiration because of advantage, and hearkened more to the
persuasions of a Sot, than to his wholesome Counsels; how dear your credit and
honor has been to you, and how you have valued it above his honor and glory;
how you have derided him that has reproved you in the Gate, and been wise to
do evil; how you have made the riches of the world the great end of all your
endeavors, and set your affections upon things perishable and inconstant.

This he will remember with a witness, and none of all the hard Speeches you have
vented against him, or the power of godliness shall be forgotten: But this
Remembrance will be your misery, and his thinking on your faults and wilful
errors, your condemnation. Flatter not your selves, that once you did remember
his Will, and Laws, and Mercies with great sincerity, though afterward tempted
by the Devil, and enticed by the frailty of your Flesh, you departed from the
holy Commandment delivered to you; for he has made already a Proviso against
that Plea, and protested, that if the righteous man turn away from his
righteousness and commit iniquity, and does according to all the abominations
that the wicked man does, shall he live? all his righteousness that he has
done shall not be mentioned, in his trespass that he has trespassed, and in
his sin that he has sinned, in them shall he die, Ezekiel. 18.24., He Will forget
all your little Services, and your petty hypocritical Devotions; indeed they
are not worth remembering, fitter to be scorned than to be remembered. To
remember them so, as to crown them with bliss, is a thing they are not capable
of, for Love, the great principle and sap that must feed them, is wanting.

Suppose you were in danger of losing all you have, even life it self, and
stood in need of some great Princes assistance who had formerly expressed more
than ordinary kindness to you, and should he upon your address turn away his
face from you, not only make himself strange to you, as Joseph did to his
Brethren by way of trial, but be really so, what a fright and confusion would
you be in? Behold God is that puissant Prince, who has formerly courted you by
Kindnesses, and Mercies, and Entreaties. If you forget him in your Conversation
here, you will certainly be in danger of losing, not only all your Goods, but
eternal Life to boot. Before this powerful Prince, who alone can save you from
perishing, you must stand ever long, his help and assistance will be more
needful and advantageous to you than all the Advocates that Heaven and Earth
can afford. And if this immortal King, instead of remembering you, shall frown
upon you, be strange to you, acknowledge no such forgetful Creatures for
Members of his Family, or Objects of his paternal care and tenderness: Can any
Language express the astonishment your Souls will be in? when he shall put you
in mind of all the sins you have forgotten, and of all the secret Follies you
kept concealed from the world and the eyes of men, when he shall remember, and
lay open all that you have buried in oblivion, and make the wounds you gave to
your Souls, and skinned them over, bleed afresh, how dumb, how pale, how
surpised will ye be at the tremendous Charge! O consider this ye that forget
God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver, Psalm. 50.22.

But after all, methinks this Discourse is incomplete, except I add something
concerning our Deceased Brother, whose death has brought us hither. Though I
had no personal acquaintance with him, yet I have some reason to believe that
the account given me of him is impartial, and agreeable to truth. He was, it
seems, a person faithful in his Generation, a man of Conscience, a pious
Christian, a good Churchman, a loving Brother, and an excellent Servant. Only
of his Death it may be said as David said of a far greater man: Did the Lad die
as a fool dies? Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters, but
as a man falls before wicked men, so fellest thou. In a word, Murdered he
was, by men brutish and barbarous; and who, like the Judge in the Gospel,
neither feared God, nor regarded man. I will not be too inquisitive into the
reasons of this Providence, though it be natural enough when such accidents
befall good men, to wonder at the strangeness of the Dispensation. But when we
see a good Prophet killed by a Lion for a mere mistake, as it appears to us;
and Josiah an excellent Prince, slain in battle for a rash act; and an Vzzah
struck dead upon the spot for stretching forth his hand to uphold the tottering
Ark, all admirable men, and whose Salvation we do not question, we need not
wonder that Providence has permitted a Murder to be committed upon this
innocent person; for as in the aforesaid examples, their violent death was
only a temporal affliction, such as sicknesses and other Diseases are, so the
accident in our deceased Friend was of the same nature, and such calamities in
good men do but help and advance them the sooner to their everlasting harbor.
And yet I cannot altogether excuse our Brother here departed. For as the
Murder was acted in a public Fair, where great disorders, rudenesses, and
insolences are committed, and excesses, and vain Shows are all the
entertainment, so it is probable, and I fear, that when he went to this place,
he ventured into one which he had no lawful call to be at. The Primitive
Bishops and Christians were very much against such vain and foolish Shows, and
forbid their Disciples to frequent them; and as Peter fell by going into the
High Priests Hall, so it might be very just with God to let so sad a Providence
befall our deceased Friend, to give warning to other good men to keep ever in
Gods ways, that they may be confident of the Angels bearing them up in their
hands, lest they dash their foot against a stone. But though there might be
inadvertency, and infirmity, in our deceased Brothers going to a place he had
nothing to do at; to be sure it was only a single act, not a habit of juvenile
vanity; and though he was thereby deprived of the farther comforts of this
Life, yet that can be no impediment to his enjoyment of a better; for God
judges of us not by an accidental incogitancy, but by the stream and current of
our lives. His mortal wounds, though procured and caused by very bad
instruments, yet did not put him into a rage and passion, but he freely forgave
his Murderers, and like St. Steven prayed that God would not lay this sin to
their charge, and when he had said so he fell asleep. His death is a Sermon to
us all; and though he be dead, yet he calls to us in Christ's language, Watch
therefore, for ye know not when your Lord comes, whether in the evening, or at
midnight, or at cock crowing. and what I say unto you I say unto all, watch.

THE PRAYER.
GReat, Glorious, and Incomprehensible God! with thee is terrible Majesty;
touching thy Essence* we cannot find it out; thou art excellent in Power, in
Judgment, and in plenty of Justice. Thy ways are always equal, and the most
piercing, as well as envious eye can spy no fault in thy proceedings. Thou art
infinitely pure and holy, and the Light, thou art decked withal, admits no
spots, no variableness, no shadow of turning: Thou art the most worthy Object
for my thoughts and memory to fix upon. Thou deservest to be remembered in all
the actions of my life. And to forget thee, without whom I cannot breathe is an
Indignity, I cannot answer, I have too long passed by thee as if I had no
relation to thee. I have been able to remember a frivolous story of my
Neighbor, and my memory has served me well enough, to preserve a wrong or
injury done to my Name and Person; but thy loving kindnesses and gracious
Providence, and what ever concerns my everlasting welfare, I have suffered to
slip out of my mind. How many years have I spent in the world without any
serious thoughts of the great mystery of Godliness? Thou have given me Line
upon Line, and Precept upon Precept, and how like water have I suffered them to
be spilt on the ground! I have looked upon my remembering thee as a thing
indifferent, which I might observe or neglect at my pleasure? I have lived thou
know, as if the world had been the only object of my hopes and desires! my
best and golden days, how have I squandred them away as if they were things too
precious to be consecrated to thy service! How vain has my mind been! How has
it ranged and roved, and fluttered up and down among the contents and comforts
of this present life! How greedily has it applied it self to these fading
Flowers, and thought, that here lay all the sweetness I could hope for! How
late do I begin to love thee! How late do I begin to be wise! Had I improved
the Talents thou have given me betimes, as soon as I was capable to understand
what Religion and an everlasting interest meant, what good might I have done!
How many might I have drawn by my example to thy pleasant ways! How great a
portion of thy love and favor have I lost! and how much earlier might I have
enjoyed the influences of thy Charity! How justly might thou have doomed me
to a reprobate mind, or struck me dead in my vanities! I remember Lord, how
thou have called, and I have refused; how thou have stretched forth thy hands
unto me, and I have not regarded! How justly might thou laugh now at my
calamity, and mock when my fear comes; when my fear comes as desolation, and my
destruction like a Whirlwind! But O my God, in the midst of thine anger
remember Mercy! Remember O Lord, thy tender Mercies, and thy loving Kindnesses,
for they have been ever of old! Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my
Transgressions; according to thy mercy remember thou me for thy goodness sake,
O Lord! Good and upright is the Lord, therefore will he teach sinners in the
way. O my God! I am dull, I am ignorant, I have stood in the way of sinners. O
teach thou me, teach me to remember thee at my lying down, and mine uprising.
Teach me to remember thee in my going out, and in my coming in! Let thy
remembrance for the future be very sweet to me, and let me never think of thee
but with pleasure and delight. Let me forget what is behind me, and put me
always in mind of the recompense that is before me. Call not my sins to
remembrance; and as for my transgressions, forget them, and cast them behind
thy back. Teach me to remember what thou have done for me, and make that
remembrance powerful to engage me to gratitude and obedience. In death there is
no remembrance of thee, and who will give thee thanks in the Grave? The living,
the living, they shall praise thee. O let my life be a continual remembrance of
thee. Morning, Evening, and at Noon, let me remember thee; and in the Night let
my song be of thee, who art the God of my Salvation. Let me remember thy love,
and how thou have humbled thy self for my sake. I am apt to forget thee, O
refresh thou my memory with a sense of thy goodness; and when the world would
drive any serious thoughts out of my mind, keep them in, O Lord, by thy mighty
power, and make them agreeable to my Memory and Understanding. Remember how
frail I am, and uphold me with thy free Spirit. Forget me not, O my God, though
I have forgotten thee. Deal not with me according to mine iniquities, neither
reward me according to my transgressions. Remember thy promise unto the
penitent, and how graciously thou have offered Pardon and Salvation to those
that turn from their evil ways. O God, it is the desire of my Soul, and the
real purpose of my Heart, to turn to thee, to seek thy face, to walk in thy
ways, and to bid farewell to all the sinful Pleasures of this life. Put me in
mind of all the Motives, and Arguments thou have given me to make my Calling
and Election sure. When they wear out in my Mind, write them there afresh, and
renew them still, that being ever before me* they may lead me to thy holy Hill:
O bring to my remembrance every Precept and every Duty I am to perform, and
when ever I am to perform any, say unto me, call to me, This is the way, walk
in it, and turn neither to the right nor to the left, then shall I praise thee
with joyful Lips, and give thanks at the remembrance of thy Holiness, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom, with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and
glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

