THE REWARD of the WISE: AND THE Fruitful Christians FUTURE BLESSEDNESS.

OPENED At the late Funeral of that Piously Wise and Faithful, Fruitful Servant
of God and of our Lord Jesus, Mr. Thomas Moore of Whittlesey, Interred at the
Church in Coleman-Street July 8. 1672.

By John Horn of Lin-Regis in the County of Norfolk.

Who is as the Wise man, and who knows the Interpretation of a thing? a man's
Wisdom makes his face to shine, and the boldness (or strength) of his face
shall be changed, Eccles. 8.1. The Wise shall inherit glory, but shame shall be
the promotion of Fools, Prove. 3.35. The Fruit of the Righteous is a Tree of
Life, and he that wins Souls is Wise, Prove. 11.30. Qui in Ecclesiae regnum
parando constabiliendoque fidel^ ^^navarint operam, pro modo fructus quem
attu^erunt in vinea Domini glory and h^nore coronabuntur in regno coelesti.
Eras. in Lucae, 19. London, Printed for Benjamin Southwood at the St^ next to
Sarjeants Inn in Chancery Lane. 1672.

TO THE READER. ESPECIALLY, Those of mine, or the Deceaseds Friends and
Acquaintance.
Christian Readers, Brethren and Friends;
IN this Discourse, here presented to thee thou have the commendations the
heavenly Wisdom, the Original, ^ountain and Author of which is Christ himself,
and God in him by his holy Spirit and the useful^ (...) advantage of which
unconceivable (...) what set before thee, ^ith the acts (...) ^^^^cises of it
(...) rent in us, the way to attain it, and how to use it, and what the reward
and recompense of those that obtain and rightly improve it for the glorifying
of God, and good of their Neighbou^ things than which what can be of so great
concernment to thee? or what is there (...) the whole Scripture more commended
(...) thy choice and industry? For the pr^ of Wisdom is above Rubies, and
(...) thou can desire is not to be compa^ with her. This is that, that makes
(...) that have it differ, both from the br^ creatures, and from all other men,
(...) being destitute thereof, are both in (...) and death in far worse
condition (...) state than they: For without know^ the soul is not good now,
Prove. 19 (...) and dying without wisdom it perish (...) for ever, Job 4.20,
21. Whereas (...) that attain it, and use it as is here (...) rected, reap
thereby immortality (...) eternal glory: where these things (...) neglected,
what do men but trifle a^^ their times in vanity, bring their (...) (...) an
end unprofitably, and in the issue ^e down in everlasting misery? For ^ther
they pursue after and please themselves with the counterfeit of wisdom, the
wisdom of this World, and Science falsely so called, which having the name of
wisdom, gulls and cheats abundance, as as if it were the thing it self (like
as the Romish Harlot does with her having the name of the Church) because men
find, or fancy some secret content and pleasure therein to their animal soul at
present, and it procures some respect and luster with men, which at Death at
furthest is extinct and vanishes as to any benefit to the Soul departed; or
else the honors of this world they otherwise court, or its riches or
pleasures, which at the present finds them business with care and toil to get
or keep them, and at length leaves them to lie down in poverty, and sorrow, and
contempt with God, and all his Holy ones for ever: from all which evils the
Heavenly Wisdom will preserve its Friends and Followers, and fill them with
the true riches and pleasures, and advance them to the highest and enduring
Honors. Such are the contents of this ensuing Treatise, with other matters
intermixed tending to excite thee to the study and practice of Piety and
Godliness; a Treatise occasioned by the Death and Burial of the eminently wise
and pious man, Mr. Thomas Moore of Whittlesey in the Isle of Ely. To the
preaching whereof (as to most of its contents) and so to the writing hereof
occasioned thereby, I may seem in a sort to have been somewhat signally
designed and directed of God; considering by how unexpected, but yet gracious,
providence I was excited and encouraged to go up to London, where for some
time he had lain sick, or dying: how opportunely, I with my honest companion
(Mr. Thomas Gonvile, whose unthought of coming and company gave me such
encouragement) arrived there to be there at his end; the way made for my
preaching, and beside all those, how after a whole days thoughtfulness, and
some part of (...) ensuing nights, about what Text to ^each that might suit the
occasion. After I had committed the matter to Gods direction, and my self to
rest, upon my awaking He brought this Text I ^reated on suddenly to my mind:
than which I think the whole Bible affords not ^ne more suitable to the person
and occasion. As if God by all these things would signify, that He would not
have (...) faithful, diligent and useful a servant of his, as the Deceased was,
to go (...) his Grave in silence and obscurity; but that some instructions
should be given to ^hers, as he had often instructed others, and that from a Text
that might best ^it his worth, and the account God made ^f him. But why God was
pleased to ^rder this service to so unworthy and un(...) a one for it as I, I
cannot say, but (...) it pleased him, and I take it as a favor ^^om him, and
honor to me, that I ^ight, who was none of the least enga^d for his love and
helpfulness to me, perform this office for him, of whom i^ may be said, that
his name (among the justs) shall be had in everlasting remembrance: However
(...) found such fare as many his betters, (...) Christ himself, and his holy
Apostles, and Prophets. Of Christ himself we find the people of the world had
this account; Some said he is a good man, others said nay, but he deceives the
people Joh. 7.12. Yea and many of his disciples taking offense, Went back an^
walked no more with him, Joh. 6.66 Such was this man's repute and fare wit^ men
also. They that knew him, an^ were acquainted with him, knew that (...) was a
good man; and so he was also reputed by many that had less acquaintan^ and
intimacy with him. But some the like no Religion, or none beyond the common
imposed Form, might be too read to reproach him, because more religion than
they liked on: Yea and some men Zeal for their opinions about Election and
Reprobation, so as to reject as (...) error the extent of Christ's Death to all
^en; not unlike the men of the straitest ^ect of Religion among the Jews, who
were Christ's fiercest opposers, accounted Him a Decived person, and a Deceiver
of others. And how should they do otherwise, while they judge themselves the
only Orthodox! Seeing he was a great Assertor and Opener of the extent of
Christ's Death, and of the grace of God in Christ, toward the world of Mankind,
and jumped not with them in their frame of thoughts, about Gods Electing and
Rejecting: yea and asserted and urged the sufficiency in that Grace of God
toward all men in the hearty belief, knowledge, and obedience of it, for
producing in men, all that is necessary to their Salvation; laying that as the
bottom doctrine from whence all others rightly flow, and receive light for the
right understanding and improvement of them: yea both Promises, Threatenings,
Instructions, Reproofs, the Doctrines of Repentance from Dead Works, Faith
toward God, Baptismes, and laying on of Hands, the Resurrection, and eternal
Judgment^ Election and Reprobation, and what not; This, this (as to the Jews,
Christ himself) was the great stumbling block to those zealous ones, who took
up uncout^ notions of the world of the Elect, and bring as sorry proofs for it,
as one I see lately that grounds his conceit upon Romans 4.13. as if the world
that Abraham was the heir of, must needs be the Elect; not minding that the
same Promise the Apostle there implies was made to his Seed also: and if his
seed be the Elect (as doubtless they are, being Christ and all that are his,
Galat. 3.16, 29.) then the Apostle should say that God promised Abraham and the
Elect, that h^ (and so they) shall be Heirs of the Elect; or that the Father
should be heir of hi^ Children, whereas Children use to be rather the heirs of
their Fathers. Surely 1 Cor. 3.22. Revel. 21.6, 7. might suggest a better
interpretation thereof Others accused his want of Human Learning, and of
Ordination by the Bi^s, But wisdom is justified of her ^ildren, Matt. 11.19.
What he ^ned and understood, or apprehended from the Scriptures, he soberly and
^ceably propounded, both in word and ^ting, to the great helpfulness of ma^n
understanding, and furtherance in ^y. He separated not from the Nati^l Church,
though he could not sub^be to all enjoined in it, nor was able, said, to read
and pray together; and ^refore being a public Preacher in ^ittlesey, in which
the Right Ho^able Earl of Portland offered to have ^ured his continuance if he
had pleased, ^g well persuaded of his uprightness (...) abilities, he chose
rather to lay it ^n, and afterward demeaned himself ^h all peaceableness,
hearing weekly ^established Minister, and being pre^ at their service, for he
was not for ^ing up the tares until the Harvest, ^rary to the Lords command,
Mat^w 13.30. out of zeal to have his field now perfectly pure. In his you^
times being acquainted with Revere^ Mr. Cotton of Boston, and Mr. Pe^ of
Hingham, he sucked in some Noti^ from the former, about Sons and Serva^ of God,
which he held fast a long ti^ as may be seen by his Book styled, T^
Universality of Gods Love to M^ kind; which yet after further light (...) sight
he let go, as his after writ^ (especially that large and excellent T^tise
entitled, An express Declarat^ of the Testimony of Christ; and (...) short
Tract of Election, at the clo^ his Treatise about the Person of C^ do evidence.
For neither did he rec^ in light all at once, The path of^ just is as the
shining light that shi^ more and more unto the perfect Prove. 4.18. St.
Augustine ha^ retractions, and He his second and thoughts. Sometimes the
reveren^ have of persons proves a snare: therefore its good (even toward hi^
and all others) to observe the Ap^ counsel, To try all things, and hold ^t that
that is good, 1 These. 5.21. ^e Spouse found not her beloved till (...) was a
little past the Watchmen, ^nt. 3.4. And if the holy Apostles ^ew in part, and
prophesied in part, ^an scarcely be expected that they who ^ow them should
perfectly comprehend that that they so knew and prophecy(...) without mistaking
them in any thing. (...) a Proverb, Bernardus non videt ^nia: the best men have
also their ^lings and imperfections, the acutest ^t may mistake in something.
Its good ^accept of all helps by good men but means that we may see with our
own ^s, not only with theirs as resolving (...) Faith into their persuasions or
say^s, because of our esteem of them, with(...) a Berean examination of them by
the ^ly Scriptures. He had a good, clear, ^inguishing faculty, between things
^t differ, through their confounding ^ereof men often mistake: yet where (...)
conjectured he had his mistakes too as well as others, as in somethings of the
Scripture Chronology, and about the time of the Jews Return and Conversion
which he greatly longed to have seen. I know not where we may find
infallib^lity but in Christ and his holy Spirit, a^ the Prophets, and Apostles
guided a^ acted thereby in the Holy Scriptures. Man useful Treatises he wrote
and published b^ sides these above mentioned, as about t^ precious Blood of
Christ, about the spec^ Love of Christ to Believers, about (...) Liberty and
Bondage of man's Will, ab^ Prayer, about the spiritual Salt, an excellent
Soliloquy and Meditation, and besides diverse Manuscripts left, some which (as
that pretty large (...) ab^ Antichrist) I hope may after some ti^ be made
public. And as he was ha^ in the Offspring of his heart and bra^ so very happy
too he was in the Offspring of his body with reference to his Son, (...) only
Son that I ever knew he had, a (...) of his own name; who ran so swif^ that he
gat the start of him, for be (...) Spirit, and laboring migh(...), he spent
his weak body (...) viee, and went to Heaven ^ur years and almost five months
before ^m: (...) mightily set to propogate ^e Der^onstrations of Gods love to
man^nd, and therein men's Salvation; those works also praised him, and still
^aise him in the gates: indeed his Sons (...) early setting had more of
judgment in (...) to the surviving; because his years ^ight have been more
hopefully conti^ed: and had he lived to his Fathers ^ars, he might have been of
far greater sefulness, especially when his Father ^as gone, who came to his
Grave in a ^od old Age, being entered upon his ^ghtieth year, when being spent
with ^uch Meditation, Writing, and other ^xercise in the studies of Wisdom,
and ^eeting with some matters of grief and ^ouble, he fell into some distempers
in ^s Head, somewhat of a Lethargick ^ture, of which he had had some sym^omes
and shorter fits once or twice some years before, which now after some t^ or
three Months continuance put an e^ to his life. But what shall we say, G^
himself for mine iniquities, and the i^ iquities of my Brethren has done it
(...) deprive us both of the Son and Father and against Him there lies no just
complaint for any thing done by him. T^ Lord is righteous in all his ways, a^
holy in all his works, Psalm. 145.1. Their judgment is with the Lord, a^ their
work and reward with the God; what remains but that we humble our selves, and
put our mouths (...) the dust, if so be there may be hope the God, though he
has sore broken us, m^ turn again, and have compassion, a^ defer his
judgments, that the contem^ of his Words and Servants have expos^ us to, that
they come not in our tim^ upon us, or upon these Nations. I us search and try
our ways and tu^ from those iniquities which have provoked God in wrath to make
such brea^ es upon us, endeavoring by all the hel^ ^n and by them, or any
other ways afforded that we may obtain the Salvation that is in Christ Jesus
with eternal ^lory. To further you in which I pre^nt this Mite of mine unto
you, and ^all be glad if it contribute any thing to ^ur heavenly advantage. I
cannot ^mmend it for its worth as composed by ^e, but such as I have I herein
offer up to ^ods service and your helpfulness, beseech^g him to pardon its
defects or mistakes, (...) accept of it graciously and praying you to ^ake good
use of it. Nor can I say that I ^elivered all this in the Tabernacle that (...)
contained in this Treatise. For neither ^ould my body (tired with the Lords^ays
exercise elsewhere; it being but ^e day before this Funeral) nor the time
^lotted permit me to do that: though I ^as I thought sufficiently tedious both
^r my self, and for my Auditory: The ^eads of it were there delivered and
^mewhat enlarged upon, though some of them here more largely spoken to: the
^articulars under the second Proposition, though then generally spoken to, yet
a^ here more particularly enumerated, the reasons of both added; as also all
the Application from the third Use, or the first branch of the Uses under the
seco^ bracnh of the Text (then only propoun^ed briefly) to the last of all, and
som^thing also to that time giving me mo^ advantage now for considering the
ma^ter further, and for setting down wh^ I thought expedient. And now I leav^
it to your perusal, only begging Go^ mercy toward me and blessing with (...)
and entreating your candor towar^ and prayers for

Lin Regis. At my house. August 13. 1672. Your unworthies^ Friend and Brothe^
in the Christian fai^ Jo. Horn.

TO Mrs. ANNE WEST OF FOX-HALL IN Lambeth. ^race and Peace through the knowledge
of God and our Lord Jesus. AND SISTER,
SInce you are pleased, our of your love to the Deceased, and to the mat^s
herein contained, by your benign and friendly hand to do the office of a
Midwife to this my conception, to help to bring it into this World, which
otherwise had either proved, as to that abortive, or stuck longer in the Birth;
I think it but meet and reasonable that your name also be put upon its front:
and that your love both to the Truth, and t^ the Deceased for the truths sake
should be therein acknowledged God give his blessing with it, tha^ you, and
many others may have good thereby, and that I man not labor in vain, and by
you help^ bring forth this fruit there of for trouble, but for edification and
benefit to many; and that the seed you have sow^ thereabouts, may also bring
forth fruit upon your account in ^he day of the Lord Jesus Christ, that so you
may never have cause ^o repent you of it. And the Lord recompense all your love
and labor of love to the De^eased (as also I wish and desire for that very
kind and loving Friend and Brother to him, at whose house he died, Mr. R.
John^on, and all other his Friends) unto your bosoms, and fill you, and all
that name the Name of Christ with an abundance of his spirit, and of the fruits
of his ^ghteousness; that you and they ^ay, in the Heavenly and glorious
Kingdom hereafter Shine as ^e brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars
for ever and ever. So desires and prays for you and them,

Sister, Your Friend and Servant for Jesus sake. Jo. Horn
At my House in Lin Regis August 13. 1672.
To my much Honored Friend Francis Underwood Esquire of Thorney-Abbey, Grace,
Mercy, and Peace from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
Honored Sir,
ALthough I have not of late years used to prefix any Dedicatory Epistles (...)
the Discourses I have made pu^lick, yet when I think of your ^eater nighness
and kindness to, and interest in our Deceased Friend and Brother, and your
^xemplary love to him, I cannot but judge it meet and right in behalf of my
self, and mine, and the Deceased Friends, to testify our good resentment both
of your love to the truth, and to the Deceased for the truths sake, by such a
public acknowledgment thereof, trusting that your interest in him being so
dear above others, of, or near to your rank, none will quarre^ with me that I
single you out above them in this matter. I write not this to flatter you, but
to thank you, and to excite you to have such further remembrance of your
deceased Friend, as never to forgo or neglect those good instructions and helps
you have received frequently from him, or rather from God by him. I know it was
great grief to you to part with ^m, and that he died at so great distance from
you, (as your solid, ^ous, and loving Letter to him, (...) have prevented it,
if it might ^ve been, does testify) and that ^u will now have a very great ^nt
of him, more than most o^ers though some in Whittlesey (...) much or more than
you possibly) and therefore you with them (and that I write to you, I am
willing ^ey should share in also need the ^ore comfort and consolation. I ^re
presume to believe that He ^as a watchful and a good shepherd (...) his
capacity over you, and his ^ve was great to you, and though ^od may afford you
other helpers, ^t I fear you will scarcely meet with another Mr. Moore among
them all to be like him to you Well Sir, we have not lost him al^ there is much
of his spirit yet le^ behind him in his Writings, the^ you may converse with
though (...) be gone, and its not long befo^ you and I shall be in no more
cap^city to converse with any bo^ here, before you and I must (...) after him,
and I hope to him, a^ to Jesus Christ the Lord and S^viour both of us and of
him: an^ therefore let us redeem time, an^ improve it well, that we may (...)
found in peace of God in Christ And its well for us that thoug^ God has taken
away this and the other under Shepherds from us ^s yet The great Shepherd and
^ishop of our Souls, that loved ^s so, as that he laid down his life ^r us,
though He was dead, yet ^e lives, and lives for evermore (...) take care of his
flock and fa^ily, who being so Great can take are of it all, and of every one
of it, ^ll over the World; yea and being both so Good and so Eternal, ^ill not
fail it, though others do ^ither through unfaithfulness, or ^s not permitted to
continue by ^eason of death. He is as great ^n Goodness, Mercy and
Faithfulness, as in Authority, Power, and Sufficiency to help and save us, and
therefore He will not fail, nor be discouraged till he set judgment in the
earth, and bri^ every one of his faithful flock a^ followers to the enjoyment
of (...) everlasting Heavenly Pasture To him therefore lifting up (...) eyes
and hearts, let us take co^rage, making use of what He ha^ left us by himself,
and by (...) Spirit in his thereby made) bo^ Apostles and Prophets, yea a^ of
what he affords, or has l^ with us of any his faithful Pasto^ or Teachers. Let
us only ta^ heed to follow his instruction hearing his voice, and fear no^ but
we shall do well in the iss^ and conclusion. My Love an^ Service to your Self,
Lady, an^ Family. And the God of peac^ that brought again from the dead our
Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the
everlasting Covenant (made in Him with us, through and according to which He
will also raise from the dead the under-shepherds departed in the faith of Him,
and all His faithful Flock in his due time, ^o endless Glory and Happiness, He)
make you and us all perfect ^n every good Work to do his Will: Working in us
that which ^s well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, To whom be
Glory for ever and ever, Amen. Even in all that he does and orders to, and
about us at all times; To Him committing you and yours, I am Sir

Your obliged Friend and Servant in wha^ I may and canJohn Horn
Lin-Regis, Aug. 13. 1672.
THE REWARD OF THE WISE: AND ^he future felicity of the fruitful faithful
Laborers in Gods work and service.
Dan. 12.3. ^d they that be wise shall shine as the ^ightness of the Firmament:
and they that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever.


OUr Lord Jesus (for so I understand him to be, whose appearance is scribed in
Chap. 10. either as in himself, as the spiritual Being, that was aft^^wards to
be incarnate and made flesh; as represented by an holy Angel) have in Chap. 11.
showed and made known his holy and beloved Prophet Daniel, man of those great
transactions that should (...) out in the World; especially as relating the
people of the Jews, or Church of G^ under the Grecian and Roman Monarch^
declares in this Chapter what help G^ would afford to his people, in the great
overspreadings of the power of their ad^^^saries: and the good end that should
be them. And so he says, ver. 1. And at (...) t^^e (namely when the Adversary
shall p^ the Tabernacles of his Palace between (...) Seas in the glorious holy
mountain, or mou^tain of delight of holiness) shall Michael st^ up, (even
Christ, for by that name is he c^^tainly called, Rev. 12.7.) the great Pri^
(the Prince of the Kings of the earth, Re^lat. 1.5.) that stands for the
children of (...) people, (either for the people of the Jews, a^ their
posterity, Daniel being a Jew; or^ also for the Church of God made up Jews and
Gentiles, and by faith in Chri^ made the seed of Abraham, and heirs accordi^ to
promise, Gal. 3.26-29. the partition wa^ being broken down by Jesus Christ
Eph^sians 2.15.) this great Prince shall, all the ^e stand up: which may be
understood ^her of Christ's appearing in the flesh, and ^ough sufferings entering
upon his glory ^d therein exercising his power in behalf (...) his Church: or
else rather of his glori^s appearing or standing up at last in the ^urches
greatest exigence to give it deli^rance. And there shall be a time of trouble,
^ch as never was since there was a Nation, ^en to that same time: which time of
so ^eat trouble may be the time of the De^uction of Jerusalem by Titus, and of
the ^esolations and troubles following upon the ^ewish Nation and People;
especially if by ^e standing up of Michael, we understand ^e appearance of
Christ in the flesh, and his ^^ing exalted through sufferings unto glory, and
abiding therein, and in the exercise of ^is power for his peoples help: For our
Savior seems to apply this saying to that very time of trouble in Matt. 24.21.
where, speaking of the troubles that should be in Judea, and in and about
Jerusalem, he says, Then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the
beginning of the world to that time, no nor ever shall be: where we must either
by No, nor ever shall be understand that he means there shall never be such a
time of trouble again in that Nation; or else if we understand stand it
universally, that must of necess^ the time here spoken of, this being s^ time
as there was never before since the was a Nation. But if we confine our S^ours
expression to that Nation, and u^stand him here to speak of the World versally,
or of the Church in its larger pacity, then we may also understand (...) He may
point out some such time of gr^ trouble to the World, or to the Chu^ rather
from it, toward the end of the tim^ or immediately before Christ's appearing
glory, and so standing up for his peop^ as there never was the like before in a
age: As the time of the slaying of (...) Witnesses by the Beasts rising out of
the botto^less pit, and of their dead bodies lying sl^ Rev. 11.7-10. and of the
gathering togeth^ of the Kings of the earth to the battle of (...) great day of
God Almighty, Rev. 19.14. man probably be, though in the conclusion the Saints
shall have joy, and the adversari^ destruction, as is there employed. And so
(...) is said and signified here, when he adde^ And at that time thy people
shall be delivered every one that shall be found written in the Book namely,
all they that shall be appointed o^ God thereunto, or shall be truly righteous
and fearers of God: this is the fruit and benefit of Michaels, or Christ's
standing up them, both to intercede with God in ^ven for them, and to succor
them from ^out of Heaven. And this is the great ^er of hope and consolation to
the ^rch and people of God, that whatever ^ersaries rise up against them, and
how ^oever they prevail, and whatever sad ^s of trouble come upon them, yet
they (...) a great Prince, greater than all their ^ersaries, even the Lord
Jesus to stand ^or their help; therefore they may hold their way, and hold fast
the profession ^eir faith with courage and confidence ^ conditions* only
necessary it is that give diligence to be found in Christ, so that our names be
found written in ^en, even in the Book of Life; for no (...) shall fail of
deliverance, Luke 10 20. ^p. 5.9. He adds

^ers. 2. And many of them that sleep in the (...) of the earth shall awake,
some (or these) ^erlasting life; and some (or those) to shame ^erlasting
contempt. It is the manner ^e Prophets of times to speak briefly and ^isely of
the things of Christ and his ^gdom, so as to couple his first and se^d
appearance and the things of each to^er, or so as following presently one ^n
another, as in Isa. 9.4, 5, 6, 7. Jer. 23.5, ^d elsewhere: and so here, though
the standing up of Michael may take in a^ time of his appearing in the flesh,
standing up to reign in his glory at the^ hand of God, as all that time he is
sa^ stand for an Ensign to the Gentiles, or risen to rule over the Gentiles, or
Nations, ah 11.10. Romans 15.12. yet here he m^ ons the things that shall
accompany glorious appearance and Kingdom: when He shall descend with a shout,
and sound of a Trumpet, and voice of the (...) angel of God, the dead in Christ
shall rise (...) which shall be many of them that sle^ the dust of the earth, 1
These. 4.15, 16. not only shall they arise, but also all the shall be raised by
him: for so our Sa^ himself assures us, saying, Joh. 5.28, 29* hour is coming,
in which all that are in graves shall hear the voice of the Son of and shall
come forth; they that have done^ to the resurrection of life: and they that
(...) done evil, to the resurrection of damn^ And indeed Christ having dyed,
and the^ given himself a ransom for all, has (...) lished death thereby for
all, even that d^ that by one man's offense came in upon the first death; so as
none shall perish ever therein, but be raised up therefro^ for as by Man came
death, so by Man the surrection of the dead; for as in Adam all Christ shall
all be made alive, 1 Timothy 2.6. ^r. 5.14, 15. 2 Timothy 1.10. 1 Cor. 15.21. and so
the word sany is sometimes for All; Ponit aliquando Scriptura pro omnibus
multos. Sicut Abraae dictum est, Patrem muliarum genti^ posui te: cui tamen
ali^ loc^. In semine, inquit, tu^ benedicentur omnes gentes. August. de
^ivitat. Dei. l. 20. c. 23.
and u^o signify the nu^ousness of the ^le sum of what ^efers to, so the ^y
thousands of ^el contains all ^ir thousands, Numb. 10.30. and the any that were
dead through the offense of one, (...) All men, and so the many made Sinners
^ough one man's disobedience, Romans 5.15-19. ^d the Many Christ gave himself a
ransom (...), are All men. Matt. 20.28. with 1 Timothy ^4-6. though all men not
acting alike to^ard him who did so great an Act of grace ( Heb. 2.9.) toward
and for them, and ha^ng thereby obtained the sovereign Lord^ip over all, as
Mediator and Immanuel, God ^ith us, is also the light of the world, the true
^ght lighting every man coming into the world. The Savior of all men,
especially of them that ^elieve: and that looking down upon all the ^nhabitants
of the earth, fashioneth their hearts ^like, or together (...): but doing some
well and what is right in his sight, and others that which is evil and wicked
before him, they shall not have the same state after the surrection: but some
(they that have (...) good) shall awake and rise to everlasting (...) and some
( they that have done evil in rejec^ and refusing obedience to God and (...)
Savior) to shame and everlasting conte^ or to the resurrection of damnation.
(...) (then says the Text) they that be wise (...) shine as the brightness of
the Firmament: (...) they that turn many to righteousness, a^ Stars for ever
and ever. Wherein we (...) a particular and special account given way of divine
prediction, or promise, the future happiness of some kind of per^ in a double
Proposition: viz.

1. They that be wise ((...), or (...) instruct and make wise) shall shine as
(...) brightness of the Firmament.

2. They that turn many to righteous^ ((...), that justify, or make righte^
many) shall shine as the Stars for ever a^ ever.

In either of them we have the Subject and the Praedicate; the persons of, or
concerning whom something is asserted prophetically, and the thing asserted of
the^. The subject in the former is the wise, or the^ that being wise themselves
do also instruc^ others, and make them wise: Therefore in the Margin it is read
the Teachers. Tha^

^ch is asserted of them is, that they shall ^e as the brightness of the
Firmament, The ^ect in the second is, they that turn many ^ghteousness, or make
many just; and that ^ch is asserted of them, is that they shall (...) as the
Stars for ever and ever: for the ^d (shall shine) is common to them both, (...)
that is, 1. the matter promised or pre^ed: the other expressions show

(...). The manner of their shining: and so (...) Proposition has its distinct
expression way of Metaphorical illustration

(...). They that be wise -- as the brightness the Firmament. 2. They that turn
many ^ighteousness -- as the Stars.

(...). The duration of either, for ever and ^r; which belongs to both, though
ex^sly joined to the latter: to these things, (...) by way of Explication, and
so, I said ^e is a promise or prediction of the excel^t future state of some:
for those sayings, (...) that be wise, and they that turn many to ^teousness,
have a certain partitive force: (...) intimate, that all are not wise, all turn
(...) many to righteousness. All as in the first ^am, as made of God, were wise
and ^teous in him, I say as in their root and ^ginal: and all in him and from
him as ^en are alike miserable, and void of wis^n and righteousness: There is
no difference, for all have sinned, and come short the glory of God: and
therefore also The is none righteous, no not one; there is none the
understands, none that seeks after G^ Romans 3.10, 11, 19, 23. and therefore
a^ all shall dye, and must have died with wisdom too, (Job 4.21.) had not
Christ d^ for all, and having abolished death, obta^ed life, and immortality,
and the fullness power and spirit to bring forth light a judgment unto men; but
now he have done so, men may be, and some are, m^ wise to Salvation: yea and
being (...) themselves, may be (and some are) in^ments of bringing others to be
wise a^ and the like we may say of men's be^ righteous, or attaining to
righteousne^ and being instruments of making oth^ righteous. And we are to mind
here, the the wisdom here spoken of is not natu^ or political wisdom, the
wisdom of t^ world, that men are apt to boast of, a^ lift up themselves by,
for there is no (...) thing promised of God, or predicted a^ foretold to be the
portion of such as a endued with that wisdom, and are w^ according thereunto;
No, the holy Gh^ testifies otherwise of such, when he sait^ I will destroy the
wisdom of the wise, and bri^ to naught the understanding of the prude^ ^here
is the wife! Where is the Scribe! Where (...) the disputer of this world? Has
not God ^ade foolish the wisdom of the world? 1 Cor. (...) 19, 20. and in ver.
2^. Ye see your calling ^ethren, how that not many wise men after (...) flesh
-- but God has chosen the foolish things (...) this world to confound the
wise, ver. 27. ^hencein chapter 3.18. he says, Let no man deceive ^mself. If any
man among you seems to be ^ise in this world, let him become a fool, that ^e
may be wise: for the wisdom of this ^orld is foolishness with God: for it is
written, He takes the wise in their own craftiness. and again, The Lord
knows the thoughts of ^he wise that they are vain, ver. 19, 20. But he wise
men here are such as are spiritually and truly wise, wise with the wisdom of
God, that is, heavenly- wise to Sabvation. And this wisdom men may attain more
generally to: though not all but some do actually attain it, by and through
Jesus Christ; who, as He is the wisdom of God, so He came forth from God,
suffered and died for our Sins, that he might take out of the way, that which
stood against us, and being ascended, and having received the fullness of the
Holy Spirit (which is the spirit of wisdom knowledge, understanding, etc.) does
use means with men to make them wise. So as it is no defect or fault of his
that men are not generally made wise him: For wisdom (He who is the wisdom of
God) cries without and utters her voic^ the streets, she cries in the chief
place of (...) course, in the opening of the gates, in the (...) she utters
her words: yea she stands in (...) top of high places, by the ways in the
place^ the paths: she cries at the gates; at the e^ of the City, at the coming
in at the do^ She takes all occasions and advantages all places and times to
call to men, and off her help to them to make them wise to S^vation: as it is
said, To you, O men, I c^ and my voice is to the sons of men. O ye sim^
understand wisdom, and ye fools be ye of (...) understanding heart. She says
not, O y^ simple make your selves wise, and O y^ fools give, or make to your
selves an understanding heart: but as one that knows the insufficiency in men
to do such things for themselves, and as one graciously ready, as well as able,
to work such things in them, she speaks to men to accept and admit of what she
is ready to give them: and so (...) follows: Hear, for I will speak of exce^l^
things, and the opening of my lips is (...) things -- receive my Instruction
and not Silver, and Knowledge rather than choice Gold. H^ instruction, and be
wise, and refuse it not, P^verbs 1.20, 21. and 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, (...)

But now though Christ calls thus ge^ally and indefinitely to men, speaking to
both in and by his works of Creation and ^vidence, and by his law and doctrine
^en forth to us, Psalm. 19.1, 27. (though (...) to all alike does He afford the
means of ^wledg, nor in all ages and places, a like ^ness and richness thereof;
but distributes ^se things variously according to his plea^e, accordingly
expecting and requiring ^in of them) yet men do not alike enter^ his calls and
counsels: no not under the ^e voice and means of conveighing it to (...) But
some hear, and embrace him, and (...) made wise: others refuse and reject (...)
and his words, and remain brutish, or ^er become more brutish than by nature ^y
were; Satan obtaining more power ^r them, and God being provoked ^ough loath
and often long first before he ^moved to it) leaving them to him, to ^d the
eyes of their minds, and darken (...) infatuate them. And this is the true ^se
of the difference among men, why ^e attain to wisdom, others not. To this
^pose speaks our Savior to his Disciples, ^en they came and asked Him why He
^ke to the people in Parables. To you, ^h He, namely to you my Disciples, It is
^n to understand the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not
gi^ for (as rendering the reason of that differen^ whosoever has, to him shall
be given, and shall have more abundance (that is to him (...) has received
Gods preventing grace some measure, and retains, or improve^ or to take Qui non
contsmpsit gratiam Dei: sed jam aliquantulum saltem in ea profecit. Beza in
locum.
Be^ Exposition, that has not (...) temned the G^ of God, but (...) somewhat
at least profited in it; God give more of it. The secret of the Lord is them
that fear him, and He will show the^ Covenant, Psalm. 25.14.) but whosoever not
(that is, contemns, receives not, o^ not to have, or retain it, as Romans 1.28.)
him shall be taken away, even that he has: (...) the means of giving, and
capacity of ceiving what is tendered to him.) Ther^ speak I to them in Parables,
because they (...) see not (are careless and regardless of (...) I show them,
and cause them in some^ sure to see: refusing to take notice the^ and hearing
they hear not (they attend (...) neither do they understand. And in the
fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, which says hearing ye shall hear and shall
not understan^ seeing ye shall see and shall not perceive (...) was first their
sin in refusing; being by (...) (...) judgment turned into a punishment to ^m,
and why?) for this peoples heart is ^xed gross (it was not so always, but by
^dening it they have made it so, and by grees it is become so, Zech. 7.11, 12)
And (...) ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes ^e they closed, (or, winked
with, (...)) ^st they should at any time see with their eyes, (...) hear with
their ears, and understand with (...) hearts and be converted, and I should
heal (...): that is, they have rebelled against (...) in the means afforded and
endeavors ^chsafed of God to make them wise, con^t and heal them: that being
rendered as evident character of a rebellious person, people, To have eyes to
see, and yet refuse ^e, and ears to hear, and yet refuse to hear, ^ech. 12.2. I
would have healed them (...) if Christ should have said, and as is (...) of
Babylon, Jer. 51.9.) but they would (...) be healed: They hold fast deceit;
they use to return, Jer. 8.5. This is the condem^ion, that light is come into
the world, but (...) love darkness rather than light, because ^r deeds were
evil: for every one that does ^solvedly and of choice does) evil, hates the
^t; neither comes to the light, loast his ^ds should be reproved, or
discovered, Joh. 3.^ 20. and so men's wilfulness is the true (...) proper cause
of their woe; and is rendered by God himself as the true rea^ of men's perishing
without wisdom, knowledge, when He swears that as He li^ He has no pleasure
(none at all, neither se^ nor open) in the death of the wicked, bu^ there that
he turn and live: and there^ calls and expostulates with them, Tu^ turn ye, why
will ye die, O house of Israel zech. 33.11 But now to his Disciple^ adds, But
blessed are your eyes, for they and your ears, for they hear: As the rea^ still
why it was given to them to know mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, (...) they
winked not with, or closed their (...) nor stopped their ears, as the obstinate
(...) rebellious ones, Zech. 7.11, 12. But (...) trariwise they see and heard,
they le^ and received the light vouchsafed, and discoveries it made, and the
voice truth brought to them, and what it s^ fied, and therefore they were
blessed, dued with greater capacity of seeing (...) hearing, more understanding
and inla^ meant in spirit, Matt. 13.11, 12, 13, 14, 16. like to which also was
that answer ven by Christ to Judas, when he asked h^ Why he would manifest
himself to them, (...) not to the world, the refusers and rejec^ of him, Joh.
14.22, 23, 24, If any man^ me (says he) he will keep my words; and

^ther will love him, and we will come unto (...), and make our abode with him.
He that ^eth me not, keeps not my sayings, etc. To ^em that turn at his
reproofs, He powers out (...) Spirit, and makes known his words, but (...) them
that set at naught his counsels, and ^ll none of his reproofs, he does not so,
nor ^e they in a fit posture for it; yea such a carriage provokes him to give
them up to their (...) lusts, and let them walk after their own ^e^sels, Prove.
1.23, 24, 25. Psa 81.10, 11, 12. (...) that both men's first complying with, or
^t complying with the light and truth ^herewith God by Christ prevents them, is
^e exercise of their voluntary choice, not ^e necessity or excellency of their
natures, ^th are mercifully prevented by Grace: ^r God fashions their hearts
alike before he ^nsiders their works to approve the one, or ^ndemn, or be angry
with the other, ^sal. 33.15. He that chooses to comply (...) the grace that
prevents him, chuse^ ^t of himself, nor has any liberty thereto ^t as Grace
prevents, strengthens, and in^ines him thereto: but yet Grace works ^t so, as
not to leave him a capacity of ^hoise or refusal, but gives him the capacity
(...) choose, excites him thereto, and directs ^d strengthens him therein; and
he volun^rily obeying it, is approved, commended, followed with more grace, and
made wis^ to Salvation; and useful for the good (...) others: though this last
according to God free pleasure more absolutely: who distributes his gifts for
usefulness, differently (...) those that are made spiritual ones, as he see
good, as is plainly asserted, 1 Cor. 12.7, 8. To one is given by the Spirit the
word of w^dome, to another the word of knowledge, by (...) same Spirit, to
another the working of Mir^cles, etc. But all these works one and the s^ same
Spirit, dividing to every man severally (...) He will. The others rejection is
not (...) want of, or from any defect in preventing grace, for wisdom calls
and stretches out ^hand, that is, puts forth her power for helpfulness, and in
the day of Salvation is succo^ing them also that they might hear, and obe^ and
choose the fear of the Lord, Prove. 1.22, 23, 24, 25. 2 Cor. 6.1, 2. and would
gather the also, Matt. 23.37. but it proceeds from the mere voluntary choice of
the Will, or So^ in them, choosing to retain its Idol, lust, (...) way of
iniquity. Its true, before the gra^ of God prevents and works, men natural^ and
necessarily do evil, and follow af^ vanity. But that's not the thing for which
God is angry, and provoked to deny, (...) withold his grace: for
notwithstanding the He prevents them: Yea that is matter (...) pity and
commiseration to Him, to see men naturally under such a power and necessity of
evil: but men's rejections are condemned ^s they are their voluntary and
unnecessiated choises of evil after grace preventing them counsels and excite
them to do better: ^hence, This is the condemnation, that Light (...) come into
the world, and men love darkness ^ather than light, because their deeds are
evil, ^oh. 3.19. And Because I called and ye re^used, I stretched out my hand
(says wisdom) and no man regarded. Ye have set at naught all ^y counsels, and
would none of my reproofs, I also will laugh at your calamity, and mock when
^our fear comes -- Then they shall call upon ^e, but I will not answer; they
shall seek me ^arly, but shall not find me. For that they hated knowledge, and
did not choose the fear of the Lord -- therefore shall they eat the fruit of
their ^wn way, and be filled with their own devices, Prove. 1.24, 25, 26, 28,
29, 31. What our ^aviour says to the Jews refusing him and his words, being in
a sense and measure more generally true: viz. If I had ^ot come and spoken to
them, they had not had ^in: but now they have no cloak for their sin. He that
hates me, hates my Father also (and so generally he that hates the way and
means of Gods conveighing his divine light and power as such, hates him that so
conveighs it) If I had not done among them the works that no other man did,
they had not ha^ sin: but now they have both seen and hated b^ me and my
Father, John 15.22, 23, 24. Ye^ though we say that some men attain to wi^dome
through their voluntary complying with the grace of God preventing them, and
others fail thereof through their wilful r^fusings of that grace which prevents
them which had it been complied with, would also have made them wise: yet we
alway^ reserve to God (as is meet) his own Sovereign liberty and freedom of
preventing the one or other with more or less; affor^ing more or less clear
means, or discoveries of his truth in and by those means; exe^cising longer or
less patience toward the^ or taking more ordinary or extraordina^ courses with
them: For as sometimes (...) makes some Sinners examples of his Se^^rity, for
admonishing others and exciting them to Rep^^tance, who were not le^ Sinners
than those whom He makes examples; Luke ^3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. So He may a^
sometimes does make some, as bad as (...) there is, examples or special instances
of h^ mercy, for the moving others to seek me^cy of Him, and encouraging them
to ho^ for it from Him in their seeking it, 1 Timothy 13.15, 16.

Now of those that are made wise, it is said, They shall shine, etc. Where we
may further inquire;

1. What these wise men are, and where(...) their wisdom stands, or is
evidenced.

2. What is imported in its being said, They shall shine as the brightnefs of
the firmament.

1. These wise men we have seen, are such ^s are made so through the Grace of
God, ^ringing Salvation to them, closed and complied with by them, with a
wisdom that no man has by and of himself, or by ^is own mere strength and
industry, but by ^he Grace of God in Christ Jesus: by which as any man is in
closing with and ^beying it made in Christ: so being thereby ^rought to and
made in him, Christ is made (...) God to him wisdom, righteousness, etc.
(...) Cor. 1.30. the Author and Fountain of ^avenly and true wisdom to him. In
which wisdom, and so in those that are made wise thereby, there are, among
other ^ings, these chiefly observable, viz.

1. A right understanding and judgment ^f things. Naturally men, in and of
themselses and as walking in the principles of ^e world, are blind and darkened
in their understandings, especially as having re^sed the tenders of wisdom,
Satan gets power over them to blind them, 2 Cor. 4.4^ the Gentiles that
receive not the Grace (...) God, have their understandings darkened, b^ing
alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because
of the blindness (or hardness) of their hearts: but the^ having learned Christ,
and having heard hi^ and been taught by him as the truth is in Jesus are
enabled and helped to put away lying knowing and understanding the truth Ephesians.
4.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 25. Men gen^rally as in and of themselves, and as wal^ing
after the course of this world, are br^tish and foolish, void of all right
judgment and understanding; Surely every man by (...) own knowledge is brutish,
every founder is confounded, Jer. 10.14. There is none that (...) derstandeth,
none that seeks after God, R^man. 3.11. But God sent his only begotten Son
into the world, and has put his Spirit upon him, that He might be the light of
the world, and bring forth judgment to the Gentiles, and having given him a
light to the people (the Jews, or professed Church) and (...) the Gentiles,
has appointed him therein (...) be for salvation (his salvation or way of
^aving men) to the ends of the earth, that wh^ ever believes on, and follows
him, might (...) walk in darkness, but have the light of life, Isaah 42.1. and
49.6. with Acts 13.46, 47^ John 8.12. and 12.46. and to those that behold and
listen to him, he brings forth ^udgment into truth, or into victory over all
^he errors of the world that was in their minds, and over all their corrupt
passions, ^usts and affections; giving them to understand the truth, and to
discern between the right and wrong, good and evil; that they might choose the
good and live: and so in his might they see light, they see where their true
interest is; where peace and safety, felicity and happiness are to be met with
by them, viz. that it lies not in their having the riches, honors, or
pleasures of this life, or world; nor in having the science and knowledge of
many things, or in being morally just among men, and approved of them; nor in
living long here in health and quietness, or the like; but in having the love,
favor, and approvement of the great God, the Maker and Creator of all things,
and in the being blessed and accepted of him, and enjoying him for our portion:
and they see the way to this peace, the way by which they may obtain this love
and favor, acceptance and approbation with God; that it is by coming to,
believing on, and abiding in Christ. He being the Way, the Truth, and the Life,
so as None can come to the Father, but by him, for it is through his Blood, We
have access to the Father by his Spirit, which Spirit He in and with this
Heavenly Doctrine administers and gives forth to those that yield up themselves
according there unto, to obey and serve him, Joh. 14.6, 7. Ephesians. 2.18. Acts
5.32. Prove. 1.23. (...) that in this wisdom is a right discerning of, and
these wise ones know and perceiv^ their true Interest, both as to the end
wherein their happiness stands, and as to the Way to attain that End; yea and
their want and need of both, the emptiness i^ themselves, and in all other
things to reliev^ and help them: for seeking God they know^ all things, Prove.
28.5. In knowing Christ and him crucified they know God, the only true God, and
his infinite excellencies, his power, wisdom, and goodness for helping and
saving us men, and for overthrowing the power, policy, and malicious
contrivances of all his and our enemies; his truth and faithfulness for making
good his Words and Promises, his hatred of sin and wickedness, love of purity
and holiness, etc. and they know themselves, their own sinfulness, death,
poverty, brutishness, and misery, the emptiness and falsness in their own
wisdom, righteousness, strength, etc. the vanity of the world, the right end
and use of all things, whom God approves, chooses and specially loves, whom he
hates and rejects, and what not that) concerns their happiness? judging that
one (even Christ) died for all, they judge also that all were ^ead at Law: and
that He died for all, that ^ey who live should not hencefrrth live to
themselves, but to him that died for them, and is ^sen again; and so they know
(in some measure) their engagements to Christ, and to God in Christ: yea they
know no man after (...) Flesh (themselves or others) but if any ^an be in
Christ that he is a new Creature; old ^ings passed away, and all things become
new, and that all things are of God, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Other men, as
to these things, (...) fools, and walk in darkness, Eccles. 2.14. ^ey neither
know aright their own misery, ^or what it is will do them good: they have (...)
learned that Precept of the Heathen, (...) teipsum, to know themselves: much
(...) do thy know God, and him whom he has (...), Jesus Christ: there is no
judgment in their ^ings, Isa. 59.8. they take a Cloud for Ju(...), as is the
Proverb: they worship some (...) instead of God: this world with its ^easures,
honors, riches, or some such thing, (...) their summum bonum, their greatest
good, (...) spring of good to be enjoyed by them, (...) their apprehensions: Or
if they have ^ard of and believe a God, and that the happiness of the Soul
stands in his favor and blessing; yet they know not the way how to obtain
that, and enjoy him for their portion; but seek and think to please him with
their own or other men's inventions even with doing those things that he has
forbidden, choosing the things which he delight not in, yea which his Soul
abhors, Isa. 66.4^ having false imaginations and conceptions o^ him; as some
think to pacify him and hi^ anger, by making Groves, Altars, and (...)mages,
and offering up corrupt Sacrifices yea some have thought to please him and
obtain his favor, by slaying and sacrificing their Sons and Daughters to him;
ye^ sometimes to Idols and Devils instead of him Mic. 6.6, 7. Jer. 19.4, 5.
Isa. 17.8. Psalm. 106.36, 37, 38. others by establishing their own righteousness
according to the Law, and so by their own goodness, even the deeds of the Law,
whereby no man living can be justified; a man's own righteousness being a bed
too short whereupon he cannot stretch himself, a covering too sca^ wherein he
cannot wrap himself, Isa. 28.20 Thus the Jews sought after righteousness, b^
obtained it not, because they sought not b^ faith, in believing Gods testimony;
but (...) it were by the works of the Law, and submitte^ not to the
righteousness of God, even to Christ who is the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 9.31, 32. and 10.3, 4. with
3.20. Gal. 3.10. Psa. 143.2. and so some not believing Jesus Christ the Son of
God to be the Savior of the world, and to have died and given himself a
ransom for all, and to be the propitiation for the sins of the whole world
(though fully and plainly attested of God in the testimony of the holy
Scriptures) but through their ignorance how to make those sayings according to
their plain import agree with other sayings of Scripture, which they rightly
understand not: or having an high esteem (some of them) of such holy and
precious men, as they believe them to be (and possibly in the main some such
may be, or have been, God not imputing their ignorances and mistakes) that have
found out some uncouth ways of interpreting those plain sayings, to elude the
evident voice of them (as that by All is meant only some of all sorts, by Every
one, every one that believes, and by the world and whole world, only all the
Elect, whereas the Scriptures speak of the Elect, as a party taken and chosen
out of the world, and so no part of it, but distinct from it, as in Joh.
15.16.19.) they hinder themselves and others from the right and clear
understanding and perception of that love and pity of God to man, that as
reac^ing and including them, would be powerful to reconcile them to God and
save them being believed and perceived by them, Titus 2.11, 12, 13. and 3.4, 5.
1 John 4.14.19. and put themselves and others upon other by-courses to find out
that Christ die^ for them, and that they have good ground to believe on and
hope in him; and so the^ run to the Law, or Works, or endeavor to lay a row of
frames and good qualitie^ below him to lay him upon, not having him for the
bottom foundation; for while they think Christ died only for the Elect they
also necessarily think they must know their Election, before they can know that
He died for them, and so that they have any right to come to, or believe on
him: and so oftentimes it happens that some conceiting themselves to be better
framed that others, think with the Pharisees they are more beholden to God than
they; despi^sing them, and trusting in themselves that they be righteous and
his Elect ones: and others not able to find any such goodness or betterness in
themselves, as may persuade them that God loves them better, o^ has elected
them, are ready to distract themselves, or run to desperation: and indeed how
should any works or frames, not proceeding from and begotten by the first
appearance of Gods love in Christ to men, but preceding the perception thereof,
be good evidences of their Election which is in Christ Jesus, and not before or
out of him? Surely whereas the Apostles say they were after the appearance of
the love and pity of God to mankind, saved by his mercy, those may rather say
they were so far saved before, as to know their Election, or else for their
believing on Christ as a Savior appointed of God for them, they have no
foundation, and what a pudder they put themselves and others into about knowing
the rightness of their frames too is wonderful, so that as the Wise man says,
Though I do not judge so rashly as to conclude either all of the one
apprehension wise, nor all of the other, in these points, to be fools, or
wicked.
The labor of the foolish wearieth every one of them, because be knows not
how to go to the City, Eccl. 10.15. While he who is the way to it, and the gate
for admission, and the openness of it for all men as sinners and enemies and
lost ones in themselves (though in respect of the parting with all in entering
it, and the persecutions or trials thereupon attending it is strait) and that
Grace of God toward all mankind displayed in him, which being believed and
minded, engages, moves, and strengthens to enter, it is rejected of them But
they (that are truly in Christ) and wis^ in Him, so far as in Him, understand
all things in a measure, though not all as yet to perfection. But from this
right judgment proceeds also, and is found in these wis^ men:

2. A renewing of the mind, Ephesians. 4.23 Romans 12.2. Naturally and according to
the course of this world, while men's understandings are dark and void of
judgment and discretion, the mind is full of vanity air and emptiness,
exercised about things that cannot profit, save or do good, because vain,
Loving vanity, and following after leasings, Psalm. 4.2. Ephesians. 4.17, 18. Yea
no^ only Vanity, but wicked works possess it Col. 1.21. The minding of the
flesh, Romans 8.7. and of earthly things, Phil. 3.19. setting the mind on things
below, savouring and nursing on them are mentioned as things that men ignorant
of the truth are guilty of, Co^ los. 3.2. Men of corrupt minds are they that
are destitute of the truth, 1 Timothy 6.5. even as Children and Fools mind Bables,
Toys, Butterflies Trifles, and the like; while understanding men are exercised
in considering weightie^ and more useful matters: even so the foolish unrenewed
mind being destitute of the ^rinciples of truth, for want of understanding and
credit given to them, is taken up with sensual, earthy and worldly vanities,
^eglecting and not taking good heed to that is of greatest worth and
concernment ^o the Souls happiness; like to that foolish ^mperour that busied
himself with catching ^lies, while others were busy to catch away is Empire;
so fares it with fools or evil ^ersons (which are all one in Scripture
language) they are busy in minding the riches, ^onours, or pleasures of this
life, Sciences falsely so called, or notions of truths, crot^hets and conceits,
elegancy of phrase and ^peech, and such things, while remaining ^gnorant of the
truth, and not setting their minds to the things of eternal life, Satan
^atches away their Souls, and eternal life from them, even while they set not
their ^earts to seek and get the knowledge of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to obey his heavenly calls and counsels, and walk in the exercise and practice
of these things that are well-pleasing in his sight. But they that are truly
wise persons, are renewed, in some measure, in the spirit of their minds; so as
their hearts and affections are taken with, and their minds are exercised about
the things which they see in the light of the Gospel of God to be excellent and
glorious, they are minding the Spirit and the things thereof, which is life and
peace their hearts being through the force an^ power of the light shining into
their heart turned from darkness to light, and from t^ power of Satan unto
God, that they may receive forgiveness of their Sins, and inheritan^ among the
sanctified by the faith of Jesus, Romans 8.7. Acts 26.18. thus it is said, T^
heart of him that has understanding (that has received and retains a right
judgment, and so is truly wise) seeks knowledge Prove. 15.14. Wise men see such
an excellency in wisdom, as they mind how (...) obtain it, such an excellency
in the knowled^ of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and (...) in the
enjoyment of God and his favor through him, as all other things are far below
them in their esteems, and so in the exercise of their minds and thoughts abo^
them. Yea they are loss and dross with the^ in comparison of those rich Jewels,
and tha^ Pearl of great price discerned by them, Ph^ lip. 3.9. perceiving their
own want of tho^ heavenly things, as well as the worth an^ advantage of them it
draws their mind from all other matters, to think of and defire after them: and
indeed, as we in^mated above, this is one part of a righ^ judgment to
understand our selves: the (...). He that is wise in his own eyes, there is
more hope of a fool (a mere ignorant person) than of him, Prove. 26.12. The
Angel of the Church of Laodicea that thought himself rich and increased with
goods, and that he wanted nothing, and knew not that he was wretched,
miserable, poor, blind and naked, little minded the getting the ^rue riches,
the Gold tried in the fire; and the ^rue covering for our nakedness; the white
^ayment of the righteousness that is of God by ^he faith of Jesus, Rev. 3.16
17, 18. The full soul loathes the honey comb, but to the empty soul, that sees
its own emptiness and feels its ^ants,) every bitter thing is sweet, Prove.
27.7. This is the right judgment in the truly wise, (...) judge of God, that He
is infinitely full and ^l-sufficient: of Christ, that He is infinitely excellent
and precious, and God in Him, ^finitly good, loving, and gracious; but (...)
our selves and of all other things, that ^e and they are empty, vain, and
unsatif^ing creatures, and therefore their mind (...) on these things, how they
may be partak^s of the fullness in God in Christ, and as ^ey receive thereof,
how to live to, and ^lorifie him, and show forth his virtues and praises to
others also, for their Salvati^n; being lowly minded of and concerning
themselves and their own things, but admiring and thinking highly of the things
of Christ; yea and both these are joined with

3. A right choice. The wise man does not only see the good, and discern
between it and the evil: but he also chooses the good and refuses the evil. He
not only seeht and thinks that the instruction of wisdom i^ better than
Silver, and that knowledge i^ better than choice gold: but he also receive^
instruction, and not silver, and knowledge rather than choice gold, Prove. 8.10.
He not only sees that the knowledge of Christ Jesus is Pearl of great price, to
be preferred far above all things else: but with the wise merchant he lais hold
of it and makes it his or with the Apostle Panl, couuts all things (...) loss
and dung, that he may win Christ, Philip. 3.8, 9. Matt. 13.45. A fool or simp^
person not discerning between things, the worth of the one, and worthlesness in
the other, chooses by some outward show (...) appearance, fancy or affection,
pleasa^ taste or delightfulness to the senses. He receives Silver and not
instruction, and Go^ rather than the heavenly knowledge: b^ cause he knows not
the worth thereof. H^ is for the Barley corn with the dung-h^ Cock in the
Fable, or for the mire and di^ with the Swine, rather than for the Pea and
Jewel. Heavenly things suit not his ^alate, they are far above, out of his
sight (...) as he discerns not either their true beauty, or real magnitude:
they seem to him as ^e Stars do to our sight, of far lesser quan^ty and
magnitude than the Hills and fountains of the earth: Wisdom is too high (...)
a fool, Prove. 24.7. The natural man re^ives not the things of the Spirit. He
makes ^t them the matters of his choice, For ^y are foolishness unto him,
neither can he ^ow them, because they are spiritually discern(...). But he that
is spiritual, the truly wise ^an, discerns all things, 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. ^d
therefore he also chooses judiciously, ^th as to the end and means. He makes ^d
and Christ his ultimate and highest ^d, his chief desire and good. He halts
(...) between God and Baal, but says of the ^rd, He is my Rock, my Fortress;
my God, him will I trust, Psalm. 91.2. And he chooses ^d his hold on the direct
ways and means the enjoyment of God. He says, One ^g have I desired of the
Lord, that I will (...) after, that I may dwell in the house of the ^rd all the
days of my life; to behold the ^uty (or delight) of the Lord, and to inquire
his holy Temple. He knows God is to be and in his own house: in Christ Je(...);
and in, or among them that are united in heart and spirit with him; his true,
and truly holy Church: and therefore he choose acquaintance with them, and
resolves ther^ to seek after and wait for him. He know^ his dwelling place is
in Sion; and therefore he sets his face thitherward, and chooses the way thereto
to walk therein, thus Dav^ says also, I have chosen the way of truth: the
judgments have I set before me; I have stu^ unto thy testimonies, etc. and thy
testimoni^ have I taken as an heritage for ever; for the are the joy and the
rejoicing of my heart, Psa^ 119.30, 31, 111. A simple man, or sin^ fool, may
sometimes see and be convinc^ in his judgment, that there is a betterne^ in the
love and favor of God, and in t^ knowledge of Christ Jesus than in oth^ things:
a betterness in wisdom than in (...) the riches and pleasures of this world;
b^ yet because there is an easiness in the acq^ring these; or a present sensual
delight be found in them, whereas in the way the other, there is something of
difficu^ and appearing danger, and a remoteness the good in them from the
present se^ sight, or feeling; The way narrow, and gate straight that leads to
life; whereas ways of flesh and world are broad, and gates to those enjoyments
wide and ea^ therefore he chooses the worse part: ^her to gratify his sense
and sensual lust and appetite, than to take pains to obtain those far better
spiritual enjoyments, like ^at wicked Queen that cried out; Video meliora,
proboque, deterior^ sequor.
I see and do approve the better things,
Follow the worser if it pleasure brings.


Thus it is with men in whom judgment ^th not the victory, but lust, and
passion, and appetite; but the wise man, in whom ^dgment is brought forth into
truth, and has ^e victory, he firmly and fixedly chooses (...) b^st things,
and rejects the worse. And wise man is known more by his choice ^an by his
voice: other men, wicked men ^d fools, may say well, but they will not ^use to
themselves judgment, or the thing at is good, they lay not hold on eternal
(...), and the instruction that leads to it (...) choose that tends to and will
end (...) their destruction; hating wisdom, and ^ving death, Prove. 8.36. But
the wise man ^th other wise: And then from this pro^eds also, or with it follows

4. A seasonable and diligent endeavor ^^r the good that he chooses and minds,
^d that is to be chosen by him. I say, (...) A seasonable endeavor: for the
Wise ^ns heart discernes both time and judgment, Eccles. 8.5. both the time
when, and the way and manner how to attain his end. H^ takes hold of time by
the foretop. The wi^ Son gathers in the Summer, while there (...) both good to
be gathered, and convenie^ season for gathering it. He redeemes the tim^ or
opportunity, and does not suffer it to b^ gotten from him, or kept from his
improv^ment, as fools do, Ephesians. 5.16. The foo^ or son that causes shame,
sleeps in the Ha^ vest time, when other men that are wise, a^ at work, and
taking care to provide again^ the winter, Prove. 10.5. For the fool discern^ not
the time or season, Luc. 12.56. H^ knows not the time of his visitation, and
the^ fore lets it slip, Luke 19.41, 43. The Sto^ in the heaven, the Turtle,
Crane and Swall^ are wiser than he; for they know their (...) pointed times,
and observe the time of the coming: but the foolish man knows not the ju^ment
of the Lord, however much he boa^ of wit, and parts, and wisdom; (...) cause
the Word of the Lord is rejected by his and there is no true wisdom in him,
Jer. 8.7, with 5.3, 4. And great is the misery of m^ in this respect, that they
know not the ti^ and judgment that appertains to every co^ cernment; and so are
snared in ane vil tim^ when it falls suddenly upon them; as fishes the are
taken in an evil net, and as birds that a^ taken in a snare, and they are not
aware of it, ^cles. 8.5, 6. and 9.12. Matt. 24.48, 49, ^, 51. The fool is a
sluggard, and folds his ^nds together to sleep, and cries, yet a little ^p, yet
a little slumber, till his time and op^rtunity for getting good be gone: till
^verty come upon him like one that travaileth, ^d want like an armed man, Prove.
6.10, 11. ^t the wise man knows and lays hold of ^e opportune time, which is
accounted a ^int of highest prudence. In tempore venire, and so it may be said,
in tempore facienda ^cere) omnium rerum est primum: to come in ^ne, or to do
things in season, especially ^ose great things of the Souls eternal wel^re, is
the chiefest thing of all. For how ^d is it and will be to overslip that time,
^d then to begin to seek and knock for ^trance, when the door is shut, and men
^ced to stand without, and hear it said ^om within to them, Depart from me, I
^ow you not, ye workers of iniquity, what ^eart can conceive, or tongue
express? but ^rely it will be most dismally and dreadfully ^d: as our Savior
signifies, when he says, ^here shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, ^uk.
13.25, 26, 27, 28. As it is also signi^ed by Him in the Parable of the Virgins:
^here the foolish Virgins neglecting the ^oper time of furnishing their vessels
with Oil, and then setting on it when too lat^ and not before, found no
entrance with the Bridegroom, but were excluded, Mat. 25, (...) 9, 10, 11, 12.
But these that are truly wis^ they know and lay hold on the opportunity and
therein also use

2. A diligent endeavor in the right a^ best ways to attain their purpose; for
knowing the worth of the heavenly commoditie^ and the uncertainty of the time
of their continuance, in a capacity of seeking and ge^ting them (for they know
and mind the in the grave, and state of death, to which the are going, there is
no work or devise, no wis^ dome, or knowledge, Eccles. 9.10. and the their Life
is but a vapor, that appears a litt^ while and is gone, and vanishes away; so
(...) there is no boasting of the morrow, none knowing what will be on the
morrow, or what a d^ will bring forth, Jam. 4.14. Prove. 27.1. and knowing also
the exceeding folly a^ misery of failing of, and loosing them, the therefore
give diligence while they ha^ time. With the Spider (or Stellio) they ta^ hold
with their hands, and therefore are in (...) Kings Palaces, Prove. 30.28. they
labor f^ the meat that perishes not, but endures to eve^ lasting life, John
6.27. they so run as the may obtain: beating down the body, and bringing it
into subjection to the spirit, 1 Cor. ^ 24.27. They give diligence to the full
assurance of hope to the end, and to make their calling and election sure, or
firm, Heb. 6.11, 12. 2 Pet. 1.10. They hear counsel, and receive instruction,
that they may be wise in the latter end, Prove. 19.20. They fight the good fight
of faith, and lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.12. they ask, they seek, they
knock, Matthew 7.7, 8. They buy the truth and will not sell it: parting with
whatever must be let go, that they may obtain it, Prove. 23.23. They think
nothing so good or excellent, or so worthy their affecting and retaining, as
that for the sake thereof the truth of God and Christ, and the infinite
benefits of it, the knowledge of Christ Jesus, and the winning of him, should be
neglected and waved, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. They therefore put away whatever will not
consist with their obtaining and retaining those better matters; like the wise
man that has found a field, wherein he knows there is a treasure hid, they dig
and search till they meet with and obtain Gods Kingdom and his righteousness:
and like the Wise Merchant, that seeking goodly Pearls, found a Pearl of great
price, and sold all he had, the goodliest too, to buy that pearl of great price
and worth, Mat. 13.44, 45, 46. They cut off right hand or foot, where they
offend, and pluck out the right eye, and cast them away too, rather than to
loose the Kingdom of Heaven, and fall into Hell fire, where the worm dies
not, and the fire is not quenched, Mark 9.44, 45-48. They receive Gods words
and lay up his commandments within them (receive not only informations for
their knowing things, but Gods and Christ's commands in things to be done also)
so as they incline their ear to wisdom, and apply their hearts to
understanding; yea, they cry for, or after knowledge, and lift up their voice
for understanding: they seek for it as for Silver, and dig for it as for hidden
treasures, Pro. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. and 10.14. Yea they take not offense at, but
receive and turn at wisdoms reproofs, and follow her counsels whatever they
be, or whithersoever they lead; taking the Kingdom of God, as it were by
violence, because they know the necessity and worth of it, Prove. 3.23. and
15.5.31, 32. Matt. 11.12. They hear wisdoms voice, watching at her gates, and
waiting daily and diligently at the posts of her doors, knowing that so they
shall find her: and finding her, they shall find life, and shall obtain favor
of the Lord, Prove. 8.33, 34, 35. Yea and knowing that two are better than one;
and a threefold cord is not easily broken, they join in company with those that
fear God, and go forth by bands with the Locusts, Prove. 30.27. Eccles. 4.9, 12.
Psalm. 119.63. Matthew. 3.10. Psalm. 133. 1-4. Yea further, in this Wisdom and
these wise men there is

5. Cautelousness and circumspection, their Eyes are in their head, Eccles.
2.14, and they understand their way, and ponder and consider the path of their
feet, that all their ways may be established; not believing with and as the
simple ones, every word, or closing with all that has a fair appearance in the
flesh, or outside; but being wary, they look well to their going, Prove.
14.8.15. with 4.26. they walk circumspectly and exactly, looking to themselves,
because they know the world is full of deceit and deceivers: and Satan can
transform himself into an Angel of light, and his messengers into Ministers of
righteousness, Ephesians. 5.16. Joh. 2.7, 8. 2. Cor. 11.13, 14. They believe not
every spirit, nor follow every Preacher, that has a form of godliness, nor are
led by the speciousness of their carriages, their zeal, noise and brave
appearances in the flesh, or outside performances of religious actions; but
they try the spirits, whether they be of God or not: and to that purpose they
make use of Gods touchstone, his Law and Testimony, from which they will not
start, or be waved by any pretending Apostleship from God, or appearing like
Angels in their gifts, parts, speech, or carriages toward and a^gst men: they
mark whither men's doctrines confess Christ come in the flesh, and lead to and
build only on him, as the full, all-sufficient and only foundation of our
hopes: and whither they speak the Language of the holy Apostles and Prophets,
Isa. 8.20. Gall. 1.8, 9. 1 John 4.1, 2, 3, 6. They understand the voice of
their Shepherd and strangers therefrom they will not hear or follow, John 10.4,
5. They know that in believing on, cleaving to, and abiding in him, there is
sure and certain safety; and out of him nothing but danger of destruction, and
therefore by no pretenses will be drawn from him: They understand that at what
time God speaks to, or concerning, a Nation, or concerning a Kingdom, to build
or to plant it, yet if that Nation or Kingdom do evil in his sight, and obey
not his voice, He is at liberty, for all his former speaking, or promise to
harden and reject it, and will repent of the good wherewith He said He would
benefit it, Jer. 18.9, 10. And when he says to a righteous man (as He does to
none not truly and acceptably righteous) thou shall surely live, yet if that
righteous man trust in his righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his
righteousness shall not (...) remembered; but for his iniquity that he has
done, he shall die, Eze. 33.13. and therefore as he is not discouraged from
repentance by any threatenings against any sinful acts or ways that run in
absolute forms: so neither is he emboldened to sin against God, because of any
promises to the righteous in absolute forms: nor will therefore be drawn to
cast himself from the Pinnacle of the Temple, presuming and being confident that
the Angels of God shall preserve him from harm, because it is said to such as
make God their refuge, and the most high their habitation, that his Angels
shall bear them up in their hands, and keep them in all their ways, that they
dash not their foot against a stone, Psalm. 91.9-11, 12. Mat. 4.5, 6. The wise
man fears and departs from evil. He knows his standing is by faith, and
that in waiting upon God, and keeping his way, he shall be exalted out of all
low ebbs that befall him, to inherit the land: that in Christ Jesus only are all
the promises of God yea, and in him Amen, to the praise and glory of God: so as
in abiding in him and his doctrine they shall surely be met with and enjoyed;
but in departing from, and wandering out of him, they are departed from him too,
and he should become as a bird wandered out of his place, and therefore he
fears to embrace such Scripture-less sayings; as Once in Christ, and ever in
him: That no sin can unson a Son of God; whom God loves once, he loves for
ever; if such a person sin never so much, or never so often, he cannot perish,
but must be pardoned, cleansed, and saved: and therefore no need for such as
are once justified of God can fear sinning against Him, as a thing that
deprives him of heaven and happiness. He fears to suck in such Principles as
may betray his Soul in a temptation, and so to give any admission to sin and
wickedness, knowing that God spared not the Angels that sinned, nor his people
which He brought out of Egypt, but afterward destroyed them that believed not:
nor the natural branches, or seed of Abraham, though elected of God, and in
Covenant with him as his first born people. He is not high minded because of
any grace bestowed upon or wrought in him, but fears to offend, or to follow
after any principle or counsel leading him thereto: knowing that though Gods
goodness is toward and upon him; yet the continuance of it to him is no
otherwise assured than in his abiding in Christ, keeping his Commandments, and
so continuing in his goodness, Prove. 14.16. Psalm. 37.34. 2 Corinthians. 1.20.
Romans 11.20, 21, 22, 23. John 15.9, 10. 1 Cor. 9.27. with 10.1, 3. 10, 11. But
the fool rages and is confident, or he goes on, transgresses, and is angry
with them that would put him in fear (...) any harm that may befall him; and is
bold and confident: confident that he stands so sure he can never be moved. He
can never fall away totally and finally, though he hearken to the enticements
of Sin and Satan, and follow his desire and inclination to satisfy his lust
and affection: for why? He is elected, He is in Christ, a Son of God: Sin he
may, and suffer he may, but all shall be for his advantage at last, and work
for his good: even his presumptuous sinnings and sufferings for them too, and
he can never perish; therefore he goes on, and whereas He that fears always
is blessed; this bold, presumptuous and confident fool falls into mischief,
Prove. 14.16. and 28.14.

6. A foresight of dangers, with a prudent, provident care to prevent them: and
this also because his Eyes are in his Head, and he makes use of them to look
before him; even to what is yet to come. And he has so good a fight through
the spirit of wisdom given him, in and through the faith of Christ, and
showing him things to come, as that he sees things afar off, and what others
see not; even the end of ways, and events, and issues of courses, good or evil,
before they be come upon men. He sees the effects in the causes, and the fruit
in the root, and in the nature of the stock and juice it springs from: whereas
the foo^ and evil man sees not things till they b^ come, or just upon them:
for he wants the eye of Faith, or which the Faith or Gospe^ of Christ received
gives; and he has no^ or uses not that heavenly prospective-glas^ which makes
evident things not otherwise seen; and shows the things that are far of in
their true magnitude, as if they were near hand: thus its said, The prudent man
foreseeth the evil and hides himself: the spir^ tually wise and good man sees
it before (...) be come into other men's sight or view, o^ before it be upon
him; and he sees the place of refuge, where he may be safe from it, and escape
its dint, and thither betake himself, and there hides himself, that (...) find
him not out. He knows that in Chri^ Jesus there is salvation and deliveran^
from all that is evil and may hurt him from the World or Devil, and that in
repentin^ (if gone astray from him) returning to, an^ believing on him, and
obeying his Wor^ and Doctrine, and abiding therein, h^ shall not perish, under
whatever may happen to or in the world, but he shall have everlasting life: and
therefore he betake himself to him, his counsels, and instruct^ons, and follows
them, trusting to h^ Promises, and so he is safe and hidden; but the simple
pass on, and are punished, they transgress and go beyond the bounds God has
set them, they abide not in the Doctrine of Christ, to believe and obey that;
and seeing no evil come upon them, nor any appearance of it, they go on, on,
on, in their deceitful ways till the sad issue of them come upon them; they cry
peace, peace, hoping for, and promising themselves safety and security till
punishment befalls them, till sudden destruction comes upon them as Travail upon
a Woman with Child, and they shall not escape it, Prove. 22.3. and 27.12. 1
These. 5.2, 3. But the Wise, with the prudent and provident Ant, they foresee a
Winter before ^t be arrived, while yet the Summer and Harvest last, and the Sun
shines warm upon them, and they provide against it come: provide their meat in
the Summer, and gather their food in the Harvest. Prove. 6.7, 8. and 30.25. They
know that though no Wild-Beast be yet upon them, yet many such there are; many
evil spirits, and evil men full of Craft, Power and Cruelty, and that they are
not (...) themselves able to encounter with them, and make their party good
against them, they being a feeble folk in themselves, and therefore preparing
against the worst, they, with the Conies make their houses and habitati^ns in
the rock; they make the Lord their refuge, the most High their habitation. Pro.
30.26. Ps. 91.9. They know that though the light be sweet, and its a pleasant
thing for the eye to see the Sun, yet the time of darkness will come too, and
that though a man may live many days and rejoice in them all, yet the days of
darkness will, or may, be many, because all that comes is vanity; and
therefore they remember God their Creator in the days of their youth, or
choice, before the evil days come, and those years draw near in which they
shall say they have no plea^ure in them. Eccles. 11.7, 8. and 12.1. knowing and
minding that in the world, the followers of Christ must have tribulation, and
are liable to many trials and temptations, and that they are often (and may be
so to themselves) deep and heavy, and of long continuance: They, with the wise
Virgins, are careful to furnish their Vessels with Oil, before they give rest
to their Souls; that so if long trials come upon them, and Christ defer his
coming to help and deliver them (figured out in the Parable by the Bridegrooms
staying till midnight) yet their Lamps may burn, and shine, and not go out:
that is, they mind the word of God, and knowledge of Christ, and treasure it up
within them; laying up in store a good foundation therein against the time to
come, that they may lay hold on eternal life: They meditate the Law and
Doctrine of the Lord day and night, and walk therein, that they may have such
hope and trust in the Lord, as to be made like the tree planted by the waters
side, and that spreads out her roots by the Rivers, that is not careful in the
year of drought, sees not, or is not hurt by any evil, nor ceases from bearing
fruit, etc. Mat. 25.1, 4, 7, 10. Jer. 17.7, 8. and so they lay up knowledge and
keep it within them. Prove. 10.14. and 14.33. and 22.18. and yet so as they make
use of it too, to shine as Lamps by it, and give light to others; and so there
is in them also.

7. A right use making of their knowledge, as it is said, the lips of the
righteous feed many. Pro. 10.21. and the tongue of the righteous uses
knowledge aright. Prove. 15.2. for as they keep knowledge, Prove. 5.2. so they
disperse it too, Prove. 15.7. and so they use it not for pride and ostentation
to puff up themselves with it, or do hurt by it to others, as fools and sinners
do, increasing therethrough their own guilt and punishment, but to do good to
and instruct others: and so they are (...), Teachers, as the Margin reads it,
or such as make others wise; that is, are Instruments of it in the hand of God.
As it is also said, The wise in heart (they thai with the heart believe the
Gospel unto righteousness) shall be ^alled prudent; and the sweetness of the
lips ^ncreaseth learning (with the mouth confession is made to salvation.) For
understanding is a well spring of life (both to himself and others) to him that
has it; Whereas, the instruction of fools is folly. The heart of the wise
teaches (or makes wise) his mouth, and adds learning to his lips. Pleasant
words are as honey comb, sweet to the soul, and health to the bones, of them
namely that hear and duly receive them. Prove. 16.21, 22, 23, 24. Romans 10.10.
and so we may take in here that other reading, The Teachers or Instructers
shall shine, etc. but then we must couple in the former reading with it, and
understand it of such Teachers as are also themselves wise in the points spoken
to and explicated: such as do first hear and obey the word themselves, and are
doers of the truth they teach to others; for it is not every one that says
Lord, Lord, that is the wise man; for many shall say in that day to Christ,
Lord, Lord have we not Prophesied in thy name? and in thy name cast out Devils?
and in thy name done many wonderful works? to whom He shall say, Depart from me
ye that work iniquity. Therefore our Savior likens him that hears his sayings
and does them, to a wise man, that built his house upon a rock: and when the
rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that
house it fell not, because it was founded upon (...) Rock, Whereas, the hearer
of them and the not doer (the prating fool, that receives not commandments to
obey and do them) is like a foolish man that built his house without a
foundation (or upon the sands) and the rain descended, and the floods came, and
the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell (and so the prating fool
shall fall) and great the fall of it, Matt. 7.21-27. Prove. 10.8. But he that
hears himself speaks constantly Prove. 21.28.

And indeed this instruction may be signified in the diversity of construction
of this word, rendered wise and Teachers: viz. That they that would be (or are)
Teachers of others, should be wise themselves, (i.e.) Men of understanding and,
fearers of God, (none others being wise in the Scripture language: thence the
righteous are opposed to fools, Prover. 14.9.) Art thou a master in Israel,
says our Savior to Nicodemus, and know not these things, John 3.10.
implying, that Masters, or Teachers in Israel, should not be strangers to the
matters of regeneration, whereof he had been there speaking: Verily, verily I
say unto thee, We (namely Christ and his faithful servants) speak what we know:
and testify what we have seen, ver. 11. It is noted of our Savior, that He
did and taught, Act. 1.1. and so he would have others also do: Whosoever (says
He) shall do and teach, the same shall be called great in the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew. 5.19. such are the subject of Gods promises here, the truly
wise, for the foolish (though prating fools) shall not stand in Gods sight. He
hates (as to fellowship with him, or as to admission of them to nighness to
him) all the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5.5. But the wise shall inherit glory,
Prove. 3.35. which is the sum and substance of what is here asserted, when he
says, They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament: and
that is

2. The Second thing in, or part of, the Proposition, that that makes it up a
full Proposition or Observation, and therein we come to enquire what is
imported in its being said, They shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament. Wherein I shall here only speak of its general import, leaving the
Metaphorical resemblance till afterward: and so it is to be noted that he says
not they do shine; but in the future, they shall: which future may either refer
to all the time of Michael's standing up, as it may signify the whole day of
Christ's manifestation, and of the Gospel preaching him, according to the
revelation of the mystery, and so indeed as our Savior himself was the light
of the world, while a Preacher in it, Joh. 9.5. So he calls John Baptist a
burning and a shining light, John 5.35. and his Disciples, the light of the
world, Matthew. 5.14. and the Angels of the seven Churches are called seven
Stars, Rev. 1.20. and both He and the Apostle would have the believers of his
Doctrine, and the Preachers thereof to shine as lights unto others, holding
forth the word of life, Matt. 5.16. Phil. 1.1. with 2.16. or else it rather
refers to the time to come: When Christ shall be revealed from Heaven, and come
with all his Saints: and they that here believed on him, and served him, and
suffered with him, shall appear with him in glory, 1 These. 3.13. Coll. 3.4. the
time of the resurrection mentioned in the verse. before; or of the end of the
world: and this appears more properly to be the time spoken of, because of what
we find from our Savior to that purpose, in the Parable of the Wheat and
Tares; where our Savior says, that in the end of the world, the Son of man
shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all
(seandals, or) things that offend, and them that do iniquity, and shall cast
them into a furnace of fire, where shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth; and
adds, Then (at that time) shall the righteous (the truly wise) shine forth as
the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. He that has ears to hear, let him
hear, Mat. 13.40, 41, 42, 43. Indeed here, and now in this world and time,
though they be and shine as lights, yet they are beclouded and obscured very
much with reproaches, put to shame and ignominy among men, and that by the
greatest persons of, and such are in most repute for wisdom and learning with
them, and have a great luster and splendor therethrough in the earth; even as
our Lord himself, the bright and morning Star, and the Sun of righteousness was
vilified and set at naught by the Master builders, the chief Priests, Scribes,
and Pharisees, and Rulers of the people, they that thought themselves righteous
and very wise, and were reputed the most eminent and religious persons among
others, men of the straitest Sect of Religion, that had a great deal of zeal
and devotion, a great appearance of piety and religion, and whom the eyes of
men were therefore generally upon, as appears by that saying, John 7.48. Have
any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? These covered him over
with reproaches, calling him a Wine-bibber, and a gluttonous man, a friend of
Publicans and Sinners, Matthew 11.19. A Samaritan, and one that had a Devil,
Joh. 8.48. One that deceived the people, John 7.12. that He cast out Devils by
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, Mat. 12.24. yea that he was Beel zebub himself,
Matt. 10.25. as if he had been a Devil incarnate instead of God manifested in
the flesh, a Blasphemer, Joh. 10.33, 36. Matt. 26.65. a Teacher of sedition,
and an enemy to Caesar, Luke 23.2. John 19.12. and as He foretold that it should
be with his Followers, that they should be reproached, and have their names
cast out as evil doers, so it befell and befalls them also, and that too, from
men appearingly pious and religious, that make a great show and flourish in the
flesh, and would be esteemed the only Masters in Religion; the most zealous and
Orthodox: by such oftimes the truly wise are reputed among the foolish, and the
followers of Christ numbered, as He was, with the transgressors, suspected and
accused of error or heresy, false doctrine, or bad living, because not
consenting with their Rabbiships in all their Dogma's, or not conforming to
them in all their scrupulosities or fuperstitions: Such sometimes are accounted
Fanatics, Schismatics, Arminians, Pelagians, and branded with names as
hateful as that of Samaritan was to the Jews and Pharisees. So as it is not
easy to discern who are the lights in truth to be followed, or walked with by
us; in respect whereof partly, they are also called Gods hidden ones, Psalm.
83.3. But then at that great day they shall appear; for God will bring forth
their righoeousness as the light, and their judgment as the noon day. Psalm.
37.6. Then Zions righteousness shall go forth as brightness, and their
salvation as a lamp that burns. And the Gentiles shall see their
righteousness and all Kings their glory. Isa. 62.1, 2. Especially such as being
endued with wisdom themselves, do also improve it for others good, so as they
make others also wise and righteous as follows. For I shall wave the farther
enlargement to this, and the use to be made of it, till I have taken in the
second Proposition or Assertion also, they both agreeing in the substance of
their praedicates or matters asserted, and only differing in the manner and way
of illustration. And so it follows.

2. Propos. They that turn many to righteousness, (justify or make righteous
many) shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever. Wherein are diverse things
employed. As,

1. That men are naturally in and of themselves void of or without
righteousness, as it is said, there is none righteous. No, not one. Either as
to the primitive, original righteousness, in which God made us at first; or as
to the righteousness of (or after) the Law) for all have sinned and are come
short of the glory of God. Romans 3.10, 23. yea that men are averse from
righteousness; out of the way of or toward it; their backs upon it as it ^re;
as those that are going from it, or farther and farther off it. So much is
employed in the phrase of turning them to righteousness. Which word, turning,
though not formally in the Original Text here, yet is found in Luke 1.17. Acts
26.18. and in other places; and so the Scripture expressly affirms of all men in
their natural unconverted state; yea of those also that are under the Law, and
are seeking and endeavoring after righteousness according to the Law; that
they are all gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable, there
is none that does good; no not one. Destruction and misery are in all their
ways, and the way of peace they have not known. Romans 3.12-17.19.

2. That there is a righteousness for men to be turned to; or a way for those
that are not, to be made righteous: both as righteousness signifies freedom and
discharge from the guilt of sin and condemnation by the Law for it: and as it
signifies a conformity to the mind of God, and title and right thence to Gods
Blessing and Promises. For,

1. There is a righteousness wrought and prepared of God for us in both
respects in Christ Jesus; called therefore the righteousness of God, and not
our own. Phil. 3.8, 9. a righteousness without the Law; not commanded us in,
nor to be attained of us by the Law, in observing and acting after that (for
the Law neither required Christ to suffer and die for us, nor us to get him to
do so) but yet is witnessed to by the Law and Prophets: even the righteousness
of God by faith of Jesus Christ unto (or for all ((...)) and upon all that
believe. A righteousness freely prepared of God in Christ, and wrought by
Christ for, and declared and manifested in the Gospel (which is the faith) of
Christ unto all, as that that is free for all, and God would have all submit
to, and come and partake of: but comes upon all that believe, so as they have
benefit of it. This is Christ himself in a sort as delivered up for our
offenses, and raised again from the dead for our justification: That has given
himself the ransom for all men from that first death and judgment they were
fallen under; and being raised again is the Propitiation, the abiding covering
Sacrifice ((...)) for the sins of the whole world: so as there is in him a
plentious Redemption, a power and sufficiency for the forgiveness of the sins
of the whole world: a covering plaster and hiding of sins for all the world:
and this intended on Gods part, as a Medicine or Propitiation for the whole
world; so as that forgiveness of sins is with him therein for them all, as in a
public Fountain or Treasury where they may have it in a due repairing thither
for it. Yea, and during the day of his grace and patience, their sins are so
far covered, as that they are preserved thereby from actually perishing, his
patience is afforded that they might repent, to the end that in coming to him
they might receive forgiveness of sins; yea and title to Gods Promises and the
blessings thereof; and be made righteous and conformable to him in themselves
(such is the virtue in him) and so fitted and made meet for their enjoyment.
And this comes upon all that believe (that giving hearty credit to the Gospel,
are brought in, to depend on God in and by Christ; yiedling up themselves to
him, to listen to, and be guided and ordered by him) so as that they become
actually justified therereby, both acquitted of all their sins and interested
in all Gods Promises by virtue of him, who also makes and will make them more
and more comformable to Gods mind in all righteous frames and conversation. As
it is said. Be it known unto you, that through this man is preached to you the
forgiveness of sins. That as a thing prepared and made ready in him for all,
and to be received by men in their being turned from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God. Acts 26.18. And in him ((...)) all that
believe are justified from all things from which they could not be justified by
the Law of Moses. Acts 13.38.39. Through his name whosoever believes shall
receive remission of sins. Acts 10.43. And so being justified by his grace are
made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. Tit. 3.7. And He will
sanctify and cleanse them by the washing of water in the Word; so as to
present them to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle, or any
such thing: but that they may be holy and without blemish. Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
Thus is Christ the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes:
so as to make them just and righteous in Gods sight. Romans 10.34. 1 Cor. 1.30.
and thence his name is The Lord our Righteousness Jer. 23.6. This is that
righteousness of his which he has openly declared, revealed or showed in the
Gospel. In the sight of the Heathen. The Salvation prepared before the face of
all people. Psalm. 98.2. Luke 2.30. As also,

2. There is a righteous frame and disposition of Soul, and a righteous
demeanor, conversation and walking proposed to us in the Scriptures of truth,
in the word and doctrine of the Gospel, to be followed after by us in the
receiving of and walking in Christ Jesus; which the grace of God that brings
Salvation (or is saving) to all men teaches, Tit. 2.11, 12. 1 Timothy 6.11. and
All Scripture given by inspiration of God is profitable to instruct and direct
us in, and promote in us, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16.

3. That men may be turned to this righteousness from their unrighteous state
and practices: or they may be made partakers and practicers thereof. It is
true, no man can of himself turn himself thereto; or make himself righteous
therewith. This also is of God; who as he made his Son who knew no sin, sin for
us that we might be made the righteousness of God in him: so also sent his Son
to bless us in turning every one of us from our iniquities. Acts 3.26. and has
put his spirit upon him that he might bring forth judgment to us. By whom he
has also given forth his Law and Doctrine which is a ministration of the
spirit, (and so is perfect converting the soul, Psalm. 19.7.) and of
righteousness. 2 Cor. 3.8, 9. The Gospel, or preaching, of Christ is the power
of God to salvation to every one that believes: yea and the word of faith by
which seriously heard and minded the heart is persuaded to believe, Romans 1.16.
and 10.8.17. Isa. 55.3. With this our Lord Jesus sent his Servants to open the
eyes of the blind, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan to God, Acts 26.18. True it is that all have not this Law and Doctrine
of God alike clearly, nor some at all declared to them, but even there the
goodness or kindness of God as otherwise evidenced, is leading them to
repentance; to which also his chastisments provokes them. And though they
cannot by those less clear means attain to that understanding and abundance of
consolation as men may by the clearer means the Law and Doctrine of God as
audibly and distinctly made known (at least ordinarily and without miracle) yet
they that by such means fear God and work righteousness, or keep the
righteousness of the Law, their uncircumcision is counted circumcision, and God
through and by means of Christ accepts them, Acts 10.34. Romans 2.4, 5, 26, 27.
But the choice way and means that God uses for conversion and turning of men
to himself, is the preaching of the Gospel. That being a preaching of
repentance and remission of sins in the name of Jesus Christ, Luke 24.46, 47.
and therein Christ is set forth a Prince and a Savior, giving repentance and
forgiveness of sins, Acts 5.31. though so as yet men are therefore required to
listen to him, and in hearing to receive the grace he gives for turning them,
so as to repent and be converted that God may blot out their sins and forgive
them, Acts 3.19. Yea he now by and with the Gospel preached to all Nations,
commands all men every where to repent, Acts 17.30. whereunto his Spirit is not
straightened, or shortened, but so administered that his words do good to him that
walks uprightly, that does not willingly and stubbornly decline the force of
them; winking with the eye, that he might not see, and hardening the heart, that
he might not understand, and be converted; but singly yields up to the power
working therewith, Mic. 2.7. Matt. 13.12-15. Acts 28.26, 27.

4. That he makes use of Men and their Ministry or Service, even such as he
has endued with wisdom and capacity thereto, by holding forth that word,
law, and doctrine, and walking therein blamelesly, to be means or instruments
for converting men and bringing them to righteousness; by bringing them to
Christ Jesus to know, believe on, and obey him. And such as are made wise and
gracious themselves by that blessed word He commissionates and commands them to
call others to Christ, that they might be made wise and righteous also in and
by him. So He gave the word, and great was the company of publishers of it,
Psalm. 68.11. and Christ being ascended on high, gave gifts to men. And He gave
some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, or Gospel-preachers, some
Pastors and Teachers, furnishing them with gifts, and appointing them in the
exercise of those gifts to instruct others that are ignorant in the knowledge of
Christ, and thereby endeavor their conversion unto God, Ephesians. 4.8-11. and so to
make them Disciples to Christ, and so wise and righteous persons, Matt. 28.18,
19, 20. Mark 16.15, 16. He has set them as the salt of the earth, and light of
the world, to be useful and profitable to others, to draw them in also to
glorify God, Mat. 5.13, 14, 15, 16. Yea, The manifestation of the Spirit is
given to every one to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. and No man lights any candle
to put it under a bushel, or under a bed, but to set it on a Candlestick, that
it may give light to all that come into the house, Matt. 5.15. Every one that
hears (that in any measure udderstands and is obedient to the truth of the
Gospel) has commission and command from Christ to call others to him,
endeavoring their coming to him, that they may be made righteous. Let him that
hears say, Come. Rev. 22.17. Christ commissionates neither all, nor only
University Scholars, and those that are learned in the Arts and Sciences to be
his Ministers, Preachers of his Gospel, and inviters of men to Him; and so
instruments of turning them to righteousness, and makers of them righteous. If
they hear not his Call themselves, and be not subject and obedient to Him, He
commissionates them not to be his Preachers, nor accepts their service, how
learned soever otherwise they be. For to the wicked God says, What have thou
to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy
mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee? Psalm.
50.16, 17. But whosoever hears, yea whither man or woman, learned or unlearned in
worldly Sciences, they are bid to say, Come: and they may do it, so they keep
(as all must) within their bounds, and go not beyond the proportion of Faith
that they have received, or behave not themselves disorderly. A Woman indeed is
not permitted to speak in the Church, or Congregation, nor to usurp authority
over the man; but otherwise if they have the gift, they may pray or prophecy, 1
Cor. 14.24. and 11.5. 1 Timothy 2.11, 12 and be Teachers of good things, Tit. 2.3.
and by their good conversaion may endeavor to win in their husbands that
believe not the word, 1 Pet. 3.1. the woman of Samaria was a good instrument by
calling her neighbors to bring them to know Christ, Joh. 4. and not only
Aquila, but Priscilla too instructed Apollos, and helped to bring him to a
perfecter understanding in the way of the Lord, Acts 18.24, 25, 26. and we read
in the Church History of a woman that was very instrumental in converting a
Nation. Every man as he has received the gift of God may minister the same one
to another as good stewards of the manifold grace of God, 1 Pet. 4.10. (though
every one may not be an Elder or Officer in or over a Church, but such as are
chosen orderl thereto) doing all things orderly, decently, and so as in
charity, and for edification, 1 Cor. 14.26 40. and 16.14. He that had but one
Talent, should have traded with it; and put it to use for his Lords advantage,
and ought not to have wrapped it up in a Napkin, or hid it in the earth; and for
his not doing so, he met with that terrible Sentence; Thou wicked and slothful
servant, thou knew that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I strowed
not: Thou ought therefore to have put my money to the Exchangers -- Take
therefore the Talent from him -- and cast ye the unprofitable Servant into
utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matt. 25.26, 27,
28, 30.

5. That where men are faithful in holding forth the word and truth of God, and
walk thereafter, and so to their abilities and capacities are seeking the glory
of God and the good of Souls, there God is and will be with them, and bless
them, Mat^ 28.18, 19, 20. the Difciples going forth, and doing, and observing
what Christ commanded them, he promises, Lo I am with you always to the end
of the world. So the Lord by the Prophet Jeremy, says, If they had stood in my
counsel, and caused my people to hear my words, then they should have turned
them from their evil ways, and from the evil of their doings. Jer. 23.22. The
diligent hand here too makes rich, Prove. 10.4. while Paul plants and Apollo
waters, God gives increase, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7. If men refuse to come to Christ to
be converted and gathered to him, and to God in, and by him, whom his servants
would gather to him; their labor in that case shall not be in vain, they shall
be accepted of God, and reckoned as gatherers of many, or turners of them to
God, because they did faithfully endeavor it: even as Abraham in the Scripture
is reputed to have offered up his Son Isaac, though he was not actually
sacrificed, or slain, (God by his Angel interposing) because he was really
willing and ready to have offered him up, and intended it, Genes. 22. with Heb.
11.17, 18. And our Lord Jesus when he complained that He had labored in vain
and spent his strength in vain, and for naught, because when he would have
gathered Israel, Israel would not be, or were not gathered, comforts himself in
this, that his judgment was with the Lord, and his work or reward with his God.
Isa. 49.4. That is, God would judge him and reward him according to his
faithfulness, and hearty endeavor after others good, as fully as if they had
received the good he desired. Thence he adds, that though Israel be not
gathered, yet should he be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and his God would
be his strength. Yea, and make him successful to others; not only to raise up
the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved (or desolations) of Israel,
but also to be, a light to the Gentiles, and to be his Salvation to the ends of
the earth. verse 5, 6.

And truly that we may also note, that often times when the labor of his
servants prove unsuccessful with some, he directs them to others with whom they
find success: as in the Parables of the marriage Dinner, and of the great
Supper; when the labor of the servants in calling the forebidden Guests proved
unsuccessful, they setting light by the Feast and making excuses why they would
not, or could not come; they were ordered to others, to call and bring them in,
with whom their endeavors took such place, that the Feast and house was filled
with Guests, Mat. 22.1, 2-9, 10. Luke 14.16, 17-23. And when the Apostle Paul,
laboring with the Jews to convince and turn them in to God, found them
unbelieving and obstinate: God sent him to the Gentiles that would hear, and
many of them were converted by him. Acts 13.46, 47, 48, and 28.25-28. Yea many,
in many places were brought in by his, and his fellow lobourors Ministry, as
appears in many chapters of the book of the Acts. God often going forth with
his Servants so as to prevail upon peoples hearts. So he went forth with Peter
and the Apostles at Jerusalem, so as many thousands were converted by them.
Acts 2.41, 47. and 4.4. and 5.14. and 21.20. Yea, and with those that were not
Apostles: and, for ought we find mentioned of them, no ordained persons, by any
humane ordination. Those that were scattered abroad by reason of the
persecution that arose about Stephen, went and Preached the word every where,
and the hand of the Lord was with them, so as a great number believed and
turned to the Lord. Acts 8.1, 4. and 11.19, 20, 21. So does God own and
accompany the faithful diligent endeavors of his Servants. He that received
five Talents, and traded diligently with them, and he that received but two did
likewise, both of them were so blessed of God in their trading, as to double
their stock: that so no man might be discouraged from diligence by the less
measure of his received furniture or gifts. Yea, and doubtless had he that had
but one Talent, traded with it, and been faithful and diligent to improve it,
he should have been so blessed therein, as to have brought in an acceptable
increase; perhaps two or three more, Mat. 25.16, 17.

6. That where men in their faithful and diligent improvement of their Talents,
are made instruments of converting men ( Ministers by whom they believe as God
gives to any or every one, 1 Cor. 3.5.) there he attributes the event and the
effect to them, though but instruments, as if they were the Authors and
Producers thereof. So here, they that instruct many, and are succeeded with
their conversion, are said to turn many to righteousness, or to make many
righteous; though the power was of God and not of them, and the praise to be
given to him; without whose power and blessing they had done nothing, much less
effected any good by their doing. So the effect is sometimes attributed to the
Instrumental cause, sometimes to the Principal. As the Axe is said to hew or
cut down a Tree, though of it self it can perform no action; but the man that
uses it may more properly be said to hew or cut down with or by it. Thus our
Savior oftimes ascribed his cures to the faith of the persons cured, because
therethrough they received the benefit which they that believed not could not
receive; not coming to him for it, or being judged unworthy of it, Mat. 9.22.
Mark 5.34. and 10.52. Luke 7.50. and 8.48. and 17.19. and 18.42. with Mat.
13.58. Mark 6.5, 6. And so the Apostle says to Timothy, Take heed to thy self
and to the Doctrine; continue in them; for in so doing, thou shall both save
thy self and them that hear thee. Attributing his own and others men's Salvation
to him in his faithful diligence in his work and office, which supreamly was to
be ascribed to God only, and his grace in Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 4.16. After the
same race or manner does he here speak of making others wise (as the former
word may be rendered) and of turning to righteousness, justifying or making just
many. But as these things are all here employed, so it is here plainly and sully
expressed and said;

7. And lastly, That they that turn many to righteousness (or make many
righteous) they shall shine as the Stars, for ever and ever. That Is the full
proposition here asserted. That is;

1. In the short and sum of it, they shall be gloriously rewarded for the good
therein done by them; their work shall be with the Lord, so as he will highly
recompense it or reward it with glory. Yea, both they that are wise themselves,
and those also more especially that are instrumental causes, by their faithful
endeavors of making others wife and righteous; especially they that make many
so, shall be rewarded gloriously, or with great glory, in the resurection of
the just. (and so we shall carry them both on together as I said above) and
this because;

Rea. 1. God is not unrighteous to forget their labor after wisdom, and
especially therein, their love to his name. He having of his great goodness
made precious promises of rewards unto such, Heb. 6.10. with 2 Cor. 6.16, 17,
18. and 7.1. Mal. 3.17. and 4.2, 3. He is faithful and cannot, nor will forget
his word, or go back from his Covenant confirmed and ratifyed in, and by the
blood of his only Son, but will make it good and perform it to the utmost, Heb.
10.23. with Isa. 51.6. For the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the
earth shall wax old as a Garment: but my salvation (says he) shall be for
ever, and my righecousness shall not be abolished. And He has promised to
accept and reward gloriously such persons as are themselves wise, and causes of
others being so, and that being themselves just and righteous, are causes of
righteousness to others, ( Psalm. 91.14, 15, 16. Isa. 62.1, 2, 3.) Because

Reas. 2. He is a lover of wisdom and righteousness. He is himself the only
wise God, Romans 16.27. Jude 25. and the just and righteous Lord, Zeph. 3.5. and
wisdom and righteousness are of, and from him, Prove. 2.6. Psalm 4.1. beams
issuing forth from or generated by him, and his influxes, and therefore loved
of him; or rather they are the beams and influences of his blessed and beloved
Son, our Lord Jesus, the wisdom of God and his tighteousness, or just and
righteous one; and therefore they are lovely too, and delighted in by him, so
as to render lovely and delightful to him those that are in, so as to be made
wise and righteous by them. As it is said, A wise Son makes a glad Father,
Prove. 10.1. And my Son, if thine heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even
mine, yea my reins shall rejoice when thy lips speak right things, Prove. 23.15,
16. And, My Son be wise, and make my heart glad, that I may answer him that
reprorcheth me, Prove. 27.11. comparing those passages with Chap. 3.11, 12. Heb.
12.5, 6, 7, 8. whereas the foolish may not stand in his sight. He hates all
the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5.4, 5. The righteous Lord loves righteousness,
and the righteous: his countenance does behold the just, Psalm. 11.7. and 146.8.
Yea, because also

Reas. 3. He loves mankind, and desires man's welfare and happiness, Would have
all men saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, that being good and
acceptable in his sight. He would not that any perish, but all come to
repentance; to which purpose he has interposed his only Son, the man Christ
Jesus, who gave himself a ransom, or price of redemption for all, the one and
only Mediator of God and man; therefore he would have all men wise and
righteous, that they might be happy, 1 Timothy 2.3, 4, 5, 6. 2 Peter 3.9. He would
rather that the wicked turn and live, than go on in sin and die, and perish:
therefore also he loves those that are so wise, as to take the course to be
happy, as Men loving their Children like it mainly when they see they do well,
and take the course to live happily; and therefore also He loves and likes them
mainly, who being wise themselves make it their business, (by holding forth his
Word and Doctrine, and setting before them the love and goodness of God, and
the great things he has done for them, and invites them too, their need
thereof, and the misery that will come upon them, if neglecting them, etc.) to
do their endeavor to convert others to righteousness, and bring them to be just
and good, that they may be happy. For seeing he loves man, and desires his
welfare, nothing can be more acceptable to him, than to endeavor to promote
man's happiness. And indeed he has therefore so highly loved, honored, and
glorified his Son Jesus Christ, as man, because He in obedience to Him and love
to us, laid down his life for us; as he says Himself: Therefore my Father
loves me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again, Joh. 10.17.
And because he humbled himself to Death, the Death of the Cross for us, that so
he might therethrough be the Savior of us, The Author of eternal Salvation to
all that obey him, and bring many sons to glory; therefore God has highly
exalted him, and given him a Name above every name, that every knee should bow
to Him, and every tongue confess to him, that He is Lord, to the glory of God
the Father, Phil. 2.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. with Heb. 2.10. and 5.9. so as He is the
brightness of his glory, and in the fullness of his power and glory for
evermore. And as any one in listening to and believing on Him, becomes a
follower and disciple of Him, and walks in his steps, making it his business,
according to his capacity, to do good to others, and win them in to him, and so
to righteousness; so God loves and approves of them the more, and will conform
them to his blessed Son, and give them fellowship with him in his Kingdom and
Glory. Yea they that come nearest him in likeness of love, and charity, and
gooddoing to others here, shall doubtless be nearest to him in glory hereafter.
God so loves man, that he likes and approves it, and will reward it, when men
so love one another, as to do good to one another in outward and bodily
matters. He that is (good of, or) has a bountiful eye shall be blessed: for he
gives of his bread to the poor, Proverbs 22.9. and He that has pity on the
poor, lends to the Lord, and what he has given will he pay him again, Chap.
19.17. especially they that out of love to Christ and them relieve his Members
and Brethren, though but with outward bodily reliefs, for they shall hear that
heavenly Sentence, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world, Matt. 25.34, 35, 36. Oh how
much more then shall they be rewarded that have hazarded their lives, and spent
their time and strength to do good to the Souls of others; to turn them in to
Christ, to the making them righteous, and so his friends and brethren; and
preserving them from hell and destruction! Surely the wise (and wisemakers)
shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament: and they that turn many to
righteousness (or make many righteous) as the stars for ever and ever: they
shall be glorious, abundantly glorious: that is the substance of what is
asserted here of them, and signified in both the Metaphors used for
illustration, and in what is added thereto; wherein we have also,

2. The manner of their being glorified, or rather the exceeding great measure
of it. We may speak to both the Metaphors together, as to what is common to
both first; and then take notice of something peculiar and special, in which
there is some difference,

1. Common to both, namely to the ^rightness of the Firmament, and to the
^tars, is that they are; 1. High above us, and so it may denote and signify,
that both ^he wise, and they that turn many to God, shall be highly honored
and glorified: even ^s Christ, the great turner of many to God, ^e perfect one
in wisdom and maker of ^ise men, is highly glorified above all, so (...) He is
far above all Principalities and Po^ers, Thrones and Dominions, and every name
^at is named both in this world, and in that to ^me, Ephesians. 1.20, 21. Angels,
Principali^ and Authorities being made subject to ^im, 1 Pet. 3.22. And all
things put under his feet. He being glorified with Gods own self, even with
that glory He had with him before the world was, Heb. 2.8. John 17.5. and
therein exalted, extolled and made very high, Isaiah 52.13. So also they that
here are wise, and means and instruments of making others so, and they that in
their endeavors turn many to righteousness, shall be highly glorified, God
will exalt and honor them, and set them on high, because they have known and
glorified his Name, Psalm. 91.14, 15, 16. Yea their glory shall be as high above
all the glory of this earth, as the Heavens are higher than the earth; and the
stars above our common lights and torches, and that i^ exceeding high, as it is
said, Is not God i^ the height of heaven, and behold the height o^ the Stars
how high they are, Job 22.12. an^ yet as high as the Heavens are above the
earth so great is his mercy (or kindness) toward the^ that fear him, Psalm.
103.11. Their glor^ shall be above the reach of men, either (...) give to them,
or take from them. Ah^ suerus having promoted Haman, and set h^ feat above all
the Princes that were wi^ him, yet could pull him down thence, a^ command him
to the gallows. But the gl^ry of the Saints shall be above the reach (...)
either Men or Devils to pull them do^ from.

Pure and unmixt bodies, and their splen^our or glory in which they shine, is
pure and elear; there is no fuliginous, smoaky, ^isty matter mixed with the
Firmament, specially the brightness of the Firmament, and the glorious Stars:
neither is there any ^ixture of man's invention and endeavor (...) their
splendor, or shine, as in the shin^ngs or brightness of fires, or candles, and
^orches here below: even so also shall the ^lory and splendour of the Saints and
holy ^en, the truly wise and such as have turn^d many to righteousness, be a
pure and ^nmixed glory and splendor; nothing of ^orldly casualties, changes,
or vicissitudes ^all it be obnoxious to; neither shall there ^e any thing so
weak, as that that is of man's ^aming and devising put upon them; as ^ow there
is put upon the sons of the glory ^f this world; human wreaths and crowns,
^tles, dignities, robes, and the like: But ^l shall be there, and upon them
divine and heavenly, pure and unmixed, the new ^erusalem, the Bride, the Lambs
wife shall ^ave on her the glory of God: and her light, ^lendor, or luster,
shall be like that of a stone ^ost precious, like a Jasper- stone, (in part ^e
representation of the glorious God upon is throne, Rev. 4.3.) clear as
Crystal, Re^elat. 21.11.

3. Most manifest and conspicuous, such is the brightness of the Firmament, and
the Stars above; they may be seen by their own light, at the greatest distance
and remoteness: even a man, as it were, with half an eye may see their shining
splendor; so as the brightness of candles and torches at a great distance
cannot be seen: even so the glory of the wise and faithful ones that are
instruments of turning many to Christ, it shall be most bright and manifest, it
shall be seen and beheld of all: for when Christ shall appear in glory, they
shall also appear in glory with him, Coll. 3.4. Therefore that time and state
is called, the manifestation of the Sons of God, when they shall all be seen
and known, who and how excellent they are, Romans 8.19.21. then men that could
see no glory in and upon the servants and fearers of God, nor no profit
accruing to men by his fear and service; but said, It is in vain to serve God,
and what profit to keep his ordinances, and walk mournfully before him, and
that call the proud happy, shall tack about, and turn, and gaze upon the
strange change that shall be then, and discern plainly between the righteous
and the wicked; the wise man that is truly and spiritually so, and the fool;
him that serves God, and him that serves him not. For then the day of the
Lord shall burn like an oven, and all the proud, and all that do wickedly shall
be as stubble; and the day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of
Hosts, so as it shall leave them neither root nor branch. But unto them that
fear the Lord, shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing under his
wings: So as to render them bright and conspicuous also. Yea, then the
righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father: So as
their glory cannot possibly be any longer hid, Matt. 13.43. Mal. 3.14, 15, 17.
and 4.2. Now the life of the Saints and holy men of God is hid with Christ in
God: but then Christ their life appearing, it shall appear also to be very
glorious; when He shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all
them that believe; their glory shall be so great, clear and wonderful, and so
discerned to be by all, Coll. 3.3, 4. 2 These. 1.10. And then the sons of them
that hated them shall come bending to them, and all they that despised them,
and looked upon them as poor, piteous, sorry people, shall bow down themselves
at the soles of their feet, and call them the City of the Lord; the Zion of the
holy one of Israel: and whereas they were forsaken and hated, God will make
them an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations, Isai. 60.14, 15. and
that leads to the next thing, They shall be as the brightness of the Firmament,
and as the Stars.

4. Perpetually and everlastingly glorious. The Firmament and Stars are not
subject to those decays, and expirings, and extinguishments as to their luster
and glory, as our inferior lights, Candles, Torches, and the like, which may
either be blown out, and so loose their shine, or will of themselves in short
time expire and go out, as suffering a consumption and defect of the matter
that feeds their light and shine: but though by reason of the Clouds
intervening, or the earth in their daily revolutions, in their turning about
it, or by reason of the brighter glory of the Sun, their brightness or shining
luster is not always seen by us; yet they are always alike bright and
glorious in themselves. And yet because of that intermission of their shining
unto us, by reason of those things above mentioned, the Holy Ghost might, to
supply that defect, add here that expression (which may be understood to
appertain to both clauses) viz. That they shall shine for ever and ever. (...).
a hidden, unknown time, and still beyond that, even for ever and ever: their
glory shall be like the glory of God that shall shine upon them everlasting,
Everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, and sorrow and sighing shall flee
away, Isai. 35.10 and 51.11. They shall be an eternal excellency for the Lord
shall be their everlasting light, and the days of their mourning shall be
ended, Isaiah 60.15, 19, 20. The glory of this world passes away, and men's
shining luster like the lamp of the wicked goes out, their honor shall not
descend to the grave after them, Psalm. 59.17. 1 John 2.17. but God will give
these an everlasting name, honor and renown, so as they shall be had in
everlasting remembrance, Isa. 56.5. Psalm. 112.6. For the mercy and kindness,
((...)) of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him,
and his righteousness unto childrens children, to such as keep his Covenant,
and think upon his Commandments to do them, Psalm. 103.17, 18.

5. Indeed both the brightness of the Firmament and the shining of the Stars
are inferior to that of the Sun: and so the Holy Ghost may signify in his use
of those Similitudes, that their glory spoken of shall be inferior to the
glory of the Lord Jesus Christ the Sun of righteousness, and indeed its meet
that He in all things and for ever should have the pre-eminence, and be
glorified in ^ll their glory, as they also are made glorious by partaking of
his: as the Philosophers tell us, that the Firmament and Stars derive their
shining luster and splendor from the Sun, and from its light and luster: So to
be sure all the Saints and holy ones shall do so from Christ, not shining in
any splendour, in such sense their own, as not to have or derive it from him.
And yet inasmuch as our Savior uses the Metaphor of the Sun to set forth the
greatness of the then shining glory of the righteous, Matthew. 13.43. it may
signify to us also, that the Mystery of God, and the great and glorious
thoughts and purposes of his heart toward his servants and people was not made
out so sully and clearly in former times to and by the holy Prophets, as they
are now in these last days by the coming, and appearing, and in the Doctrine
and Discoveries of the Lord Jesus by himself and his Apostles, Ephs. 3.5. We
have the things of God more fully made known in these last days than in those
former times, God reserving this honor to the appearance and ministry of his
bleffed Son. As the way into the Holiest was not y^ made manifest, while the
first Tabernacle wa^ standing: So neither was the glory of it or that was to be
thence revealed, so fully signified and declared, Heb 9.8.

2. As to what is peculiar of difference in these two Metaphors or Similitudes,
the brightness of the firmament and the Stars I shall only observe, that the
Stars are the more glorious ornaments of the Firmament, and exceed the
brightness of the Firmament barely, or where there is no Star. And so to that
in saying that they are wise, or instruct, shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness as the Stars. We may note,
that he does signify both

1. That there shall be different degrees of glory given as rewards to the
fearers and servant of God: as is also signified by the Apostle in saying, He
that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly, and he that sows liberally shall
reap liberally, 2 Cor. 9.6. And our Savior implies the like in his answer to
the two Sons of Zebedee and their Mother, desiring that they might sit one at
his right hand, and the other at his left hand in his Kingdom: for He tells
them among other things, that ^o sit at his right hand and at his left in his
Kingdom (that is, to be near to Him) is not his to give, but to them for whom
it is prepared ^f his Father, as implying that it is so prepared for some, but
not for all his Disciples, Matthew. 20.21-23. Mark 10.40. as also it is employed
in that of Zechary 12.8. ^s the words may be construed and understood, where he
says, He that is feeble among them, shall in that day be as David: and the
house of David shall be as God, as the Angel of God before him: and in that of
the Apostle, that as one Star differs from another Star in glory: So also
shall be the Resurrection of the dead, 1 Cor. 15.41, 42.

2. That the greatest Glory shall be given to them that are most abundant in
doing good; for they that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament, but that is less than the Stars; like to which they shall shine that
turn many to righteousness; which is more than simply the being wise, yea or
instructing or making others wise: for so they may do that turn not many to
righteousness: this also is confirmed by the former proofs, particularly that
of 2 Cor. 9.6. and is evidenced in the Parables of the talents and pounds,
where he that by trading with his pound got ten pounds is rewarded got with
rule over ten Cities; when he that had got but five, is rewarded with ruling
but over five, Luke 19.17-19. for God shall render in the judgment to every man
according as his works shall be, to them that do work good shall he reward
glory, honor and peace, but yet so as to the Jew first, and also to the
Gentile, for there is no respect of persons, but there is of works, with God,
Romans 2.6 10.11. which renders it a thing not in vain to be more diligent and
industrious in the way and work of the Lord, but good to abound therein, which
would be bootless and in vain, if men being believers on Christ in the main,
should be equally rewarded for doing little good, as if they, or others that
did more. Indeed when there is a heart to do more, and the reason of not doing
more is merely want of matter or capacity for doing more, there the reward of
them that do less, as to the matter done or administered by them, may be as much
or more than of them that have done more as to the matter done, having ability
to have done still more or better than they did; as in the case of the poor
woman casting in her two mites, which was all that she had, into the Treasury,
accepted by our Savior as doing more than all they that out of their
superfluity had cast into it, though much more in quantity than she had, Mark
12.41, 42, 43, 44. as also in the Parable of the Laborers, where they that
wrought but one hour, not being called in sooner, and as it may seem more
referring themselves to the good pleasure of their Lord for their wages and
reward, and less capitulating with him than those that came sooner, had equal
reward with them, Matthew 20.1-9 15. But where men have capacities and
abillities proportionable, and do not equally proportionably to them, the more
faithful, diligent, and bountiful shall have the greater reward. And so its a
good encouragement to greater diligence and abundance in the service of God and
Christ, knowing it shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. and yet so
as puts no discouragement upon any that have hearts set to do more, but have
less talents or abililities. But that belongs to the use of these points, to
which (having been so large in Explication) we now come at length; even to

Application.
Applicat. 1. And first what has been said on the first point, may serve

Use 1. To commend to us the study of Wisdom, or a diligent endeavor after
it, as that which will be of greatest advantage to us; for seeing they that be
wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament in and after the
Resurrection, well may we say with Solomon, How much better is it to get
wisdom than gold! and to get understanding, rather to be chosen than Silver,
Pro. 16.16. It is true that much Silver and Gold will make men glitter here;
but it is in things without them; their gay clothes, and gaudy garnishings of
them, their houses, household stuff, horses, and suchlike matter; but alas the
glory and shine they give them, is as much below that of the wise man here
promised and predicted, as the glory or shine of the Glow worm is below that of
the brightness of the Firmament. Gold and Silver, Riches profit not in the day
of wrath, from which wisdom will make us wise to Salvation, giving us that
righteousness which delivers from Death. Prove. 11.4. A good Name is rather to
be chosen than great riches, and loving kindness rather than Silver and Gold,
Prove. 22.1. But it is not Silver and Gold that will without wisdom give us a
good name, much less loving favor with the Lord: but wisdom will give us
them; for Riches and Honor are with her, yea durable riches and righteousness,
and whosoever sinds her, finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord, Prove.
8.18, 34, 35. Wisdom is that that will make a man's face to shine, and change
the boldness (or strongth) of his countenance, Eccles. 8.1. truly it puts a
luster upon faces, or appearances now. Stephen who was a man endued with the
Holy Spirit, and therethrough with such wisdom, as all his learned Adversaries
were not able to resist, even when he came to answer his adversaries
accusations for his life, in the presence of the Greatest Council in Jerusalem,
All that sat in Council looking steadfastly on him saw his face, as it had been
the face of an Angel, Acts 6.8-10-15. with 7.1. Oh what will it do when he
shall appear with Christ in glory? Men may be rich, and have riches, and yet
leave little fame or glory behind them when they are gone; no nor have any
great matter of luster while in possession of them. How pitifully did Croesus
or Crassus look to a judicious eye, and so Nabal and Haman; but much more in
the eye of God and his holy ones, in comparison of Saint Paul, or Peter, or
Stephen, yea or any the least in Gods Kingdom? Yea men may be rich and
infamous, do so unworthily as to foil all their heights and enjoyments in the
world by their foolish and sordid actions, as that rich man Nabal did, Whose
name was Nabal and folly was with him: truly many have gotten greater fame, and
shone more among men both in their life time and after death by their wisdom,
though but poor and mean persons, than those that have been very wealthy being
void of wisdom; as not only many Prophets and Apostles, but even many
Heathens, that are yet famous for their wisdom and learning, though but a
worldly and perishing wisdom: as far below the heavenly wisdom, as a rush
light is below the brightness of the Firmament; and therefore that that will
give them no luster in the Resurrection. Surely Solomon's wisdom made him shine
more than all the riches and honor of his Kingdom, others have been as rich
as he, but none so wise: nor did his Riches so much as his great Wisdom draw
the Queen of Sheba to come so far to see him: and yet his folly in loving
strange women, how much did it take off the luster of his wisdom! How much
more gloriously would he have shone, had he been so wise as to have shunned
that folly: and he prefers even a poor and wise child before an old and foolish
King that will no more be admonished, for this out of prison may come to reign,
when he other, though born in his Kingdom, may become poor, Eccles. 4.13, 14.
especially being wise with the wisdom of God, which is the wisdom here
commended, as endring them that are wise therewith so ^orious hereafter: even
Christ the wisdom ^f God as known of us and believed on by ^s, in knowing him
we shall know all things ^ghtly: and have our hearts and minds ^ghtly framed so
as to fear God and keep ^s commandments, and the fear of the Lord, at is
wisdom, even the beginning (or prinpal matter of it the (...)) and to de^rt
from evil, that is understanding, Job 28.28. Prove. 1.7. and 9.10. Psalm. 111.10.
that's the wisdom, the praise whereof is so set forth in the Scriptures, that
makes them happy that gets her, and that find the understanding and knowledge of
her: The merchandise whereof is better than the merchaudise of Silver, and the
gain whereof is better than fine Gold, that is more precious than Rubies, and
so excellent, that all the things that a man can desire are not to be compared
to her. In her right hand is length of days, and in her left hand riches and
honor: her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths peace. She is a
tree of life to them that lay hold upon her happy is every one that retains
her, Prove. 3.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. For they that be wise with this wisdom
shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament for ever and eve^ Other wisdom
worldly and humane literature may make a man shine for a time nay sometime
through many ages, lik^ some candles and torches that have the thieves, as they
call them, in them, the strong sents and stinking smoakes belonging to them, as
in the heathen Poets and Philosophers, and diverse Heathen-Christian may be
seen. But its this heavenly wisdom only that will advance a man on high, a^
make him shine most purely, brightly, a^ above the reach of envy, and for ever
(...) the world to come. And therefore the wise having such happiness entailed
upon them, as may render it evident and easy to be believed that Wisdom is
the principal thing, Proverbs 4.7. It may in the next place

Use 2. Exhort us all to get wisdom, get understanding; yea above all things
and with all gettings to get this understanding, that we may be made of the
number and company of these wise men, who shall obtain such excellent glory,
such a happy portion. And surely its not a thing impossible to get this
wisdom, for then the Holy Ghost would not exhort us to go about it: let there
be but an earnest and hearty endeavor after it, according to Gods directions
given us thereabout, and God that is ready to give it, yea that gives liberally
to all and upbraids not, will give it to us, James 1.5. Labor we then for that
meat that endures to everlasting life, which the Son of man will give unto us
so laboring for it, for him has God even the Father sealed, John 6.27. Fools
and Scorners and all are called to it, to look after it, and promise is made of
God, that ^n obeying his Calls and Counsels thereabout, they shall have it
given them. To that end that we might have it, did God ^end his only begotten
Son, his Word and Wisdom, both to take out of the way that which hindered its
communication to us, and having done that, to be the author and giver of it:
and to that end has he put his Spirit upon him, that he might bring forth
judgment to us, though barbarous and brutish Gentiles naturally, and thereby
make us wise to Salvation: and He that spared not his own Son, but delivered
Him up for us all, how shall he not with Him freely give us all things, and so
this wisdom also, Romans 8.32. Yea and Christ came forth from God to that
purpose, to set on foot the preaching of that word wherethrough that heavenly
wisdom may be obtained: and being ascended up on high, and having received of
the Father the promise of the Spirit, even the spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding, the spirit of Counsel^ and Might, the spirit of Knowledge, and of
the fear of the Lord. He has given forth this Spirit also, and thereby made
known the heavenly word, wherethrough this excellent wisdom is conveyed, and
may be received, and all that we may be made wise: so that it is not to be
despaired of, no not by the most simple and foolish, but hopefully and
believingly to be sought for and endeavored after by us. In and for worldly
matters and earthy advantages men may possibly weary themselves in the very
fires for naught, and labor in vain and to no purpose; but looking after this
we shall neither labor in vain, for God has not said to the House of Jacob
seek ye me in vain; He the Lord speaks righteousness, and declares things that
are right: and He has said, Ask and ye shall receive, Seek and ye shall find,
Knock and it shall be opened unto you, with reference to this Heavenly
commodity, For every one that asks receives, and he that seeks finds, and to
him that knocks it shall be opened, Isai. 45.14. Mat. 7.7, 8. Nor being
obtained, shall we ever repent the labor and diligence we use for getting it,
it is of that infinite price, worth and benefit, as the Honey is good, and the
Honeycomb is sweet to the taste, so shall the knowledge of Wisdom be unto thy
Soul: when thou have found it, then there shall be a reward, and thine
expectation shall not be cut off, Prove. 24.13, 14. Yea, Man knows not the
price thereof, it cannot be valued with the Gold of Ophir, the precious Onyx,
or the Sapphire: the Gold and Crystal cannot equal it, and the exchange of it
shall not be for Jewels (or vessels) of fine Gold; no mention shall be made of
Coral, or of Pearl, for the price of Wisdom is above Rubies. The Topaz of
Ethiopia cannot equal it, neither shall it be valued with the ^ure Gold, Job
28.13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

Quest. But (as there follows) where shall this Wisdom be found! and where is
the place of Understanding. How shall we come by it! or what shall we do to
obtain it?

Answ. I might say while it is yet a day of Grace, as the wise Virgins said
unto the foolish, Go ye to them that sell, and buy for yourselves, Matt. 25.9.

1. Go to them that sell, that is, to Jesus Chri^, and to God in Christ, and to
his Holy Spirit, in and among his people, o^ Church, his house or Temple: for
Wisdom has built her house, and hewed out her seven Pillars, and there she
has killed her Sacrifice mingled her Wine, and furnished her Table and she
sends out her maids (or servants) with whom she and her spirit also go forth to
ca^ persons in thither: and she says to the simp^ turn in hither, and to them
that have no understanding, Come, eat of my bread, and drink (...) the wine
that I have mingled, Prove. 9.1-5, 6. Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to
the waters, and he that has no money, etc. Isa. 55.(...) and Blessed is he
that hears her words, wat^ing at her gates, and waiting at the posts of
^doors: for whosoever finds her finds life, and (...) obtain favor of the Lord,
Prove. 8.33, 34, 3^ But take heed of other posts, Go not to ^thel, nor enter
into Gilgal, etc. Amos 5. (...) Seek by the faith and in the Doctrine a^
Ordinances of the Lord Jesus Christ, a^ not as it were by the works of the Law,
or by other men's precepts or devises, Romans 9.31, 32. Isai. 29.13. Matt. 15.8, 9.

Quest. But how shall we know which is Gods house, his Church and beloved
People? For many lay claim to that name and titly. The Church of Rome tells us
she only is the true Church, the house of God, and God and Christ and the Holy
Spirit; and this heavenly Wisdom is only in and with her, and so to be sought
for there only; other Societies say they are the holy and only Church, and the
truth and true wisdom only with them. How shall we know whither to go?

Ans. Search the Scriptures: God has ^aused them to be written for our
instruction ^n righteousness, and they are they that testify ^f Christ, and
therein also set forth and de^cribe to us his true Church: and all that ^retend
to the name of the Church acknowledge, that those Scriptures are to be received
as truth by us, which we have among ^s, being the Scriptures of God, in which
^e have Gods testimony, which is sure and ^ill not deceive us; but makes wise
even ^e simple ones, that attend to it, and to God (...) and by it, and they
tell us that they are the Church of God, or children of it, that keep the
^mmandments of God, and the faith of Jesus, Rev. 12.17. And truly by them the
Church of Rome above all the rest is discovered to be that Strumpet and Harlot
that magnifies her self as the only Queen or Lady, but loves not Christ, but
gives his honor to graven Images, and such like devises of their own, to his
Mother after the flesh, and other deceased Saints, and keeps not, but expugnes
Gods commandments, as the Second Commandment against making graven Images, and
worshipping and bowing down to them; and the Commandment of Christ, that all
his Disciples should drink of the Cup in the Supper of the Lord, they
notoriously cast by, obtruding upon men her inventions and institutions for
Articles of Faith; as the Popes Supremacy and Infallability,
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and many other matters, and strictly enjoining
her own commands, while she cast^ by Christ's: Yea she above all makes herself
drunk with the blood of the Saints an^ Martyrs of Jesus. So that the way to
tru^ wisdom is to decline and come out of tha^ filthy Babylon. The Reformed
Churches a^ to their bulk are visible enough, but ha^ their tares overspreading
them too mu^ too, and their divisions and fractions; (...) that in a manner we
may take up that complaint of the Prophet Micah in respect (...) true and
thorough Members of the Catholic Church. Woe is me, for I am as when they have
gathered the Summer fruits, as the grape gleanings of the Vintage, there is no
Cluster to eat. Scarce a pure Church or greater Society of all sound Christians
in every respect. But yet we may find such as to the main Fundamentals of the
Faith hold and maintain them; and so far as any do so and put not upon us
Doctrines and Practices inconsistent with them, we may so far own and join with
them. And amongst such Churches we may by the light of Gods Word, taken heed to
by us, meet with here and there two or three or more doubtless, with whom we
may have more intimate Fellowship and Communion in the Name of Christ: Who has
promised His presence in any so small a company of those that indeed confess
and fear him, Matt. 18.20. So that if we cannot find a whole Nation of hearty
Believers and real Members of Christ, nor a whole Countrcy or City: Yet if we
find but any smaller company of such as take heed to the Word of God, and give
up themselves to worship God in Christ, and walk in their conversations
according thereunto, we need not be at a loss for finding God and Christ among
them, to to give us Wisdom and Understanding in the knowledge of himself, and
with such we may walk without needless breaches or separatings from the
National Church, or owning and outwardly acknowledging the truth, though mixed
with Tares, Mat. 13.28, 29. As David though not renting from the National
Church of Israel (though not faultless, Neh. 8.17.) yet was also companion more
intimately of all such as feared God, and of them that keep his precepts, Psalm.
119.63. and resolved to praise God both in the Congregation more generally, and
in the Assembly of the upright, Psalm 111.1. even as those that feared God in
Malachies time, without renting or dividing from their public Assemblies,
spoke often one to another with Gods good approvement, Mal. 3.16, 17. yea and
so our Savior practiced, and his Disciples. As for such as question the
lawfulness of National Churches, they seem to have forgotten the Scriptures
that tell us, That Christ shall call a Nation that he knew not, and Nations
that knew not him, shall run unto him, Isai. 55.5. and that Christ sent his
Apostles to disciple all Nations, who surely therefore might disciple or church
whole Nations, as they were found complying with them, Matt. 28.18, 19, 20. But
were our case such as sometimes Elias supposed his to have been (as thank God it
is not) that we knew none not corrupted in faith, and practice from the word of
God; yet if we accordingly as God is preventing us with light and truth, and by
his spirit is therein enlightening and moving at our hearts (as we showed in the
beginning of this discourse, that wisdom is preventing men generally with her
calls and counsels) do yield up our hearts to God, and (as our Savior says)
do his will in what He makes clear and evident to us to be his will. He will
further instruct and teach us of his mind, and we shall know the doctrines
proposed to us whether they be of God or of men, John 7.17. and walking in the
light as God gives it forth to us, and is in it, we shall not fail to be of the
true Church, and to partake of the prayers and grace of it through Christ,
though we may be at some loss where to find it, or the members of it. Come we
then to the testimony of God, and close we with the light and truth He therein
and thereby manifests unto us, and we shall be in the way to get this wisdom:
for the testimony of God is sure, when men's pretensions and boastings that they
are the Church may deceive us, The entrance ^f Gods word gives light, and it
gives understanding too, so as to make wise the simple, Psalm. 19.7. and
119.130. so as to Salvation; of which some mistakes through infirmity and
weakness of sight shall not deprive us. But withal Go to them that sell; Go to
God in and by Christ Jesus in the operation and guidance of his holy Spirit, by
earnest Prayer and Supplication; as it is said, If any man lack wisdom, let
him ask it of God, who gives to all men liberally and upbraideth not, and it
shall be given him, but let him ask in faith, nothing doubting, Jam. 1.5, 6.
Ask ye, and ye shall receive; for every one that asks receives, Matt. 7.7,
8. Thus the Spouse addressed herself to her Beloved, Tell thou me, O thou whom
my soul loves, where thou feedest, and where thou causest thy flock to rest at
noon, Cant. 1.7. Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, Chap. 2.5. and
Thou that dwell in the gardens, the companions hearken to thy voice, cause
me to hear it, Chap. 8.13. and Solomon, or the wisdom of God by him, joins
together the minding and receiving Gods word, and praying or crying to God, in
Prove. 2.1-3.5. My Son, if tho^ wilt receive my words, and hide my commandments
with thee; so that thou incline thin^ car unto wisdom, and apply thine heart
to understanding: yea if thou criest after knowledge and liftest up thy voice
(namely to God) for understanding -- Then shall thou understan^ the fear of the
Lord (the beginning or principal point of wisdom Cha. 1.7. and 9.10.) and find
the knowledge of God, for the Lord gives wisdom (it is the Lords to give,
therefore needful to look and repair to him for it, and He does give it,
therefore there is good encouragement to seek and ask it of him.) Out of his
mouth comes knowledge and understanding. But yet in and with this going to God
and Christ for it, both in taking heed to his Word, and calling on his Name for
it. We must also

2. Buy it. Go and buy of them that sell. So the Holy Ghost counsels us to,
Prove. 23.23. Buy the truth and sell it not, wisdom, and instruction, and
understanding: Buy it however, whatever it may cost thee; but sell it not upon
any terms whatsoever, for the greatest gain or advantage that may be tendered
to thee: And again, Ho every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, and ye
that have no money, come, buy and eat, buy wine and milk without money, and
without price, Isaiah 55.1. and again says our Lord Jesus, I counsel thee to
buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich; and white raiment,
that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness may not
appear, Revel. 3.18. which are but the same with this heavenly Wisdom with its
fruits and benefits.

Quest. But seeing those are invited to buy that have no money, and to buy
without money or price, that is moneyworth, what must we pay or give for it? or
how can we be said to buy it?

Answ. It is called a buying, because as in buying there is a parting with
something that we may acquire a right to, or interest in or possession of
another thing, even of the thing that we buy: So here there must be a letting
go something, though it be not truly money, or any thing truly desirable, much
less any thing that may for its real worth be valuable with this heavenly
Wisdom ( the price whereof is above Rubies, so as it cannot be valued with the
gold of Ophir, the precious Onyx, or the Saphir,) yet it is what we are apt to
prize at a high rate: yea many do so highly prize it, as that they will rather
go without wisdom, than part with it: and that ihat is in general, whatsoever
is by wisdom reproved, and whatsoever the heart cannot attend to wisdom to
receive and walk thereafter, except neglected and parted with by it; as it is
said, Turn at my reproofs, (namely from all your Sins and Idols, from every
false way that I discover to be so, as I discover it, and from loving or
cleaving to any thing, so as to cause a neglect of me, and of obedience to
sayings.) And (...) will pour out my spirit to you, I will make known my
words, Pro. 23. as particularly to instance in some things, or Heads of things.

1. We must part with and let go our love of honor and applause with men, and
the leaning and relying on them, their learning, wisdom, power, multitude, and
be willing to suffer the loss of that esteem that we have, or might have with
them; yea and to incurr their hatred, reproaches, or injuries, as they may be
occasioned by our cleaving to and walking in the truth: this was one thing the
not parting with which hindered the Jews from closing with Christ, and so
having the wisdom of God: they received honor one of another, and contented
not themselves with, or looked not after that honor that came from God only.
How can ye believe, that so do, says our Savior, Joh. 5.44. yea this hindered
many who in their hearts were convinced of the truth of Christ from attaining
the wisdom that is by it, that they loved the praise of men more than the
praise of God, Joh. 12.43. they minded what the Rulers and Pharisees did, and
hung upon them that mislead them, for direction, Joh. 7.47, 48, 49. And so now
if we love the praise and honor of men that are great and learned, and make
(...) great noise and show of their zeal and strictness as the Pharisees did,
and would as they, be reputed the only wise, religious and orthodox persons, we
shall mistake and do amiss. If we prefer any man's seeming, yea or real zeal and
devotion, or fame for piety or learning, and value their approvement, so as
that we will be waved from Gods testimony thereby, and them that cleave
thereto, though but a few, and despised as our Saviors Disciples were, we
shall deprive our selves of wisdom. Yea, our Savior tells us if we Come to
him, and hate not (comparatively and as in competition with him) our Fathers*
Mothers, Brethren, Sisters, Wives, Children, yea and our own lives also, we
cannot be his Disciples, that is, we cannot be good Scholars and proficients in
his School, so as to attain to be made wise and truly understanding persons,
Luke 14.26. He that loves Father or Mother more than him is not worthy of him,
and he that loves Son or Daughter more than him, is not worthy of him, Matt.
10.37.

2. We must part with all high thoughts and conceits of our own knowing,
understanding, or sufficiency in our selves, for that will cut off our legs as
it were, and take us off from travailing after and seeking for this heavenly
wisdom; for that will make us lukewarm in our desires and endeavors after it,
and take us off from buying it, as it did the Angel of the Church of Laodicea,
who saying in his heart, that He was rich, and increased with goods and wanted
nothing, not knowing his own wretchedness and misery, poverty, blindness and
nakedness, grew therethrough so luke warm, that Christ threatened to spue him
out of his mouth, as some nauseous humor, Rev. 3.16, 17. See thou a man wise
in his own conceit, there is more hope of a fool (even of a mere fool's being
made wise) than of such an one, Prove. 26.12. thence Woe to the wise in their own
eyes, and the prudent in their own sight, Isai. 5 21. for they think they know,
when they know not any thing as they ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2. and so grow
scornful of such counsel and instructions as are needful for them, to bring
them to know and to be wise indeed; so as they are ready with the Pharisees to
say, Are we blind also, John 9.40. for the Scorner loves not one that
reproves him, neither will he go unto the wise, though it be He that hears
reproof gets understanding, and he that hates reproof is brutish, Prove.
15.12.32. and 12.1. and so though ^he seek for wisdom, he finds it not in
his way and manner of seeking it, Prove. 14.6. for God scorns the scorners, but
gives grace to the lowly, Prove. 3.34. this self-conceit and ^leaning to our own
wisdom and understanding, which makes us swerve, and carries from attending to
Gods word, and its instructions, and those that bring them to us so as not to
listen to or be guided thereby must needs therefore be parted with by us, if
ever we will be wise; as it is said, Trust in the Lord with all thine heart,
and lean not to thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and He
shall direct thy paths. Be not wise in thine own eyes, fear the Lord and depart
from evil, Prove. 3.5, 6.7. And if any man among you seem to be wise in this
world, let him become (own and acknowledge himself to be) a fool that he may be
wise, 1 Cor. 3.18. Naaman the Syrian thinking himself wise enough, so as he
could fore-understand how the Prophet must deal with him for healing his
leprosy, was put into a rage and passion through his scornfulness, and turned
away from the means of healing which the Prophet directed him to, so as he had
missed of healing doubtless, how or which way soever else he had sought it, had
he not upon the wise advise and persuasion of his servant laid down that high
thought and scornfulness of the Prophets counsel and submitted himself thereto,
2 Kings 5.10-14. read the relation there. And see how dangerous a thing it is
to lean to our own thoughts, a^ the conceits of our own knowing, and the
scorning contrary counsel that seems ridiculous to us, and how good it is to
hear the good counsel of God and his holy servants, and receive their
instructions, as what tends to make us wise in the latter end, Prove. 19.20. the
leaning to and retaining these two evils, their own imaginations and the
authority of their Fathers and Masters, so as to forsake Gods law and disobey
his voice was the occasion of Gods heavy judgment upon the land of Israel; See
to this purpose Jer. 9.12, 13, 14. Its good with David to hate thoughts and
love Gods law, Psalm. 119.113.

3. We must also part with and let go evil company and counselors, such as
cause us to err from the way of wisdom and knowledge; for He that walks with
wise men shall be wise, but a companion of fools shall be destroyed, Prove.
17.20. Thence wisdom calling the simple and them that have no understanding to
come to her house and partake of her provision which is fit and virtuous to
give them understanding, says, Forsake the foolish and live, and go in the way
of understanding, Prove. 9.5, 6. as implying that there is no living nor walking
in the way of understanding while foolish persons are our companions, and
delighted in by us. And by the foolish are meant all that are ignorant of, or
disobedient to the grace of God, however otherwise learned or wife they may
seem to be to themselves or others. As those that have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge; that being ignorant of Gods righteousness go about to
establish their own righteousness (and make that stand in Gods sight, or make
it a sufficient stay or support; the ground of their hope and foundation of
their confidence toward God) and submit not to the righteousness of God, even
Christ the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes, Romans
10.2, 3, 4. as well as also other grosser transgressors. Thence the holy Spirit
also pronounces them happy that walk not in the counsel o^ the ungodly, nor
stand in the way of sinners, no^ sit down in the seat of scorners, but their
deligh^ is in the Law of the Lord, and therein their exercise night and day.
Psalm. 1.1, 2. implyin^ that men cannot exercise themselves in the Law or
Doctrine of the Lord, and deligh^ themselves therein so as to attain the
blesse^ness of being made wise thereby; excep^ they avoid the counsels of
ungodly person^ the ways of sinners, the seat or teaching (...) the scorners.
Solomon also instructing in the book of the Proverbs, men in the way wisdom,
which he highly commends to (...) and wills us above all things to get; giv^
this as one of his first instructions: My so^ if sinners entice thee, consent
thou not. My s^^walk not thou in the way with them, refrain ^hy foot from their
paths, Prove. 1.10, 15. and when he had said, Hear thou my son, and ^e wise, and
guide thy heart in the way, then ^e immediately adds, as necessary thereto, ^e
not among Wine-bibbers, among riotous ea^ers of flesh; for the glutton and the
drunkard ^all come to poverty, Prove. 23.19, 20. as also (...) chapter 22.34. he
exhorts to make no friendship ^ith an angry man, nor go with a furious man. and
else where, to go from the presence of a ^lish man when we perceive not in him
the lip ^knowledge, chapter 14.7. and to cease to hear ^e instructions that cause
to err from the words (...) knowledge, chapter 19.27. And when the Apo^e would have
the Corinthians not receive ^e grace of God in vain but be enlarged in ^eir
hearts toward God and his Servants, ^d to what is good; he warns them that ^ey
be not yoaked unequally with unbelievers ^hey being such persons as from whom
no ^od or spiritual profit such as that of wis^me* is to be expected) but to
come out ^m among them, and be separate, and not touch (...) unclean thing, and
so God would receive ^m and be a Father to them, and they should to him for
sons and daughters, 2 Cor. 6.1. (...).17, 18.

4. We must part with our love of Ease and Pleasures, put away Slothfulness and
Daintiness: for slothfulness casts into a deep sleep, and an idle soul shall
suffer hunger, and not be filled with that wisdom whose fruits do satisfy,
Prove. 19.15. Wisdom is not attained to but through diligence, and therefore we
must put away slothfulness, love o^ ease, pleasures and such things. Thence
Wisdom instructing us how we may attai^ her of God, requires, besides a hearing
(...) her, a watching daily at her gates, and wai^ing at the posts of her
doors, Prove. 8.33, 34 And besides the inclining the ear, and applyi^ our hearts
unto her sayings, and calling to G^ for her; that we seek for her as men seek
silve^ and dig for her as for hidden treasures, Pro^ 2.4. And surely men that
love silver, a^ seek for it are industrious, and not sloth^ in business: and
did a man know there i^ treasure hid in a place where he might ha^ opportunity
of digging for it, and wh^ digging diligently he should find it; oh h^ diligent
would he be at it, early and late he find it! Thus the Apostle exhorting (...)
Hebrews to give diligence so to know Ch^ and God as to be filled with, or
attain to full assurance of hope, to the end he ad^ Be not slothful, but
followers of those who thr^ faith and patience inherit the Promises. Heb^ 11,
12. Dij laboribus omnia vendunt, say Heathens; that is, the Gods sell all
things to men for their labors; as if that was all the price they require for
them. And there is some truth in it in reference to the only true God. The
price for which he sells to us as from us wisdom and its great fruits and
benefits is a hearty love to it and an industrious laboring to obtain it
working (as the word is (...)) not for the meat that perishes, but for that
which endures to eternal life, Which the Son of Man will (if we so do
especially) certainly give us, for him has God even the Father sealed, set
apart and authorized to that purpose, John 6.27. the hand of the diligent here
also makes rich, and bears rule when he that deals with a slack, hand
becomes poor, and the slathful shall be under tribute, Prove. 10.4. and 12.24.

5. We must part with whatsoever way and practice is in it self sinful, and
contrary to the Law and Doctrine, Will and Commandment of God. Thus David, who
was made wiser than his enemies, and got more un^erstanding than his teachers,
and than the anti^ts, because he meditated in Gods Testimonies, and kept his
Precepts and Commandments, ^ells us, that He refrained his foot from every ^il
way, that he might keep Gods word and (...) get still more wisdom therethrough,
Psalm. 19.98, 99, 100, 101. For indeed wisdom (as is said, Wisd. 1.4.) will not
enter into a wicked or malicious soul, nor where the body is subject to sin,
for it is a pure, most holy influence from the most holy God, and loves not
that which is filthy and unclean. Thence the fear of the Lord is said to be the
beginning thereof, because by it we depart from evil, pride, arrogance, and the
evil way, and the froward mouth does wisdom hate, Prove. 8.13. Therefore if we
would be truly wise, cleanse we our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. Laying aside all
filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, receive with meekness the ingraffed
word (the fountain of Wisdom, Eccles. 1.5.) which is able to save the soul,
Jams 1.21. And to add but one more,

6. Lastly, in a word; We must Deny ou^selves, take up our Cross and follow
Christ and therein forsake all that we have: else w^ cannot be Christ's
Disciples and obtain thi^ heavenly gift, Mat. 16.24. Luke 14.33^ We must deny
and forsake all our ow^ things, casting them away as loss and du^ for the
excellency of the knowledge of ou^ Lord Jesus (the true wisdom) as all o^ own
fleshly privileges and rejoycings, (...) to the knowing our selves after them
wh^ there our fleshly birth, or humane parts, (...) lations to such good and
excellent person admission to Gods Church and Ordinances; so as not taking up
content that we have them. Yea our own righteousness after the Law and our own
best self seize, our wisdom, carnal or fleshly understanding, with all
our own desires and designs to g^t our selves, or keep to our selves the
honors, riches and pleasures of this world, as any of them stand cross to, or
are inconsistent with (as often or usually they are) the getting, the knowledge
of Christ, laying down all our self conceits, interests and purposes at his
foot, we must only and above all things attend to know him, and his grace and
gracious mind and will concerning us, and follow on after him, therein
patiently bearing and enduring what ever thing cross to our said interests,
desires or designs befall us in the way of his truth and righteousness, and so
doing we shall not fail of being truly and indeed wise, and doing wisely to
Salvation, for Good and upright is the Lord, therefore He (preventingly)
teaches sinners in the way, the meek he will (by his following grace) guide in
judgment, the meek (that hear his reproofs and rebukes, and take all well, and
yet yield up themselves to him, to learn of him and follow him) will he teach
his way. Yea, What man is he that fears the Lord! him will he teach the way
that he should go, his soul shall dwell at ease -- The secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him, and He will show them his Covenant, Psalm. 25.11, 12,
13, 14. Thus doing we shall be made wise and obtain the happiness here spoken
of, viz. to shine as the brightness of the Firmament, especially if also (as
wisdom will lead us to, and direct us in that also) we make it our business to
make others wise by instructing them, and to turn others to righteousness; with
reference to which branch as also to the other reading of the word translated
wise.

2. In the second place what has been noted thereto, we may further apply it
sundry ways, as

Use 3. 1. To exhort and provoke such as have wisdom, and are in any measure
furnished with the heavenly talents, to be diligent and faithfully in improving
them and laying them out for the good of others also, endeavoring to their
capacities, and in the places God has set them, and according to the
instructions of his truth, to make others wise and righteous, in turning them
from their sins, errors and disobedience to the wisdom of the just one; and
to be earnest, diligent, and servent herein as they have opportunity, knowing
that their labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, but they shall receive a
good reward: They shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever, 1 Cor. 15.58. and
this is a point of wisdom also; For the fruit of the righteous is a tree of
life, and he that wins souls is wise, Prove. 11.30.

Quest. But what should we do, or what course shall we take, that we may turn
others to righteousness, and make them truly wise?

Answ. I might say shortly from the words of our Savior to his Disciples and
Apostles;

1. Let us retain the Salt in our selves and ^ts favor that we have received
of God in and by Christ; for Christ's Disciples are the ^alt of the earth, to
purge corruption from them, and render them savoury unto God: But if the salt
has lost its savor wherewith shall it be salted, its thenceforth good for
nothing, Matt. 5.13, 14. Mark 9.5. that is, ^et us have and hold fast the word
of Christ, and the wisdom therein contained and conveyed to us, with its
reproves ^f instructions, so as we our selves may be ^ept in an awful fear and
reverence of God, and be sweet and clean in our speech and ^arriage in the
world and toward it: that ^e savouring the grace of God our selves, and
retaining the savor of it in our own ^earts, may be made savoury to others;
Letting no corrupt communication come out of our mouths, but such as is good to
the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers, Ephesians. 4.29.
which in another Epistle is, Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with
salt, with the fear of God, and so what is of a cleansing nature, reproving the
false hopes, confidences, and carriages of the world, or of such as do amiss
among our brethren) that ye may know how ye ought to answer every man, Coll.
4.6. for evil communications corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15.33. but a
wholesome tongue is a tree of^life, that brings forth what is food for those
that are whole and sound, and leaves that will hea^ the Nations, or Gentiles
that are disceased Prove. 15.4. Ezech. 47.12. Rev. 22.2. Bu^ for this let the
Reader view, if he have it the Treatise of our deceased Brother upon this
subject.

2. Let our Light so shine before men, the they may see our good works, and
glorify our F^ther which is in Heaven. For the Disciple of Christ are also the
Light of the world, an^ this light of God and Christ, whereby the are made
lights, is put into them, that b^ing made lights by is, they might not b^ put,
or put their light under a bushel, but (...) a candlestick, so exercising and
holding (...) forth, that it may give light to all that come i^ the house,
Matt. 5.15, 16. And this light they may and ought, to their abilities, to let
shine two ways, or in a twofold letting it out, viz.

1. In word, in holding forth the word of Life: so the Apostle exhorts and
directs the Philippians with their Bishops and Deacons; and not only (though
principally) the Bishops and Deacons are concerned therein, Philip. 1.1. and
2.15, 16. Shine ye (says he) as lights in the world: Holding forth the word of
life, that is the way (as if he should say) in which ye are to and may shine as
lights: not that every Believer is fitted to be a public Preacher in some
Congregation; but what they believe in, and with their hearts unto
righteousness they may and ought also to confess with their mouth unto
Salvation as they have opportunity and ability thereunto. And such as are
gifted with profitable gifts of wisdom, knowledge and understanding may and
ought soberly and orderly to exercise them too for the good of others. For all
that have the gift, May prophe^yone by one, that all may learn and all may be
comforted, Romans 10.10. 1 Cor. 14.31. 1 Pet. 4.10. and all that hear (as we
noted before may, nay are commissionated to say come, Rev. 22.17. and may show
forth the virtues and praises of him that has called them out of darkness into
his mavelous light; being a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy
Nation, a peculiar People, or purchased to that purpose. 1 Pet. 2.9.

But here is to be minded, that if we would do good to others, make them wise
and turn them to righteousness, we must hold forth the Word of life, and show
forth the virtues and praises of the Lord. Confess with our mouth the word of
faith believed in the heart to righteousness: not do as foolish people, the
workers of iniquity, who all boast themselves, or as the word signifies, speak
of, or forth themselves, Psalm. 94.4. (...) all the workers of iniquity speak
themselves, talk of their own righteousness, paoclaim every man his own
goodness, Prove. 20.6. which they that do are there opposed to the faithful
friend to God, Christ or the souls of men; which He says, Who shall find? as
implying that they are not found amongst the self-proclaimers, that preach
themselves and not Jesus the Lord, as the Apostles did, 2 Cor. 4.5. and cry up
themselves, The Church, the Church, the persons to be adored, believed,
depended on, as it is said of the corrupt Israel that made mention of the God
of Israel not in truth nor in righteousness, they call themselves of the Holy
City, Isa. 48.1, 2, call themselves the (or of the) Holy Catholic Church, and
tell stories to men of their Perfection? religiousness, seize; like the
Whore that says, I sit a Queen, and I shall be a Lady for ever, Isa. 47.7.
Rev. 18.7. No, the way to turn many to righteousness and make them truly wise
is to show forth Gods praises, to make mention of his loving kindness, to do as
he who said; My mouth shall show forth thy rightheousnes, and thy salvation all
the day, for I know not its numbers. I will go in the strength ^f the Lord God,
and I will make mention of ^hy righteousness, of thine only: not of mine and
thine together, Psalm. 71.15, 16. That is, Preach, confess and make mention of
the Gospel of Christ, which is, the power of God to ^alvation to every one that
believes: for there^n is the righteousness of God revealed from ^aith to
faith, as it is written, the just shall ^ve by faith, Romans 1.16, 17. and this
accor^ing both to the appointment of the Lord of ^ld, who established a
testimony in Jacob, and ^pointed a law in Israel, in which he command^d the
Fathers, to show to their Children, the ^eneration to come, the praises of the
Lord, his ^rength and the wonderful works that he has ^ne, to the end that
they might set their hope (...) God and not forget his works, and not be as
^eir Fathers, a stubborn and rebellious gene^tion, Psalm. 78.4, 5, 7, 8. and to
his own practice too, who having done marvellou^ things, his own right hand and
his holy arm having gotten himself the victory in his great^ combat with and
against Satan, and all the principalities and powers of darkness. He has made
known his salvation (his resurrection from the dead, and the salvation
therethrough obtained for us, and his Gospel which is the salvation of God that
the Gentile heard, Acts 28, 28.) his righteousness (not ours, but as he is
ours, the Lord our Righteousness, Jer 23.6.) has he open^ showed (or revealed,
Romans 3.22.) in the sight of the Heathen, not preaching something first to make
them Jews and Proselites Converts to God, and then when they cease^ to be
heathen show them his righteousness as the false Apostles way was. And this h^
commanded to his Disciples and Apostl^ after him to do, not to go preach the
law (...) works, but go preach the Gospel to every cre^ture or in the whole
Creation, Mark 16.1^ preaching repentance and forgiveness of s^ (not in Moses
but) in his Name (in ope^ning his name, and so upon account of wh^ He has done
and is become for men, a^ in his Authority and Power requiring it a^ that)
among all Nations, beginning at Jerus^lem, the People and City that had m^
deeply sinned, dying their hands in blood the Prophets and just men, yea and of
the Lord himself, Luke 29.46, 47. And so the spirit of Prophecy instructed and
required of men in the days past: saying, Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon
(or proclaim) his Name, make known (not yours but) His deeds among the people.
Sing unto him. Sing Psalms unto him. Talk ye all of his wondrous works. Glory
ye in his holy name. And again; Sing unto the Lord all ye earth. Show forth
from day to day his salvation. Declare his glory (his Son the brightness of his
glory) among the Heathens, his mavelous works among all Nations. For great is
the Lord and greatly ^o be praised. He also is to be feared above all Gods, 1 Chronicles. 16.8, 9, 10, 23, 24, 25. Psalm. 96.1, 2, 3. and 105.1, 2, 3. And so it
was fore-prophecyed. One generation shall waise thy works to another, and shall
declare ^hy mighty Acts. I will speak of the glorious ho^our of thy Majesty:
and of thy wondrous works (things or words) they (others) shall abundantly
utter the memory of thy great goodness, and shall sing of thy righteousness.
The Lord is gracious, full of compassion, slow ^o anger, and great of mercy.
The Lord is good (...) all, and his tender mercy over (or upon) all ^is works
Psalm. 145.4-10. And surely Christ ^eing made to us of God, wisdom,
righteous^ess, etc. The way to make men wife and righteous is to turn them to
him, that they may be made in him; which, though it be the work of God, yet
it is a work that he does by his Law or Doctrine that goes forth from Sion; the
preaching of the Gospel, Acts 26.18. or confessing his name, which He therefore
has made known unto men, and put into their hearts that they might thereby be
made instruments of converting others to him: as he has also chosen them to
put his name upon them, and to declare it, that the residue of men might
thereby be moved and have advantage to seek after God, Acts 15.16, 17. With
Gods Law o^ Doctrine then (which is perfect converting the soul) such as know
it, and have fitness in any measure for it, are to endeavor to convert others
to God by Jesus Christ, setting him forth to and before all and every man as
they have opportunity and capacity, as the only righteousness are salvation of
God, prepared for them a^ and every one, Luke 2.30, 31. Isa. 49.6. Romans 3.21,
22. the righteousness of God (...) (or for) all, and upon all that believe. An^
so declare his mighty works to that purpose t^ them, which he has done for all
and ever one, as the holy Apostle did; who tells u^ He dyed for all, and gave
himself a ransom for all, and tasted death by the grace of God for ever very
one, so as through his one righteousness the free gift is to (or for its) all
men to justification of life, that he is the propitiation for our sins, (even
for ours who have him our Advocate to make good our cause with God, as He is
and does for all that believe on him) but not ours only but also for the whole
worlds, 2 Cor. 4.44, 15. 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9. 1 John 2.1, 2. and this without
such Ifs, or corrupt additions as are the product of men's ignorance, or
unbelief of Gods Testimony, and dependence upon one another Wisdom, seeking
honor one of onother, or loving the praise of men more than the praise that
comes from God only, viz. those glosses and additions of all the Elect, every
one of the believers, and the world of the Elect, etc. Whereas the Scriptures
every where distinguish the Elect from the world, and do not call them by the
name of the world. Alas! how should men be turned unto righteousness, unless
they see that there is a perfect righteousness that is worthy to be turned to,
made ready for them, and to be turned to by them, a righteousness wherein and
wherewith they may be righteous? or (which comes to the same) how shall men be
made righteous, if not made in Christ, or brought in to believe on and submit
to him, there being no other way to righteousness for them: that that is of or
after the Law, as attained to or attainable by sinful fallen man, being
rejected of God! And how shall men be made in Christ, if they see no excellency
and preciousness in him, and preparation of him for them? if they be borne in
hand that God sent him but for here and there one, they know not who, and they
must infallibly be brought in, yea they cannot hinder themselves of it; and if
not so, they must perish notwithstanding all endeavors after salvation? who
that has and uses the exercise of his reason, will look after him upon such
motives as that Doctrine contains? and not rather take his course till he
cannnt choose but come into him, as thinking otherwise or till then, all his
labor will be needless and in vain? And what abouts are men fain to go, and
courses take they to bring men to righteousness, through their not knowing or
believing Christ to be the Savior of the world, the Savior of all men, and
especially of them that believe, while they put them upon the Law and legal
humblings and works and opperations preceding the knowledge of Christ and the
good foundation laid in him, to be as evidences or grounds of conceiving and
believing that they are of the Elect, for whom only they imagine and say that
Christ died! and oh what wretched mistakes are those men guilty of, and how
destitute are they of the truth, that durst call the very manifest expressions
of the Holy Apostles Errors and Blasphemies! But Gods way of holding forth
light to men to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan to God, ^s to preach Gospel to them, to let them know
that they being all Sinners against God, and liable to his wrath, ungodly and
enemies, He in the greatness of his mercy, to keep them from perdition sent his
own and only begotten Son into the world to be their Savior, and that he might
be so, He delivered him up to Death for their offenses that were upon them, and
raised him again for their justification; and has exalted and glorified him,
and filled him with all His fullness, that they inlistening to and obeying him
might be saved and made happy by him. To such purpose is that Word of
reconciliation put into the Apostles, or committed to them, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19-21.
That God was in Christ reconciing the world to himself, not imputing their
trespasses to them, but made him that knew no sin to be sin for us, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him: wherewith agrees the Doctrine
preached by our Savior to Nicodemus to regenerate him, viz. That as Moses
lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up,
that whosoever believes on Him might not perish, but have eternal life: For
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes on him, might not perish, but have everlasting life: For God sent not
his Son into the World, to condemn the World, but that the world through Him
might be saved. He that believes on Him is not condemned. He that believes
not is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God, and this is the condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men loved darkness rather than light, etc. John 3.14, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19. like to which is the message sent to the bidden Guests in the Parable,
Matt. 22.4. Go te^^ them that are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my Dinner, my
oxen and fatlings are killed, and all things are ready, Come ye to the
Marriage. Whence we may (as also from 2 Cor. 5.19, 20, 21. Prove. 9.1-5, 6.)
observe that there are two main Heads, or branches of the preaching to be
preached to men to turn them to God, or to righteousness, o^ of what is to be
said to them, and the orde^ to be observed in saying them, viz.

1. The Declaration of the Love and Grace of God in Christ to Sinners, and what
He has done and prepared for them for their welfare and happiness; as that He
has

1. Prepared a Dinner for them, a Feast for all people, Isa. 25.6. For
entertaining them, and making them happy, and this in Christ Jesus, as it is
said, This is the record that God has given of his Son, that God has given us
(even us mankind the same us that he commands to believe, 1 John 3.27.) eternal
life, and this life is in his Son, 1 John 5.21.

2. To that purpose made his Son flesh, and delivered him up to Death for us,
for our Sins, and raised him for our Justification; as it is said, This is the
Gospel that we preached to you, viz. how first of all (or among the first
things) Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that He was
buried, and that He rose again the third day according to the Scriptures, 2
Cor. 15.3, 4. This is the meaning of those expressions in the Parable. My oxen
and my fatlings are killed, my choice things are sacrificed for you, and their
flesh thereby are become meat for you, my Son who answered to all the
Sacrifices of the Law, being delivered up to death for you, is become fit
matter of nourishment for your souls; wherein is signified the greatness and
freeness of the love and charity of the heart of God toward us, in not sparing
his own dearly beloved Son, but delivering him up for us all, and that when we
were yet without strength, ungodly, sinners, and enemies, that he might be as a
feast for us, matter of hope and encouragement to confidence in God for us,
Romans 5.6, 7, 8, 10. and 8.32. Seeing also

3. That all things are ready, the fullness and every way sufficiency and
perfect compleatness of the grace in Christ for us, both as to the end and as
to the way, both as to the giving us full safety and satisfaction in the
enjoyment, and as to the provision for making us fit and meet to enjoy that
end; the end is eternal life, an everlasting Kingdom and Glory: and this is
ready in Christ for us, and to fit us for them; forgiveness of Sins, washing
and Sanctification, the Holy Spirit to renew us, and work all our works in us,
and the whole work of God in and upon us in Souls and Bodies; and in a word all
things pertaining to life and godliness are treasured up in him for us, and He
also and God in and by him ready to impart them to us, nothing wanting in or
with him, only men wanting as to the accepting; but to move to that here is,

2. A gracious loving invitation and provocation of men to accept of the grace
of God set before them, and made ready for them, and to accept it to purpose,
so as they may not fail of the enjoyment thereof; Come to the Marriage, Come
eat of my bread, and drink of the wine that I have mingled: forsake the
foolish, and live, and go in the way of understanding, Prove. 9.5, 6. Be ye
reconciled unto God; yea, we beseech you in Christ's stead, as if God did
beseech you by us. Be you reconciled, etc. 2 Cor. 5.20. Wherein we have

1. An evident signification that it is the blessed, gracious good will and
loving mind of God, that men, any or every man, to whom the call comes, should
be partakers of this provision, The simple and such as have no understanding He
would have to come and eat; Every one that thirsts, and he that has no
money, nothing good or desirable in himself, such as are not graciously
thirsting for Christ, but are laying out money for that that is not bread, and
laboring for that that satisfies not: Yea, He would have the wicked forsake
their ways, and the unrighteous their thoughts, and turn to him, and He will be
gracious to them, and abundantly pardon them, Isai. 55.1, 2, 7. The poor, the
halt, the maimed, and those in the highways and hedges, the worst of men he
would have them come to the Supper prepared by him, Luke 14.21, 23. He would
not that any should perish, but that all come to repentance, 2 Peter 3.9. Would
have all men saved and come to the knowledge (or acknowledgment) of the truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. Has no pleasure at all in the death of the wicked; but rather that
they should turn to him in his Son and live, Ezechiel 33.11. and 18.23. 32. and
to that end He calls and invites them from the rising of the Sun, to the going
down of the same, Psalm. 50.1, 2. All the ends of the earth, Isaiah 45.22. and
waits with long patience upon them, Romans 2.4, 5. 2 Pet. 3.9-15. even to Jezabel
he gave space to repent of her evil deeds, Ren. 2.21. for Christ stands at the
door, of men's hearts, and knocks, and if any man hear his voice, and open to
him, He will come in and sup with him, etc. Rev. 3.20. yea and therefore he
sends and calls again and again to men, Matt. 22.3, 4. and 22.37. and is angry
with men for refusing to come, Matt. 22.7. Prove. 1.24, 25, 26, etc.

2. That there is a necessity of coming to and believing on Christ for the
enjoyment of this grace and glory prepared in him, because

1. It is all treasured up in Christ for us, so as not to be enjoyed or
received but in and with Christ. How shall not he with Christ (not apart from
or without Christ) freely give us all things, Romans 8.32. This life is in his
Son; He that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son, has not
life, 1 John 5.11, 12. The Feast is prepared in Wisdoms house, and she and her
servants go forth to call men to it in the house, but do not carry it out of
the house to them to be eaten in the streets, Prove. 9.1-5, 6. for men may not
have forgiveness of Sins, the Holy Spirit, the grace and blessing of God in
their own sinful ways, because Christ has died for them; but for those things
they must forsake the foolish, and leave their own ways, and come in to him
and his ways, For

2. God is not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, evil may not dwell with
him, fools may not stand in his sight; he hates (as to fellowship with them)
all the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5.4, 5. No unclean thing or unrighteous
thing or person therefore, may enter into or inherit his his Kingdom, 1 Cor.
6.9. Rev. 21.27. and therefore there is a necessity, that we be washed,
sanctified, justifiied, made wise and righteous, which we cannot be but by
turning to God in and by Jesus Christ, believing on and obeying him.

3. It was Gods end in sending his Son, and Christ's in giving himself for us,
that He might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works. Not that he might justify and save us, and make
us happy in our sins and uncleaness, cleaness, Tit. 2, 13, 14. He dyed for all,
that they that live should not henceforth live to themselves, but to him that
dyed for them and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.15.

4. Neglecting and refusing to come to Christ, to believe on and follow him,
therefore men must needs perish in their sins and uncleaness. For

1. All things in this life and world will fail, being vain and momentany. All
flesh is grass, and the goodliness thereof as the flower of grass, 1 Pet. 1.24.
The world passes away, and the fashion and lust (or desire) of it, 1 John
2.17. 1 Cor. 7.31. and all our own wisdom is bruitishness and folly, with an
enmity to God, and he will destroy it, Jer. 10.14. 1 Cor. 1.19. and 3.19, 20.
and all our righteousnesses and goodness, though after the Law, but as a
menstruous ragge, so as we cannot live in, or be justified by and on account of
it, Isa. 64.6. Romans 3.20. Gal. 3.10. nothing but Christ will preserve us from
perishing, Acts 4.11.12.

2. Yea men's neglects of and rejections of Gods Grace and great Salvation,
provokes his heavy anger and displeasure, which will kindle a fire that will
never be quenched, but will for ever burn upon them, Mat. 22.7. Mark 9.44-48.
Heb. 2.3. and 10.26.29. and 12.25.

Such things are to be talked of, proposed to and urged upon men, sometimes one
and sometimes another of these things to convert them to righteousness: as also
the discovery to men of what is the good, acceptable, and perfect will of God
as to what he would have them do and practice in their believing on Christ,
that they may please him, and have the fellowship of his spirit and his
blessing. And so what God and Christ require of them, and his grace obliges
them to do, or deny or to forbear. With the manifold encouragements to
obedience, and heartnings thereto against all temptations, persecutions and
whatever other discouragements, in proposing Gods precious promises and
gracious readiness in Christ to pardon sins and accept of weak, if upright,
endeavors, and the like, as the Scriptures abundantly evidence: to which it
would be too long to speak here particularly. Such things are to be held forth
by believers in holding forth the word of life in shining as lights among men.
Which they are to do also,

2. In their works and conversation: As the Apostle also implies, when he
says; Do all things without murmuring and disputing, that ye may be blameless
and harmless (or fincere) the Sons of God. Without rebuke in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Nation; among whom ye shine (or shine ye) as lights.
Namely, in so walking and demeaning your selves. Both these ways Levy is said
to have exercised himself in, in his turning many away from iniquity, Mal. 2.6.
The Law of truth (as the Gospel is called the Word of truth, Ephesians. 1.13.) was
in his mouth: and iniquity was not found in his lips. There is the first thing.
And then the second follows, viz. He walked with me in peace and equity, and
turned many from iniquity. And indeed they that will not be won by the word,
may sometimes be won to the word by a good Conversation, as is employed, 1 Pet.
3.1. For herein also we may show forth the virtues of Christ, and God in him:
while we as Strangers and Pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts, and have our
Conversation honest among the Gentiles (the uncircumcised in heart) a
Conversation that becomes and is answerable to the Gospel of Christ: an holy,
humble, charitable, courteous, upright and blameless Conversation. So as that
whereas they are apt to speak evil of us, as of evil doers, they may glorify
God (by occasion of the good works that they shall behold in and from us) in
the day of visitation, 1 Pet. 2.9, 11, 12. which our Savior also evidently
implies in his exhortation to his Disciples, aforementioned in Mat. 5.16. When
he says, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works
(walk so well and blameless before them in your holding forth the word of life,
that your works may testify of you, and evidence the force and power of the
truth believed, and grace received and declared by you, so as men may behold
them) and glorify your Father which is in Heaven. For this way also we may
declare or show forth his salvation: even show forth in our selves, as
evidences of it, the saving virtue that is in the Gospel, and Grace believed by
us; that the Gospel of Christ is the power of God to Salvation (even to save
men from their sins in the power and pollution of them; yea and from the
clogging force in sins guilt in the conscience ^ausing deadness or sadness) to
every one that believes, whither Jew or Gentile. And ^erein we may show forth
his righteousness; namely, that god is upright, faithful and and true in what
he says and promises; while according to his promises, we receive ^is
blessings in and upon us, to the filling us with the fruits of his
righteousness, making ^s apt to every good work, and cheerful and hopeful in
God under all evils of adversity, Psalm. 92.13, 14, 15. And also while we
exemplify in our selves before men the righteous ways and practices which God
would have men walk in. And indeed without this all our profession or preaching
is rendered vain and ineffectual exceedingly, and instead of glorifying God, as
He is and will be in trees of righteousness of his planting, Isa. 61.3. God is
dishonored among men by such as talking of and professing his love and grace do
walk otherwise: witness what the Apostle says in Romans 2.17 24. Behold thou art
called a Jew and restest in the Law, and make thy boast of God, and know
his will, and (tryest the things that differ or) approvest the things that are
excellent, being instructed out of the Law, and art confident that thou thy
self art (...) guide of the blind, a light of them that are in darkness, an
instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, which has the form of knowledge,
and of the truth in the Law. Thou therefore that teach another, teach
thou not thy self! thou that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal?
thou that say a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery?
thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? thou that make thy
boast of the Law, through breaking the Law dishonorest thou Gods for the name
of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, as it is written. Let us
take heed we be not such lights, or such vain boasters and talkers of light and
truth, and of the Gospel of Christ: but yield we up our selves to the grace of
God and its teachings, and walk we in the spirit in all goodness, righteousness
and truth; and so let us endeavor where God has given any furniture and
fitness for it according to what God has given us, to seek and promote the
good of others. With both these forementioned particulars, adding and joining
earnest, and faithful, and fervent prayers, and supplications to God, that He
would be merciful to us and bless us, and make his face ^o shine upon us, that
so his way may be known upon earth, and his saving health among all Nations,
etc. Psalm. 67.1, 2. as knowing that all our success in all our work and service
for him, and endeavors with men, depends upon his grace and blessing: without
which, they that labor to build the house of God and convert souls to
Righteousness will be ^ut labor in vain, Ps. 127.1. Thus we find Christ ^ur
Lord rising early and going apart to pray ^o God before he went to teach the
people, Mark 1.35, 38. and so let us endeavor to ^o make others wise, and to
turn many to ^ighteousness, considering also that it is ^ere farther employed,
and that this may serve,

Use 4. 2. To inform us, That this the and of Gods giving the knowledge of
himself, and grace in Christ to us with any gifts more or less for usefulness,
that we should live to him therein, and seek his honor, glory and interest in
endeavoring the good of others, not living to our selves or minding our own
thing only, no not only the good of our own souls, much less inferior worldly
advantages, but that we should look upon others, and seek their good also. No
saying to our brethren, as Cain to Abel^ Am I my Brothers keeper? but letting
the sam^ mind be in us that was in Christ Jesus; wh^ being in the form of God
and thinking it no robbery to be equal with him, yet so looked up on our needs
and miseries as to abase and empty himself and take upon himself the form of a
servant and the fashion of a man, yea and therein also to humble himself and
become o^ bedient to the death, the death of the Cros^ that he might ransom
and redeem us from the death and judgment that was upon us and become our
Savior: that He might lif^ the poor out of the dust, and take the needy from
the dunghill and set them upon the Throne with Princes: even the Princes of his
people, Phil. 2.5, 6, 7, 8. Psalm. 113.6, 7, 8. especially those that are
stronger and more gifted. And mo^^ especially yet if also called to Office and
Ministry among others, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and look
after that tha^ is lost, not pleasing themselves, but every one seek his
Neighbors good, and how to please him for his edification and salvation,
seeking first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness: both that they may be
more and more subject to his Kingdom and Government, and filled with the fruits
and benefits of it, and to that purpose with his righteousness: without which,
there is no inheriting his his Kingdom. As also to promote his Kingdom, enlarge
his Church, bring in more souls, and souls more and more into it. And to that
purpose show forth and seek the manifestations and discoveries of his
righteousness both in word and conversation, as is before noted. Not first to
seek our selves; no not necessaries for our life, food and raiment, much less
great matters in this world, honors and preferments, riches, pleasures, and the
like, Romans 15.1, 2, 3. Mat. 6.22.23. Luke 12.30, 31, 32. Yea they that have but
one Talent, we may see, it is Gods mind and Christ's that they trade for him with
it, in seeking to bring an increase to him: that is evidently declared to be his
mind, in the judgment awarded upon him that neglected to improve his one
Talent. And that it is pleasing to God that we endeavor the good of others,
and their salvation with our own, is in this also plainly made manifest, in
that they that instruct and make wise others and turn many to righteousness,
shall receive such honor at the hands of God, as to shine as the brightness of
the firmament and as the stars for ever and ever. Yea this also may serve,

Use 5.3. To inform us what is the right use and improvement that we should
make of those advantages and means of grace that God affords us in sending wise
men and prophets, and holy men among us, who instruct us and hold forth the
light of the knowledge of God and of his ways among us, in word or
conversation, or both: As also when his grace therein is received effectually
and to purpose, and not in vain by us. Viz. That that is the end of God in such
vouchsafements to us, and the use and improvement which we are to make thereof,
that we be made wise and righteous thereby. And so far is the grace of God
received to purpose by us, as it has that effect in us, and we become thereby
wise and righteous, are turned from our iniquities and brought into and made
partakers of the divine nature and virtues of Christ Jesus. Therefore we are
not to rest content that we have Gods servants, words and ordinances with and
among us: or that we get by them some light into our understandings, so far as
to fill us with notions of truth, and to make us able to talk and make
profession of it. There is great difference between such a knowing as may but
puff us up and make us proud, and true wisdom and righteousness, the more we
have of opportunities and means of knowledge; yea and the more knowledge we get
thereby of what is good and true, and what is Gods will concerning us, and the
more profession we make thereof, the more or greater fools are we, if we be not
brought into subjection to Christ and his gracious government thereby, and if
we be not made just and righteous therethrough. Yea the more unrighteous are we
toward God and men and our own souls, if having more of such means and
knowledge, we are not yet therethrough brought into subjection and obedience to
Christ, so as to love Him above all, and denying our selves, with all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, to ^ive soberly, righteously, and godly, and ^o
to him in this present world. He that knows his masters will and does it not,
shall be ^eaten with many stripes; for to whomsoever ^uch is given, of him
shall be much required; and to whom men have committed much, of him ^hey will
ask the more, Luke 12.47, 48. Christ was not sent of God, neither came he into
^he world, nor has he sent forth his Spirit, and fitted and furnished servants
of his, and sent them into the world, and given forth his Word and Doctrine,
and the light of his sons and servants holy conversation to such end that we
might only have our brains filled with better and righter speculations, or our
tongues tipped with finer and righter language, and that we should bow to him
with our knees, and honor him with our lips, and cry Lord, Lord, and jangle,
and wrangle, and make a noise, bustle, and bluster in the world about opinions
and forms of worship, while still we remain in heart and life covetous, proud,
ambitious, vainglorious, unjust and wicked. But his great end in all this, and
the great end we are to pursue in the enjoyment of them all, and the use we are
to make of them was, and is, our being redeemed from all iniquity, and
purified, to be to Christ a peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14.
Oh let us look diligently, that we neither fail of the grace of God, nor
receive it in vain; but so as we may have it so effectually in our hearts
prevailing with us, and bringing forth its fruits in us, that we may serve God
acceptably, with reverence and godly fear, be^ made wise to Salvation, a
righteous people, a^ branch of Gods planting, the work of his hands, that He
may be glorified, Isai. 60.21.

3. This also with reference to both its, branches,

Use 6. May administer diverse reproofs as;

1. To such as neglect Wisdom and Righteousness, and regard them not, that
seek other things, but seek not the Lord, that call and cry and lift up their
voices for vanities, and that that will not profit them, for perishing
pleasures, riches, or honors, but content themselves to be without wisdom and
understanding, seek not Gods Kingdom and his Righteousness, have a will to be
rich, and through the love of money fall into a temptation and a snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful lusts which drown them in destruction and
perdition, and pierce their souls through with many sorrows, but flee from
Wisdom and her calls, counsels, instructions, and repro^, shunning the light
thereof, because their deeds are evil: and follow not after righteousness,
godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness, that they might lay hold on eternal
life, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10, 11, 12. Who not believing that they are the truly wise,
that fear and serve God in the faith of Christ Jesus, nor that they shall shine
so gloriously in the issue, and as the reward of their wise doings, therefore
say to God, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thee, or of thy ways,
preferring riches before righteousness, wine and women and the ways of
wickedness before wisdom, heavenly understanding and righteousness; their
farms and oxen before the heavenly Marriagefeast, husks with swine before the
substantial bread of life, laying out their money for that that is not bread,
and their labor for that that satisfies not; when they might (but will not)
eat that that is good, and let their souls delight themselves in fatness,
these are fools indeed; and shame and contempt will be their promotion, Prove.
1.7. and 3.35. When they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament, then shall these ly down in everlasting darkness, and be an
abhorring to all flesh, Isaiah 50.11. and 66.24. especially those that have had
the greatest opportunities and advantages for getting wisdom, and for being
justified and made righteous, and yet foolishly and wickedly have neglected and
despised them, Hebr. 2.3. that have a price put into their hands to get
wisdom, but they have no hearts to it, Prove. 17.16. Indeed had Christ never
been sent of God, or come into the world, or had he never died for them and
rose again, or had he by no means, or God through him, ordered any light or
truth to them, so as it might be known or discerned by them, or given them no
capacity to see, hear or receive it, their case might deserve more pity and
excuse. God that winked at the times of ignorance, would certainly
(comparatively at least) overlook their remediless ignorance and brutishness;
but now that things are otherwise, the light is come into the world, Christ
has given himself the ransom for all, and the the testimony in due or proper
times, and is the light that lighteneth every man coming into the world, and
what is to be known of God is manifest in or among men, for God has showed it
them, and they close their eyes, and refuse to see, and like not to have, or
retain, God in their knowledge; yea professing themselves to be wise, and
neglecting what comes to make them wise, become fools, and their foolish heart
is darkened, they have therefore no excuse; but the wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven against them, for all their ungodliness and unrighteousness,
because they withold the truth in unrighteousness, 1 Timothy 2.4, 6. John 1.9. and
3.19. Romans 1.18, 19, 20, 21, 22-28. Truly this is the case among the heathens:
But how much more inexcusable must we Christians needs be, who have the
Scriptures of the Law and Prophets among us; yea the Preachings and doings of
Christ and his Apostles, and in all a clear discovery of the mind and will of
God, and of his love and grace to us, and the highest means and advantages
given us for attaining to wisdom, and being made just and righteous, but put
them from us, or receive the Grace of God herein in vain. Oh how great is the
folly, and how sad will be the state of such among us! Folly and madness to
neglect and slight what they might have of such worth, as to advance them to
greater glory than all the glory of the earth, or world, even to shine as the
brightness of the Firmament. But much more folly by neglecting that, to incurr
endless obscurity, and disgrace, and everlasting misery! If men are accounted
fools (and well may be oftimes) who having opportunities and advantages to
attain to glory and dignity among men, do sloathfully, cowardly or otherwise
neglect them, how much more shall they who might attain to heavenly glory, and
care not for it, nor will look after it? upon which account also

2. Here is reproof to such as being somewhat acquainted with God, and his
grace, and truth, and having received some furniture and fitness for being
useful to others, ye^ with the sloathful and wicked servant refuse to improve
their talent, know how to do good to others, but have no heart to it mind their
own things only, but neglect the things that are Christ's, Philip. 2.21. Seek
what to eat, and what to drink, and wherewith to be clothed, but seek not the
advancement of Gods Kingdom or its increase, nor the glorifying of Gods
righteousness to men that they might be saved. Whither through coveteousness
and desire after the getting and keeping of the world, they cannot look after
Gods glory, or their own, and others good: or through sloathfulness and
loathness to undergo hardship, and the difficulties and services requisite to
be performed by them, or through fearfulness and unbelief thinking the work and
service of the Lord too dangerous, and Him no certain or sufficient protector
of his servants (and this often goes with the other: The sloathful man says
there is a Lion in the way: I shall be slain in the Streets, Prove. 22.13.)
fearing what men may do unto them more than him that can cast body and soul
into hell fire, and so conceal the words of the Holy one, ^er hide them so
within a bushel, that they ^are not sown abroad in Gods field to bring forth an
increase. Have received light but smother it, and will not suffer it to shine
forth, and therefore set it not on a Candlestick, but hide it under^ bed or a
bushel, or the like: Or through want of Charity to, and ^are or desire of their
neighbors good. And ^ruly if he that having the worlds good sees his Brother
have need and administreth not to him, but shuts up the bowels of his
compassion from him, is injurious to God and men, and has not the love of God
well abiding in him, 1 John 3.17. How much more worthily may it be said of such
as having that which is far better than all this worlds good, the knowledge of
God and his truth, wherewith to help men to heaven, by instructing them in and
unto wisdom and righteousness, and see their brethren and neighbors have need
thereof, and yet shut up the bowels of their compassions against them, and
leave them for want of instruction and vision to die and perish; how dwells
the love of God in such men? And oh what a reproof may this be to many Pastors
or Ministers, such as the Prophets have cried out against, that feed
themselves, but feed not (but starve) the Flock? that either have not knowledge
o^ mission from God, and yet run and speak but not out of his mouth (of whom
more by and by) or that having the words of God to speak to them, withold them
and speak them not: Yea and such as causelessly leave and desert their Flocks,
or neglect their opportunities of teaching men knowledge, and of turning them
to righteousness: such a^ that Shephard, that Idol Shephard, tha^ (...)
Shephard of no worth, spoken of in Zech. 11.13. that leaves the Flock. Surely
the loss of the great glory here set before the faithful and diligent servants
of God, the loss of shining as the brightness of the Firmament, and as the
Stars for ever and ever, might sufficiently awaken men from such neglect of
their duty: But much more if withal the woe and misery contrary hereto
threatened to such, and allotted for their portion be considered, it might alarm
us all to take heed of these evils, both that judgment threatened and predicted
by our Savior. Take that Talent from him -- and cast ye that unprofitable
servant into outer darkness, there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth, Mat.
25.24, 25, 28, 30. and that Woe in the Prophet Zechary pronounced, Woe to the
Idol Shepherd (or Shepherd of no value, Idolized and worshipped perhaps of men,
but of no worth in himself, and as to his way and practice) that leaves the
Sheep or Flock: (the Hireling that seeing the Wolf come, shifts for himself,
but leaves the Sheep to the danger of him; or that for any cause whatsoever,
voluntarily deserts and leaves the care of men's souls committed to him) A Sword
shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye, his arm shall be utterly dried
up (He shall lose his force, power and virtue for doing good) and his right eye
shall be utterly darkened. He shall lose all right understanding; or shall be
bound as it were hand and foot and cast into outer darkness, where his eye
shall see no light. A sad and heavy sentence is either of them, and such as
might awaken us to consider our ways and be fervent in spirit serving the Lord
with all diligence; seeking to do all the good we can to others. Yea and to
take the best advantages that Providence affords, and that we may lay hold of
for doing good to all, or as many as may be. Like the Apostle that pleased not
himself, but pleased all men in all things, not seeking his own profit, but the
profit of many, that they might be saved, 1 Cor. 10.33. the more the better:
For they that turn many to righteousness have the more excellent promise; that
they shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever. They therefore are faulty, and
foolishly defective to themselves and their own good; who for any fleshly or
worldly considerations of ease, honor, greater profits here, or the like,
content themselves to do good to a few, when they are in a capacity and may
have opportunities to do good to many more. It was the great blessing promised
of God to Abraham, that he should be the Father of many Nations, Genesis 17.4.
Romans 4.17, 18. And the glory of Christ, that through his sufferings, He brings
many sons to glory, Heb. 2.10. And David, when God went so forth with him in
his reproving and instructing men, that Many said, who will show us God? Lord
lift up the light of thy countenance upon us, tells us that God put more
gladness thereby into his heart, than in the time that their Corn and Wine
increased, Psalm. 4.6, 7. The servant that with his pound well employed gained
ten pounds, was made Ruler over ten Cities, when he that gained but five with
his pound was made Ruler but of five Cities, Luke 19.17, 19.

3. But if they that neglect to do what good they can are faulty and to be
reproved; hence what shall we say then to such, as not only do not what good
they can or might, to make others wise and righteous, but even do their
endeavors to hinder men from wisdom and righteousness, or to turn them
therefrom? surely such are far more exceedingly faulty. And if they that make
others wise or instruct them thereto, shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament in the judgment, and they that turn many to righteousness as the
Stars for ever and ever; then they that hinder or pervert men from being wise
or righteous, shall rise to shame and everlasting contempt, as was said of
some, verse 2. And here diverse sorts of persons fall under sore reproofs, as to
say;

1. They that by force and violence endeavor to hinder men, or do drive them
from being wise or righteous: they that make Laws and Edicts against and so (in
prosecuting them, or otherwise) persecute men for righteousness sake, forcing
men to forbear those ways by which they might attain wisdom and righteousness,
or in which they might practice them; and compelling men to practice
unrighteous matters. Such as walk in Pharohs course, who would not let the
people have liberty to wait upon and worship God, but put other burdens upon
them to take up all their time, that they might not have leisure for that;
whither Masters of Families, parents or higher powers, Ezod. 5.17, 18. Or do
like Jeroboam, set up devises of their own, and compel all men to conform
thereto; and thrust out those who would more rightly serve God, 2 Chronicles.
11.14.15. and 13.9. with 1 King. 12.28, 31, 32, etc. Or like Ahab and Jezabel,
that threw down Gods Altars and killed his Prophets. Or like Nebuchadnezzar,
who threatened the fiery Furnace to them that would not do unrighteously in
bowing down to, and worshipping his Image, Dan 3.5, 6. Or like the Princes and
Presidents of Babylon under Darius, that procured a Law to forbid the practice
of Gods worship also for a time upon pain of being cast into the Den of Lions,
and prosecuted it against Daniel for not observing it, Dan. 6. Or like the Jews
and Pharisees, who made a Law to put out of their Synagogues any that would
confess Jesus to be the Chpist, John 9.22. and 12.42. Or the Council that
afterward upon severe penalties, forbad the Apostles to preach in his name,
punishing those that do wisely and righteously according to God, and those that
endeavor to bring others to do so likewise, Acts 4.18, 21. and 5.28, 40. Or
like the Beast, or the false Prophet, that setting up an Image or form of
Religion of their own devising, compel all to submit to ^t, and cause the
refusers to be killed. And such as will not some way or other acknowledge and
submit to their unjust doings, that they shall neither buy nor sell, trade nor
traffic, Rev. 13.15, 17. these are greatly faulty in so doing; As we find the
Apostle Paul diverse times aggravates his own sin of this nature, whilst a
Pharisee and ignorant of Christ; judging himself for it, the chief of Sinners,
the least of the Saints, unworthy the ^ame of an Apostle, etc. Because he,
through ^he ignorance of his unbelief, practiced after this sort to persecute
and be injurious to the Church of God. Persecuting them to death, and
delivering them both men and women into Prisons, punishing them often in every
Synagogue, and compelling them to blaspheme. And being exceedingly mad against
them, he persecuted them into strange Cities, Acts 22.4. and 26.10, 11. with 1 Timothy 1.13, 14, 15. Ephesians. 3.8. 1 Cor. 15.10, 11. Oh then how great is their guilt
and sin that wickedly and wilfully against light and knowledge do such matters?
how sad their case! and how heavy and dreadful will be their judgment! They
that forbid men to speak to others that they may be saved, and persecute them
that do so, because forbidden by them, and take away by such acts and ways of
force from men the Key of knowledge, the Gospel Doctrine, and neither enter
into the Kingdom of God themselves, nor suffer those that would. Upon such,
wrath comes to the utmost, not doing it in a^ false zeal, so as to be excused
in a measure by their mistake and ignorance, Mat. 23.13. 1 These. 2.16. 1 Timothy
1.13. But of that last mentioned charge, others besides such persecutors may
also be guilty. As,

2. They that being Teachers, of or Preachers to the people, seduce them from
the truth, and not only do not preach it, but preach against it and traduce it.
Thus did the Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites, and the Lawyers too, Luke
11.46.52. Lading men with heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, worse than
Pharohs Taskmasters, while they put them upon getting such and such holy
frames and lives, such brokenness, godly sorrow, love and the like, to be the
grounds of their knowing Gods love to them (as indeed are good and needful in
their way and place) but withold from them and preach against that discovery of
the grace of God toward them, as and while sinners and ungodly that should
truly and genuintly effect them, putting men upon getting them, that they may
be the foundation of their believing, that the Gospel of the grace of God
appertains to them, or which is the same, that Christ was sent and dyed, and
gave himself a ransom for them, and God would have them saved: which indeed are
but the effects of those things first known and believed. For it is the
appearance of the love and grace of God to man, that is the spring from whence
all right frames and works do flow, and by that they are taught, Tit. 2.11, 12.
and 3.4, 5. But truly, while men teach others that Christ died but for a few,
they know not who, a secret number known only to God, and they must all by an
irresistible power be infallibly and necessarily brought in to God; and for all
the rest, Christ having not died, they must necessarily perish. What do they
but lay snares for men to render them careless of righteousness, and of the
knowledge of God, and to reason as some do, that if they be of the Elect, they
must needs be saved and cannot miscarry, let them live at the present, as
debauehedly as they will or can: and if otherwise, what will all their seeking
after God and breaking off from their sins avail them? They can be but
hypocrites and reprobates, do what they can. If it be said, but the Elect may
make themselves obnoxious to greater punishments here by sinning, and the
Reprobates by endeavoring to be good, lessen their future punishments. From
their own Principals mistaking and perverting that that is right, they that are
skilled in their Doctrine, may retort that to the Elect all things shall work
together for good, and their greater unrighteousness shall but the more commend
the righteousness of God: and the Reprobate shall have no less punishment than
God has decreed to them inevitably. And so they that preach to men a necessity
that those that are once brought truly to believe, must abide in the love of
God without any such If, as Christ puts upon his Disciples, when he says, If
ye keep my Commandments ye shall continue in my love, John 15.10. But they will
go higher than our Savior, and say, tush: away with these Ifs here, ye shall
keep Christ's Commandments and continue in his Love. Or if ye break them (as at
other times they will grant, for they read that David and St. Peter did so) yet
ye must be brought in again, so as ye cannot possibly fail of Salvation, and
all those sins also shall work together for your good: what do they but
strengthen the hand of Satan, and corruption in cases of temptation, to
prevail with such as have high persuasions that they are Elect and true
Believers, to presume to sin and do unrighteousness, as that, that in the issue
shall not hurt them, nay shall work to their advantage also? And while men make
it doubtful in their Preaching whether Christ be a Savior for them, or has
died for them or not, what do they but hinder them from seeing all those strong
engagements to believe on him, and submit to him, which that persuasion, as the
Scripture holds it forth, engages them with? It is true such Preachers and
Professors often say, If Christ died for ^ll men, then men may live as they
list, for they that Christ died for must be saved, and cannot perish: but this
saying of theirs is ^oubly vicious. For 1. If Christ's dying for men, and men's
being persuaded of it, be a ground of licentiousness, then men should do ill to
be persuaded that Christ died for them, or that they are of the Elect; for by
their own reasoning, Such as are elected, or judge themselves so, may live
licentiously, and as they list, yea are in great danger so to do (though they
may do it without danger) seeing without doubt Christ died for them. But 2.
That Is a falsehood, that all must be saved from the second Death for whom Christ
died (and that is the death we are now to seek to be saved from, and the being
saved from which, men mean of, when they talk of being saved.) The Apostle
signify the contrary, Romans 14.15. 2 Pet. 2.(...) 1 Cor. 8.11. Heb. 10.26-29.
Yea, and di^ they know and mind what the Apostle Jud^ implies in that saying,
that he put the Believers in remembrance, though they once knew (...) how that
the Lord having saved the people (...) of Egypt, afterward destroyed them that
(...) lieved not, Jude 5. they would judge otherwise: for though all that Christ
died (...) (that is all men) are, and shall be saved (...) of that first Death
and Judgment in whi^^ Christ found all involved: yet such as (...) fuse to
hearken to and follow him, call^ them, and offering to conduct them to (...)
promised inheritance, and to cleanse (...) prepare them for that He might bring
the^ to his Heavenly Kingdom, they shall be destroyed by Him in the Second
Death; even as those that were saved out of Egypt, and afterward believed not
on him, that having saved them, called them and went before them to lead and
bring them to Canaan, perished in the Wilderness. And both what Christ has
done for them in love to them, in dying for them and purchasing them into his
own dispose and Lordship, from under the jurisdiction of Satan, from his
having right and power to dispose of them, and in his therethrough becoming
^eir Savior to save them from the second ^eath, and bring them to happiness:
as ^so the possibility and danger of perishing, ^^y the certainty of it, yet,
except they ^^ne to believe on and follow after Christ, they be known and
believed, will strongly ^gage and oblige men to submit to and ^lieve on him,
which obligations by the rementioned doctrines are taken away (...) men: Yea,
seeing He died for all, that (...) that live might thenceforth live to him,
(...) Cor. 5.15. What do men by denying his ^ath to have been for all men, but
lay a ^ndation for men to deny to live to Him, that they have cause so to do,
till they can persuaded that he died for them? But ^all not insist further upon
the harmfulness of that Antisciptural and Antiapostolica^ doctrine, which I
hope all sober men begi^ to be ashamed of; only some hot violen^ persons, who
too much like the Scribes an^ Pharisees, challenge all right judgment (...)
themselves, and compass Sea and Land (...) make Proselites, but so as not to
bring the^ indeed to Christ for righteousness, but rath^ to a righteousness
before Christ, that the might with or by that come to Christ in (...) way of
their conceiving, are too much guil^ of retaining such principles, and speak
(...) proachfully of what is expressed in the G^spel sayings, as if they
contained blasph^ my, or gross error in them: For who cause I am thus large,
and insist thus mu^ upon it, and for them that are in danger be harmed by them.
But there be men (...) diverse other bad principles also, that hind or pervert
men from righteousness. Su^ as either deny the Person of Christ, or (...)
Satisfactoriness of his Death and Suffering or the Resurrection of his personal
Bod^ and its Ascension into Heaven, or the wo^ of his Mediation there, or his
return ag^ inglory Personally, from thence, to ju^ the quick and dead, or the
Resurrection Men in their bodily beings, or the eter^ Judgment, but turn these
into Allegor^ and things already done in themselv^ which are dangerous and
destructive principles, Heresies of damnation, or damnable Heresies, denying
the Lord that bought even them that hold them, and bring upon them swift
destruction, 2 Pet. 2.1. errors of the same stamp with what the Apostle notes
of Himeneus and Philetus, who concerning the truth erred, and said the
resurrection was past already, destroying or overthrowing the faith of some, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. As also the Mockers that say, Where is the promise of his
coming? for since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were
from the beginning of the creation, 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. These also cause some to
fall from their own stedfastness, or endanger it, ver. 17. Yea and the Great
whore that corrupts the earth with her abominations and fornications, is a
grand enemy to men's being righteous, while they hold the truth in
unrighteousness, or rather some of those that are her members oppugn (...), and
they that do not so, yet corrupt it by preaching other Doctrines, as of
necessary ^oncernment to be believed with it, that ^re underminers of it; as
when they press ^he necessity of the belief of their devised ^rticles and
Imaginations, and teach men ^o give the glory of Christ, and of God in ^im, to
creatures dead and living, and make (...) necessary to men's Salvation, to hold
their Faith and Worship of a sinful and fallible man, yea of the Man of Sin,
pretending his infallability, contrary to evident instances to the contrary,
yea and who in a word, Comes after the manner of Satan, with all
deceiveableness of unrighteousness in them that perish: while (...) himself in
the Temple of God (or the (...)) and shows himself that he is God, may order,
alter o^ do in the Worship of God what himself pleases, and withal persecutes
to death, those within his reach (...) subscribe not t^ his usurpations, but as
so doing, he an^ his abettors fall under the former Head (...) reproof.

3. They also who by their lives an^ practices, counsels and examples, debau^
or stumble men from the ways of wisdom and righteousness; they that entice to
Si^ and counsel to Atheistical, Idolatrous, loo^ or vicious principles and
practices, such (...) those ungodly ones mentioned, Psalm. 1. Prove. 1.10, 11.
such as Ahabs house was Ahaziah, 2 Chronicles. 22.3, 4. and by the evil examples
(especially being Maste^ Magistrates, or men of place) draw in other with, or
after them, to do foolishly and (...) righteously, running together into the
sa^ excess of riot, of which sort there are bundance every where in the world.
(...) especially such as being Teachers, Prophesis to men of wine and strong
drink, Mic. 2.11. and preach for licentious liberty and practice it; so as it
may be said of them, what the Lord, by Jeremiah, said of the Prophets and
Priests of Samaria and Jerusalem, that they are profane, and cause his people
to err, committing adultery, and walking in lies, strengthening the hands of
evil doers, so as that none does return from his wickedness; yea so as from
them profaness, or hypocrisy, is gone forth into all the land, Jer. 23.11, 13,
14, 15. Yea and all such as professing to know God, do in their works deny him,
being abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, bunglers or
void of judgment, Tit. 1.16. these above all are perilous, and make the times
perilous, when having a form of Godliness (and the greater their Form, the more
perilous, if) they deny the power of it; either in denying that Grace of God in
Christ held forth in the Gospel, rendering it the power of God to Salvation
(which belongs to the first sort spoken to under the Second Head of this Use of
Reproof,) or (which is here intended) denying the efficacy and operation of the
Grace of God, as to the obeying and walking in it, being under the profession
and form of godliness, lovers of themselves, covetous, proud, boasters,
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankeful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, or make-bates, incontinent, fierce,
despisers of those that are good, Traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of
pleasures more than lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4. the holding the truth
with such unrighteousness does greatly hinder men's being turned to
righteousness by it; for it occasions men rather to blaspheme the name of God,
or speak evil of his doctrine, while they see those that Preach or Profess it
to live so badly, as was noted from Romans. 2.17.24. Denying in practice and
conversation, the Lord that bought them, they cause the way of truth to be evil
spoken of, while they walk in pernicious, or (as some read it lascivious) ways,
2 Pet. 2.1, 2. or else leads those that own the truth with them to rest in the
notion of it with them as they do, and walk with them in like unrighteousness;
which still adds to the scandals and stumbling blocks laid in the way of
others, causing them to decline the way of truth, and either to turn Atheists
and Profane, or turn to some false ways of Religion, where there appears more
strictness of carriage, and blamelesness of conversation, which might be found
also with, and among Pharasees Phil. 3.6. where men make a fair show i^ the
flesh, but are corrupt from a solid and single rejoicing in the Cross of
Christ, Galat. 6.12-14. For both all the specious works and doings of those
that are of corrupt principles, perverting men from the truth, and all the best
and truest speakings of those that join therewith a corrupt and vicious life,
fall under this reproof, as being ways wherein men may hinder men's turning to
Righteousness, and lay rubs in the way of them that sincerely endeavor to do
that service. And all these, whosoever they be, great or small, zealous or
profane, that are guilty of any of these ways in the several branches of this
Use mentioned, fall under sharp reproof, especially this last sort, who deny
the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and turn the Grace of God and his
Gospel into an occasion of sinning, even into wantonness, for to such,
especially being Teachers of others, the Apostles instead of glorious shining
as the Stars for ever and ever, threatens, as to wandering Stars, the blackness
of darkness (as that that is reserved to them) for ever Jude 12. 2 Pet. 2.17.
and therefore this especially is to be taken heed of, as being that to which
that of the Lord in Ezech. 20.39. belongs: As for you, go ye and serve every
one his Idols, even hereafter, if ye will not hearken unto me, says the Lord,
but pollute ye my holy Name no more with your gifts and with your Idols: and
that of our Savior too, in Matt. 18.7, 8, 9. It must needs be that offenses
come: but woe to that man by whom the offense comes, for whosoever offends one of
these little ones that believe in me, it were better for him that a mil-stone
were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea.
Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast them from
thee: It is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, than having two
hands or two feet, to be cast into everlasting fire. And if thine eye offend
thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee, it is better for thee having but one
eye to enter into life, rather than having two eyes to be cast into Hell fire.
And surely if things as dear and needful to us as our hands, or feet, or eyes
are rather to be parted with by us, than that by offending with them we should
loose our souls, much more should we part with any fancy or fashion, garb or
garment, way or practice of vanity, rather than by offending and hindering the
souls of others, thereby to incurr such punishment, though all of these ways
reproved, deprive of happiness and glory, and expose to heavy misery and
judgment, the neglect of wisdom and righteousness, the being backward or
neglecting to do good to others, and to make them, what in us lies, wise and
righteous; and most of all, the hindering men from turning to, or calling them
out of the right way, and so turning them from righteousness in any wise or
manner. Yet this last mentioned way of iniquity exposes to the heavyest. But
truly as David, when he had been asserting the goodness of the Lord, and that
All his ways are mercy and truth, to them that keep his Covenant and his
Testimonies, presently adds, as finding defect therein in himself. For thy
Namesake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity, for it (thy name, as well as my
iniquity) is great, Psalm. 25.10, 11. And when he had been propounding the
blessedness of him that Considers the poor, how God would pity and help him in
his afflictions, presently adds; I said Lord be merciful unto me. Heal my soul
for I have sinned against thee, Psalm. 41.1, 2 3, 4. So may I, considering the
happiness of the wise, and of those that turn many to righteousness, and the
faultiness of those here reproved, reflecting upon my self, and finding
shortness and guilt in most of these ways reproved, cry out too, Lord be
merciful to me, heal my soul for I also in many of these ways have sinned
against thee, and against the souls of others also. But

Use 7. 2. This also in both its branches may afford great good motive and
encouragment to those that are wise themselves in the wisdom of Christ, or
diligently seeking after it, and those that are faithfully and diligently
endeavoring to improve what wisdom and other furniture they have received from
God for the good of others, that they might be made wise and righteous in
Christ Jesus, to go on and hold fast their wisdom, and their exercise of it to
so good an end. Seeing here they have an assurance given them by Jesus Christ
and his holy spirit, that they that so do, shall be glorious with him at the
last; which may bear them up against all the discouragements they may meet with
here in the way, as from their being here hid and obscure, thrust into corners,
taken no notice of, or made no account of, among their Neighbors. Yea, or from
their being here reproached, vilified and rendered odious, as Christ himself and
many of his followers: both holy Prophets, holy Apostles, and other holy men
have been in their several Ages. No cause from these things to be discouraged,
but to hold on their way, as it is said. The righteous also shall hold on his
way, and he that has clean hands, shall be stronger and stronger, Job. 17.9.
And as it is said by our Savior: Let him that is righteous be righteous still,
and he that is holy (devoted, separated and given up to serve God and Christ,
in seeking the glory of his name, and the good of others) let him be holy
still. And behold, I come quickly, and will render to every man according as
his works shall be, Rev. 2.11, 12. That is, to them that by patient continuance
in well doing seek after glory, honor and immortality, eternal life, Romans 2.7.
This consideration is oft-times propounded by Christ himself, as when he says:
He that shall confess me before men, him will I confess before my Father in
Heaven, and before the Angels of God, Mat. 10.32. Luke 12.8. And, No man that
has left Father or Mother, House or Land, etc. for my sake and the Gospels (to
serve me and it, as well as also to know me and it) but he shall receive an
hundred fold here in this life -- and in the world to come eternal life, Mark
10.29, 30. And so in each of the seven Epistles to the seven Churches in Asia,
Rev. 2, 3. This the Apostles too propounded both to themselves and to others.
To themselves; We believe, therefore we speak, knowing that he that raised up
the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus, and present us with you. For
which cause we faint not. But though our outward man perish, our inward man is
renewed day by day. For our light afflictions which are but for a moment
(attending us namely in our seeking after, and serving the Lord, getting and
walking in wisdom) Works for us a far more exceeding and an eternal weight of
glory, while we look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that
are not seen, etc. 2 Cor. 4.14, 16, 17, 18. And to others, when he says; So
run that ye may obtain, and every man that striveth for masteries is temperate
in all things. Now they do it to obtain a corruptible Crown, but we an
incorruptible, etc. 1 Cor. 9.24, 25. And this is a faithful saying: For if we
be dead with him, we shall also live with him: If we suffer with him, we shall
also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. Oh what have men often done and endured,
and with how great patience and unweariedness for a little glory? that they
might get a name and praise with men, and be glorified of them; and shine, as
it were, in their achieved glories and renowns? Witness that great Alexander
that in twelve years space ran over almost all the world with undaunted
courage, encountering with and vanquishing wondrous difficulties, for glory
sake. And Julius Caesar, Pompey and many others. But alas! What is all the
glory of this world in comparison of the glory to be revealed on the Saints of
God at the appearance of Jesus Christ! of which the Apostle tells us; that it is
a weighty and an eternal glory: and that he reckoned that all the sufferings of
this present time, are not worthy to be compared with it, Romans 8.18. Surely if
the hope of a little uncertain gain carries the Merchant, Husbandman and other
Tradesmen oftentimes through great dangers and unwearied labors and
difficulties: and the hope of a little honor and glory among men, has often,
and yet does carry out soldiers to exceeding great and tedious hazzards, what
should not the hope of so great glory as this, To shine as the brightness of
the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and ever, carry us out to, in
traveling for wisdom, and for doing good to all we can, and all the good we
can, that we may be instruments of their salvation? Seeing we have the promise
of God, both of his presence and helpfulness with us in all our labors and
dangers to assist and strengthen us: and of his rewarding our labors also and
crowning them in the issue, with so great glory and happiness. Neither of which
promises are engaged to those others in their adventures; but they run at
uncertainties, and upon only fallible probabilities.

Use 8. And Lastly, How may what has been said and considered from this
Scripture, occasion gladness (with sadness) to us in respect of this our
Deceased Brother, Mr. Thomas Moor; the occasion of our meeting here and
treating on this Text of Scripture? than which I could not think there was any
in the whole Bible more applicable to him, and pertinent to our present
business.

1. In respect of himself, we have undoubted cause and ground from this Text,
of great comfort and gladness; as being thence persuaded that it is and shall
be well with him, though dead in the body, and brought hither to be Interred;
no doubt but he shall arise among the just, and such as shall have this
Scripture fulfilled upon them: for that he was a wise man, and endued with a
great portion of Divine wisdom and Heavenly understanding, all that knew him
and his parts, and gifts, and way of life may testify: and his many pious and
religious Treatises, both in Print and Manuscript left behind him, will witness
for him. Indeed He had not University Learning to furnish him or to know
himself by; but what He had, was the more immediately or remarkably from God,
in and by a diligent Study and practice of the holy Scriptures and their good
instructions, and converse with Godly persons: to which, from his youth, God by
his Grace excited and stirred him up, and in which he mightily assisted and
blessed him. And indeed God has not tied himself, nor us up to the
Universities for their Learning, for his giving, or our receiving Heavenly
wisdom: But wherever men apply their hearts unto it, and mind its instructions
in those means of attaining it that he affords them, and walking in what He
gives, wait and call upon him for it, He is ready and faithful to give it, as
He has said, If any of you lack wisdom, let him (he says not go to the
Universities, but) ask it of God, who gives to all men liberally (or singly,
(...)) and uphraideth not, and it shall be given him, Jam. 1.5. though in the
measure of it, he gives not to all alike. He is a free Agent and gives for
gifts and usefulness to others more or less, as he pleases: but always so much
to the faithful, diligent seekers, as shall suffice for their Salvation, and
usually contribute something also to others usefulness; but Gifts for
understanding Scriptures, and prophesying thence, or speaking to others
edification, exhortation, and comfort, He gives not to all, but where, and as
He pleases: and to other oftimes besides, if not as sweetly and fully as (yea
and more than) to many (if not any) that ^re brought up in those places. Such
too usually knowing themselves by, and priding themselves in such their fleshly
privileges God ( that will have no flesh glory in his presince therefore)
stains the pride of that glorying too, and makes choice of Babes and suckling
to reveal his wisdom, and its mysteries too, when he passes by the otherwise
learned wise and prudent, choosing the foolish thing of this world to confound
the wise, and wea^ things to confound the mighty, and things tha^ are not (or
are naught set by) to bring t^ naught things that are, that no flesh may glory
in his presence, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29. as the that have those fleshy Privileges
and accomplishments are too apt to do: as is to visible even in them also that
are in some good measure endued with his grace; w^ may see therefore that God
has chose many of his most useful servants (thoug^ not all) from low and mean
places, an^ conditions. So David was chosen from the sheepfolds, and taken from
following the ewgreat with young, to be both an excellent Prophet, and a worthy
and potent King, Psalm. 7.70, 71. Mary a virgin of low estate, to have the
honor of being Mother to our Lord Luke 1.48. Christ himself, according to the
flesh, was a stone of stumbling to the pro^ Religionists, the Jews, Scribes and
Pharisees who stumbled at his meaness, and at (...) Cross and Sufferings, which
themselv^ contrived in a sort, and occasioned to him cause He was the supposed
Son of a Car^ter, and a Mechanic: for he himself ^ay appear wrought of that
trade, Mark (...). Is not this the Carpenter (say they) the of Mary, etc. and
he was brought up ^h those his mean Parents, and was not ^ught up at the
Schools, whence the Jews ^vailed, saying, How knows this man let^ (or
learning) having never learned, ^.7.15. and the company of his Disci^ and
Followers were not of the persons ^pute for learning; for they said of them, ^h
any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees be^d on him, but this people (meaning
his ^iples) that know not the law, are accur^ Joh. 7.47, 48, 49. And so the
Apostles know what they were diverse of them ^ermen, Toll-gatherers,
Tent-makers, etc. (...) choosing to put his treasure into earthen ^s, that the
power might be of (and so the (...) to) God, and not the men, 2 Cor. 4.7. (...)
that God has changed his way in (...) last days, and altering his purpose and
^ution for destroying the wisdom of the (...) and bringing to naught the
understanding (...) prudent, and making foolish the wisdom is world, 1 Cor.
1.19, 20. designs now ^tifie the flesh, and lift it up in his pre^ and ty up
his choice of instruments for his glory to men that may vaunt themselves of,
and congratulate one another their fleshly accomplishments (as if wisdom of
the flesh and world would (...) illustrate the Cross of Christ, and its ve^
that was wont heretofore to obscure it but a Scriptureless tradition, and a
(...) ceit I fear, of men fleshly minded, and (...) speak as they would have
it, because circumcised in heart, and they have learned to worship God in the
spirit, rejoi^ Christ Jesus, and to have no confidence i^ flesh, Phil. 3.3.
Surely men in having the^ of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord (and the fore the
giver to whom He will) of G^ with respect of persons, in this sense too, (...)
to say to the learned Academicks, and g^ly read Scholars, Sit thou here in a
(...) place, and have thou high respect and e^ in our hearts, while they say to
those are taught of God, and fitted by his (...) in the meditation of his word
only, for fullness therein, because not so educa^ Stand thou there, or sit here
at my foot-st^ a lower place and esteem, are judges of thoughts, being partial
in themselves, as (...) as they that put such difference be^ the goodly
apparel, gold ring, or gay clo^ and the vile, or mean raiment, or the pe^ that
were in them: and they are liab^ to less reproof than they; for though learning
is a gift of God, as well as riches, and ^o be received with thankfulness, and
may (...) very profitably used in his service, as ^hey also may; yet men are as
apt to abuse that, and lift up themselves therein, as they ^re riches, and it
may as well and truly be ^d, Do not learned men and the wise in such ^sdom,
oppress the truth, pervert, corrupt and ^il the souls of men, as it is said, Do
not ^ich men oppress you? and of both, Do they ^ot blaspheme that worthy name
by which ye are called? But let both the one and the other ^e commended where
they do well, and ^ulted where otherwise: but let not the ^ts of God, where
ever given, be over^oked, or not thankfully acknowledged. I ^ow it is not every
one that is apt to lift (...) himself, and thinks himself fit to be a ^acher of
others, that is therefore so. There are both of the learned and unlearned ^^t
run before they be sent of God, or approved by him in their errand. But of this
^amp was not this our deceased Brother, ^aving much of the presence of God with
(...), and blessing of God upon him in his ^mistration. So as we may say truly
of (...), the other Branch of the Text also, that ^de turned many to
righteousness, many choice and precious Christians, excellently endowed with
understanding, experiences o^ of Gods goodness, gifts of Prayer, and heavenly
virtues were the fruits of his Labors. Many that are gone before him (...)
God, and some that are yet remaining (...) earth, whose lives and whose wor^
praise them. For indeed he had a goo^ understanding in the grace of God, and
(...) the righteousness which is by Faith of Jesus Christ, which he much opened
to, and (...) culcated upon his Hearers; and so he mi^ be properly said by
setting them befo^ men, to turn them to behold and mind a^ embrace them, and so
to be made just (...) righteous. Some in this City of Lon^ were Seals of his
Ministry, but many (...) in the Countries where he lived, and wh^ he was more
conversant; as in Cambridge shire, Norfolk, the Isle of Ely, Lince^ shire and
thereabouts. Many that h^ blessed God that ever they knew him, a who yet do: so
that we may with comfort a^ confidence leave him here in the earth, an assured
hope and expectation of his ^ing raised up again to everlasting life: a that
then he shall among them that be (...) shine as the brightness of the
Firmament, a among those that turn many to righteous^ as the Stars for ever and
ever. For ind^ he did not only hold forth good Doctr^ the Doctrine of the Grace
of God to men, but did also walk humbly and holily among and toward men:
Preaching in his practice as well as in his doctrine: Though we do not make him
more than a man, a good and an useful man, having learned with St. Augustine to
give that honor only to the holy Scriptures, called Canonical, to be the
absolute rule of our faith and life. We look upon his Life as that which had
its failings and passions as other good men's, and read his Writings, and heard
his Discourses as we would other holy men's, with our senses exercised to
compare them with the Holy Scriptures, and (as was his frequent expression
prefixed before diverse of his Treatises in their Epistles) to bring things to
the Testimony, and receive what agrees therewith, and if any thing swarve
therefrom, or want confirmation thereby to let it alone or reject it, for we
have learned of our Lord to call no man Master of our faith but himself, the
only absolutely perfect Pattern of Life, and Teacher of Truth: though we have
also learned of his Apostle to have all in honor for their works sake that
faithfully and skilfully instruct us into, and provoke us to hold fast that
which our Lord has taught us, 1 These. 5.12, 13. I know many, and those that
account themselves and were accounted the strictest Religionists, censured him
for his Doctrine and Practices; and was not our Lord himself so, and by such
manner of persons? For his Doctrine, because he held the Death of Christ to
have been for all men, and the Grace in Him to be treasured up in Him for all
men, as what is free for them; and dissented from those of Mr. Calvin's mind in
his apprehensions of Election and Reprobation: but they that censured him upon
that score, bewray their own ignorance, or unbelief of Gods testimony in the
Scriptures, and unaquaintedness with the manner of its speaking, and are of
those that call some bodies else their Rabbis than Jesus Christ; and follow
other Guides rather than his holy Apostles, crying up this or that supposed
holy man, more than them and their plain sayings. For his practice: some as
accounting him a Sect-Master, or a maker of a Schism, but they that so did, did
not well know him: For his work it was not to divide men from the Church of
England, in which he walked and worshipped, though not in all things approving,
yet not for lesser dissatisfactions renting from it. Upon which account many
others of the zealous parties more censured his practice. But I think he
followed therein, the way and practice of the holy Prophets and Apostles: who
though reproving the Errors and Faults in the Jewish Church, or those that
called themselves of it, yea and approving and practicing the Assemblings and
Speakings together of such as feared God, besides the public Assemblings of
the professed Church, Mal. 3.16. Psalm. 111.1. and 119.63. Mark 1.21. 39 and
2.1, 2. Luke 10.38, 39. Acts 3.1. and 4.23. and 12.5, 12. yet made not a
separation therefrom, till, or otherwise than they might be thrust out by them,
Isa. 66.5. Well, we shall leave him to his righteous Judge, who sees not as
men see, nor judges after their Judgment; With whom his work we trust is
accepted, and of whom we hope he shall be rewarded with this great happiness, To
shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and ever.
In which comfort concerning him, we here leave him. Though yet notwithstanding
this cause of Gladness concerning him.

2. In respect of our selves, we have great cause of sadness, for that God has
deprived us of him and of his farther helpfulness and usefulness among us, and
that too, in the midst of his farther endeavors of it. Both as we may reflect
upon our unthankfulness for, and want of making due improvement of so good an
Instrument of good to us, and so great a gift of Gods grace and mercy as he
was, as what might provoke God to take him from us, and to take him away too so
as he did, both at such a distance, where few of his Acquaintance could have
the opportunity of visiting him: and especially in such a manner, as by
suffering such a feebleness to befall him, as took away the benefit of his
speaking audibly to us, during the continuance of his sickness (if I may call
it a sickness) which though long. He being weak many weeks, yet in all that
time he spoke little so as to be well-understood a whole Sentence together,
only now and then a Sentence. But those about him perceived that he spoke
oftentimes about Christ or the Resurrection, and the hope of the glory to come,
and was much in Prayer to God even to his end. Surely God might take him away
in such a manner for correction and reproof to the living, as if he should
signify therein, that because we made not sufficient account and use of what
he had so much and often spoke in his lifetime, we should have little from him
audibly in his dying. Which though it might be imputed partly to his age and
spentness, being just entered upon his eightieth year, and having spent his
natural strength much in his continual writing, meditation and exercise, and
partly to the distemper that fell upon his head and nerves and rendered him
listless, drowsy and in a measure Lethargick or Appoplectick, as I conceive.
Yet seeing God does often order that they that serve him much in their life
time, express much of him too in their death in an edifyable manner to others.
And he could, had he pleased, have ordered such strength and livelyness to him
also therein. Therefore it is better for us, taking it out of Gods hand as a
reproof of our unprofitableness, to make that use of it for the future, to
improve the mercies God gives us while we have them: as our Savior admonished
the the Jews, when he said, Yet a little while I am with you, and then I go to
him that sent me. Ye shall seek me and shall not find me, and where I am
thither ye cannot come, John 7.33, 34. and 8.21. to the end they might attend
to him and make good use of him and his presence while yet with them, and where
they might find and come to him, and so might walk in the light, while yet the
light was with them, John 12.35, 36. and not as the Poet observed to be the
common practice of men, Presentem virtutem odio habere, absentem quaerere
invidi. Horat. Slight present good, out of envy of it, and then when it is
withdrawn seek for it when it cannot be had. Surely it is matter of lamentation
for the Church and World to be deprived of any useful persons in them. As also
cause of sadness we have, as the taking away such, may presage judgments
approaching upon us, as is often found, and as is employed in Isa. 57.1, 2. The
righteous man perishes (namely from among men) and no man lays it to heart.
And men of mercy (or kindness) are taken away, none considering that the
righteous is taken from the evil (either the evil that is already predominant,
as Lot from the evil that vexed his righteous soul, or as we read it, the evil
to come, as Lot also was, and Noah when taken into the Ark, from the
approaching deluge) He shall enter into peace, etc. In respect of him therefore
we have cause of gladness, as our Savior said to his Disciples, John 14.28.
But in respect of our selves, cause to grieve. And God grant that that of our
Savior when the women wept for him when he went to his death, may not be
applicable to us, Weep for you selves and for your Children, for behold the
days come in which they shall say, Blessed are the barren and the wombs that
never bare, and the paps that never gave suck, etc, Luke 23, 28, 29. Well, what
of judgment and correction to us there is in it, it is good for us to bear,
Searching and trying our ways, and turning again to the Lord, who in diverse
such strokes and breaches made upon us, has been smiting us. Blessing him that
we enjoyed him so long, and that he lived to fill up so fully the number of his
years; in which respect there is the less of judgment, I conceive, in his being
now taken away. And whereas we can now have no farther usefulness of him by any
personal care of, or service among us, let us, bewailing our unprofitableness
under what we have had, have the more regard to his Relics. I mean those good
and useful Books and Writings (the best and truest Relics of the Saints to be
made much of by the surviving) lest behind him. In and by which we may yet be
minded of the sum and substance of what he spoke to us, and hear him as it were
yet instructing us and reap the labors of his spirit for us, Luke 16.29. 2
Pet. 1.15. And let it be also our care (as being in this his Death and Burial
aptly minded thereof, and provoked thereto) so to number our days as to apply
our hearts unto the heavenly Wisdom. So as we following after the knowledge
thereof and walking therein we may be accepted of God also, and be accounted
worthy to have our lot and portion among those that be wise, who shall shine as
the brightness of the Firmanant in the Kingdom of God; and if it may be that we
also may be instruments of turning many unto righteousness, that we may shine
then too as the Stars for ever and ever. Amen.

Blessed be God for his unspeakable gift.
THE END.
A DOUBLE ACROSTICK.
Thy Race is Run, and
Having thy work done,
Oh may we too do
Merit we cannot, but)
At Christ's appearance.
Shall rise again, and
Thou full happily
Home to Heaven did ply.
Ours, so as we may
Mercy find that day
At that day when we
Shall judged by him be.
More. more such useful
Once was the Prayer of
Old Master Power 'twas
Rome's and Geneva's
Even when thoudst showed their
Moors to us God send,
One who did attend
Of old Bullinbrook)
Rocks when thoudst shook
Errors by Gods Book.
So be it, may we
Either with us, or
Neither the Learned
In many places
On whom like gifts were
Rarer endowments
Say, for few there be
Else where, like to thee.
Nor Unlearned can
Instance such a man,
Of Gods grace so showed
Richer parts bestowed.


(...) Epitaph on Mr. Tho. Moore Sen.
HEre lies a man wrapped up in dust,
Whose better part's in heaven we trust
^he who through Grace with diligence
^tain'd to great experience.
^d was with heavenly gifts indu'de
love the common multitude
^undantly. Yea few there were,
any, in Gods truth more clear.
(...) many wisely did instruct,
^nvert to righteousness, conduct
^ways of Truth and Piety:
^herein himself did live and die.
^d therefore though (as all else must)
(...) now be laid in clay and dust;
(...) at the coming of the Lord
(...) make good what He in his Word
^th promised. He shall, no doubt,
^m thence to glory be raised out;
^d then, in brightness as the sky
^ll shine, and as the Stars on high.
^h gain has godliness: So good
God to such as here have stood
^his good counsels; and have chose
^th Christ above all things to clo^
^ving their sins his truth to (...)
(...) minding seek the things (...)
(...) such as read these (...)
(...) Faith and pure C^ (...)
To follow after Christ, believing
God will be faithful, none deceiving
Who trust to his good Word: and so
Let Us choose in such good ways to go
As this deceased Friend, and all
Whom holy men the Scriptures call.
For there is no glory may compare
With theirs who truly godly are.
John Horn.

Another.
Here lies a Father, Friend, and Brother,
Where Is he can show me such another!
Learned, not in the learning of the School
But in that which who wants are fools.
His preaching, writing, walking-one,
His hands did not belly his tongue.
Christ in whom's all; in all be blessed,
And having done his work's at rest.
B^

Thomas Moore. O harm to some.
A Help he was to many Souls, who
His heavenly teaching had their hea^
(...) unto Christ; in whom they met
(...) ^enly peace, and blessed safety (...)
(...) in's such a sense
(...) as a rock of offense
^o such as his good counsels did reject,
^ot suffering them to have their due effect.
^or better not to have Gods grace set forth,
^han to reject or count it little worth.
and o to some his death's harm who deprived
^f what advantage by him while he lived
^hey had in Gods good ways, are likely now
their former love thereto away to throw.
^ea to the countries it is more generally
^harm where good men live, for them to die.
^r good men's worth and usefulness is often
(...) such like names as these in Scriptures taught
^ch treasures, jewels, lights o'th'world, or stars,
^ods grain, earths salt, and sometimes its pillars.
^oss of which O what a harm it would be!
^ightless heaven, or grainless earth to see!
(...) loose our jewels or rich treasures, and
^ose pillars whereon our choice buildings stand!
^d yet no less Churches or world's less when
^d takes away therefrom his godly men.
^n such in Sodom had its safety been,
^r had Jerusalem such sorrow^ seen
^t for the want of such. O then to some
^eat harm by such men's death does use to come.
While of their good instructions when the li^
And of their good examples they are depriv^ (...)
And profit of their often fervent prayer,
O what a harm'ts to some who can decla^
Another Anagr. Thomas Moore O home a storm, or Thomas Moore O home to arms.
WHen God's about upon the world b^
A storm of wrath, some sad destructive the
Because of their refusals of his grace,
While his good words find in their hearts p^^
O then it is his often wont to take
Home to himself those who do conscie^
Sin to avoid, and follow what is good:
So Noah God took home before the Flo^
Into an Ark of safety; and just Lot
To Zoar, that with Sodom he might no^
By fire and brimstone be from heaven st^
So good Josiah from a people void
Of goodness he by death did first take ho^
Before on Judah his fierce wrath did co^
And on Jerusalem; the like we find
In Jeroboams child, when God did mind
Upon his wicked house ruin to bring,
He took him first by death, cause some g^ thing
^him was found: yea often men merciful
Isa. 57.1.
(...) love from harms approaching does he pull.
therefore we a storm suspect may, when
^e see him home to take such godly men
this our friend deceased was, whose name
^epresented in this Anagram.
(...) well we may cry out, O Home when we
^orm approaching nigh upon us see.
^k Papists, cry to Protestants O Home.
(...) the lap of Mother Church; to Rome!
^f some storm were suddenly to fall
which would at unawares destroy us all.
(...) God himself does on the contrary
^haste you home to Zion loudly cry:
(...) she is our Mother, thence that divine law
^herefrom we first our heavenly breath did draw.
(...) oh at how great distance live all they
^m thence who to Romes city go astray!
^sk the way to Zion, that way let
^r faces, and not toward Rome, be set.
^ence we did first proceed, inquire the way
(...) which to that pure truth return we may
(...) says and practice, which from thence did come
^ither to shun a storm, O haste we home
^cutting whirlwind (thence we are told) on all
^he heads of wicked men with pain will fall
Jer. 30.23.
O home to God ye sinners therefore fly,
That ye may shun approaching misery.
For why! that dreadful storm does stron^ s^
Of fire and brimstone, even of death and H^
O might this voice throughout these Isla^ ri^
And reach from meanest beggar to the K^
All to repentance, all excite before
A storm of wrath, the judgment of wh^
Upon us fall, lest Death and Hell oretake
And do for ever miserable make us.
O England, home to God, thou heavily
Have sinned against his holy Majesty.
Thou diverse sad blasts have already felt
Wars, Pestilence, decay of Trade have d^
Within thy borders, besides diverse mo
Dismal presages of ensuing woe
If thou repent'st not, yet thou worse o^ gr^
O home lest thee a storm quite overthrow,
Patience may stay Gods hand a while, (...)
If thou sin on 'stroy thee at length He w^
O London, home, the heavens on thee dofro^
Both pestilence and fire have brought (...) do^
And yet thou liftst thy head aloft again,
Though all thy filthiness does still remai^
Unpurged from thee, nay is it not increast?
(...) home to God, make haste, repent thee, lest
(...) sad a storm from heaven upon thee blow,
(...) may thy stately buildings quite o'rthrow.
^is name to thee O Home the rather calls,
because it lies interred within thy wall.
(...) Home ye servants of the Lord who ere
^e straggling in this world, and seeking there
(...) satiate your souls, a storm will break
^our hopes in pieces, if you don't betake
^ou home to God, and cleave to him more fast,
(...) home a storm is threatened, a strong blast.
(...) home to arms, to stand upon your guard,
(...) on Gods armor lest ye be quite mard,
^st to Gods anger ye expose you so
(...) to your selves to cause exceeding woe.
(...) let us all attend the heavenly charms
^f our dear Savior. Home to his Arms
^etake us quickly: So we safe shall be
^om all that's evil, and destruction flee.
Jo. Horn.

Thomas Moore, O arm those mo.
LOrd thou have weakened now our strength,
It will be proved so:
(...) we return not now at length
For help where shall we go?
(...) thou go further on to break
Our companies, what will
Become of such as yet are weak
And very ignorant still!
Even for thy Name those are increast
With many a bitter foe.
And many helpers now are ceast
With thy strength Arm those mo.
Thou say if our iniquities
We do acknowledge so
As that we clear thy contraries
In walking as our foe,
Thou will remember for us then
Thy mercies great of old:
And plant us as thou did when
Thou broughtst us to thy fold.
We have, as did our Fathers-fore,
Proved plants degenerate:
And like thy Vine such grapes we bore
As thou could not but hate.
Lord purge us for thy holy Name
From every bitter root:
Break us not further for the same
In mercy do not do 't.
O magnify it in this way,
Though we have grieved thee:
And with thy Children, Lord, we pray
Let us still numbered be.
O arm those-mo, who are most tried,
They need thy help chiefly;
With fresh strength let them be supplied
Thy Word now verify.
O arm those mo who weak are made,
By taking such away;
Be thou, O Lord, their present aid,
And in their stead a stay.
O arm those mo who yet have space
To gather strength and to go on
That they may now go mend their pace
And hold out till their race be run.
Arm us all mo for to persist
Till we thy will have fully done,
That at the last we may be blessed
Even when thou sendst again thy Son.
F. Brigge.

An Elogy upon the Death of Mr. Tho. Moore Sen. by the same.
OUr former cry may be renewed,
For God renewed has his stroke:
We are not more increast, but few'd:
With greater breach He has us broke.
O pass it not with lightness over
Though this was gathered in his season:
There is not such another Moore,
Then to lament we have great reason.
The ancient and the honorable
Do fail; they are removed away.
Is not our case then deplorable
When none but babes to be our stay!
And is it not almost come to this!
O Lord how have we thee offended!
In whom iniquity none is,
But all thy ways to be commended!
Thou righteous art, thy judgments true,
Yet give us leave with thee to plead:
Oh execute not what is due,
Thy heavy wrath we well may dread.
Will thou this way encourage such
As with their tongue think to prevail?
While thou afflictest very much
The poor that ready are to quail?
With taunts men ready are to fright,
Or with their flatt'ries to allure,
Foundations being out of sight
A mountain they present secure.
What can the righteous do, say they,
Now their upholders are destroyed?
All will come down: they are our prey,
Our snares and baits they cannot avoid.
But these did not build us upon
Themselves, to Christ as surely laid
The standing good foundation,
They us directed for our aid.
He is the holy Temple where
God is, and with respect to whom
His chastisements now ordered are,
And so shall be the wickeds doom.
Let us likewise now in our Grief
Direct to him our earnest prayer,
To send unto us some relief,
And this our grcevous Breach repair.
The Father who out lived the Son,
Is in like manner taken hence:
He who has turned many a one
To God from sin and ignorance
But Death him always shall not keep,
Nor yet his glorious splendor hide,
When he is raised out of sleep
His shining brightness shall abide.
An Acrostick by the same hand,
The breach before was much to be bewailed
His taking from us, that was filled with skill
On all occasions, and who never failed
Minding men daily of Gods holy will.
And have we not a fresh occasion now
Since that presented to lament afresh!
May we not fear God with a further blo
Our hearts will humble for our stupidness
O Let us have our selves to humble then
Returning to the Lord, acting like men
Ere he come over with his blow again.
Surely God is beginning for to rise
Even up from off his Mercy-seat,
No greater sign is set before our eyes
In holy Writ, than gather'ng thus his whea
O when he takes his precious Grain away,
Ruin is threatened unto them that stay.
An Epitaph by the same.
HEre breathless lies our Brother dear,
Who spent his breath to make us hear
The joyful sound our hearts to cheer.
But of how few was it believed!
Nay by our deafness we him grieved,
A^^ he by death is now reprieved.
Death put an end unto his pain,
Which while he lived he did sustain,
And is to him an endless gain.
In service he did often go forth,
Setting before us Christ's great worth,
But God with us showed himself wroth.
Which he of times has done before,
But in this stroke He wounded Moore:
The wound to us was very sore.
Oh may it now be laid to heart,
That with our Idols we may part,
Before we feel a further smart.
So may we meet with in the end
The good God does by all intend,
And be made happy with our Friend.
But we awhile must bid Adieu
And bide the sorrows that ensue
The Death of him, like whom there is few,
Which few the Lord continue still
To publish his most blessed will,
Till they their numbered years fulfill.
An Anagram upon the name of his Honored Friend Tho. Moore Son. by Thom.
Goddrick.
O man it is love; Homo, amor est. or, Homo est amor.

The man is love.
1. The man is love; this is too much to say
Of any man but one: though some may be
Conformd so farto him through grace this day,
That much of's image men in them may see.
Who Being with his Father always one
Is truly love, even Jesus Christ alone.
2. God manifested in the flesh is love,
In Him thereto is nothing contrary.
He is the light that shines from above,
In Him's no darkness, nor obscurity;
O man, its love as it in him does shine
That thou should mind, to it thy heart incline.
3. Tongues, Prophecy, and knowledge, bounty, faith
With constancy to death continued in,
If Love be wanting (so the Scripture says)
Advances nothing, does nor profit win:
Nor Circumcision, nor its contrary
Availes, but faith which works by Charity.
4. Love's the fulfilling of the holy Law,
What it to God, what it to man does bind us,
That worship, service, reverence and aw
Which is our Makers due, as it does mind us.
To love the Lord with all the soul and heart
Comprehends all, includes every part.
5. Love to our Neighbor never works ill,
What Is due to him it therefore comprehends.
Our Lord to us the substance of his will
In those two words alone, briefly commends,
On which the weight and stress of what was said
By Moses and the Prophets both is laid.
6. The man whose name you see prefixed here
Was exercised in showing forth Gods love
In its extent, making it to appear
That charity descends from above.
That men in knowing God might somewhat be
In love and mercy perfected as he.
7. The Scriptures only made him wise to be
An instrument of winning souls, and sure
(without the help of vain philosophy)
Through faith in Christ their virtue does endure
Thoroughly to perfect and to furnish us
To each good work, This man was furnished thus.
8. Who more than half the age of man assayd
By word and pen the mists to drive away
Which do obscure the true foundation laid
By God, for men to build on in this day:
That men might neither slight, not yet mis-place
The precious cornerstone, that gift of grace
Who hold forth truth in its simplicity
Unveil the love which men's traditions hide
Turn many to Gods righteousness, and by
His special favor ever shall abide,
Even as the brightness of the firmament,
And shine as stars in glory permanent.
READER, my absence from the Press ^ath occasioned these following Errata's,
which thou art hereby desired to mend: As also the Learned Reader may easily
discern ^me Hebrew Letters in p. 84. l. 26. and 122. l. 15. ^rossly mistaken,
which I leave to his inge^uity to mend.

PAge 14. line 30. read that which was. p. 25. l. 20. for thy r. they. p. 30.
l. 21. for nursing r. musing. p. 34. l. 7. ^seeth. p. 37. l. 20. r. that that.
p. 43. l. 1. r. Mat. 18.20. l. 18. ^or. Joh. 2. r. 2 John p. 25. l. 26. dele
him. p. 46. l. 7. for can. r. (...). l. 18. for deprives r. can deprive. p. 60.
l. 22. d. (...). p. 66. l. (...) 8. r. understand. p. 68. l. 18. r. orderly. p.
7. l. 28. r. and did. p. 73. l. 12. r. other. l. 7. for race r. rate. p. 76. l.
27. for to r. too p. 81. l. 1. set the figure 2 before pure. p. 85. l. 9. r.
Psalm. 49. p. 88. l. 20. d. got. p. 97. l. 11. for Isa. 45.14. r. 45.19. p. 102.
(...). 3. for or r. as. l. 10. r. kept. p. 105. l. 13. for to r. too. p. 106.
(...). 19. d. that. l. 29. r. my sayings. p. 124. l. 10. r. Gentiles. p. 125.
l. 2. for Luke 29. r. 24. p. 127. l. 8. for 2 Cor. 44. r. 2 Cor. 6.14. p. 136.
l. 15. for an r. and. and at folly d. Comma. p. 140. (...). 18. for has r.
have. p. 141. d. be. l. 29. r. this i^. p. 142. l. 6. (...). things. p. 155. l.
5. for God r. good.


