THE QUAKERS Proved Deceivers, And such as people ought not to listen to, or
follow, but to account Accursed, IN THE Management of a Charge formerly given
out against them to that effect, by J. Horn, Preacher of the Gospel at
South-Lin in Norfolk.

Which Charge was managed and made good by him against George Whitehead, in the
Chancel of South-Lin, before some Hundreds of People, Jan. 13. 1659. to the
great baffling of the said George Whitehead and his Party, through the merciful
and gracious Hand of the Lord appearing for his Truth and Servants therein, as
is known to, and witnessed by the generality of the Audience of Understanding.

Published as a Warning to all to beware of the said people called QUAKERS, and
their erroneous Principles herein also in part discovered.

1 SAMUEL 2.2. Talk no more so exceeding proudly, let not Arrogance proceed out
of your mouths, for the Lord is a God of Knowledge, by him Actions are weighed.

LUKE 14.11. For whosoever exalts himself shall be abased, but he that
humbles himself shall be exalted.

LONDON, Printed for John Allen at the Rising-Sunne in Paul's Churchyard. Anno
Dom, 1660.

The Occasion of the ensuing Discourse and Dispute with George Whitehead.
I. H. Meeting with George Fox accidentally, October. 4. and falling into
disecurse with him, amongst other things, told him he would prove him and the
Quakers deceivers, and such as people ought not to hear or follow, but to
account accursed, G. F. asked him if he would give it under his hand, I. H.
said, Yes, G. F. hidding him appoint time and place, he did so, appointing the
Thursday next following, or that present day in the Afternoon, being Tuesday,
G. F. refused it, saying he was to go that day out of Town, but asked I. H if
he would do it the next time they came to Town, which might be about a
Fourtnight after, in case they gave him notice of their coming two or three
days before, I. H. (having before engaged to a Friend in Lincolnshire to go a
journey to see him, and appointed him to meet him 12, mile off his home October.
14.) told G. F. he could not nor would engage that, both because he might be
not well then, and because if well, he might be out of Town, having engaged a
journey, about such time as he spoke of. But at any time when he should be in
Town, and well, when it might stand with his conveniencie, before a competent
number of people, where he might be heard, he should be ready to do it. To
which purpose also the said I. H. posted up some Papers the same day, to warn
people of them, charging them to the same effect as above, and adding that he
should be ready to make it good, when there to lawfully called, the 12th of the
said month notice was given to I. H. that George Fox was to come to Town the
next day, and expected that I. H. should make good his charge, I. H. replied
that he could not do so, nor was engaged to it, being fore engaged, a journey
in which he had appointed his Friend to meet him, October. 14. and that that
journey he had signified before to G. F. and thereupon positively had denied to
engage himself to make good his said charge at their next coming; and that he
had publicly given notice of his being to go that journey in the Congregation,
the Lords day before, as was notoriously known. They threatened then to post him
up if he stayed not, as going away from it: Nevertheless, I. H. to perform his
fore-ingagement to his friend, went his journey, and they (though he reminded
G. F. in a Letter he left for him, of what had past between them, as
above-related) coming to Town, viz. G. F. and G. W. not only aspersed the said
I. H. as refusing to stand to his charge against them, but also incivilly and
unreasonably in his absence, posted him as failing in his promise, and going
away on purpose, their impudency, in which I. H. remonstrated to the people, in
Papers posted up in Answer to theirs at his return. [About Jan. 7. G. W. came
to Lin, and about the 10. or 11. day provoked I. H by a Letter full of high
vaunting Language, like Goliath, or one of the sons of Anak, boasting of the
nature he was in, and what they could and should do] to make good his charge
against them, which after some Overtures of time and place, (...) at length
agreed upon to be done in the Chancel of South-Lin, on Jan. 13.

The Charge Proved and Managed against him was thus.
BEing come together into the Chancel of South-Lin, and places being by either
of us, and our friends taken, after some Appeal to the Lord, and desire of his
Presence for making out his truth, and giving testimony to it, and stopping the
mouth of iniquity; The said I. H. entered upon his charge or proof of it to this
Purpose.

People, I am come hither to make good a Charge formerly laid by me against the
people called Quakers, viz. to prove them to be Deceivers, and such as people
ought not to hear, or to follow, but to account them accursed. I hope you will
judge it but reasonable, that I have liberty without interruption, to produce
what I have to say by way of proof of it; which I shall desire to observe this
Method in.

1. I shall show that there are some people that we ought not to follow, but
account accursed, and who, or what manner of people they be. And then

2. I shall in the Strength and Name of the Lord, (for I come not in my own
strength or name to do it) prove that the people called Quakers, (and amongst
them this George Whitehead) are such people.

For the first, I shall desire you to mind, Gal. 1.8, 9. For if we, or an
Angel from Heaven preach another Gospel (or preach unto you other) then that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. To which we may join, 1
Cor 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema
Maranatha, Cursed, the Lord comes, or at the coming of the Lord. And in 2 John
10. If any man come to you, and bring not this doctrine, (confess not, or
magnify not Christ come in the flesh,) receive him not to house, neither bid
him God speed, etc. But I shall observe some things from the first mentioned
Scripture, viz. Gal. 1.8. If we or an Angel from Heaven. Where note, that we
are not to receive any man upon his pretense of being an Apostle, or one sent
of God. Such as pretend to be so sent, and to have seen or spoken with Christ,
or to be immediately sent of God, may be of those that we are to account
accursed; for the Apostle says, If we, and again, If I Paul, preach another
doctrine, etc. (yea, and so in Rev. 2.2. we read of some that said they were
Apostles, and were not, but were found liars.) Again, it is not enough that
men come as Angels from Heaven to induce us to receive them, it is no Angel
like appearance, either in their excellent speech, speaking like Angels,
vanting that they are in the Spirit and Power of God, nor any Angel like
carriage in appearing humility, holiness, sinlesnesse, etc. that should
presently make us conclude such, and such men are of God, even such also may be
Persons to be accounted accursed by us. For even Satan himself is transformed
into an Angel of light, and no marvel if his Messengers, or Emissaries
transform themselves into Ministers of righteousness, as the Apostle says. 2
Cor. 11.13, 14. these things then be not the certain characters to know men to
be listened to, and received by, but according to their conformity to the
Apostles doctrine. If any pretending never such immediate authority from God,
or have never such an Angel like speech, and carriage, yet agree not to, or
speak not the language, and Doctrine delivered by the Apostles for the
obedience of faith to, and among all Nations, we are not to listen to, or
follow him, but account him accursed. such be the Persons to be so accounted by
us. I should nextly then inquire into the Doctrine or Gospel preached by the
Apostles, and so bring these men to the trial of that Touchstone, but I shall
not enlarge upon that, because I would be brief, and give him time to answer
for himself. Only I shall pitch upon two Heads of Trials. 1. Touching the
manner of the coming of the true Prophets and Apostles, in the way of their
doctrine And 2. The matter delivered by them therein.

For the manner of their coming shall note,

1. That the true Apostles and Prophets of God and Christ always, use^ (...)
to come with abusements of themselves in the Presence of God, and with exalting
and lifting up God and Christ, they use to own themselves sinners, to have sin,
and to be weak, brutish in themselves, as of themselves, and the like; never
any of them have used to vaunt themselves or speak of themselves or one another
as sinless, but always abase themselves and glorisie the Lord; thee therefore
that come otherwise, preaching themselves sinless and perfect, and much more;
that vilisie and reproach others for confesting sin, these have nor the badges
of the true Prophets and Apostles; by this we may discover this People called
Quakers.

That the holy men of God the Prophets and Apostles use to own themselves to
have sin in them, the Scripture; witness: 1. The Patriarchs and First Fathers
though we read not of any pa^ticular sins of some of them, yet in this they are
manifest to have owned themselves to have been sinners, and to have sin in
them, that they use to worship God by Secrifice, in which was a remembrance of
sin, Hebr. 10.2, 3. But 2. The Prophets are more express in their
acknowledgments, as David, Psalm. 19.12. Who can know his errors? cleanse thou
me from my secret sins, and keep me that presumptuous sins prevail not over me;
he had secret sins them it seems to be cleansed from: And again in Psalm. 38.16,
17. I said hear me least otherwise they (mine enemies) should rejoice over me,
when my foot slippeth (it seems he was sensible of slips sometimes) then they
magnify themselves against me, then they rejoice and insult: See this is a
Character of false Prophets, and enemies to the true Prophets so to do. Yea he
further adds, for I am ready to halt, and my sorrow is continually before me,
for I will declare my iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin (see David was
sensible of his readiness to halt, and bewails it, and he had iniquity, and sin
he confested) but mine enemies (adds he) are lively, and they are strong, etc.
The enemies to the true Prophets, they it seems boasted themselves, and
vapoured in their strength and pretended holiness, as if they had no sin to
confess as poor David had, and rep^oached David for it, as these people, and
this G. Whitehead have lately reproached us for joining our selves with the
Nation in confessing sin, and that they (the Quakers) are ordered of God as a
judgment to us (namely this Nation whereof we are part) for our neglect of
Christ the salvation of God, and abuse of his truth; how do they infult over us
for this? Are they not herein made manifest to be like David's enemies, false
Prophets, that magnified themselves against him, and were lively and strong
while he confessed his sin. Again in Psalm. 143.2. David says, Enter not into
judgment with thy servant O Lord, for no man living shall be justified in thy
fight: Mark, no man living, implying clearly that there is no man so just, and
holy, and without sin in himself, while he is alive in the world, or living, or
before his decease that he may be any otherwise justified in the fight of God,
then by his not entering into judgment with him, that is then by his forgiving
his sin, and accepting him in Christ, does not that then clearly and perfectly
imply no man perfectly freed from sin in himself in this life? Solomon also
says in 1 Kings 8.46. There is no man that sins not: And Eccles. 7.20. There
is not a just man on earth that does good and sins not, he did not then
magnify himself as sinless: Agur also a good man, see how he abase^ himself,
and gives glory to God in the beginning of his prophecy; Prove. 30.2, 3. Sarely
(says he) I am more brutish than man, and have not the understanding of a man;
I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy, Who has
ascended, etc. Every word of God is pure, he is a shield to them that trust in
him; he was far from witnessing perfection in himself, and glorying thereof to
others: No, he abases himself, and only gives glory to God. Isaiah also when h^
was a Prophets, (for he began to prophecy in the days of Vzziah, Isai. 1.1.)
when he saw the glory of God and Christ, and the Seraphins hiding their faces
and feet with their wings in his presence as not pure enough for Gods sight,
and heard them cry one to another not of o^ another) Holy, holy, holy, is the
Lord God of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory, cries out, Woe is me,
for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, and live in the midst of a
people of unclean lips, etc. And though the Lord then took away his iniquity,
and purged his sin as if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness 1 John 1.9.)
yet we find him again afterward confessing his sin, and joining himself with
the people in confessing their iniquities (and so he was none of them people
reproved by him that use to say to others, Stand by thy self, I am more holy
then thou, as Isai. 65.5.) as in Isai. 59.10, 11, 12, 13. We grope for the wall
like the blind, and we grope as if we had no eyes; the deceivers of our times
had they heard him say so, its probable would have replied, Thou art a blind
Guide indeed, art thou fir to be a Prophet and Shepherd? and do thou call ^s
blind Watchmen, and thou thy self say thou gropest like the blind, and
gropest as if thou had no eyes? He after adds, For our transgressions are
multiplied before thee, and our sins testify against us, for our
transgressions are with us, and as for our iniquities we know them, in
transgressing, and lying against the Lord, and departing away from our God,
speaking oppression and revolt, etc. and again in Isa. 64.6. We are all as an
uncleanthing, and all our righteousness are as filthy rags, and we do all fade
as a lease, and our iniquities like the wind have taken us a way. So we might
show you in Jer. 14.7, 8, 9, 20, 21. And Daniel he confessed Rebellions and
Sins against God. Dan. 9. and says verse. 20. he confessed his sin, and the sin
of his people Istael, etc. But I would be brief.

3. Come we to the Apostles, or the times of and since Christ come in the
flesh. John the Baptist acknowledged sin in him, for he says, I have need to
be baptized of thee, and come thou to me, Matthew. 3.14. He thought not
himself, it seems, so clean then that he needed no further washing by Christ.
So the Apostles. Paul says, Sin dwelt in him, Rom 7.17, 20. and in 1 Timothy
1.15. when he was an Apostle he confessed himself a sinner, saying, Jesus Christ
came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am (mark, I am) the chief, or a
chief one. James also says, In many things we offend all, Jam. 3.2. and John,
If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, then have we fell^n ship one
with another. And what then, have we no sin then in us? nay, he says not so,
but the contrary, the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin, [cleanseth in
the present time] he says not, it has before cleansed us from all; so as now
there is no further need for it to cleanse us; for we have none to be cleansed
from. But to the contrary, If we say we have ^o sin, we deceive our selves, and
the truth is not in us. And in chap. 2.1, 2. he says, These things write I to
you, that ye sin not, it seems then, the Apostles w^iting so, and confesting
sin in them, was not a pleading for sin, as these men upon that account traduce
and reproach us, but he writ those things as a warning of men to take heed of
sinning, for it tends to make men the more watchful, to know that there is such
an Enemy in their bosom, that is so dangerous to them. Whereas the contrary
persuasion lays men open to follow after what ever is in their hearts, as not
being sin. But says he if any man sin, we, (we that believe) have an advocate
with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our
sins (mark for our sins, it seems then they thought, and judged that they had
sins, and so need to live upon Christ by Faith, as their propitiation, and to
abide always in him, wherein they fined no^) they said not, there is no sin in
us, nor we have no sin in us for Christ to be our propitiation for. True it is,
he says in 1 John. 4.17. as he is, so are we in this World. But we are not to
strain the Scriptures beyond their scope, however, that cannot be the meaning
of the Apostle, that is directly contraty to his other sayings, he cannot
the^fore mean in it, we are without sin as he is, because that is contraty to
his own saying, that if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, nor will
it reach to all things, for then we might say as Christ is without a visible
personal Body in the world, subject to aches, and pains, and mortallity, so are
we too and that's evidently false, but he speaks in respect of judgment, we have
such use and respect in the world as Christ has.

Hereabout Genge Whitehead began to grow impatient, and to set himself to
interrupt, and to answer, but I. H and others present, and amongst them Mr. H.
the Church warden told him that was not fuire, I.H. being called, and come
thither to make good his charge should have liberty to proceed, and I.H. told
him he had not yet done with the first branch of it. So after a little
str^gling, he gave way for him to proceed. And he proceeded to this purpose.

I. H. You see this proved, that the true Apostles and Prophets use to confess
sin in themselves, and none of them to glory in their perfection and
sinlesnesse, only the false prophets, were otherwise carried to lift up
themselves as strong and lively; and the Pharisees they use to boast, God I
thank thee, I am not as other men are, not like the Publican, ^nsti^g in
themselves chat they were righteous, and despising others as being sinners: and
whether this be not the way too of these men the Quakers, (for G W. his
impatience will not perm^ me to observe the method propounded,) I appeal to all
that have heard them or read their books, Do not they glory of their
sinlesnesse and righteousness, and despise others the say they are sinners,
yea, have they not reproached, (even this G. W. among the rest has reproached
us) for owning our selves, as part of the Nation, guilty of sin with them.

2. Again, the true Apostles and Teachers use to prove their doctrine and
preaching by the Scriptures, and not to abuse the Scriptures with gross and
senseless glosses. Now these men do abuse the Scriptures with deceitful
glosses. I will instance one or two ^we alleged, 1 Kings 8.46. There is no man
that sins not, to prove that the true Prophets owned all men to be sinners
in the^elves. Now mark what a ^llesse gloss these people, and this G. W. by
name pu^s upon it, viz. That among the^ that sin, there is none that sins
not, making the wisest of men speak a Tautolog^^ and (...) speech to God, that
there is none that sins, that sins not. And then they add to that another
sorry shift, that that was under the Old Covenant, under the New Covenant is
otherwise, as if they would say, under the Old Covenant there was no man of
them that sinned that sinned not: but now its otherwise, some among those that
sin, sin not. Again to Eccles. 7.20. There is not a just man upon earth that
si^neth not. They say, mark the word ( there) there in the changeable state is
not a just man, etc. pulling the word there from is, when as G. W. knows that
it is but one word in the Latin, viz. Est, and to there and is ought not to be
parted, there, is not in that place Adve^b of Place: and then too they must
say, Job was not such a just man, for he was in the changable state, waiting
all his appointed time, till his change should come. Nor Paul, and the other
Believers, for they looked for the Savior from Heaven to change their vile
body, Phil. 3.20.

Hereabout again G. W. grew impatient, and would have been interrupting, and
answering: but he was told, it was not fair, not to let J. H. proceed, seeing
it was his work, or part, to prove his Charge against them; and the
Churchwarden bid him either be fair, and hear out the proof of the Charge, or
else he should not be there. To whom G. W. replied, Would he have him out of
the Meeting Place? and indeed I conceive, he would have willingly had that to
glory in, rather than to hear himself proved a Deceiver, and such as people
ought to count accursed: but being persuaded to acquiess, or be quiet a little,
he answered, there had been much said, and his memory could not bear so much as
might be spoken, or to that purpose. To whom J. H. replied: It seems, thou art
not yet perfect, if thy Memory be so weak: yet after a little struggling, he
gave way again: and J. H. proceeded, to this effect:

2. I should come near to the matter of their Doctrine: but he being impatient,
I must but briefly mention the Heads of what I would charg them with therein: I
shall only say then, That they that subvert the Faith delivered by the
Apostles, and undermine the hope of the Gospel, they preach other Doctrines
than the Apostles did, and are such as ought to be accounted accur^^ed by men:
Now, that these men the Quakers, and G. W. particularly does so, I thus
demonstrate.

1. They subvert the Faith in denying Christ to have tha^ body in heaven
glorified in which he suffered, and rose again, and so they deny the truth of
that in Act. 1.11. that he should even (...) again in like manner as they had
seen him go up; they therein subvert the Faith of his ^pearing in heaven for
us, etc.

2. They subvert the Faith in saying as Edw. Borroughs, in the Declaration of
their Faith, that the knowledge of Christ that is to eternal Salvation is the
knowledge of him after the Spirit, as he was before the world was, which is in
effect, not to confess, but make nothing of his coming in the flesh.

Again, They subvert the hope of the Gospel, in denying the Resurrection of the
bodies of (...), and in saying that that coming of Christ, in which he shall
descend with a shout, with the (...) of the Archangel and Trump of God; And
when the dead in Christ shall be raised, and the living believers be changed,
is over and past, the Apostles and Believers of that Age (...) and remained to
it; for what then have we to expect and hope. But those things we m^st speak to
(...) we can come to them afterward, because he is impatient. N^w therefor let
us hear what thou can say for thy self.

G. W. then address^ng himself to answer. First, pulled out the papers that
I.H. had written (...) one of which he said, that through the strength of God
he would prove them Deceivers, (...) such as people ought not to hear, but to
account them accursed, and another, in which (...) warned people (...) beware
of them, as of those whom he by good proof knew to ^e D^ceivers, and such as
people ought not to follow, but to account accursed; (...) to depart from the
truth known to (...) Deceives, is without controversy the sin (...) of in
Hebr. ^.4, 5, 6. and (...), ^6, (...) is unpardonable, when finished; nor (...)
G. W. make any question about that.
and, that tho^ (...) having known the truth, (...) go after them, did (...)
therein (...) able sin, which he was ready (...) lawfully called to it: which
(...) the people: and J. H. stood to maintain them against him, Having read
them, he sold the people that J. H. had not made good his charge against them:
For though J. H. said true, in saying That the Prophets and Apostles witnessed
sin in them, and confessed sin, yet that did not prove, that the Quakers
preached another Doctrine than they did: For, though the Prophets and Apostles
did so as J. H. had proved, yet (said G. W.) they witnessed also another state
afterward, when they were free from sin: and that J. H. had not proved that
they ha^ sin in them so long as they lived. (which how false that was appears
in what J. H. ^^id on Psalm. (...). 1.) It is true (added George) that David had
sometimes s^cret sins, and confessed sins, but David witnessed another
state, when he had no sin; for in Psalm. 103.1. he says, Bless ye the lord O my
soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name: now it David had sin in
(...), now could all that was within him bless Gods holy name? can sin bless
Gods ho^y name that is so contrary to God and his name? therefore seeing all
within David could bless Gods name, it follows, there was no sin in him: and so
in Psalm. 119.1. David says, Blessed are the undefiled in the way, they also do
no iniquity: now every sin defiles, This is spoken too in the Dispure.
and therefore they have no sin in them, that are undefiled in the way, and in
another place David says, Lord thou have heard me, and granted me all my
desires. (but we could not get him to name in what place he read that Saying,
though we called to him for it, but went on, taxing us for interrupting him,
and gave this gloss,) now he desired the Lord to cleanse him from his secret
sins; and God having granted him all his desires, he was cleansed from them
all. Then he went to that of Solomon, Eccles. 7.20. and reading two or three
Verses before he gave this gloss upon it, That of men in the changable state
there is not a just man that does good: And hereabout T.M. and he had two or
three words: T. M. objected, That there was no mention of any changable state,
but of fearers of the Lord: But he went on, and (as I take it) bid Joseph
whiteworth that sat by him and wrote, write, that Tho. Moore said, (a
falsehood.)
There is no changable state: and added, that Solomon said, That the
righteousness of the Men may be said to be perfect, that yet have sin in them,
as Job was a perfect man, Job 1.8. and 2.3. yet he had sin, Job 7.20, 21. and
42.5, 6. and Asa, as 2 Chr. 15.17, with 16.8.
perfect shall direct his way, and so went on to Isaiah, and gave the like put
off to him, as, that Isaiah indeed confessed sin, but witnessed another state,
when God had wrote all his works in him: and Daniel witnessed the bringing in
an everlasting righteousness. And Christ bid, Exhortations to things prove not
those things to be perfectly attained by any here: nor does the Scripture ever
say, Let not sin be in you, as if men might get it all out; though it says,
Let it not reign in your mortal bodies.
Be ye perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect, and Paul says, So many as
are perfect let us be thus minded. And James says, Let patience have her
perfect work, that ye may be entire, wanting in no good thing. And to that of
h^s saying, In many things we sin all: he said, So he says, With the tongue we
bless God, and therewith curse we men: not that He did so, though he put in
himself, and so as if he was none of the all that offended. And that John
says, If we say, We have no sin, or have not sinned; but he says not, If we
say we are not all sinners we deceive our selves; that he joined himself with
the little It seems then, the little children may have sin in them: and are not
they born of God? How else were they children, and knew the Father? as 1 John
2.13. So then, They that are born of God may have sin in them.
Children to whom he writ, that they might not sin, and that they might have
sin: and with reference to them he says, If we say, we have no sin, we deceive
our selves: but they witnessed another state, when they say, Whosoever is born
of God sins not, because the seed of God abides in him: Neither can he sin,
because he is born of God. And in 1 John 5.18. We know that whosoever is born
of God sins not, but he that is begotten of God keeps himself that the
wicked one toncheth him not: And again, He that does righteousness is
righteous, even as he is righteous: And therefore He concluded, That J. H. had
not made good his Charge; had not proved, That they preached other Doctrine
than was preached by the Apostles, etc.

To this I. H. replied, That he had mistaken his Argument, which was to this
purpose, That the true Prophets and Apostles came confessing sin, and not
reproaching any for so doing, but they did not so own sin, but reproach them
that confessed them. They urged that I. H. said the Prophets and Apostles came
always confessing sin, whereas the expression was always abasing themselves and
exalting the Lord, and that they use to acknowledge themselves sinners, and to
have sin, and never to say of themselves that they were without sin, or had no
sin; but I. H. waving other things asked G. W. whether they that he proved to
have owned themselves sinners, and to have confessed their sin (as he also had
granted) were Prophets and Apostles when they so did: To that G. W. answered,
that they did then minister. I. H. What? did they minister before they were
Prophets and Apostles? Had they not Commission from God then to minister, and
so were they not then Prophets and Apostles when they spoke and wrote such
things as were alleged. To this G. W. somewhat unwillingly (as he seemed)
granted that they were then Prophets and Apostles.

I. H. What state was that then in which they witnessed no sin in them, if they
were Prophets and Apostles when they confessed sin.


G. W. When they were born of God then they witnessed no sin in them, or that
they were freed from fin, for he that is born of God sins not, etc.


I. H. Were not the Apostles then born of God when they were Apostles, and
wrote these things, as Paul, that it was no more be that did it, but sin that
dwelt in him.

G. W. Paul had a time when he was not born of God, when he groaned, and
traveled, and waited for the adoption, the redemption of the body; for while
sin was above him, and he groaned and was burdened with it, he was not yet
born of God, but when he was set free from it then he was born.


I. H. What was not Paul bo^n of God when he says, We also that have the first
fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves, groan within our selves, waiting for
the adoption, the redemption of the body.

G. W. Paul when he traveled, and was g^oaning for deliverance, and waiting
for the redemption of the body, was not as yet born or God; but afterward he
witnessed a being redeemed from sin, and then he was born, as ye know in
natural things, a woman when she is in travel to be delivered, the child is not
yet born.


I. H. People, I pray did ye ever hear of a woman in travel, before that woman
was born? Was there ever such a thing? Here all the people fell a laughing at
G. W.


G. W. Nay, thou beliest me, I did not say so, That a woman travels with child
before she be born.


I. H. Nay, I did not say thou said so, but thy similitude must be so, if
thou speak to purpose, for it was Paul that thou said groaned and
traveled to be delivered, and it is the woman in travel that groans and
travels, not the child to be born: But George I shall read thee a Scripture,
and prove that Paul was then born of God; it is 1 John 5.1. Whosoever believes
that Jesus is the Christ is born of God. Paul did believe Jesus to be the
Christ when he was an Apostle and writ to the Romans, and said they waited for
the redemption of the body; did not Paul when an Apostle (and so the rest of
them) believe Jesus to be the Christ? which will thou deny.


G. W. [Here George was pitifully put to it, and all the people generally see
his confusion, that he was in a share, so that he durst deny neither of those
Propositions; but he then flew to another shift] that Paul condescended in his
writing to those of low degree, and that were not yet born of God, and became a
Jew to the Jew, and to them that were under the Law, as under the Law.


I. H. Tell me which Proposition thou will deny, Is not whosoever believes
Jesus to be the Christ born of God; Or did not Paul when he owned himself to
have sin in him believe that Jesus was the Christ: And here G. W. was
pitifully shackled and nonplust, and would fain have been out of the Argument,
having nothing to say for himself still but that.


G. W. The Apostle condescended to the estate of some he wrote to (as if the
believing Romans or Saints at Rome that he wrote to) were not born of God, or
did not then believe that Je^us is the Christ; or as if the Apostle would make
himself an unbeliever with unbelievers.


I. H. Then it seems Paul wrote a lie, as touching himself that he waited for
the Redemption of the body, and traveled (as thou say) in pain when it was
self of h^^ h^ did not so but had already attained the Redemption of his body.
Did he say fal^^y of himself?


G. W. He condescended to the state of others, he became a Jew to the Jew, etc.
as before.


J. H. Did he say falsely then with respect to himself? Did not Paul believe
that Jesus was the Christ, when he was an Apostle, and confessed sin in
himself? was not he born of God. Here he being still baffled and not answering
any thing to the purpose, diverse called to him to answer to the business, or
else to own himself a Deceiver, or to that purpose.


T. M. Answer then, whether Paul was born then of God, or believed Jesus to be
Christ or to that purpose.


G. W. You are two to one.


T. M. We speak both but one thing; we ask the same thing.


G. W. I came not here to satisfy unreasonable men; Paul spoke at a Jew to the
Ju^.


J. H. Then he spoke there false it seems of himself; will thou say so? He
b^^ng p^zled about it J. H. said to him, Ah George, where is thy vaunting
Language now, as if thou could tread down all before thee? and thy setting up
thy self above God?


G. W. Thou be^^est me: Did I set up my self above God? See people how (...) or
to that purpose.


J. H. Did thou not set up thy self above God, when thou did reproach me by
my G^d? as if he would or could not carry me forth against thee: He said, If
thy God will c^^ry thee forth, by way of reproach. [Also I was informed, that
at Godney they said, They would make us ashamed of our God: Now, if God be the
true God (as he is) what, but a setting up themselves above God was this let
all judge.]


J. H. Can thou deny that Paul was born of God, when an Apostle? or, that he
believed that Jesus was the Christ?

G. W. Paul spoke to the state of others when he said, O wretched man that I
am; and groaned, and waited for the Redemption of the body.


J. H. Did Paul then witness or experiment the Redemption of his Body from
corruption before he dyed?


G. W. Yea, he did witness it.


T. M. Witness it; But Had he it? was his body redeemed from corruption before
he dyed?


G. W. Yea, he had the Redemption of his body before he dyed.


J. H. Is not the body sown in corruption when it dies? It is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption.


G. W. Yea, but is not sin corruption?


J. H. How is it redeemed from corruption before it dye, when it is sown in
corruption when it dies?


G. W. Corruption is sin: Paul's body was redeemed from the Law of sin, and
Death.


J. H. But is all corruption sin? There is a corruption of mortality that came
in by sin.


G. W. All corruption is sin, or came in by sin; and take away the cause, and
the effect ceases. Now we shall prove that he was made free from sin.


T. M. Answer plainly, and prove it from the Scripture, That the Redemption of
the body that Paul waited for, he had it before he dyed: For you bring nothing
for it ^et but your corrupt Logic, in which one as weak as my self might
discover its ^alsness.


G. W. Did I use any Logic -- what Logic?


T. M. Where there is freed me from the cause the effect ceases* Now, that Paul
had freedom from sin the cause of corruption before he dyed is that you w^nt
about to prove, and so to get from the Question.


J. H. Yea that is Logical; but will not always hold; the effect may last
when the cause is goue [as a house may stand, when he that built it is dead]
but is not that corruption which is in death, in which the body corrupts? and
did not Paul wait for the Redemption of his body from that?


G. W. Yea that death that came in by sin. [but what death was that that cameth
by sin (he said he asked the Question before I asked what follows though I do
not remember that he did]


I. H. What Death came not in by sin?


G. W. What death came in by sin?


I. H. I asked thee what death came not in by it?


G. W. I ask thee a question, and thou ansvverest me by asking me another:
Answer my Question, I first asked thee.


I. H. I did not hear that thouaskedst that Question first, but thou said,
That death that came in by sin: and I asked thee, what death came not in by sin?


G. W. Nay I asked thee first, What Death came in by sin? and thou refusest to
answer my Question; Is this fair?


I. H. pe^ceiving he sought occasion to vvinde out from the business in hand,
by starting another Question, if he did first ask it, or whenever he started
it; replied: I remember not that thou did ask me that first; but however it is
not my business now to answer thy questions, that may lead us from the matter
in hand; My business is now to prove my charge against thee: if thou will own
that that is done I will answer thee thy question.


G.W. pulling out a book writ by J.H. and T.M. about their former Dispute with
him, and S.F. would fain have diverted to it, and said, He would prove J.H. had
there belied him.


J.H. Thou have answered that Book in print, the people may see what thou say
against us there, and we shall give it an answer God willing ere long* what
have we to do with hearing thee read in that book now?


G.W. I will prove here that J.H. has here contradicted himself, or to that
purpose, and would fain have been reading.


J.H. If thou will grant I have proved my charg, we will hear thee read; but if
not, let me do what I come about. Answer me, and prove that Paul had the
Redemption of his body there spoken of before he dyed.


G.W. urging yet to read, the people told him, That was to go from his
business, and bid him answer to what he was charged with, or say the Charg was
proved.


J.H. Did Paul prove the Redemption of his body before his decease, for which
he waited, as he says Romans 8.23?


G.W. Yea he did before his decease.


J.H. Prove that.


G.W. In Rom 8.2. He says, The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has
made me free from the Law of sin and death. And in another place, I can do
nothing against the truth, but for it.


J.H. What be these to the purpose? Paul said, He was made f^ee from the law of
sin and death, before he said, He waited for the adoption, the redemption of
the body: For he says that in Romans 8.2. and yet speaks of waiting for the
Redemption of his body, after that, in ver. 23. Therefore what he says about
his being free from the Law of sin and death could not be the redemption of h^s
body that he there mentions; for why should he wait for that yet; if he before
had it? did he wait for what he had already?

Here G.W. was wholly driven from that proof, so as we heard no more of it, and
to help himself betook him to the other.


G.W. But he says in the other place, he could do nothing against the truth
but for the truth.


J.H. Could he then do something against the truth when he said, He waited for
the Redemption of the body? The which also T.M. asked.


G.W. Yea, That which waited for the Redemption could: for he cried out, Oh
wretched man that I am; and he was led captive by the Law of sin and death.


T.M. Where says he That he was led captive by it? He says, He found a law in
his members leading him captive to the law of sin and death: but where says he
that he was led?


G.W. He says, With his flesh he served the law of sin; so then he was led by
it, and could do against the truth: Does not fin do against the truth?


J.H. But Paul says not, That his flesh or members waited for the adoption,
the redemption of his body, but that he himself waited for it: and though his
flesh served the law of sin, yet that was not he that did it, but fin that
dwel^ in him.


T.M. While he waited for the adoption, the Redemption of the body, though fin
acted in him, yet he did not walk after it, but was led by the Spirit; and so
could do nothing against the truth: or to that purpose.

G.W. George still pleaded, That his members, the creature that waited for the
redemption could do someth^ng against the truth, till it was delivered from the
bondage to corruption; and then it had the Redemption of the body, for which he
waited.

T.M. Paul, while he waited for the Redemption of the body, was led by the
Spirit of G^d, and such as are the sons of God; and they that are born of God
cannot sin, or do any thing against the truth: or to that purpose.


G.W. still insisted upon the creature waiting to be delivered that it night,
and that Paul's (...) which were yet in bondage to corruption might act against
the truth, not receiving the A^^wer given, That the was not he that did it, but
sin that dwelt in him, and so (...) him; (...) That such as are led by the
Spirit, and are sons of God, (...) at such, and so in (...) Paul says it of
himself, do any thing against the truth, but for it; (...) at is, not find in
his heart to yield up to sin enticing, or striving in his members to do any
thing against it.

[Besides, a by-Note.
Paul says in the same Chapter, verse. 35, 36, 37. That he was persuaded
nothing could separate them from the love of God in Christ Jesus: and therefore
(...) he could then do nothing against the truth, but for it. But this that
G.W. pleaded, clearly argued their gross corruption, in not believing the
Redemption of the body from death and grave; and that made him put it upon a
Redemption of Paul's members only from sin, from which yet that he was perfectly
freed, as ^o its inherency in him before death he was not able to prove.]


J.H. calling oftentimes to be heard by G.VV. what he had said, and had to say,
and G. going on in a discourse, to no purpose, about the creature being in a
travail, and waiting for the Redemption, and applying that to Paul's body or
members to be redeemed from sin, and acting then ag^st he truth: J.H. said, I
came here to prove you Deceivers, and to make good my charge, and (...) heard
wha^ I have to say. Thereupon J.Lee, without our approbation, called out to
him, and said. G.VV. why caust thou not be patient now, and hear what is said
to thee as well as thou (...) other day with Mr. F.?


G.W. Here G.VV. could hear that, and take occasion to spend a little time in
commending (...) as he called him, as better and more moderate than we.


J.H. We are not desirous of thy commendations, or think them any great praise
to us, if (...) them; I came here to make good my charge against yon, and you
run on to other things, and (...) not hear what I say to you. That which thou
talkest of the creatures groaning and waiting (...) deliverance is a distinct
thing from what we have in hand, and pertains not to Paul's waiting for the
deliverance in his body, or members, thou talkst of, read the Text, and here
J.H read the (...) 8.19. The earnest exspectation of the creatures waits for
the manifestation of the sons of God. The creature that waits for the
manifestation of the Sons of God is distinguished from the Sons of God to be
manifested, and is not the Sons of God themselves: and so in verse. 21. The
creature itself shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God: See the same distinction again. And th^n
again, when he had said, The whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain
together until now, he adds, And not only they, but we our selves also who
have received the first fruits (...) the spirit. See an evident distinction
between the creature beforementioned, and that travailed in pain, about which
thou mak^st a stir: and Paul and the Believers that waited for the Redemption
of the body from mortality and corruption: they were the Sons of God to be
manifested, and being sons of God, born of God, could then do nothing against
the truth but for it, in such sense as he that is born of God sins not nor
can sin, and yet they had the Redemption of the body as a father thing to wait
for: And therefore that saying, That he could do nothing against the truth but
for it, proves not that he could do not that he had in this life the Redemption
he here speaks of. Prove that Paul had this Redemption of his body before he
dyed, or else own the charge proved.

The people calling upon him to make good that, or else own the charge made
good, he replied.


G.W. If I should own that he has made good his Charge against me, I should
prove J.H. to contradict himself; for he says in his Paper, That people should
not hear us, and yet you and he would have me answer that you might hear me
what I have to say, He read the Paper.


G.W. jangling with some of the people about that frivolous put off. J.H.
called to be heard, and answered thus,


J.H. I did explain the meaning of that word when I writ the Paper, and gave it
out, and desired I might by hearing be understood to listen to and receive your
Doctrine, as I appeal to Esquire. Sho^ter, if he be here.


G.W. Then people you may see his deceit, that he w^ires one thing, and means
another that is not here written, for here it is hear.


J.H. I gave my meaning to the word expressly when I gave my Paper to G.F. and
Ed Shitter, nor did I publish the Paper.


G.W. Many have seen it.


J.H. I gave it to none but Ed. Sheoter, or G. Fox, and gave my sense to them
with it: If they shevved it many, that was their act.


T.M. The next words explain the meaning, because it follows, but to account
them accursed. It is not so to hear as to receive them.

People. This is a mere cavil: Let him answer to the business in hand, or
yield the (...) pr^oved.


G.W. Do you think I will grant (or own) That people should count us (...)?


J.H. I do not think you will, nor did I undertake to make you own it. But to
prove you so. Its enough, the people see it; They are to judge whether I make
good my charge.


T.M. Either speak something to purpose, or acknowledge thy mouth stopped, as
it has often been by the force of the truth.


G.W. He would have me acknowledge my mouth stopped, and yet I speak to them,
and answer them.


T.M. A man may have his mouth stopped, though he speak when he speaks to no
purpose. A man's mouth his stopped when he cannot resist the wisdom and power
by which the truth is spoken, as Act 6. could not resist, though yet they are
said Act. 7. to have resisted. And it appears thy mo^th is stopped, because thou
runst away from the charge to other imper^ things.


J.H. Well George, hither to I have made good my charg, That you come not as
the true Prophets and Apostles, thou have not been able to prove, That any of
them preached themselves free from sin, so as to be without sin. Thou did
speak of David confessing another state, and brought Psalm. 107.1. All that is
within me bless his holy name, and from thence would infer, that David had no
sin in him then; for How could sin bless Gods name? but David himself implies
the contrary, for verse* 3. he says, Who forgiveth all thine iniquity; it seems
he had some then.


G.W. They were for given.


T.M. It is forgiveth, in the present time: can there be forgiveness of sin, if
there be no sin he signifies a daily forgiving, or to such purpose.

G.W. David says, Psalm. 119.1. There are some underfiled in the way, who do no
iniquity.


J.H. Does David say, There are some undefiled, he says they are blessed that
are so: but that there are some so at least in such a sense as to have no sin
in them he says not; I am sure he says not so of himself, That he had no sin
in him, but implies the contrary (in verse. 5, 6.) when he says, O that my
ways were so directed, that I might keep thy statutes; as implying they were
not yet so: And again, Then shall I not be ashamed when I shall have respect to
all thy Commandments; he does not say, He had then such respect to them all.


G.W. Does not David say, there are some undefiled, when he says blessed are
the undefiled in the way, and does not every sin defile? therefore he Witnesled
some had a sinless state: or to that purpose.


J.H. He says undefiled in the way, Christ is the way: We grant some undefiled
and complete in Christ, but not so as to be sinless in themselves? Is not
undefiled perfect?


G.W. Yea, undefiled is perfect.


J. H. A man may be perfect in a Scripture sense, and yet have sin. Asa's heart
was perfect with the Lord all his days, and yet he sinned.


G.W. When was that written of him?


J.H. Surely after his death, how else should they say what he was all his
days?


G.W. Nay it might be written before; and so all his days till that was
written his heart was perfect; for afterward he relied not on the Lord, but
sought to the Physicians: his heart was not perfect then.


J.H. How could the Hystory of his life and death be written, but after his
death? It is not said, all those days, or till such a time; but his heart was
perfect all his days: a part of his days is not all his days. [his heart was
perfect in that he walked not between God and Baal, or an^ fa^se-wo^ship.]


G.W. He might be perfect all his days till then that was written: but if the
righteous man turn (...) his right^o^sness and commit miquity, his
righteousness shall not be mentioned.


J.H. H^^ heart was perfect all his days, [his righteousness is mentioned,] It
is not said, (...) turned, (...) being perfect-hearted.


G.W. He was but one.


J.H. I^ one that had sin in him, or sinned, might be yet called
perfect-hearted, then why not tw^, o^ twenty, or an hundred. He would sain have
been reading in J. H's book, but he told him it was besides the b^siness.

Wh^^^ w^ were busy in our discourse came Giles Rose a poor deluded man, that
was one of the ^^st that turned Q^aker in the Town of Lin but upon some account
or other does not thoroughly ^w^ them but is est^ded at them, and as it has
been said, objected sometimes against them some (...) ^ges between some of
their speakers, and a woman of them: He had made an inter^^p^^on two days
before of another dispute between G.VV. and another Mi^ster in the Town; The
people hea^ing him begin at a distance, like a kin^e of distracted man, to call
out, and seeing him coming, made some commotion, some of them crying to have
him carried away, that he might not ^ake any dist^^ce o^ interruption of the
Dispute, but that he ^ight proceed, and others ^^ging him in and setting him in
the midst of us, who began first to one party and then to (...), to play the
part of a Prophet in his conception against us for disp^ting, and variance^
(...) for ^oos^ning the ^^e of love, taxing G. VV. and his party for drawing
away Wives from them (...), Children from their Parents, Servants from their
Masters, etc. To whom GEORGE spoke a word or two, ^ebuking his way as deceit.


T.M. See the (...) thy ministry George, the people laughed, thy Principles are
sur^ to lead (...) to dest^actions.


G.W. He is none of ^^e fruit of my Ministry.

I. A. Your Principles, or Ministry, led a Brother of mine I am sure into
destraction.

I H. Yes, I am a witness of that; so* he fell to my knowledge out of Quaking
fits, within a very little space into destraction, and within a fortnight died.


G. W. It was before I came to this Town.


I. H. But not before yonr Principles and Doctrine came, after some time of
interruption by the aforesaid Giles when a little quiet was obtained. I. H.
fell on again.


I. H. I have made good my charge against you George, as not coming as the true
Apostles and Prophets use to do. I shall a little speak to the other part in
one argument, because I see time goes a way. It Is this, they that under-mine
and destroy the hope of the Gospel preached by the Apostles, they are preachers
of another Gospel or Doctrine, then the Apostles preached, and are to be
accounted accursed, and not received, or followed. This I charge you Quakers
with, and you G. W. by name. in that you say the coming of Christ, at which the
dead in Christ are to be raised, is already past and over. They that so do,
subvert the hope of the Gospel. Mind it people.

They that say the coming of Christ, wherein the dead in Christ are to be
raised, is past and over, they subvert, or under-mine the hope of the Gosple,
for if Christ be come in his glory, and the Saints raised that were dead, and
the living changed, and all together caught up in the air to meet the Lord,
what have we then to hope or look for.


G. W. denying this. I. H. read their words out of their Book against him, and
T. M. their words are thus, as for that coming of Christ spoken of in 1 Thessalonians.
^4.15. which these men would blindly put a sat off, to a coming of Christ in a
Body of flesh and bones, the Apostle says we that live and remain tell the
coming of the Lord. So that coming of Christ, the Saints that were ^hen a live
remained unto it. Judge good people, is Christ yet come, are the dead bodies of
the Saints raised, and the living changed, and all caught up together in the
air to meet him. If those men be not such as we are to avoid, and account
accursed, who be?


G. W. Thou read out of a book, and yet will not give w^y, I should read out
of thy Book.

M. H Here is not the same reason. He ^s to prove you deceivers, and such as
are to be accounted accursed, (or to that purpose) and therefore may produce
Testimonies out of your books against you, but you are not to prove against
him, but to defend your self.

J H* What host thou to say to this argument.


G.W. I meant is not of that resurrection of the dead thou speak of, or to
that purpose.

J, H. Thou speak of that coming of Christ mentioned in that Scripture, and
that Scripture speaks of Christ descending from Heaven to raise the dead in
him. I shall read it to you 1 Thessalonians* 4.13, 14 I would not have you ignorant
Brethren concerning them that sleept. Its evident he speaks of those that
sleep in the bodyly death, as its said of St^phen, that when he had said those
words he fell a sleep, He would not have Beleivers mourn as those without
hope concer^ing them. For if we believe says he that Jesus died and rose
again, even so then also that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him, for this
we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive (that is those
of us of our body or society, accounting beleivers of all ages but as one body)
and remain^ to the coming of the Lord, shall not revent the that are a sleep.
For the Lord himself shall dese^nd from heaven with a shout, and with the vo^ce
o^ the Archangel, and with the Trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise
first, and we which ^e a live and remain, shall be caught up together with
them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the ai^e, and so shall we ever be with
the Lord. What more plain th^n that he speaks of the co^ng of Christ to raise
the dead, those that sleep (...) the grave, and to change ^e living beleivers,
(...) Now I appeal to you all, whither those things were done in the time of
those beleiv^ before they dyed, and if so what have we to ^ope for.


G. W. There is a twofold sleeping spoken o^, there is a sleeping spi^itually
(or to that purpose) such as is spoken of in the next Chapter. Let us not
sl^epe as do others, but let us watch and be ^ober, for they that sleep sleep
in the ^ght, and there i^ a sleeping such as St^phen is said to fall a ^eepe in
at death. Now the Apo^ there sp^a^ of the first.


J. H. Nay, he speak of the sleeped (...) death, the dead in Christ shall rise
first.


G. W. Is it not said, the how is coming, and no ^s, that the dead shall hear
the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. John 5.25.


J. H. Had not the Apostles and beleive^s heard that voice of (...) Son of God,
raising them from death in sin, before the Apostle wrote this, or (...) they
that yet to look for, that in John speaks of men dead in sin, and this of the
dead in Christ.


G. W. Is it not said of those Th^ssalonian, tha^ they turned from dumb Idols
to serve the living God, and to wait for his Son from (...) could they wait
for a thing so far off? was it not the revelation of Christ to their Souls, or
to such purpose was his Answer.


J. H. Had not those Th^ssalen^s a^evelation of christ to their Souls, as to
the knowledge of him before they turned from their dumb Idols to serve the
living God.


G. W. Nay they had not the revelation of Christ then before they turned from
dumb Idols, but they waited for it.


J. H. What was it turned them to God then, was not that a frutie of the Gosple
coming to them, and does nor the Gospel reveal Christ.


G. W. Yea, there is a measure of the knowledge of Christ, which if they be
obedient they shall have more, as they that obtained like precious Faith with
the Apostles, that had the sure word of prophesy as a light shining in a dark
place, did well to take heed to it, tell the day dawned, and the day Starr
arose in the heart, when that dawned and arose that was the coming of the day
of the Lord. to such purpose was his answer, but with more circumstances.


J. H. Had not the beleivers, and chiefly the Apostles, bear that further
measure of light, and revelation of Christ, when they thus wrote, or what is
that to the purpose of this coming spoken in the Text, is that with the voice
of the Archang^l and the Trump of God, and the dead in Christ all raised then,
and those a sleep changed, [that is to one now, and to another then; and those
that are in a living frame, may prevent those that are in a sleepy posture,
such as the Apostle warns us not to be in. Therefore that's nothing to the
purpose.] the Thessalonians had something of that spiritual revelation of
Christ, as the c^^se of their turning (...) to serve the living God.


G. W. There George (...) r^n into a long circuling (...), a^ing the same over
and over again, the s^m^ of which so f^r as I could perceive was (...)
d^^^^^ent measures of the revelation of the knowledge of Christ, and that they
that (...) the least, should have more to the perfect day.


J. H. Hears nothing but the same things over and over. But did the Apostles
receive the full revelation of Christ in the time of their live.


G. W. You ask whither (...) all the glory they should have before death. Or
whither they should have no more glory after death.


T. M. Nay, we ask about the glorious coming of Christ, in which the dead shall
be raised; had they that before they dyed, is there no other coming of Christ
in glory for them, and us to see, then what they had, or see while they lived.

Here he wrangled a little about the question, and answered nothing to purpose,
but that they had greater measure before they died, but as if they might have
more glory after.


J. H. Its evident that the Apostle Paul did not remain to that coming of the
Lord there spoken of, that I shall prove.


G. W. How do you prove it.


J. H. Because he diad and is dead, whereas had he remained to that coming of
the Lord, he should only have bin changed, and caught up into the air. I
appeal to all the people whither my charge be not herein made good against
thee.


G. W. Nay, it is not.


J. H. Thou, nor I must not be judges in our own causes, let the people judge.


G. W. Nay, that of God in the people must be judge.


J. H. I appeal to that of God in them all, whither the coming of Christ there
spoken of be over and past while the Apostles lived, are the dead in Christ
raised, the living changed, all together caught up into the air to meet the
Lord, etc


G. W. Would needs read something out of J.H. book, being not able to make good
his saying which J. H. charged, as contrary to the Apostles Doctrine about the
coming of Christ. And began to read something of John Horn's granting and
bewayling the too much of that of the Prophet Isaiah 56.10. was too true of to
many Ministers of England, as that his watchmen are blind, they are dumb
dogs, which he going about to turn upon I. H.


I. H. Replyeds Nay George thou do not find us dumb dogs, we are made able
blessed be God to worry thee thou see, and put thee to the worst.


G. W. He is in the nature of a dog it seems then, whereas Christ sent not out
his Apostles a^ dogs, the Lyonis said vorare of which the word worry comes.
but as lambs amongst wolves.


I. H. But the Lamb of God is a Lion too George (and maks Israel a Lion too as
in Gen 49 9. as a Lion amongst the beasts of the Forest, (as Mica. 5.8, 9 and
its in his strength and power, that we are enabled to tear and worry thee, for
all thy great brags.


I. H. And some others of his Friends laughing at the Quakers, and at G. W. to
see some of his confusion in some passage.


G. W. Thou art in Ishmaels nature, or we may see Ishmael in you, or to such
purpose.


I. H. Nay, it is Isaac's nature, Isaac had his name of laughter; and it is said
the righteous shall see them, and laugh them to scorn, And we rejoice to see
the Lord strengthen us to baffle you, and to make manifest your folly, etc.


G. W. Art thou righteous then.


I. H. Why not, completely righteous in Christ, though in my self I acknowledge
sin.


G. W. See how he contradicts himself, (...) be complete in Christ, and yet
have sin in him.


I. H. Though that be out of our way, and from the business in hand, yet I
shall prove that those two will stand together. The Apostle says Coloss. 2.10.
In him ye are complete, and yet in the same Epistle, to the same people he
says Chap, 3.5. Mortify these therefore, your members that be upon Earth,
fornication, uncleanness, etc. If these were not in them, how could they be
called their members upon Earth? [and why should they be bid to mortify them,
if they had no life in them too]


G. W. The Apostle says of those that were complete in Christ, In whom also
ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, the putting off
the the body of the sins of the flesh.


I. H. He does so, and yet bids them Chap. 3.8. Put of all those things still,
anger, wrath, malice, etc. [They had put them off as to their purpose and bent
of heart, and yet had need to put them off in their daily practic, and
conversation.]


G. W. The Apostles writing to the Churches writ to diverse States. Some of
them were complete in Christ, and others were not, but had their members to
mortify, etc.


I. H. The Apostle makes no such distinction, he says not some of you are
complete in Christ, but says it without limitation to some, in him ye are
complete; and so he gives the other counsel to all of them [yea, he gives it
upon supposition of their being raised with Christ, and are not those that
risen with Christ complete in Christ? Col. 3.1, 5.] what do you think that the
Apostle writ one Chapter to one part of the people, and another Chapter to
another?

After this, returning to the business of Christ's coming to raise the dead
being past before the Apostles dyed, and nothing further being answered to it,
but that Paul spoke of a spiritual coming to men's spirits, we slid upon that of
1 Kings. 8 46. I known how that there is no man that sins not.


G. W. Will thou affirm that of all men living now.


I. H. Nay, first, will thou grant it of all men living, let us agree first of
what was then, and then come to the times now.


G. W. I say no man that was in that State sinned.


I. H. The word are, there is no man that sins not. There is no mention of
any State in some, in which all sinned, distinct from some other state in which
some men firmed not.


G. W. It is said if they sin, for there is no man that sins not.


I. H. It is absolutely said, a^ the reason why Israel might be supposed to
sin, that there is no man that sins not

I, M. It is not said if they sin, then thereis no man that sins not, but, for
there is no man that sins not.


G. W. There Is no man in that State.


I. H. There Is no limitation to any state, but there is no man that sins not.
Ah George do thou go up and down prea^ing to men to look to the light, and
do thou despute; and plead against the light in thee, do thou not see the
Scripture is against thee.


G. W. There is no man in (...) that sins not.

I, H. Is there any man in (...), that is not a man, if he be a man he sins,
for there is no man that sins not.


G. W. All in that state sin. But (...) thou say, there is no man now that
sins not.


I. H. (...) is no into living (...) not, or has not sin in him now, Jesus
Christ excepted.


G. W. then there is a (...) sins not. Then its not true of all men.


I. H. Jesus Christ is (...), God with us, God-man, and so more then a man.


T. M. (...) Christ is included in the (...) sinned against. If they sin
against thee. He is that one, and only man that good because he is God; and
therefore he must needs be excepted.


To (...) was the discourse between I. H. and G. W. We have here given the
substance, and scope, if not also the very (...) the Answers, and the very
words, and form, so much as could be remembered. After which the Church-(...)
M. H. with other Friends seeing I. H. much spent with speaking so long, and so
much, and fearing he might (...) therein, desired him to give the people some
short exhortation and conclude.

Accordingly I. H. minded the people of what had hin proved against them, and
warned the people to take heed of (...) and tamper^ with them, (...) they
became an (...) too, and should be given up of God to believe delusions to
their own destruction. And so desired them to withdraw, and they beginning to
depart, he also being (...) and much spent withdrew, and the whole company
dispersed to their several ways, seeming general well satisfied against the
Quakers, (...) the no small trouble of the Quakers: as might be conceived from
their coming diverse of them in the Lords day after with G. W. to the
Congregation, to have made some disturbance upon the people, or to indeavoure
to have been drawing a way some of them. But God mercifully prevented them of
their purpose.] Only they sat and heard diverse of their corrupt (...), further
disproved from that in 1. Sam. 2.2. There is (...) holy as the Lord. And
amongst other things I. H. to (...) ^easion in speaking to the holiness of
Gods Name, to show G. W. gross Jesuitical gloss, upon Psalm. 103.1^ (...)
there was no sin in David, because then all within him could not (...) God.
Showing that not only David (...) of or owned that he had sin for God to
forgive, but also that the words in the Hebrew and La^ne signifies only all my
inwards, or inward parts, of which sin can be none, though it be in a man, yet
its none of the inwards of a man, no part of the man. But with such (...)
deceitful inference, and arguments, they delude simple people, that fall down
and worship them as holy men; and Prophets, and either (...) not able, or not
willing to examine, and try what is said by them, and indeed that is one thing
that (...) them such as men ought to reware of, as very dangerous persons to
(...), that they are so (...) with what sophestry and deceit, they abuse the
over credu^u^ people, so they may but (...) them, and draw them after them All
people avoid, and take (...) of them. Beware of false Prophur that (...)
clothing, but inwardly are ^avenous Wo^ves. By such like frates as corrupting
(...) from the faith of hope in Christ, and their deceitful ways, ye may
know them.

POSTSCRIPT.
OUr Lord Jesus teaching his Disciples to pray to God as their Father, and in
the first place to breath and desire the hallowing (...) sying of Gods Name,
the coming of his Kingd^m, and that this will might be done in earth as it is
in heaven yet thing them (...) for ^giveness of their ^espasses, does he not
strong^y and plainly i^ply that (...) are the hildren of G^, and so born of
God, and th^^ have their hearts through his grace set (...) the curing of his
Kingdom, and the d^ing of his w^ll, have sins and (...) against (...) for give
^^s. If it be replied, Yea while ^ule children, and but desiving th^e things
they (...) ((...) G. W. says the little children to whom John writes that they
should not sin, might (...) they in wh^ (...) is name is hallowed the kin! me
come, and the will done in (...) in heaven, they have (...). Then I to that
say, 1. Are (...) the little ^hildren that know the Father and call God Father
the (...) Christ's teaching, born of God, and thea^ wh^s^ever is born of God is
(...) as not! (...), or in any thing to ^ssend, how come the (...) children to
be excepted, and if they though (...) have sins and desp^sses to pray (...) in
Scriptive have we (...), that others (...) God, and so any of them may not in
(...) sense too have (...) and (...). I^ we (...) that any are so perfectly
born (...) to have his Name so hall reed to and in them, (...) me to come, and
will (...) ^e, as they may be no ^e, (...) more perfectly (...)? Or is it (...)
teaches that to pray, till his Nan^ (...) everywhere hallowed, his kingdom
(...), and will perfectly done every where, even in (...), as in heaven, which
is not in this w^ld. But (...) for daily bread, or as the w^d may be end^ed
(...) necessary for bread, (...) of them, and that before (...) of their (...);
Does he (...) men have need of bread for their life, and subsistence here they
have a^ need to pray for (...) if then the Quakers so called, wi^ s^y they have
(...) sin in them, ^et them (...), and we may then it may be think there is
ground to believe them that ^he name of God (...) so come, and his will so done
in them, that they have (...) passes; Note, VVh^ is (...) of God (...), etc. 1.
Whosoever is perfectly born of God, as the spirits if just men made perfect
(that is) de cased, they cannot si^, nor the men when their spirits and bodies
shall (...) rea^^te^ in the re^ion, but none are so (...) born of God here. 2.
So far as ary man is born of God he sins not, or commits not sin, (...) can. 2.
VVh^ever believes with his heart that Jesus is the Christ, does not, nor can,
together with the exercise of that says, walk in (...) way of sin, and so
willingly do iniquity and sin, nor shall miss of his end.

Note, Whereas G. W. with some of his party coming on the Lords ^y into the
Congregation after Sermon offered to speak; to which he was permitted^y I.H. as
conceiving he might have something to say in defense of himself (which the said
J. H. was willing to have answered him in, had it been s^) but G. W. was (...)
suffered by some that had power in that place. And whereas the said I. H. since
(...) informed that G. W. said to the pe^, that he the said George had nothing
to say to the said J. H. but only a Word from the Lord to the people; (...)
some of his party rail and revise at the people for not suffering him to speak
it, or (...) hearing of it, casting that as a reproach upon the Ministry: J.H.
does declare that he judges it well done of those (...) to suffer the said G.
W. to utter his pretended word from the Lord, and that (...) as well (...) the
people^ (...) hear it; not should J. H. willingly have permitted him to speak
to the people any (...) VV^rd, unless he had first acknowledged that he had
been formerly and hitherto in a deceit, and (...) of it. For (...) been but two
days before proved a Deceiver, and such a one as people (...), had he been
permitted to speak in such a way of Doctrine to the people; he might well have
said that we went contrary to our principles in suffering him to speak, and the
people to hear him wh^m so little a time (...) had charged to be such a one as
ought not to be heard, and should people believe that God will send any Word
by (...) a man (...) a Deceiver, and they should count accursed, unless to
convince him of, and so to (...) him a knowledge the evil of his former way,
being thereof convinced; we shall do evil therefore if hereafter we any of us
per^t him to speak (and much more) if we hear and listen to him or any of them
in such way of Doctrine.

Be still all people and wait upon God, mind his Gospel, and believe and ^bey
it, (...) be saved, but as for this people the Quakers unless they see and turn
from their evil w^y, Gods hand will be against them, though they he proud at
Moab, their lies shall not be so, they shall not prosper, their (...)
rottenness, and shall be dried up, and perish, their corruption and folly is
seen and made manifest in good (...), and shall be more, (...) season^ For the
King (Christ) shall rejoice and God, and every one that (...) confesses) him
shall (...) but (...) mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped, Psalm
63.10. every word of God is pu^e and shall be performed (...) its season: Let
them alone (neither abuse them with incivilities, nor listen to their corrupt
sayings) (...) blind leaders of the blind, and both they that lead, and they
that are led by them shall fall into the dit^h, Mar. 15.14. Depart I pray you
from the tents or societies of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs
(...) nothing to do with their sayings and witnessings) least ye be consumed in
all their sins, Numb. 14.16.

FINIS.

