THE HORRIBLE PERSECUTION OF THE French Protestants In the PROVINCE of POITOU.
Truly set forth by a Gentleman of great Quality, an Eye Witness of those sad
Passages.
In a Letter to a Worthy Friend of his at Canterbury, June 26, S.N. 1681.
My Dear Cousin,
THe good Air of France which I find to conduce much to my health, and the
desire to see once more the goodly Countries of the South, made me travel as
far as Poitou, where I have much acquaintance of the best sort. Here I was
stayed by the horrible Tragedy which is now acting in this Province, to destroy
the Protestant Religion, and the Professors thereof, of the middle sort, which
in these parts are very numerous. My Heart is so full of it, that I must tell
you what I have seen.

The great Actor in it is one Intendant Marillac, who having from the potent
Jesuit Father Le Chese, the promises of the present Life, and not caring for
those of the Life to come, has laid upon the Reformed a most heavy Cross, such
as was not known since the Reformation. For which he has got about him a
Choice of Hard hearted Villains, expert to do Mischief to good Men, Indicting
some of Crimes, suing others for Debts, loading all with Taxes. Those hungry
Oppressors are made Jussices, that they may raven and tear by Authority.

They are searching into the Lives of Protestants: If any of them twenty years
before has spoken some offensive Word, or given a Blow, there goes out a
Decree against him. He is Imprisoned in a dark Den, none of his Friends are
suffered to come near him. He is put to a most refined kind of Inquisition: For
though all his Friends be kept from him, he has every day two sorts of
Visiters; Some seemingly kind and merciful, promise him Goods and Advantages of
the World, if he will but go to Mass. Some severely telling him of the King's
Absolute Will, that there be but one Religion in his Kingdom: That if he remain
obstinate in the Heresy, there is no mercy for him, he must look for the total
Ruin of himself and his Family, after he has been many Years suffering under
the Condition of a Gally-Slave. Projects of severe Sentences are given him to
read, that he may see what a weight of Distress is hanging over his Head, ready
to fall on him and crush him. If these Arts shake not his Constancy, he is left
in his dark Den, where he has Bread allowed him, but hardly enough to live.

Others are sued for their Debts, which are made to swell into fearful excesses
of Costs: The Creditor is never to be found when the Debtor has got money to
pay him, whilst the poor Debtor is vexed with all the severe ways of the Law
for not paying. The Lands of Debtors are extended for Debts, and themselves put
out of their Houses. Among those Excesses, they are haunted with evil
Counselors, offering to see the Debts paid, if they will forsake their
Religion, the only way for them to be happy.

Another Persecution of the Protestants is by Taxes, so heavy that they sink
under the Burden. Those Taxes are Arbitrary, so that the taxed persons never
know what they must pay till it be demanded: And the Protestants whom they have
made Collectors, are imprisoned for not being able to pay for others, whom they
had no power to distrain.

Some of the Raskally sort of Tradesmen will turn Papists, and then they will
set a higher Rate upon their Work; but though they were disliked as ill
Workmen, when they are not employed by the Protestants, they will complain to
the Justices, who thereupon lay Mulcts upon those that will not employ them.

Finally, when all other tricks to pick Quarrels with Protestants are wanting,
the last and certain way to undo them is used, which is to set Soldiers upon
them. There are in Poitou four Troops o^ Horse, who take Free Quarter in
Protestants Houses, and use them as Enemies. Their Salute when they come in, is
to curse and revile the Master and all his Household, with the basest Language.
Answerably to that beginning they do their worst to consume and spoil the Goods
of the House, till they have ruined the Owners. Their way to bring them to
Church, is to drag them tied with Cords to their Horses, and cudgel them
besides, to make them go. Neither do they make an end of their horrible
Violences, till they have made the Owners abandon their Houses and Goods, or
till they have made them turn Catholics.

For an increase of Cruelty, those Violences are done when men are preparing
for their Harvest, which the Soldiers destroy. Do but imagine what Soldiers
will do, when they are commanded to do all the harm they can; and what an
Harvest of Tears and Lamentations they leave to poor Families, when they have
destroyed the Harvest of their Corn.

To these Cries and Lamentations of persons persecuted for the Gospel, some are
the more bitter Cries of others brought to the Brink of Despair by their
Abjuration of Gods Truth to save their Estates. Which criminous Act they now
openly detest with a Flood of Tears. Between these two sorts of Weepers, a
Voice of Lamentation and bitter Weeping is heard in Poitou, as once in Rama:
And the rest of the Text alluded unto, will shortly be for them and all the
Protestants of France; Rachel Weeping for her Children, and would not be
comforted because they are not, when the great declared Design shall be put to
farther execution, the getting of all the Children under Age from Protestant
Parents. They have gotten too many of them already; and for the keeping of
them, they exact such heavy Pensions from the Parents, that nothing remains to
them, but their Hands to get a poor Living.

Notwithstanding all this hard usage, I see the generality of the Protestants
resolved to undergo the dismallest Trials, as the Gallows, and the Fire, that
they may Seal with their Blood the Truth of their Glorious Redeemer. As these
Persecutions on the one side fright Christians, on the other side they confirm
them, putting them in mind, that Sufferings are the Livery of a Christian.

That which is most happy for the Protestant Party, is, that they are not
accused of any Crime, and that never Subjects served their King better, or were
more subjected to his Will: Wherefore their Enemies durst not accuse them of
any Violation of their Duty to the King: And they have this Comfort, that they
suffer merely for Righteousness sake.

So they deal now with the ignoble or little Gentlemen. The Turn of the Great
Men, among whom he that writ this Letter lives, is not yet come; but they are
in part undone by the undoing of their Tenants.

London, Printed for Randolph Tailor, near Stationers Hall, 1681.


