A SERMON Occasioned by the DEATH OF THE Right Honorable, THE Lady GVILFORD.

By Philip Horneck, L. L. B. Chaplain to the Right Honorable, Francis, Lord
Guilford.

LONDON, Printed for Edmund Rumball, at the Post House in Russel Street, in
Covent Garden. MDCXCIX.

The Epistle Dedicatory, TO THE Right Honorable, FRANCIS, Lord GVILFORD.
MY LORD,
WHilst others Mourn in Silence the Loss of the Deceased Saint, I must beg
leave to make a Public Declaration of my Grief, tho it must fall short of a
true Sympathy with Your Lorship's; who, being Related to her in the strictest
Alliance, best knew the value of her while Living, must sensibly perceive the
want of her now Dead.

This, my Lord, would Naturally draw on a Consolatory Discourse, were I not
fully assured of the Presumption of such an Attempt. Your Lordship is furnished
with better Arguments than I can give; the happy effects of which, appear in
that true settlement and composure of your Spirits. I that saw Your Lorship's
demeanor at the most Melancholy Juncture, with what Christian Courage and
Constancy you received the News of My Lady's Death, how Glorious you rose above
the Billows which threatened you, cannot doubt but the same Principles which
fortified you at that time, have since confirmed you beyond a possibility of
falling. Such exemplary Conduct, My Lord, was highly requisite to secure the
Interest of Religion; for had Your Lordship failed in that great Point of
Resignation, Hundreds that stood beneath your Shade, might have staggered in
their Belief, when they had seen so Tall a Cedar shattered and broke by the
assaults of Fate. But still Your Lordship's Grief was comely, your Lamentations
well-tempered: All the Tenderness and Passion that could be fairly allowed,
Your Lordship expressed; yet, at the lowest ebb, never betrayed a Sorrow
without Hope. This was truly Great, and Rational; for, as a Philosopher of old
observes, It is not Benevolence, but Weakness, that prompts a Man to continual
Grief, and makes those only fear whom Reason has not sufficiently armed against
Contingencies.

And here I cannot but Congratulate Your Lordship upon bearing the Stroke so
well: For none can imagine how near a touch Nature gives, how piercing the
Sufferings of one's Blood are, but those whose tender Bowels feel the Smart;
and I dare affirm no Person, of such quick Resentments as Your Lordship is
Master of, could have set bounds to their Passion: None besides your Lordship
but must have fainted under the Load. In fine, No Person that had once enjoyed
so voluable a Consort, but would have courted Solitude for ever. But Your
Lordship has bravely Surmounted the busy Encroacments of Nature, and wisely
considered that this Inestimable Prize was snatched from as by the special
designation of Providence. Virtue has no security from the Grave; Death riots
on the spoil of the best as well as the worst, Cato enquires of the Gods why
Pompey should be vanquished by Caesar, who had much the better cause. We may
likewise wonder, but with more Modesty, Why the Rightous Perish, and the wicked
Survive and Prosper. No doubt the Almighty has great reason for such severe
dispensations, either that we are not worthy of them, or that me prize them too
much: In this late sorrowful Instance, I hope, I shall not exceed the bounds of
Modesty, if I ascribe the former to our selves, the latter to Your Lordship;
For Your Lordship must own, you Loved her, Loved her dearly; nay, Loved her
passionately. This God saw, and, perhaps, deprived Your Lordship of so great a
Blessing on purpose to draw of your Thoughts from all Sublunary things. This is
the result of his boundless Knowledge, who foresees what is best for us, and
mingles ill with the good things of this Life, Fears with our Hopes, Crosses
with our greatest Pleasures, least we should set too great a value upon any
thing here below, and abandon Heaven for present Fruition. The Spirit is apt to
yield in Prosperity, and we grow too frequently upon the liberal Distributions
of Providence, till God humbles us by Affliction, recalls our wandering.
Thoughts, and out of these Clouds creates a Glorious Day. As to these following
Pages, I have little to offer in their behalf, and therefore must beg Your
Lordship's Protection, both for them and my self. The first Essays, in any
kind, are hazardous, but Attempts of this Nature are almost desperate. For upon
such occasions we are unavoidably exposed to one of these two Censures, either
of saying too little, or too much: The latter of which Imputations does no ways
concern me; For how prevalent soever the Malice of the World may be, I will
venture to affirm, that I have not, neither was I in a possibility of doing
Justice to My Lady; For those Characters I have drawn are only Sketches of her
Life; but could I have been led into her Retirements, I do not question but
there might have been formed one of the compleatest Models that has been
exhibited to the World for some Ages past. Indeed, those scattered Pieces of
her Life, ought to have been touched by a more masterly Hand, but I had no power
to dispute Your Lordship's Command, which will, in some measure, I hope, atone
or the Defects. Here I must not forget to acquaint the World what repeated
Hints. I received from Your Lordship to avoid all artificial Strains, false
Colorings, and suspicious Glosses. These I have strictly obeyed; nay, I have
went so far as to lay asido even common Ornaments that I might not endanger the
truth of the Character. And now, My Lord, it is time to ask Pardon for this
trouble, but, at the same time, must beg Your Lordship to indulge one Plea (if
it may be admitted as such) That the miscarriages of Young Adventurers are more
excusable than others; especially where neither Rashness or Ambition has any
hand in the Attempt. From these Crimes I can safely absolve my self; and if
Your Lordship will be pleased to forgive the rest, it will be a mighty
Encouragement to the green Enterprises of,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's most Devoted Servant and Chaplain, PHILIP HORNECK.

ERRATA.
Page 30. line 25. read her for our

A Funeral-Sermon ON Proverbs XXXI. xxxi.
And let her own Works praise her in the Gates.
THIS Chapter contains the True and Genuine Character of a Virtuous Woman, with
relation to a Married State. The proper Offices and Employments are specified,
and her Virtue is placed not only in Prayer, and Devotions, but likewise in the
prudent Conduct of her Domestic Affairs; Instruction of her Children, and
keeping much at home. These Qualifications the Wise Man exacts of the Female
Sex, and prefers them to Beauty, Shape, or any other outward Accomplishments.
Favor is deceitful, and Beauty is vain, but the Woman that fears the Lord,
she shall be praised.

And lest any one should Object, that it is possible, after having done so many
laudable Actions, no person will set a due value on them, he prevents all fears
of this nature, by adding, that her own works will praise her: And let her own
works praise her in the Gates.

The sole difficulty contained in the Words, depends upon that Phrase of being
praised in the Gates. For the clearing of which, be pleased to observe, that in
ancient times the public Seats of Judicature were fixed in the Gates of the
City; to the end that all Passengers might see Justice impartially distributed;
and if any Person, either going or coming, had any just Plea against the
Sentence pronounced, he might offer it in favor of the Party Condemned. These
Gates being public Places where all Causes were tried, and the common
Transactions of the World brought in; the meaning of the Expression comes to
this issue; even That a Person so Meritorious, as is represented in the
preceding Lines, shall have the honor of receiving public Praise and
Commendation. Her Praises shall not be confined to the single breath of her
Neighbors, but proclaimed with a general voice; her Merits shall not lie
concealed within the walls of her own House, but fly abroad, and become the
sole Discourse of the Town.

Here might be some useful Doctrines raised from the Text, but I fear they
would be too General; besides; the Solemnity of this Occasion Commands me to
particularize; and the Illustrious Virtues of the Deceased, to whose Memory we
Sacrifice, Challenges from me more than the compass of these following Pages
will admit of. A Person whose eminent virtues raised her beyond equality, and
have now given her a proportionate Glory amongst the Saints above. A Person
whose Death calls for general Mourning, but a transcendant sorrow from the
good; a Person of whom the World was not worthy; In fine, a Person of whom
should I speak but modestly, the time would fail me. The Theme is spacious and
might well excuse enlargements; but I shall endeavor to keep within the bounds
of your patience and attention. Truth shall be my Guide through the several
Scenes of her Character; and indeed she wants no adventitious Glosses to smooth
over the History of her Life. That Tongue is to be suspected which is purely
tuned to the Ear; and Falsehood, we know, delights in borrowed Ornaments, whilst
Truth appears more comely, and Triumphs in her Primitive Nakedness, and
Simplicity. The Object will appear truly Glorious, without the advantage of
false Mirrours, so that I am under no temptation of mixing the Colors to
advantage, or making the Touches appear more lively, for her own Works shall
praise her in the Gates. Yet this must not exclude our pious Officiousness, or
debar us the pleasure of recounting her Virtues; it is fit they should be
conveyed down to Posterity, that future Ages may admire, and commemorated at
this time, that the present Age may imitate them. It is not sufficient to say
that a Person was good, without amplifying upon the Character; Particulars
always leave the deepest impression, and excite the Generous to emulation. But
here I am at a loss where to begin, fresh Beauties crowd in and dazzle us,
Wonders lie dispersed through the whole Series of her Life, and each Minute
consisted of Actions Great and Memorable.

The Infancy of most Persons is deservedly passed over, containing little else
but Simplicities, and innocent Pastime; and Relators are cautious of
introducing them upon the Stage, lest they should sully the Actions of their
riper years. But here even these tender Minutes must not be lost; for whilst
others of her Age pursued their Childish Diversions, she was attentive to good
Advice; whilst others trifled away their time, she would be asking Questions
surprising, and much above her Age.

She was early possessed with an awful Reverence of God, and with the
consequence of that, an esteem for Religion. It Is true she had been excellently
well Principled, as being under the Care and Direction of Worthy The Right
Honorable Foulk Lord Brook, and his Pious Lady.
Parents; and with Timothy, from a Child had been instructed in the Holy
Scriptures. But still there was something too remarkable in her at those years,
to escape our acknowledgment, viz. her Religious Doubts; for she would be
scrupulous even about indifferent Matters, and could not be prevailed with to
enter upon an Action which seemed doubtful. This was not the effect of
Superstitious Fears; her Soul was ever exalted above any encroachments of that
Nature. The truth is, she had formed to her self a due Notion of God's infinite
Goodness, and from thence made this natural Inference, That he was of purer
eyes than to behold the least shadow of Iniquity, which made her so strict and
cautious.

When very young, she expressed a strong desire to go to the Holy Sacrament,
and would frequently entertain her self with the thoughts of that Bliss she
should reap from thence. She soon became sensible of what she had promised in
her Baptismal, Covenant, and was eager to confirm and ratify those Engagements
at the Altar. But still she suspected there was too much rashness in her
Desire, and forbore till she came to maturer years. These Holy Fears were sure
Prophecies of her future strictness, and her Dawn being so Glorious, no wonder
that the Day proved so bright.

As she grew up, the impulse was so strong upon her, that it could be no ways
resisted; and accordingly she appeared at the Holy-Table. But what Conflicts
did she suffer? What different Passions strugled in her Breast? Fear left she
should prove an Unworthy Receiver; Joy that she was admitted to so great an
Honor, as to be made a Partaker of the Benefits accruing from the Death of her
Savior. Her Transports after Receiving were too great to be concealed; she
professed there was no pleasure on this side Heaven comparable to it, and that
it was the richest and most satisfactory Banquet she had ever tasted. The Joy
she found, was a mighty encouragement for her to persist in that Duty, and her
preparations to it were strict and Laborious. All her thoughts came under
Correction; and as she kept Minutes of her Life, so nothing of the least
importance could escape her Knowledge. She was always free from Reserves, but
before a Communion she would lay open her Soul, make the strictest
Animadversions, and heighten each Trespass into a Crime; and even after the
severest Scrutiny, would be self-diffident, and lay the best of her Services at
the foot of the Cross. She looked upon it as an high Indignity to turn her back
upon the Holy Table; and where ever she found a remisness in the Celebration of
that Ordinance, she heartily bewailed the Neglect, and was forward in promoting
so important a Duty.

From her Infancy she was an early Riser; and what the Ancient Philosophers
enjoined as necessary to the preservation of Health, she practiced upon a
Religious account. No sooner waking, but impatient till she was upon her Knees.
She always began the Day with Praises to God for the past Nights preservation,
and then hasted to her Closet to beg his protection of her the following Day,
in a more humble and solemn manner.

This Retirement generally lasted from Six to Eight in the Morning; part of
which time was spent in Reading the New Testament, with Annotations upon it;
and wherever she lighted on a passage applicable to her self, or fell in with
relations of Great and Exemplary Men, she would pitch on them for Subjects of
her ensuing Meditation.

She constantly Prayed five times a Day, and how she demeaned her self in the
Closet, may be easily gathered from the order and regularity of her public
Devotions. There was nothing light orsuperficial appeared through the whole
Series of the Action; she perfectly Wrestled with God for a Blessing, and the
Sacrifice was purified with Fire. So observant she was of the most decent
Postures in Prayer, that when there was an absolute necessity for her being
excused Kneeling, it was with great difficulty she was brought to comply. If
once upon her Knees, no business of the greatest importance could raise her
before the Service was ended.

Indeed she was so entirely fixed upon the Duty in hand, as not to be aware of
common Disturbances. No sudden Visits, or fear of breaking an Appointment could
tempt her to a Neglect; and if any Person of the highest Rank came in at the
beginning of the Service, she would invite them to join with her, and
Congratulate them upon coming in so seasonable a minute. Her Zeal in this Case
did not burn inwardly, but diffused it self through the whole Family, whose
attendance she constantly required; and no excuse could atone for their
absence, after she had given Orders that all Business should be postponed to
the Service of God, or totally omitted, rather than any failure should occur in
those Holy Exercises.

And here the Transition to her Fasting is very natural. She constantly Fasted
once a Week, but would not tie her self up to a set Day, on purpose to avoid
discovery. When prevented by Company, or any extraordinary Occasions, from
Fasting on the Day she proposed, the Concern was so great as to draw Tears from
her eyes; and if any Business intervened on that day she actually Fasted, she
thought the Mortification lame and imperfect.

Her Abstinence in the time of Lent is almost incredible, arriving very near to
that which the Primitive Fathers call (...) the Fasts of Superposition, the
most exquisite sort observed by the ancient Monks.

This was so far from creating impatience in her, that her Spirits were more
composed in the Evening, and a double sprightliness and vivacity played in her
Countenance, arising from Peace within, which was a continual Feast to her.
Such a tender frame as hers, would have administered fear to others, and put
them upon great caution in the Treatment of it; may they would have concluded
such Severities impracticable, and sat down with the discharge of milder
Duties; but she was unwilling to impose upon her self, and plead inability
before an attempt.

She was resolved to try the utmost of her strength, believing that uncommon
Supports were vouchsafed to those who ran the Race with Cheerfulness; of which
she tasted in an eminent manner, inasmuch as she was enabled to go through
those Severities without any visible decay in her Health.

The Recreations she took lay out of the common Road; for she could by no means
allow of those which generally pass under that plausible Name. There was too
much Impertinence, in her Opinion, allied to the common Visits of the Age, to
be very fond of them. Besides, the many idle words, and detracting Stories
which pass interchangeably at such times, discouraged her from being frequently
engaged in them. Plays were Diversions she never admired; and if she chanced to
go, it was owing more to the importunity of her Friends, than her own
Inclinations.

And to be plain, her complacency to the general humor of the Age, in this
particular, was purely that Religion might not suffer any imputation, as if it
rendered its Votaries peevish and ill-humour'd. Whenever she went, she always
informed her self first of the Character of the Play, never venturing to go,
except represented to her as inoffensive to Good Manners; for a profane
Expression made her turn pale, and jesting with Serious Matters chilled her
Blood.

Of late the Stage has been so Corrupted, the Characters so Obscene; in short,
the whole Plot and Artifice of the Play so Destructive to the Great Ends of
Religion, that she grew more and more averse to them. In all other Recreations
she was so far from Transgressing, that she always kept within the Bounds of
Christian Liberty. Her sprightliest Hours had their Allay, for she qualified
her Joy with Fear and Trembling; and her Diversions, to say the Truth, were
Great, and Instructive.

For want of Employment, Persons of her Lofty Station are apt to run into
excess of Vanity; and not knowing how to spend their time, lie open to a
thousand Temptations. Thus whilst they think themselves Privileged by their
Quality to sit Idle, they insensibly fall from doing Nothing, to that which is
worse than Nothing.

Against this Danger she was fully secured, by being always well employed;
Essays, History, Morality, with the like, took up all the vacancies she could
spare from the stricter Duties of Religion. She had too fine a Taste to relish
any thing mean or trifling. The Histories of our Nation she had made her own;
and that Knowledge, which would have satisfied a common Curiosity, did but
inflame her desire of knowing more; for she pierced beyond her Native Clime,
enquired into the rise and fall of remote Empires, the variety of Laws and
Establishments, with the like. These were the Subjects of her Entertainment.
And there was nothing extant in our own Language, too great for her Genius to
compass; for she had a wonderful quickness of apprehension, with that peculiar
Blessing of a correct Judgment. Being always thus happily employed, little time
remained for the lower sort of Diversions; neither was it possible for one of
such exalted Principles to descend from those heights she possessed; for such
studies as these fix the Mind upon what is laudable and serious, and prevent
wasting the time in Luxury and Folly. And that Woman (as Plutarch observes in
his Conjugal Precepts) who is studious of Geometry, will never affect the
wanton motions of a Dance. And she that is charmed with the sublime notions of
Plato and Zenophon, will look with disdain upon lascivous Novel and amorous
Romance. Her collection of Books was very choice, and none could find
admittance there but those which carried Use as well as Entertainment along
with them.

This Conversation with the Dead, was as pleasant to her as with the Living,
and she heartily pitied those who complained of Solitude, and want of company,
when they had such variety in their Closets; often repeating that old Axiom,
That she never found more company than when she was alone.

She was free from Passion of any kind, and could command her self upon the
greatest occasions, without the trouble of running over the Alphabet. Indeed
she was of so fine a Complexion, that no particular quality or humor had the
Ascendent over her; and upon that account was not so apt to be raised on a
sudden; and before it came to any dangerous height, she had time to prepare her
self against it. There was such a due balance in her Temper that it kept her
from unusual Transports on one hand, and mean Depressions on the other. The
only thing that was able to create a changein her, was, The loss of a dear
Friend or Relation: At such a Juncture, the tenderness and flexibility of her
Soul was displayed; But these were Resentments which proceeded from a Principle
of Nature, and were out of hers, as well as others power to prevent. And indeed
the contrary, which is the Stoical Apathy, or rather Brutish Insensibility,
extinguishes all that sociable Love which is so very necessary to the Creature,
and the very Cement of human Society. Still, at the Crisis of such a Trial
which was as painful to her as a severed Limb, She never parted with her
Reason, but always conquered the Passion before it became Unchristian.

Gracious and pleasant, like a Morning Sun, she broke forth upon all, as well
Strangers as Familiars. There was a settled cheerfulness dwelt on her Brow,
which bespoke her always contented, such happy Lines as expressed the Sincerity
of her Soul. To this was joined a wondrous Humility, easiness of access, and
condescension both to the Ignorance and Weakness of others, though she knew at
the same time what was due to her Station, as well as any of her Rank; but she
could not endure a servile distance, considering all Christians as fellow
Members of the same Body.

These mighty Gifts and Accomplishments soon made her Conspicuous, and drew not
only the Eyes, but the Hearts and Affections of all People unto her: Still
amidst these Applauses she maintained her Ground; she industriously shunned
Popularity, and affected to live in Shades: But Alas! that was a vain Attempt;
for the Beams of her Goodness soon pierced the Cloud which had concealed it,
and discovered her in the most private Recesses. There are few Persons but what
are ambitious of telling the World what they know; and this Vanity is more
excusable in the Female Sex, when they arrive to such distinguishing Heights:
But certainly no Person that ever knew, or did so much, cared to inform the
World less of it. Themistocles was wont to say, That the sweetest Music was a
Man's own Praise. She was just of the contrary Opinion; and nothing was more
untuneable, than to hear People run out into Eulogies and Commendations of her.
She thought Praise too nearly related to Flattery and Lies: and as she never
admired herself, so she could not bear to be commended by another.

She often expressed a great Contempt of the World, and thought no Time so ill
spent as that which was laid out in Dressing. Trains and Attendance were always
uneasy to her: She accounted Greatness no better than Gilded Slavery, and many
Servants but a civiler Sort of Guard. The Plainest Dress pleased her most, and
if ever She put on any thing more Airy and Ornamental than usual, it was to
avoid Singularity, and to comply with those Persons whose Commands She never
disputed.

She was very nice in the choice of her Friends; civil to all, only the Good
were dear to her; and those that had the Honor of being esteemed so, might
conclude themselves happy; for (not to mention her readiness to assist them in
their greatest Exigencies) in the strictest Friendship She would never omit
reproving an Indecency; for She thought mutual inspection and advice to be the
proper Branches of it, and was as faithful to her Friends as their own
Consciences. As She never was prepossessed against any one upon a doubtful
representation, so She would not contract an intimacy upon the score of 2 or 3
plausible Actions, but would first observe the variety of their Sentiments,
Turns and Affections, at different Junctures; and if they answered her
expectation, they were Enrolled amongst the happy number of her Favorites.
This made her Friendship more Valuable and Lasting: And, after she was once
fixed, it was no easy matter to displace her Esteem.

Her Charity had no Bounds; all Tasted of her Benevolence; and I dare affirm
she never dismissed a true Object unrelieved. But she would not stay for their
coming to ask a Boon: Her care and vigilance Anticipated their Requests, and
the frequent Supplies she conveyed by different Hands are standing Monuments of
her Bounty in that kind.

She was a strict observer of the Sabbath, and never missed the Public Service
of the Church, unless prevented by Sickness; and even at that time the
uneasiness upon her Spirits, for staying away, was so great, that without a
Gracious Providence, might have increased the Malady. Her attention at Church,
was always fixed; and having the advantage of a Tenacious Memory, she could
easily Command, not only the general Heads, but likewise all the material
Passages in a Sermon, which she committed to Shorthand before Dinner, and
afterward digested more Regularly, in order to ruminate on them the succeeding
Week.

Her Inclinations were very much bent to a single Life; fearing that the
Encumbrances attendant on a Married State would engross too much of her time.
But all these Jealousies vanished when she found so Pious and Cheerful a
concurrence in her Noble Lord for promoting those good Designs she had formed
to her self beforehand. And here I must not omit one thing which I have in
Command to make Public, viz. that My Lord found her Example and Persuasion of
that infinite use and advantage to him in the Affairs of Religion, as to own
her the happy Instrument, next under God, of reviving those good Habits which
were near Dying in him through neglect of Improvement. This no ways depreciates
the Character of that Great Man. This is no more than what Men of Rank and
Eminence have confessed before. Valerianus owed his Conversion to his Wife
Cecilia, Sizinius to Theodora, and Adrianus was tempted to Dye a Martyer through
the Instigation of his Wife Natolia.

Further, all that had the Honor of knowing the Deceased Saint, must confess
her Power was Irresistible: And no wonder she had such an Influence over Him in
a concern of this Nature, where besides the Commanding Excellency of Religion,
Love on his side prepared the way, and Innumerable Charms on here is where always
ready to Second the Request.

To amplify at last upon her Duty, Love, and Honor; To tell you she was
singularly Prudent in the management of her Domestic Affairs, That she was a
Woman of the truest Conduct, and Studious of the Credit of her Lord, were but
to lessen the Dignity of the former Characters; for no one will suppose that a
Person who made so great a proficiency in the Sublimest parts of Religion,
could possibly fail in the Subordinate Points.

Yet there is one thing more that deserves our Remembrance, viz. Her
Meditations upon most of the Evangelical Duties, which I have had the Honor of
perusing since her Death. They are all Lofty and Divine. The strains of them
are raised so far above the Common level of Mortality, that they appear to me
no less than the Raptures of expiring Saints. Whether they are all of her own
composure, I am not able to determime: But sure I am there is an accession of
her Thoughts by the Style and Tenor of the writing.

In the Zenith of her Health, She would frequently be talking of her
Dissolution, and speak of Death as of a Familiar Friend; and I know no Parallel
so exact as that of the Famous Marcella, St. Jerome's Friend, of whom the Pious
Father reports, That she constantly led such a kind of Dying Life, that she
fancied her self Old and Decaying before she Remembered that she was Young and
Handsome; and every time she disrobed her self, still the thoughts of shifting
her Earthly Tabernacle Sprung up in her Mind. Thus the Blessed Soul spent her
Days. And now the Tragic part comes on. Here I could willingly be excused, and
with Timanthes the Painter throw a Veil over the rest. But there were too many
Observables in the last Minutes of her Life to lie concealed. Here Illness was
sudden and surprising, and the fierceness with which it assailed her at first,
seemed to carry Mortality along with it. However she had nothing to do but to
Dye; and had the first stroke proved Fatal, she could have departed with Old
Simeons Faith and Assurance. But God was pleased to respite her for some time.
After she came out of her Fits, which continued for two Days, with little
Intermission: She expressed no Impatience though her Tortures were excessive. No
sooner had she gathered up a few Remains of strength, which were all too little
to combat with the Distemper, but she employed part of them in Praises to God
for the seeming Deliverance. The Night before her departure she renewed her
Petitions with such Vehemence, that nothing but immediate relief could have
secured her from fainting away. After this the favorable Symptoms vanished,
and we could no longer flatter our selves when the decay was so visible; yet
she retained a Quick and Active sense, and as her Spirits flagg'd and denied
her utterance, her Holy Breathings increased. A peculiar Sweetness lodged on
her Countenance in the Bitterest of her Pangs, and her Face seemed to be
impregnated with Heavenly Light. Being made sensible of Approaching Death she
discovered no change, but talked free and unconcerned about her Funeral. No
Discomposure appeared in her but what the Tears and Groans of the sorrowful
Attendants created; and that proceeded from a Tenderness of Soul in her, for
she was intirley resigned and more prepared to depart than we were to lose her.
As our Sorrows increased she endeavored to. moderate them, and comforted us
with the possibility of her Living, though she knew it was her Gain to Dye: And
indeed she was the fittest Person to give Advice, even in those languishing
minutes, as being more settled and composed than any about her. Her Soul was
serene to the last; and no wonder, since she had this Testimony from her
Conscience, That in Godly Simplicity and Sincerity she had conversed in the
World. She called for the Blessed Sacrament some Hours before her Departure.
That was always her proper Cordial; but at this juncture it revived her beyond
the Richest Drops; for her Strength and Activity after receiving was Remarkably
Superior to what she had possessed some hours before, and had her Spirits
continued Fresh and Vigorous to the end, had her Power been equal to her
Desire, How Seraphick would the last Act of her Life have been? What lively
Descriptions would she have given us of the New Jerusalem? In what Heavenly
Raptures would she have given up the Ghost? But God in his infinite Wisdom
thought fit to deny us that Bliss, whilst she, happy Soul! possessed it all
within. A silent Joy had filled all the Channels of her Soul, and like a Deep
Stream ran gently through her. A Joy she had which was better felt than Expressed.
A Joy arising from a full Confidence in God. A Joy Immense and Ravishing; and
in the middle of the Comendatory Prayer resigned her Innocent Breath into the
Hands of a Faithful Creator. Thus the bright Star Expired: Thus the Glory of
the Age, the best of Women, Dyed, and her Longing Soul soon took its way to the
Mansions above. Thus fell the Beauteous Pile, and the sine Lineaments of her
Face soon lost their splendor. Thus the Temple was destroyed, and the Fair
guest soon quited its abode. Yet still the good Works she has done are left
behind her: They will Praise her in the Gates and give her Immortality. They
will Survive the short date of Inscriptions, and proclaim her worth beyond the
reach of Talkative Tombstones. This can only qualify the mighty loss, whilst
the contemplation of her Divine Excellencies must give us a lively Image of
what she was, and present her as Living, to our view. It was not barely the
descent from (...) llustrious House that could have enbalm'd her Name: Honor
of it is self is but a short lived Meteor, which no sooner appears but Dies,
unless supported by virtuous Actions, but here was Greatness and Goodness in
conjunction, which will make her Shine with a double Luster. It Is an easy
matter to convey a Name down to Posterity; the worst as well as the best
Actions have been commemorated; but to be talked of with pleasure and to be
Numbered amongst the Just in future Ages, is the only thing that can make us
covet to be Remembered. This must not tempt us to affect Vainglory, or do good
Works for Ostentation sake. In a true Piety, though many commendable Actions may
lie concealed, yet enough will be discovered to satisfy the World that we are
really better than we appear to be; and few eminently good have Died
unregarded, though it has been their Fate to live in the remotest Corners. To
instance no further than in this Pious Soul now resting with God, none could be
more silent in their Devotions; Indeed her greatest Actions lay most retired
from common inspection, yet all her Industry could not prevent their being
known.

What remains now but to propose this great Example to your imitation? And
there needs not many Motives when the Intrinsic Charms are so inviting. Would
you be admired by the Pious in your Lifetime, or bewailed in the Grave? This
your good Works must procure you. Are you fond of an honorable Name after your
Decease? This your good Works must Establish. In fine, Would you appear truly
Glorious to Posterity? Your Goodness must create the Rays. And are not those
great Inducements to be virtuous? Are all our good desires extinct? Is all our
Zeal decayed? Will none of these Arguments work us up to a resemblance of these
Graces, or raise in us a Spirit of Emulation? Themistocles we hear complaining,
that the Trophies of Miltiades will not let him Sleep; And shall not the much
greater Achivements of this Female worthy, Rouse us from our Slumber? Let us no
longer trifle away our Time, but fothwith set about the good Work, and Tread in
our Steps. This will furnish us with a Joy ineffable when we come to lie upon
our Deathbeds. This will create Peace within; such a Peace which the World
cannot give. The Thoughts of having done well will make our Death easy, and our
Passage sure to those Eter^^l Seats above. Our good Works will make us smell
sweet in the Grave, sweet as Flowers with the Morning Dew upon them; such
pleasant Odours has the (...) Saint left behind, whose loss we deplore; such as
will ever Flourish and Maintain their Fragrancy. Histories shall perpetuate her
Name so long as the Sun and Moon endures; and at the Resurrection of the Just
her good Works shall be proclaimed in the Gates of the New-Jerusalem.

FINIS.

