AN ACCOUNT Of what happened in the KINGDOM OF SWEDEN In the Years 1669, and
1670 and upwards. In Relation to some Persons that were accused For Witches;
AND TRIED and EXECUTED By the Kings Command.

Together with the Particulars of a very sad Accident that befell a Boy at
Malmoe in Schonen in the Year, 1678. by the means of Witchcraft, attested by
the Ablest and most judicious Men of that Town.

Both Translated out of High Dutch into English, By Anthony Horneck D. D.

Printed for S. Lownds, 1682.

The Translators PREFACE TO THE READER, Showing what Credit may be given to the
Matter of Fact related in the ensuing Narrative.
THat we are to believe nothing, but what we have seen, is a rule so false,
that we dare not call our selves rational Creatures, and avouch it; yet as
irrational as the Maxim is, it is become modish with some Men, and those no very
mean Wits neither, to make use of it; and though they will hardly own it in its
full Latitude, yet when it comes to Particulars, let the Reasons to the
contrary be never so pregnant or convincing, they will hugg it as their sacred
Anchor, and laugh at all those credulous Wretches, that without seeing, are so
easily choused into an imprudent Confidence. And this pitiful Stratagem we find
practiced in no affair so much, as that of Spirits and Witches, and
Apparitions, which must all be Fancies, and Hypocondriack Dreams, and the
effects of distempered Brains, because their own are so dull as not to be able
to pierce into those Mysteries. I do not deny but the Imagination may be, and
is sometime deluded; and melancholy People may fancy they hear Voices, and see
very strange things, which have no other foundation but their own weakness, and
like Bubbles break into Air, and nothing, by their own vanity.

Yet as no man does therefore take unpolisht Diamonds to be Pebbles, because
they do look like them, so neither must all passages of this nature, we hear or
read of, be traduced as self-conceit, or derided as Old Wives Fables, because
some smell strong of Imposture and Sophistication. We believe men of Reason and
Experience, and free from Fumes, when a person of ordinary Intellectuals finds
no great credit with us; and if we think our selves wise for so doing, why
should any Man so much forget himself, as to be an Infidel in point of such
Phaenomena's, when even the most judicious men have had experience of such
passages? It seems to me no less than madness to contradict what both wise and
unwise Men do unanimously agree in; and how Jews, Heathens, Mahometans, and
Christians, both learned and unlearned, should come to conspire into this
Cheat, as yet seems to me unaccountable. If some few melancholy Monks, or old
Women had seen such Ghosts and Apparitions, we might then suspect, that what
they pretend to have seen might be nothing, but the effect of a disordered
Imagination; but when the whole World, as it were, and Men of all Religions,
Men of all Ages too, have been forced by strong evidences, to acknowledge the
truth of such occurrences, I know not what strength there can be in the
Argument, drawn from the consent of Nations in things of a sublimer nature, if
here it be of no efficacy. Men that have attempted to evade the places of
Scripture, which speak of Ghosts and Witches; we see, how they are forced to
turn and wind the Texts, and make in a manner Noses of Wax of them, and rather
squeeze than gather the sense, as if the holy Writers had spoke like
Sophisters, and not like Men, who made it their business to condescend to the
capacity of the Common people. Let a man put no force at all on those passages
of holy Writ, and then try what sense they are like to yield. It Is strange to
see, how some Men have endeavored to elude the Story of the Witch of Endor;
and as far as I can judge, play more Hocus-pocus tricks in the explication of
that passage, than the Witch herself did in raising the deceased Samuel. To
those Straits is Falsehood driven, while Truth loves Plain, and undisguised
Expressions; and Error will seek out Holes and Labyrinths to hide it self,
while Truth plays above-board, and scorns the subterfuges of the Sceptick
Interpreter. Men and Brethren, why should it seem a thing incredible with you,
that God should permit Spirits to appear, and the Devil to exert his Power
among Men on Earth? Has God ever engaged his Word to the contrary? Or is it
against the nature of Spirits to form themselves new Vehicles and visible
shapes, or to animate grosser substances to show themselves to Mortals upon
certain occasions?

I am so much a Prophet, as to foresee what will be the fate of the ensuing
story, nor can I suppose that upon the reading of it, Men's verdicts will be
much changed from what they were, if they have set up this resolution, to
believe nothing that looks like the shadow of an Apparition, though the things
mentioned here, cannot be unknown to any that have been conversant with foreign
Affairs of late years. And though there cannot be a greater evidence, than the
testimony of a whole Kingdom, yet your nicer Men will think it a disparagement
to them to believe it; nor will it ever extort Assent from any, that build the
reputation of their wit upon contradicting what has been received by the
vulgar.

The passages here related wrought so great a Consternation, not only on the
Natives, but Strangers too, that the Here Christian Rumpf, then Resident for
the States General at Stockholm, thought himself obliged to send away his
little Son for Holland, lest he should be endangered by those villainous
practices, which seemed to threaten all the Inhabitants of the Kingdom. And be
that doubts of it, may be satisfied at Dr. Harrel's in St. James's Park, to
whom the Letter was written. And a friend of mine in Town, being then in
Holstein, remembers very well that the Duke of Holstein sent an Express to the
King of Sweden to know the truth of this famous Witchcraft: To whom the King
modestly replied, That his Judges and Commissioners had caused diverse Men,
Women, and Children to be Burnt and Executed upon such pregnant Evidences, as
were brought before them; but whether the Actions they confessed, and which
were proved against them, were real, or only effects of strong Imagination, he
was not as yet able to determine.

Add to all this, that the Circumstances mentioned in the ensuing Narrative, as
I am informed, are at this day to be seen in the Royal Chancery at Stockholm;
and a person of my acquaintance offered me to procure Copy of them under the
hands of public Registers, if I desired it: Not to mention that in the year
72. Baron Sparr, who was sent Ambassador from the Crown of Sweden to the Court
of England, did upon his word aver the matter of Fact recorded here, to be
undoubtedly true, to several persons of Note and Eminency, with other
particulars, stranger than those set down in these Papers. And to this purpose
diverse Letters were sent from Sweden and Hamburgh to several persons here in
London; insomuch, that should a Man born in, or acquainted with those parts,
hear any person dispute the truth of it, he would wonder where people have
lived, or what sullen humor does possess them, to disbelieve that, which so
many thousands in that Kingdom have felt the sad effect of.

Since the first Edition, it has been my fortune to be acquainted with the
Lord Leyonberg, Envoy Extraordinary from the King of Sweden, living in York
Buildings, with whom discoursing about these Affairs, I found that the Account
he gave, agreed for the most part with what is mentioned in the Narrative; and
because his Testimony, being a public Person, may be of some moment in a thing
relating to that Kingdom, I have here set it down in his own words.

Having read this Narrative, I could do no less, then upon the Request of the
Translator and Publisher of this Story, acknowledge, that to my best
Remembrance, and according to the best Reports that have been made to me, the
Matter of Fact mentioned in it, is true, and that the Witches confessed such
things, and were accordingly Executed.

Witness my Hand, LEYONBERGH,
London, March 8, 1682.
I do not take upon me to justify the Truth of what the Witches said, for
dealing with the Father of Lies, it is probable, Veracity is not a Virtue, that
they greatly study, yet that the Devil speaks truth sometimes, is a thing so
far from being impossible, that if we give credit to the Sacred History, we
must grant that all, he says, is not False, or Erroneous. All, I design at
this time, is only to suggest, that it is not altogether irrational to
conceive, that he or his Emissaries are capable of such Actions and Pranks, as
are related in these Papers.

That a Spirit can lift up Men and Women, and grosser Substances, and convey
them through the Air, I question no more, than I doubt that the Wind can
overthrow Houses, or drive Stones, and other heavy Bodies upward from their
Center. And were I to make a person of a dull understanding, apprehend the
nature of a Spirit, I would represent it to him under the Notion of an
Intelligent Wind, or a strong Wind, informed by a highly Rational Soul; as a
Man may be called an intelligent piece of Earth. And this Notion David seemed
to favor, when speaking of these Creatures, Psalm. 104.4. he tells us, that God
makes his Angels Wind, for in the original it is (...) and most certainly, if
they be so, they must be reasonable windy substances; nor does the expression,
which immediately follows in that Verse, cross this exposition, viz. That he
makes his Ministers a flaming Fire; for it is no new opinion, that some of those
invisible Substances are of a Fiery, and others of an Airy Nature; and as we
see, God gives Rational Creatures here on Earth, Bodies composed of grosser
Matter, why should it seem incougruous for him to give Rational Creatures above
us, Bodies of a subtiler and thinner Matter, or such Matter, as those higher
Regions do afford? and if Wind breaking forth from the Cavernes of Hills, and
Mountains have such force, as makes us very often stand amazed at the effects,
what Energy might we suppose to be in Wind, were it informed by Reason, or a
Reasonable Being?

And though I cannot comprehend the Philosophy of the Devils committing
Venereal Acts, and having Children, and those Children upon their Copulation
bringing forth Toads and Serpents, yet I can very rationally conceive, that
having more than ordinary power over Matter, he can either animate dead Bodies,
and by the help of them commit those Villainies, which modesty bids us to
conceal; or some other way compound, and thicken Atoms into what shape he
pleases, especially if he meet with no hinderance from a higher power. And he
that was permitted, as we see in the Gospel, to possess and actuate living Men,
and do with them almost what he pleased, why may not he commit wickedness by
such Instruments, and cast Mists before the Witches eyes, that they may not
know who they are? And he that could in Egypt produce Frogs, either real or
counterfeit ones, Why may not he be supposed to be able to produce such Toads
and Serpents out of any misshapen Creatures, and lumps of Matter, of his own
compounding, at least represent the shapes of them to the deluded Witches, that
they shall imagine them to be really such things, as they seem to be. Nor is
this to be admired in the Devil more than Tricks are in Juglers, who by slight
of Art can represent things to the ignorant Spectator, which he shall be ready
to swear to be real, though they are nothing less, and I suppose we may allow
the the Devil a greater degree of cunning, than an ordinary Jugler.

However, Spirits that know the nature of material things better than the
deepest Philosophers, and understand better, how things are joined and
compounded, and what the Ingredients of terrestrial Productions are, and see
things (grosser things at least) in their first principles, and have power over
the Air, and other Elements, and have a thousand ways of shaping things and
representing them to the external Senses of vicious Men, what may not they be
supposed to be able to do, (if they have but Gods permission to exert their
power) and that God does sometimes permit such things, we have reason to
believe, who read what signs and wonders Simon Magus, and Apollonius Tyanaeus
wrought by the power of darkness, and how not a few men sin to that degree,
that God suffers them to be led Captive by the Devil, and dooms them to that
slavery we read of in the Revelation, He that is filthy, let him be filthy
still.

Spirits by being Devils do not lose their nature; and let any man in sober
sadness consider, what Spirits are said to be able to do in Scripture, and what
they have done, and compare those passages with what is said in the following
Relation, and he will not think those things, the Witches confessed, altogether
impossible.

Yet still, as I said before, I do not pretend to be their Advocate, but shall
leave it to the Reader to judge of the truth, or untruth of their Confessions,
as he sees occasion, only beg of him not to condemn every thing as a falsehood,
before due consideration of what Spirits are capable of doing.

That in so great a multitude as were Accused, Condemned, and Executed for
Witches, there might be some who suffered unjustly, and owed their death more
to the Malice of their Neighbors, than to their skill in the Black Art, I will
readily grant; nor will I deny, that when the News of these Transactions, and
how the Children bewitched, fell into Fits, and strange unusual Postures,
spread abroad in the Kingdom, some fearful and credulous people, if they saw
their Children any way disordered, might think they were bewitched, or ready to
be carried away by Imps; This happens in all consternations, and our fears make
us see that, which unbyassed Eyes cannot perceive; and of this a Gentleman who
was an Ear-witness, gave me this instance, of a Ministers Child of his
acquaintance not far from Stockholm, who being told, and assured by his Wife,
that the Child was carried to Blockula every night, and conveyed back into his
bed again, resolved to sit up with the Boy, and see whether any Devil durst be
so bold as to snatch him out of his arms. The Child went to Bed, and between
twelve and one of the Clock at night, began to groan in his sleep, and seemed
to shiver a little, at the sight whereof the Mother began to weep and mourn,
thinking that the Child was just going to be snatched away, but her Husband
smiling at the Conceit, and pleading with her, that the Child's laying his arms
out of Bed might be the cause of these symptoms, took the Child in his arms,
and there kept him till toward two or three of the Clock, but no Spirit came
or meddled with him, yet was his Wife so possessed with the conceit, or fear of
transportation, that his strongest Arguments could scarce make her believe the
contrary; and the same person, (a near Relation of the aforesaid Envoy) added,
how much malice and ill nature was able to effect, whereof he gave this
example, which himself saw, and could testify the truth of, viz. how in the
year, 1676. at Stockholme, a young Woman accused her own Mother of being a
Witch, and swore positively, that she had carried her away at night; whereupon
both the Judges and Ministers of the Town exhorted her to Confession and
Repentance; But she stiffly denied the Allegations, pleaded Innocence, and
though they burnt another Witch before her face, and lighted the fire, she her
self was to burn in, before her, yet she still justified her self, and
continued to do so to the last, and continuing so, was burnt. She had indeed
been a very bad Woman, but it seems this crime she was free from, for within a
fortnight, or three weeks after, her Daughter which had accused her, came to
the Judges in open Court (weeping and howling) and confessed that she had
wronged her Mother, and unjustly out of a spleen, she had against her for not
gratifying her in a thing, she desired, had charged her with that Crime which
she was as innocent of, as the Child unborn; whereupon the Judges gave order
for her execution too.

There is no public Calamity, but some ill people will serve themselves of the
sad Providence, and make use of it for their own ends, as Thieves, when a House
or Town is on fire, will steal and filch what they can; yet as there is no
Fable, but has some Foundation in History, so when wicked people make use of
such Arguments against the persons they hate, it is a sign there was such a
thing, that gave them occasion to fix the calumny; and had not such things been
done before, they could not have any color for their Villainy.

I could add a known passage, that happened in the year 1659. at Crossen in
Silesia, of an Apothecary's Servant. The chief Magistrate of that Town at that
time was the Princess Elizabeth Charlotta, a person famous in her generation.
In the Spring of the year one Christopher Monigk, a Native of Serbest, a Town
belonging to the Princes of Anhalt, Servant to an Apothecary, died and was
buried with the usual Ceremonies of the Lutheran Church. A few days after his
decease, a Shape exactly like him in face, clothes, stature, mien, etc.
appeared in the Apothecaries Shop, where he would set himself down, and walk
sometimes, and take the Boxes, Pots, Glasses off of the Shelves, and set them
again in their places, and sometimes try, and examine the goodness of the
Medicines, weigh them in a pair of Scales, pound the Drugs with a mighty noise
in a Mortar, nay, serve the people, that came with their Bills to the Shop,
take their Money, and lay it up safe in the Counter; in a word, do all things
that a Journeyman in such cases uses to do. He looked very ghastly upon those,
that had been his fellow Servants, who were afraid to say any thing to him; and
his Master being sick at that time of the Gout, he was often very troublesome
to him, would take the Bills that were brought him, out of his hand, snatch
away the Candle sometimes, and put it behind the Stove; At last, he took a
Cloak that hung in the Shop, put it on and walked abroad, but minding no body
in the Streets, went along, entered into some of the Citizens Houses, and thrust
himself into company, especially of such as he had formerly known, yet saluted
no body, nor spoke to any one but to a Maid servant, whom he met hard by the
Churchyard, and desired to go home to his Masters house, and dig in a
Ground-chamber, where she would find an inestimable Treasure; but the Maid
amazed at the sight of him, sounded; whereupon he lift her up, but left such a
mark upon her Flesh with lifting her, that it was to be seen for some time
after. The Maid having recovered her self, went home, but fell desperately sick
upon it, and in her sickness discovered what Monigk had said to her; and
accordingly they dug in the place, she had named, but found nothing but an
old decayed Pot, with a Haematites or Boodstone in it. The Princess hereupon
caused the young Man's body to be dug up, which they found putrified with
purulent Matter, flowing from it; and the Master being advised to remove the
young Man's Goods, Linen, Clothes, and things, he left behind him when he died,
out of the House, the Spirit thereupon left the House, and was heard of no
more. And this some people now living will take their Oath upon, who very well
remember they saw him after his decease, and the thing being so notorius, there
was instituted a public Disputation about it in the Academy of Leipsig By
reason of my absence from the Press, there was a mistake in the former Edition
where it is Wittemberg.
by one Henry Conrad, who disputed for his Doctors Degree in the University.
And this puts me in mind of an Apothecary at Reichenbach in Silesia, about
fifteen years ago (I had it from a very credible Witness) who after his death
appeared to diverse of his acquaintance, and cried out, that in his life time he
had poisoned several Men with his Drugs. Whereupon the Magistrates of the Town
after consultation, took up his Body, and burnt it; which being done, the
Spirit disappeared, and was seen no more. But if the Stories related in the
preceding Book are not sufficient to convince Men, I am sure an example from
beyond Sea, will gain no credit. It Is enough that I have shown Reasons which
may induce my Reader to believe that he is not imposed upon by the following
Narrative; and that it is not in the nature of those Pamphlets, they cry about
the Streets, containing very dreadful News from the Country, of Armies fighting
in the Air.

A RELATION OF THE Strange VVitchcraft Discovered in the Village Mohra in
Swedeland, Taken out of the public Register of the Lords Commissioners
appointed by his Majesty the King of Sweden to examine the whole business, in
the Years of our Lord 1669. and 1670.
THE News of this Witchcraft coming to the King's Ear, his Majesty was pleased
to appoint Commissioners, some of the Clergy, and some of the Laity, to make a
Journey to the Town aforesaid, and to examine the whole business; and
accordingly the Examination was ordered to be on the 13th of August; and the
Commissioners met on the 12th instant, in the said Village, at the Parsons
House, to whom both the Minister and several people of fashion complained with
tears in their Eyes, of the miserable condition they were in, and therefore
begged of them to think of some way, whereby they might be delivered from that
Calamity. They gave the Commissioners very strange Instances of the Devils
Tyranny among them; how by the help of Witches, he had drawn some Hundreds of
Children to him, and made them subject to his power; how he has been seen to
go in a visible shape through the Country, and appeared daily to the people;
how he had wrought upon the poorer sort, by presenting them with Meat and
Drink, and this way allured them to himself, with other circumstances to be
mentioned hereafter. The Inhabitants of the Village added, with very great
lamentations, that though their Children had told all, and themselves sought
God very earnestly by Prayer, yet they were carried away by him; and therefore
begged of the Lords Commissioners to root out this hellish Crew, that they
might regain their former rest and quietness; and the rather, because the
Children which used to be carried away in the County or District of Elfdale,
since some Witches had been burnt there, remained unmolested.

That day, i. e. the 13 th of August, being the last Humiliation-day Instituted
by Authority for removing of this Judgment, the Commissioners went to Church,
where there appeared a considerable Assembly both of young and old: the
Children could read most of them, and sing Psalms, and so could the Women,
though not with any great zeal or fervor. There were preached two Sermons that
day, in which the miserable case of those people, that suffered themselves to
be deluded by the Devil, was laid open; and these Sermons were at last
concluded with very fervent prayer.

The Public Worship being over, all the people of the Town were called
together to the Parsons House, near Three thousand of them. Silence being
commanded, the Kings Commission was read publicly in the hearing of them all,
and they were charged under very great Penalties to conceal nothing of what
they knew, and to say nothing but the truth; those especially, who were guilty,
that the Children might be delivered from the Clutches of the Devil. They all
promised obedience; the guilty feignedly, but the guiltless weeping and crying
bitterly.

On the 14th of August the Commissioners met again, consulting how they might
withstand this dangerous flood; after long deliberation, an Order also coming
from his Majesty, they did resolve to execute such, as the matter of fact could
be proved upon; Examination being made, there were discovered no less than
Threescore and ten in the Village aforesaid, Three and twenty of which freely
confessing their Crimes, were condemned to dye; the rest, one pretending she
was with Child, and the other denying and pleading not guilty, were sent to
Fahluna, where most of them were aftewards Executed.

Fifteen Children which likewise confessed that they were engaged in this
Witchery, died as the rest; Six and thirty of them between nine and sixteen
years of age, who had been less guilty, were forced to run the gantlet; Twenty
more, who had no great inclination, yet had been seduced to those hellish
Enterprises, because they were very young, were condemned to be lashed with
Rods upon their hands, for three Sundays together at the Church-door; and the
aforesaid Six and thirty were also doomed to be lashed this way once a week for
a whole year together. The number of the Seduced Children was about Three
hundred.

On the twenty fifth of August, Execution was done upon the notoriously guilty,
the day being bright and glorious, and the Sun shining, and some thousands of
people being present at the Spectacle. The Order and Method observed in the
Examination was thus:

First, the Commissioners and the Neighboring Justices went to prayer; this
done, the Witches, who had most of them Children with them, which they either
had Seduced, or attempted to Seduce, from four years of age to sixteen, were
set before them. Some of the Children complained lamentably of the misery and
mischief they were forced sometime to suffer of the Witches.

The Children being asked whether they were sure, that they were at any time
carried away by the Devil; they all declared they were, begging of the
Commissioners that they might be freed from that intolerable slavery.

Hereupon the Witches themselves were asked, whether the Confessions of these
Children were true, and admonished to confess the truth, that they might turn
away from the Devil unto the living God. At first, most of them did very
stiffly, and without shedding the least tear deny it, though much against their
will and inclination.

After this, the Children were Examined, every one by themselves, to see
whether their Confessions did agree or no; and the Commissioners found that all
of them, except some very little ones, who could not tell all the
Circumstances, did punctually agree in the confession of particulars.

In the mean while the Commissioners that were of the Clergy examined the
Witches, but could not bring them to any Confession, all continuing steadfast in
their denials, till at last some of them burst out into tears, and their
Confession agreed with what the Children had said. And these expressed their
abhorrency of the fact, and begged pardon; adding, that the Devil, whom they
called Loeyta, had stopped the Mouths of some of them, and stopped the Ears of
others; and being now gone from them, they could no longer conceal it, for they
now perceived his Treachery.

The Confession which the Witches made in Elfdale, to the Judges there, agreed
with the Confession they made at Mohra: and the chief things they confessed,
consisted in these three points.

1. Whither they used to go. 2. What kind of place it was, they went to, called
by them Blockula, where the Witches and the Devil used to meet. 3. What evil or
mischief they had either done, or designed there.
1. Of their Journey to Blockula.
The Contents of their Confession.
WE of the Province of Elfdale, do confess that we used to go to a Gravel-pit
which lay hard by a cross-way, and there we put on a Vest over our heads, and
then danced round, and after this ran to the cross-way, and called the Devil
thrice, first with a still voice, the second time somewhat louder, and the
third time very loud, with these words, Antecessor come and carry us to
Blockula. Whereupon, immediately he used to appear, but in different Habits;
but for the most part we saw him in a gray Coat, and red and blew Stockings: he
had a red Beard, a high-crown'd Hat, with Linen of diverse colors wrapped about
it, and long Garters upon his Stockings.

Then he asked us, whether we would serve him with Soul and Body. If we were
content to do so, he set us on a Beast which he had there ready, and carried us
over Churches and high Walls; and after all, we came to a green Meadow, where
Blockula lies. We must procure some scrapings of Altars, and filings of
Church-Clocks; and then he gives us a horn with a Salve in it, wherewith we do
anoint our selves; and a Saddle, with a Hammer and a wooden Nail, thereby to
fix the Saddle; whereupon we call upon the Devil, and away we go.

Those that were of the Town of Mohra, made in a manner the same Declaration:
Being asked whether they were sure of a real personal Transportation, and
whether they were awake when it was done; they all answered in the Affirmative,
and that the Devil sometimes laid something down in the place that was very
like them. But one of them confessed, that he did only take away her strength,
and her body lay still upon the ground; yet sometimes he took even her body
with him.

Being asked, how they could go with their Bodies through Chimneys and broken
Panes of Glass, they said, that the Devil did first remove all that might
hinder them in their flight, and so they had room enough to go.

Others were asked, how they were able to carso many Children with them; and
they answered, that when the Children were asleep they came into the Chamber,
laid hold of the Children, which straightway did awake, and asked them whether
they would go to a Feast with them? to which some answered, Yes, others, No;
yet they were all forced to go. They only gave the Children a Shirt, a Coat and
a Doublet, which was either red or blew, and so they did set them upon a Beast
of the Devils providing, and then they rid away.

The Children confessed the same thing; and some added, that because they had
very fine clothes put upon them, they were very willing to go.

Some of the Children concealed it from their Parents, but others discovered it
to them presently.

The Witches declared moreover, that till of late they never had that power to
carry away Children, but only this year and the last, and the Devil did at
this time force them to it; that heretofore it was sufficient to carry but one
of their Children, or a strangers Child with them, which yet happened seldom, but
now he did plague them and whip them if they did not procure him Children,
insomuch that they had no peace nor quiet for him; and whereas formerly one
journey a week would serve turn, from their own Town to the place aforesaid,
now they were forced to run to other Towns and Places for Children, and that
they brought with them, some fifteen, some sixteen Children every night.

For their Journey, they said they made use of all sorts of Instruments, of
Beasts, of Men, of Spits and Posts, according as they had opportunity: if they
do ride upon Goats, and have many Children with them, that all may have room,
they stick a spit into the backside of the Goat, and then are anointed with
the aforesaid Ointment. What the manner of their Journey is, God alone knows:
Thus much was made out, That if the Children did at any time name the Names of
those that had carried them away, they were again carried by force either to
Blockula, or to the Cross-way, and there miserably beaten, insomuch that some
of them died of it: and this some of the Witches confessed; and added, That now
they were exceedingly troubled and tortured in their minds for it.

The Children thus used looked mighty bleak, wan, and beaten. The marks of the
Lashes, the Judges could not perceive in them, except in one Boy, who had some
Wounds and holes in his Back, that were given him with Thorns; but the Witches
said, they would quickly vanish.

After this usage the Children are exceeding weak; and if any be carried
overnight, they cannot recover themselves the next day; and they often fall
into fits, the coming of which they know by an extraordinary paleness that
seizes on the Children; and if a fit comes upon them, they lean on their
Mothers Arms, who sit up with them sometimes all night; and when they observe
the Paleness coming, shake the Children, but to no purpose.

They observe further, That their Childrens Breasts grow cold at such times;
and they take sometimes a burning Candle and stick it in their Hair, which yet
is not burnt by it. They swoun upon this paleness, which Swoun lasts
sometimes half an hour, sometimes an hour, sometimes two hours, and when the
Children come to themselves again, they mourn and lament, and groan most
miserably, and beg exceedingly to be eased: This two old men declared upon Oath
before the Judges, and called all the Inhabitants of the Town to witness, as
persons that had most of them experience of this strange Symptom of their
Children.

A little Girl of Elfdale confessed, That naming the name of JESUS as she was
carried away* she fell suddenly upon the Ground, and got a great hole in her
Side, which the Devil presently healed up again, and away he carried her; and
to this day the Girl confessed, she had exceeding great pain in her Side.

Another Boy confessed too, That one day he was carried away by his Mistress,
and to perform the Journey he took his own Fathers Horse out of the Meadow
where it was, and upon his return, she let the Horse go in her own ground.

The next morning the Boys Father sought for his Horse, and not finding it,
gave it over for lost; but the Boy told him the whole story, and so his Father
fetched the Horse back again; and this one of the Witches confessed.

2. Of the place where they used to assemble, called Blockula, and what they
did there.
THey unanimously confessed, that Blockula is situated in a delicate large
Meadow, whereof you can see no end. The place or house they met at, had before
it a Gate painted with diverse colors; through this Gate they went into a
little Meadow distinct from the other, where the Beasts went, that they used to
ride on: But the Men whom they made use of in their Journey, stood in the House
by the Gate in a slumbering posture, sleeping against the Wall.

In a huge large Room of this House, they said, there stood a very long Table,
at which the Witches did sit down: And that hard by this Room was another
Chamber, where there were very lovely and delicate Beds.

The first thing they said, they must do at Blockula was, That they must deny
all, and devote themselves Body and Soul to the Devil, and promise to serve him
faithfully, and confirm all this with an Oath. Hereupon they cut their Fingers,
and with their Blood writ their Name in his Book. They added, that he caused
them to be Baptized too by such Priests as he had there, and made them confirm
their Baptism with dreadful Oaths and Imprecations.

Hereupon the Devil gave them a Purse, wherein there were filings of Clocks
with a Stone tied to it, which they threw into the Water, and then were forced
to speak these words; As these filings of the Clock do never return to the
Clock from which they are taken, so may my Soul never return to Heaven. To
which they add Blasphemy and other Oaths and Curses.

The mark of their cut Fingers is not found in all of them: But a Girl who had
been slashed over her Finger, declared, that because she would not stretch out
her Finger, the Devil in anger had so cruelly wounded it.

After this they sat down to Table; and those that the Devil esteemed most,
were placed nearest to him; but the Children must stand at the door, where he
himself gives them Meat and Drink.

The Diet they did use to have there, was, they said, Broth with Colworts and
Bacon in it, Oatmeal, Bread spread with Butter, Milk, and Cheese. And they
added, that sometimes it tasted very well, and sometimes very ill. After Meals
they went to Dancing, and in the mean while Swore and Cursed most dreadfully,
and afterward went to fighting one with another.

Those of Elfdale confessed, That the Devil used to play upon an Harp before
them, and afterward to go with them that he liked best, into a Chamber, where
he committed venereous Acts with them; and this indeed all confessed, That he
had carnal knowledge of them, and that the Devil had Sons and Daughters by
them, which he did Marry together, and they did couple, and brought forth Toads
and Serpents.

One day the Devil seemed to be dead, whereupon there were great lamentations
at Blockula; but he soon awaked again. If he has a mind to be merry with them,
he lets them all ride upon Spits before him; takes afterward the Spits and
beats them black and blue, and then laughs at them. And he bids them believe,
that the day of Judgment will come speedily, and therefore sets them on work to
build a great House of Stone, promising, that in that House he will preserve
them from God's fury, and cause them to enjoy the greatest delights and
pleasures: but while they work exceeding hard at it, there falls a great part
of the Wall down again, whereby some of the Witches are commonly hurt, which
makes him laugh, but presently he cures them again.

They said, they had seen sometimes a very great Devil like a Dragon, with fire
round about him, and bound with an Iron Chain; and the Devil, that converses
with them tells them, that if they confess any thing, he will let that Great
Devil loose upon them, whereby all Swedeland shall come into great danger.

They added, That the Devil had a Church there, such another as in the Town of
Mohra. When the Commissioners were coming, He told the Witches, they should not
fear them; for he would certainly kill them all. And they confessed, that some
of them had attempted to Murder the Commissioners, but had not been able to
effect it.

Some of the Children talked much of a white Angel, which used to forbid them
what the Devil had bid them do, and told them that those doings should not last
long; what had been done, had been permitted because of the wickedness of the
People, and the carrying away of the Children should be made manifest. And they
added, that this white Angel would place himself sometimes at the Door betwixt
the Witches and the Children; and when they came to Blockula, he pulled the
Children back, but the Witches, they went in.

3. Of the Mischief or Evil which the Witches promised to do to Men and Beasts.
THey confessed, that they were to promise the Devil, that they would do all
that is Ill; and that the Devil taught them to Milk, which was in this wise:
They used to stick a Knife in the Wall, and hang a kind of a Label on it, which
they drew and stroaked; and as long as this lasted, the persons that they had
power over, were miserably plagued, and the Beasts were milked that way, till
sometimes they died of it.

A Woman confessed, that the Devil gave her a wooden Knife, wherewith, going
into Houses; she had power to kill any thing, she touched with it; yet there
were few, that would confess, that they had hurt any man or woman.

Being asked whether they had murdered any Children, they confessed, that they
had indeed tormented many, but did not know, whether any of them died of those
plagues. And added, That the Devil had showed them several places, where he had
power to do mischief.

The Minister of Elfdale declared, That one Night these Witches, were to his
thinking, upon the crown of his Head, and that from thence he had had a long
continued pain of the Head.

One of the Witches confessed too, that the Devil had sent her to torment that
Minister: and that she was ordered to use a Nail and strike it into his Head,
but it would not enter very deep; and hence came that Headache.

The aforesaid Minister said also, That one Night he felt a pain, as if he were
torn with an Instrument, that they cleanse Flax with, or a Flax-comb; and when
he waked, he heard somebody scratching and scraping at the Window, but could
see nobody. And one of the Witches confessed, that she was the person that did
it, being sent by the Devil.

The Minister of Mohra declared also, that one Night one of these Witches came
into his House, and did so violently take him by the Throat, that he thought,
he should have been choked; and waking, he saw the person that did it, but
could not know her; and that for some Weeks he was not able to speak, or
perform Divine Service.

An Old woman of Elfdale confessed, that the Devil had helped her to make a
Nail, which she struck into a Boys Knee, of which stroke the Boy remained same
a long time. And she added, that before she burnt, or was Executed by the hand
of Justice, the Boy would recover.

They confessed also, that the Devil gives them a Beast about the bigness and
shape of a young Cat, which they call a Carrier; and that he gives them a Bird
too as big as a Raven, but white. And these two Creatures they can send any
where; and wherever they come, they take away all sorts of Victuals they can
get, Butter, Cheese, Milk, Bacon, and all sorts of Seeds whatever they find,
and carry it to the Witch. What the Bird brings they may keep for themselves;
but what the Carrier brings, they must reserve for the Devil, and that is
brought to Blockula, where he does give them of it so much, as he thinks fit.

They added likewise, that these Carriers fill themselves so full sometimes,
that they are forced to spew by the way, which spewing is found in several
Gardens, where Colworts grow, and not far from the houses of those Witches. It
is of a yellow color like Gold, and is called Butter of Witches.

The Lords Commissioners were indeed very earnest, and took great pains to
persuade them to show some of their Tricks, but to no purpose; for they did all
unanimously confess, that since they had confessed all, they found that all
their Witchcraft was gone, and that the Devil at this time appeared to them
very terrible, with Claws on his Hands and Feet, and with Horns on his Head,
and a long Tail behind, and showed to them a Pit burning, with a Hand put out;
but the Devil did thrust the person down again with an Iron-fork; and suggested
to the Witches, that if they continued in their Confession, he would deal with
them in the same manner.

The abovesaid Relation is taken out of the Public Register, where all this is
related with more Circumstances. And at this time through all the Country
there are Prayers weekly in all Churches, to the end that Almighty God would
pull down the Devils Power, and deliver those poor Creatures, which have hither
to groaned under it.

An Account of what happened to a Boy at Malmoe in Schonen in the year 1678.
supposed to be done by Witchcraft, and attested by the ablest, and most
Judicious Men of that Town.
HAving in the Preface to the foregoing Narrative taken notice of the Swedish
Envoy Extraordinary, it may not be unsuitable to the Subject, these Papers
treat of, to give the World an Account of a very strange Passage, which the
said Envoy has taken very great pains to satisfy himself in; and of which he
has the public Testimony of the Town, where it was done, by him. No longer
ago than in the year 1678. an Alderman or Senator's Son of Malmoe in Schonen, a
City belonging to the King of Sweden, the Boy being then about Thirteen years
of age, his Name Abraham Mechelburg, going to School one Morning, as the custom
is in that place about Six of the Clock, stayed there till Eight, and then went
home for his Breakfast, which when he had eaten, he was going back to School
again, when just before the Door close by the lowermost Step, there lay a
little Bundle of Linen Rags, which the Lad out of curiosity took up and opened,
but found nothing in it, but partly Pins, some crooked, some laid across, some
without points, partly broken Horse-nails, and Nails without heads, partly
Horse-hair, and such trash, which when it answered not his expectation, he rent
asunder, and threw away.

Some few days after, the Boy fell ill, and continued so for some time, no
Physician being able to guess what ailed him. At last he began to void little
Stones, at the Orifice of the Penis, which by degrees came forth bigger and
bigger, some were perfect Pebles of all sorts of colors, and in process of
time, there came forth great uneven Stones like pieces of Rocks, as if they
were broken off of a greater Stone, whereof the Envoy has two by him, One
given him by the Father of the Boy; and the other by the Kings Surgeon, both
which I have thought fit to give the Reader the dimensions of.

Before the Stones came forth, there was a strange motion in his Belly, as if
something were alive in it, the Stones seemed to crack within, and something
they heard, as if a great Stone were violently broken, and at this time he felt
the greatest pain. When the Stones were ready to come forth, the Penis was
drawn in so deep, that the Standers by could not perceive any thing of it; and
after that, it dropped those prodigious Stones, which seem rather to be fetched
from Quarries, than produced by any Saline or Nitrous Matter in the Body. The
Stone I have given the Figure of, is of a reddish color, with some grains of
white in it, heavy, and such as lie in common Roads and Highways. When the
Stones came forth, the Boy felt no pain, the pain being most upon him, when the
Stones within seemed to crack, and a little before; and the Fit was then so
violent, that four or five Men were forced to hold him. The Boy in the mean
while slept well at Night, eat, and drank as heartily as ever, discomposed at
no time, but when the Fit of voiding these Stones was coming upon him. This
lasted two years: The Parents had the Boy prayed for at Church, and instantly
besought God at home, whenever any of those Fits came upon him, to turn the
Stream and to stop the Devils Power. The Boy is now as well as ever, rides
abroad, and does all things as he used to do before this accident befell him.
The Envoy spoke both with the Father and the Boy, and tells me, they are no
indigent People, but well to pass, and Persons of very good Reputation in the
Town of Malmoe. While this misfortune lasted, the King of Sueden being then but
a little way off, sent some of his Surgeons to the place, to know the truth
thereof, who were by, when the Lad voided very strange Stones at the Orifice of
the Penis, and gave the King an account of it: One of them to be thoroughly
satisfied, held his hand under the Penis after it was drawn in, and there dropped
a very odd Stone, broad and angular into his hand. The Envoy being upon the
place last year, enquired of all People, whom he thought might not be very
credulous, who unanimously bore witness of the thing; and upon his request gave
him the following Account, which I have translated out of the Original.

A. H.

BE it known, that during the Years, 1678. and 1679. a very wonderful thing
happened in this City of Malmoe, to one of the Aldermen of the Town, his name
John Mechelburg, and his Wife's Abla Kruthmeyer; for God having blessed them
with three Sons, one of them Abraham by name, a Boy at this time aged about
sixteen years, has been very strangely afflicted with a praeternatural voiding
of Stones, insomuch that during the space of those two years, he has through
the Virga of the Penis voided several hundreds of Stones great and small, which
being weighed together, weighed no less than One and twenty pound, Averdu-poise
some weighing 6, some 7. some 8. some 9 ounces, full of Angles, and much like
pieces of a Rock that is broken by force, or instruments fit for that purpose.
These broken Stones sometimes came forth at the Boys mouth, sometimes he voided
them by siege, and the Parents of the Child have confidently assured, us that
before this misfortune, the Boy had been sick several weeks together, and kept
his Bed; during which sickness something was seen moving in his Body, as if it
had been some live thing. After this Sickness there appeared the Stones
aforesaid; The first that came forth, exceeded not the bigness of half a Pea,
but in a short time after, they increased to a greater bulk; when they were
ready to come away, the Boy complained much of the Spine of his Back, where, as
he said, he found incredible pain. While this lasted, he neither made Water,
nor went to Stool sometimes in two Months, sometimes not in a quarter of a
year; sometimes the Stones, when they were past through the Virga appeared
bloody, and upon one of them there appeared a kind of Talch. Notwithstanding
all this misery, the Boy continued to eat his Meat very heartily, nor was he
troubled with this pain at all in the night, but slept quietly, as he used to
do. About the latter end of this unexampled passion and misery, a matter of 64
Stones, for the most part small, came forth very fast one upon the neck of
another, and since the 20th of September 1679. this misfortune has totally
left him, and he is as well as ever; nor is there after all those Torments any
defect to be found, or perceived either in his body, or the aforesaid Member of
the Boy, but he continues safe and sound unto this day.

And whereas in all probability, abundance of Men, because they have not been
Eyewitnesses, will deride these passages, as fabulous, we whose names are
underwritten, upon the request and desire of the Lord John Leyonberg, Envoy
Extraordinary of Sueden, have once more spoken and conferred with the Parents
of the Boy, who have showed us the abovesaid Stones, and given us one of the
biggest, as a Present, and do hereby testify that the passages related in the
premises, are undoubtedly true, which Testimony we have also signed with our
own hands, that in case the aforesaid Envoy coming into foreign parts, shall
have occasion to speak of these things, Men may give credit to his Relation.

Given at Malmoe this 20th of September, 1680. Christophorus Rostius, Med. D.
and Prof. Nicolaus Hambraus, Pastor and Praepositus Malmoy. Wilhelmus
Laurembergius, V. D. M. Malmoy. Martinus Torstorrius, Comminister, ibid.
Sigismund Aschenborn, Consul Malmoy. Primar. John Caspar Heublin Consil.
Malmoy. Ephraim Koldewey, Surgeon to the Garrison.


The dimensions of the two Stones mentioned in these papers.


ADVERTISEMENT.
When the Boys Father, gave the Envoy the bigger Stone, he added this
Testimonial or Certificate under his own hand, IN the Year of our Lord, 1678.
November. 30. This Stone came away from my Son Abraham Mechelburg through the
Virga of the Penis, weighing three Ounces, and upward.

Malmoe April 26. 1680. John Mechelburg.



The Lesser Stone was given to the Envoy, by one of the King of Sueden's
Chirurgions, that held his hand to the Orifice of the Penis, and felt and saw
it drop into his hand.

FINIS.
The chief Errata of the First Part Correct them:
In the Postscript.
Page 46. 1, 19. r. might give, p. 47. l. 30. r. (...).
In the Considerations about Witchcraft.
The Epistle Dedicatory.
Page 2. l. 25. r. Whisling. p. 4. l. 15. r. not need. p. 22. l. 10. r.
contact. p. 25. l. 2. r. improbability. p. 31. l. 14. r. as those. p. 42. l.
28. r. Portents. p. 67. l. 23. r. on a. p. 72. l. 4. r. why sheuld. p. 100. l.
19. r. Symmt^t^. p. 101. l. 28. r. with what p. 104. l. 14. r. specifically
different. p. 105. l. 15. r. As if. p. 113. l. 16. r. at least. p. 118. l. 17.
r. sited. p. 119. l. 20. r. into it. p. 121. l. 30. r. Object. p. 126. l. 14.
r. of it self. p. 127. 1. 9. r. Differentia. p. 135. 1. 30. r. Contraction. p.
144. 1. ^5. r. so many. p. 152. l. 9. r. Hole^merians. p. 153. l. 14. r.
Syner^ergics. p. 159. l. 12. r. is not.
In the Answer to a Letter. etc.
Page 2. l. 25. r. Impenetrability. p. 3. l. 6. r. impenetrable. ibid. r.
penetrable. l. ^^3. r. Sympathy. p. 4. l. 25. r. in that. p. 10. l. 16. r.
brought for. p. 11. l. 16. r. Quiescence. p. 15. l. 10. r. can be. p. 17. l. 4.
r. in it its. l. 10. r. Self-Activity, of. p. 19. l. 13. r. Inseparably, 1. 16.
r. same. Whether. p. 23. l. 18. r. this. p. 31. l. 29. r. observing. When. p.
34. l. 10. r. better nature. p. 36. l. 5. r. to consist. p. 37. l. 23. r. of
matter. l. 27. r. really such. p. 40. l. 2. r. Atomick. p. 45. l. 5. r. so
relaxated. l. 24. r. is, no. l. 33. r. if we be. p. 46. l. 5. r. or other. p.
51. l. 18. r. (...) p. 70. l. 10. r. by its. p. 78. l. 9. r. to of.

The Errata of the Second Part correct thus.
Page 33. l. 2. r. whip! the. p. 47. l. 8. r. Samuel l. 29. r. covered with. p.
49. l. 2. r. it was. p. 74. l. 17. r. 1661, p. 76. l. 10. r. 1661, p. 92. l. 7.
r. was no. l. 22. r. ever. p. 95. l. 18. r. Women. p. 138. l. 15. r. the said.
p. 164. l. 17. r. Metamorphosis. p. 167. l. 29. r. Modifie. p. 171. l. 9. r.
august. p. 177. l. 5. r. he saw. p. 179. l. 22. r. uncoffined body. l. 29. r.
memory. p. 183. l. 1. r. be neither. p. 198. l. 5. her Mistress. p. 237. l. 16.
r. ceased p. 238. l. 18. r. no noises. p. 241. l. 26. r. his saying. p. 242. l.
12. r. of Spirits. p. 252. l. 9. r. Ban-water. p. 257. l. 16. r. her. p. 258.
l. 2. r. 1677. p. 273. l. 12 r. verae.
In the Continuation, etc.
P, 49. l. 19. r. Horblin.
In his Whip for the Droll,
P, 43. l. 3. r. scene of things.

