A Wonder of Wonders: OR, GODS People THE WORLDS WONDER, OR They are Men
wondered at: Very profitable for these Times, wherein men take so much liberty
to sin and dishonor our God.

Written by Roger Hough, a Lover of the Truth.

Isa. 8.18. Behold, I and the children whom the Lord has give me are for signs
and for wonders in Israel, before the Lord of Hosts that dwell in Mount Sion.

Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart there is no God: they are corrupt,
they have done abominable works; there is none that does good.

London, Printed for T. Passenger at the Three Bibles on the middle of
London Bridge. 1666.

Zachariah, 38. Hear now, O Joshua, the High Priest, thou and thy Fellows, that
sit before the Lord: they are Men wondered at.


BEloved, in this Chapter, the holy Prophet, brings in under the Type of J^shua
the high Priest Gods dealing with his Church and people in all Ages; they are,
and were ever wondered at by wicked and ungodly m^n: the Lord also in the
foregoing verses of this Chapter, gives this exhortation to Joshua to put off
the filthy Garments, wherewith he stood clothed before the Lord: the reproach
of wicked men is as filthy Garments. But the ungodly man puts off this garment,
by his holy and humble carriage: both in the presence of God and his people.
and so he becomes clothed with the White Robe of Christ's Righteousness, as if
were with a garment, whereby he has access with boldness to the throne of
Grace, and can boldly stand before God, and own God, as his Faithful Creator:
and though a World of wicked men wonder at him, because he fears God and walks
in his war, yet he needs not be discouraged, the Lord owns him, and the Lord
will own him, and all those that fear him, and walk before him in the great day
of account, When he makes up his Jewels, Mal. 3.17.

But it is so Beloved, Gods dearest Saints are the worlds wonder: the more
religious any soul is, the more the world wonders at it: and that I may
discover unto you the truth of this, I shall first of all show you what it is
wicked yt men wonder at. And 2ly, I shall hold forth unto you the practice of
wicked men. And 3ly, I shall labor to show you the reason of wicked men's
wonder. And 4ly, I shall apply this truth: first, in reference to the world and
wicked men, and thereby shall not only show you their wonder, but Gods people
wonder at them and wicked men wonder at one another: and secondly, I shall hold
forth a word or two to them that are really Godly: and then in the last place,
conclude all in a word of Exhortation, which will be all I shall insist upon at
this time.

And first of all in the general, wicked men wonder at religion, and at
holiness: wicked men wonder not at the notion of the things of God, T^. 1.16.
wicked men profess in words they know God, but in works they deny God: they do
not so much wonder at the profession of Gods people, but they wonder at their
holiness. Wicked men sometimes make an outward profession of Christ being come
in the flesh, in their words and outward expressions, but in their inward works
and actings, they do deny Christ come in the flesh, 1 John 4.1, 2. Beloved,
believe not every spirit, but try the spirit, whether they are of God, because
many falfe Prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby know we the spirit of
God, every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of
God: and every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is not of God: and wicked men profess that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh; in outward expression, but in works they deny him, and so they become
foolish, Saying in their hearts there is no God, Psalm. 14.1. and thus you may
perceive the folly, and madness of wicked men, in that they deny holiness,
and scoff and feer at Gods ways, wherein his people serve him: they do not
wonder that men profess God so much, as they wonder that men should serve God
so exactly, according to the word of God: and that men should take so much
pains in the service of God as they do: they wonder that men should give
themselves to such strict duties, as reading, prayer, and meditation in their
families, conferring one with another, and should take so much pains in the
public assemblies, to hear the word preached, and go so often to days
exercise as they do. The wicked man thinks it strange that he cannot have his
godly neighbor overtaken in his baits, to run with him into the same excess
of wickedness; this is the wicked man's wonder, that men profess Religion as
they do, that men declare so much for God, and serve God on that fashion: a
wicked man will serve God a little on the Lords day, and himself all the week
after, and when the Lords day is come, he will not give the whole day to the
Lord, he will have the greatest part to himself, and that day his heart is so set
upon worldly profit, that his whole desire runs after it.

But Beloved, consider I beseech you, what will it profit a man to gain the
whole world, if he thereby bring his poor soul in danger? our Savior Christ
speaking to the same purpose, Mark 8.36. For says he, What shall it profit a
man if he gain the whole world and loose his own soul? Beloved, consider I
beseech you, it is worth your pains, you cannot do to much in the worship of
God; for when you have done all you can do, you are but unprofitable servants:
for all you can do in the worship and service of God, is little enough for you
to do, if you would but seriously consider it, I pray you lay it to heart: what
do you think will be the end of those, that never in all their life time take
ear to serve God? those that are common great sinners, as Drunkards, Swearers,
Sabbath Breakers, and such as die continually lasting themselves asleep in
their sins, 1 Pet. 4.17.18. For the time is come that judgment must begin at
the house of God, and if it first begin at us? what shall the end be of them
that obey not the Gospel of God? and if the righteous scarcely be saved, where
shall the ungodly and sinner appear?

Secondly, wicked men wonder at the power of godliness: wicked men have a form
of godliness, but deny the power of godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5. Having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such turn away: some men there
are in the world that have a zeal for God, but it is not according to sound
know edge, like the Jews we read of, Romans 10.2.

And as wicked men wonder at the power of godliness, and at the practice of
godliness: so they wonder at the inward notions of the things of God: and
first, they wonder to hear a man sa^ the Lord is with them, or their heart is
lifted up in the worship and service of God; and they have refreshment, and are
nourished by hearing of the Word at God. But souls consider, do not deceive
your serves, you that wonder thus at Religion: a gracious Soul finds much
comfort in the ways of God: a gracious heart speaks thus, Psalm. 84.10. For a
day in thy Court, is letter then a thousand; I had rather be a door keeper in
the House of my God, then to dwell in the tents of wickedness. Says a gracious
heart, all the ways of God are ways of wisdom, and all the ways of wisdom,
are ways of pleasantness.

Secondly, whicked men wonder to see men afraid of the power of God, its no
wonder to see one man afraid of another man: it is no wonder to see a poor man
afraid of a great man's anger: but it is a wonder to wicked men to see a
gracious soul afraid of Gods power and anger against him for sin: it may be
that wicked men will not sin so openly before the world, as to commit sin, that
is by the Laws of the Nation to be punished (in the presence of Authority that
is to punish sin) though it may be they will do it in private, or in the
presence of their wicked communions: whereas the sincere heart cries out with
good Joseph: How shall I do this great wickedness and sin against God? Genesis
39.9. O consider souls, if ever you come to a holy knowledge of the precious
good of our souls, you will come to know that what ever you do in secret cannot
be hid from the All-seeing eye of God, Psalm. 94. ver. 4. The Lord planted the
ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the eve, shall he not see? Beloved, God
has both made your ears and your eyes, and therefore he does both hear you,
and see you, when man sees you not. Consider God sees you and takes notice of
you, Prove 21.12. verse, The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, the Lord has made
them both; so likewise in 1 Pet. 3. ver. 12. For the eyes of ths Lord are over
the righteous, and his ears are open to their prayers, but the face of the Lord
is against them that do evil. Now consider all you that forget God, you can do
nothing so secreetly but God sees you: God sees both the just and the unjust,
and will reward them according to their works and their doings: all things are
open and plain before the Lord, there is nothing hid from him, the Lord sees
you, and knows your very thoughts Psalm. 94. ver. 11. The Lord knows the
thoughts of man, that they are vanity. The Lord has an eye whereby he discerns
all things that you do.

Thirdly, wicked men wonder at the Child of God, pressing upon others to serve
God, and to turn from their sins, this they count great business like to those
wicked persons we read of, Acts 17. that made a tumult when the^ saw men
believe the Gospel, Acts 17.4, 5, 6. wicked men are moved with envy, when they
see the people of God seek to draw away men from sin and so count that what
they do are unlawful customs, Acts 16.20. But beloved, consider I desire you
in the name of the great God of heaven, and take heed of your selves, consider
what you have to do for the good of your poor souls.

Fourthly, Wicked men wonder at the child of Gods Heavenly conversation, wicked
men despise the child of Gods zeal for God, even as Michaell the Daughter of
Saul despised David for his zeal before the Lord, 2 Samuel 6. verse 20. for which
she was childless, verse the last: now consider all you that despise Gods
people for their zeal, lest God smite you with his judgments, and you perish
in his anger, Psalm. 2. ver. 12. Kiss the Son least he be angry, and ye perish
in the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Beloved, it is that that
wicked men are incident unto, to wonder at Gods people, and they do not only
wonder at them, but they rail at them.

Fifthly, The practice of wicked men is to rail at them that are really godly
and to revile them and say all manner of evil against them: therefore our
Savior Jesus Christ, in Mat. 5.11. verse, pronounces them blessed; now there
are diverse wicked men that wonder at Gods people of diverse qualities, and so
they practice, and act diverse ways in wondering at Gods people. First, There is
the openly profane person, he rails at you that truly fear God, and scoffs
and jeers Religion. Secondly, There is the civil worldly Wise man, and he
wonders much at the Child of Gods Heavenly conversation, and godly life, he is
on that fashions himself like to the world, and when Religion is in fashion, he
will be religious, and when religion is in persecution, he will persecute it
too: and so the child of God becomes a wonder to all, Psalm. 14.6. You have
shamed the counsels of the poor, because the Lord is his refuge. The worldly
wise men, they count all the ways of Godliness, to be foolishness, whereas the
Apostle says plainly in the 1 Cor. 1.21. The world by wisdom knew not God:
Beloved, it is not the worlds wisdom that will redeem you from hell, or bring
you into heaven, 1 Cor. 1.26. ver. For you see your calling breth^en, (...) no^
many wise men are called, etc. Beloved, consider of it, you that are worldly
wise men, and you that are formal professors, outside Christians; you that
count all below you wicked and profane, and all that are above strict and
precise: you are as ill enemies to Christ, as the openly profane person is:
for he that is openly profane, is openly known and discerned, whereas you
cover your selves with the figleaves of outward Profession, whereas your hearts
are most wicked and vise: although you are not common swearers nor Drunkards,
nor such as are accounted Sabbath Breakers, but you are worldly wise men, you
are such as indeed have a form of godliness, but you have not the true power,
and true practice of godliness: why, if this be your condition, you are out of
the way, you are the greatest enemies to Christ, for you make an Idol of your
own way, and set up that in your heart, and think evil of all the ways of
godliness, when as there is within you a root of bitterness, and an heart that
hears gall and wormwood, Deuteronomy. 29.18.19.

And now Beloved, having showed you how the people of God are the worlds
wonder, and wicked men's wonder, and how wicked m^n revile them, and take
occasion to scoff and jeer them: I shall now in the third place show the
occasions why it is that Gods people are the worlds wonder.

And First of all, God has for secret ends ordered it, that Gods own people
are the worlds wonder: it is so by Gods appointment, Isa. 8.8. Behold I and the
children whom the Lord has given me, are for signs and wonders in Israel,
from the Lord of Hosts that dwells in mount Zion. It is the lot of Gods
people to be for signs and wonders: God in his secret wisdom has so appointed
it, therefore be contented with it all you that fear God, it was to old in
time, and it is so in our time, we may see it by experience God people are
wondered at.

Secondly, worldly wise men that are blind in their judgments: they are as men
blind-folded, they do not see nor discern the ways of God, and his people, 1
Cor. 2.14. there is a natural blindness in natural men, that makes the things
of God dubious unto them, they cannot understand them, and so they become
foolishness unto them, and they esteem them not. Beloved, consider it, this is
the condition of natural men and worldly minded men: Heaven is lest in their
thoughts, and they look very little after Heaven; but let a man discourse with
them, and this for the most part they will reply, that they hope they shall be
saved as well as the best that make much ado, and they know God is merciful,
and they rest themselves upon the Lords mercy; but the whole course of their
desires is after the world, and worldly profit; all their affections are upon
things below, but the word and the message of God by his spirit in the mouths
of his Ministers, they count parables, Ezekiel. 20. ver. 49. Mark 12. ver. 24.
wicked men as natural bruit beasts, speaking evil of the things they
understand not, 2 Pet. 2. v. 12. Beloved the men of the world they never
understand, nor seek after God: O consider this all you that forget God, Psalm.
50.22. Consider this all you that speak proud words against the Lord, Mal.
3.13. You whose words have been stour against the Lord, Consider this all you
that are naturally blinded in your sins; if you did but know the danger you
were in, you would not do as you do.

Thirdly, There is a principal of Irreligion in wicked men; rather then they
will condemn themselves, they will condemn all the ways of Gods people; nay,
rather then they will condemn their own sins, they condemn the ways of
holiness; nay, rather then they would forsake their sins, and become new
creatures, they will rather seek to persuade others to sin with them, there is
so few in the world that are really godly, that they may well become a wonder,
though many profess Christ, yet there are but a few that truly rest, and
acquiess themselves in Christ. Beloved, there are many men in the world that
are Religious, but there are but few in the world that are truly and really
religious: Many are called but few are chosen; the whole world lies in
wickedness, 1 John 5.19. Whole Nations lie in wickedness, whole Countries,
Cities, and Towns lie in wickedness. Beloved, wickedness is the fashion of the
world, and he that is most wicked, is most in fashion; a man that has his
clothes out of fashion, is a man that is sore looked at, and wondered at:
Beloved, he that is a true Saint of God, is like a man out of fashion with his
clothes, he is a man sore looked at, and wondered at: godly men they are but
few, and as we may say, they are thin sowed, they are but here one, and there
another, one in a City, and two in Tribe, it may be a man can scarsly find one
in a City, in some places in the world: the Lord was ever so merciful, that if
there had bin but ten righteous persons found in Sodom, the Lord would have
spared Sodom for their sakes, but there was not ten to be found in the whole
City, that were righteous persons: we do not read of any but Lor and his
family, Genesis 18. ver. 32. And that very moment that Sodom was destroyed, Lot
entered into Zoar, and that City was saved for Lots sake, Genesis 19.21, 22, 23.
Beloved, if it be so that godly persons are so few to be found, as indeed it
has been so formerly, and I pray God for his mercies sake, it be not so
amongst us at this present day, Ier. 5. ver. ^ Run ye too and fro throughout
the streets of Jerusalem, and know, and seek in the broad places of the City,
and see if you can find a man, if there be any that executes judgment, and
that seeks the truth, and I will pardon it: And thus; ou may see they that
are really the people of God, they are but few in number, godly men are v^ry
few, and they have many Enemies, affronting them, wicked men they are a great
numbers, and stand stiffly in opposition against them, and when they have
nothing else to say, they can affront the people of God, with their holy
carriage toward God, what they say, do you think that none must go to Heaven,
but you? we make not such a do, and yet we hope to be saved as well as you:
what say they, shall no one be saved, but such as you? shall no one never come
to Heaven but such as make so much a do of praying and preaching, as you do, as
if we were ready to die every moment? soul whoever thou art that thus reasons
against God and his people, thou if ever the Lord opens thy eyes, will repent
of the folly, and at the hour of death when thou know that thou must die,
and can live no longer, thou would give all the treasure in the world, if it
were in thy power to be in such a condition as the poorest soul is in the
world, that has feared God truly, yea thou would wish then that thou had
lived as such a one has done, when thou formerly has despised, mocked, and
jeered, thou could be willing new to change condition with him.

Fourthly, Goods People are become the worlds wonder, because there are many
great men, that are wicked men, many great men are wonderers, there are many
great men, and but few great men that are good men, great men are either proud,
or presumptuous, for the most part, Jer. 5.5. I will go unto the great men and
speak unto them, for they have known the way of the Lord, and the judgments of
their God, but these have altogether broken the Yoke, and burst the bands:
Great men are great enemies to God and his people. But beloved consider, if it
be so as you chance to see a great man to become a good man, that indeed is a
mighty forceing argument to encourage people in the ways of God, and a mighty
help to Religion, and thus you see godly persons are men woudred at: for these
ends, First, God has ordered it: Secondly, Worldly wise men are blinded in
their judgments: Thirdly, There is a principal of irreligion in most men, and
Fourthly, Few great men are good men.

And now Beloved to apply this truth to our selves, consider, that he that the
world most wonders at, and esteems the least, and counts the most unhappiest,
its most certain that that man is the most happiest of all other: Soul if thou
be never so weak, nor never so low, nor never so base in the worlds account, if
thou have but grace truly seasoned with holiness, thy condition is happy: true
piety will bring thee from thy low condition, to enjoy happiness with poor
Lazarus in Heaven: whereas Pride, and Presumption may bring thee torment in
Hell, with rich Dives, Ah says one, I am but a poor man, but if I were as rich
as such a man. I would desire no more in the world but to be in as good an
estate as such a man: this is almost the reply of most men of the world: but
soul consider, do thou want nothing else, I am sure if thou be but a carnal
man, thou want ye chiefest mercy, and thou never desires it: that is to have
thy soul enriched with grace and true holiness: many a man will desire and wish
he were as well to live as such a neighbor, but few desire to be in such an
estate, as a poor soul that really fears God: many desire if they could to be
in a good estate here, many could well be content to be in Dives estate for
outward preferment here, but few desire to be in Lazarus poverty: many could
desire to have Dives riches in the world, and Lazarus Heaven, but the will not
be obtained: men have not the world in such acceptance in their hearts, that
they never look after Heaven, nor the things that do belong to their peace, and
welfare: but beloved, God sees you not as men sees you, God sees your hearts,
and he values it, though men cry out after the world, yet God calls for the
heart, Prove. 3.1. My son forget not my Law, but let thy heart keep my
commandments; Beloved, if ever you intend to be saved, let not the world, nor
worldly substance be your choice, fust seek the kingdom of cleaven, and the
righteousness thereof: and come to God in the name of Jesus Christ, and get a
full assurance in Jesus Christ, that through his merits and bloodshed you may
come to Heaven.

And now consider beloved, I beseech you, if Gods people be the worlds wonder,
who are they that wonder at them? and let me now speak a word to those that
wonder at the people of God, to speak to every common sinner according to his
sin, is too large for this small volume, but in general, to the contentious
person, the proud person, the carnal-minded man, the Swearer, the Liar, and the
Kaylor the Sabbath-breaker, the Fornicator, and Adulterer, whatsoever thy sin
is, they that fear God, wonder at thee, as well as thou wonders at them: they
wonder at you, to see your carriage and behavior.

They wondor at you, that are wicked men, how you dare sin against God that
made you? that you have so little care, and grace in you, as to commit sin
against the great God of Heaven and Earth, that made you, and gave you his word
as a rule to walk by, they wonder at you, how you dare covet so much after the
things of the world, and regard your souls no more: and you that are Drunkards,
how dare you give more honor to the creature, then you do to the Creator that
made you? and you that are Swearers, and Liars, and Sabbath Breakers, and
Raylors, and Adulterers, what do you think will become of you in the end? what
would you do, if God should withold his mercy from you, and should not give
you the fruits of the Earth, nor rain from Heaven? if God should withold from
you the labor of your hands, and you should not enjoy food for your bodies,
refreshment, nor raiment to cover you with? It is God that gives both, but you
offend by your wicked walking, Psalm. 145.15, 16. verses. The eyes of all things
wait upon thee, and thou give them meat in due season: thou openest thy hand
and satisfies the desire of every living creature. God gives you all his
mercies, and you little consider it, but what would you do if God should say
unto you, go to your lusts that you have served, as gods before me, and let
them feed you, and cloth you? O souls, consider the Lord sees you, and knows
your goings, out and your returnings in, The eyes of the Lord are over all, the
Lord preserves all that call upon him, but the wicked will he destroy, Psalm.
145.19.

Consider this all you that wonder at the saints of Gods holy walking before
God: they wonder at you, how you dare murmr against the way of God and
against holiness, being the Scripture says, without holiness no eye shall see
the Lord; what do you think will become of you that never repented in all your
Life time of your sins, and yet are common great sinners? whereas the Scripture
faith, 1 Cor. 6.9.10. verses. Know you not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the kingdom of God? be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor Thieves,
nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the
Kingdom of God. And Rev. 21. ver. 8. But the fearful, and unbelieving, and
abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and
all Liars, shall have their portion in the Lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death: Now consider all you that wonder at Gods
people, what ever sin you you lie under without repentance, you are excluded
out of Heaven, and must perish; there is no way to escape Hell and recover
Heaven, but by repentance, I may say unto you in this cause, as Christ said
unto the Samaritans that escaped, Luke 13. ver. 13. I tell you nay, but except
you repent, you shall all likewise perish. God may sometimes in his judgments
meet with sinners in their sins, that others may see and take warning by their
fall, as some that have been common drunkards, have in their drink taken
surfeits, and so have had their bodies weakened by diseases, and their days
shortened: some in their drink have been drowned in the water, and some have
been murdered in their drink, as being unsensible, and not of their own men, 2 Samuel 13. Chap. A mon being drunk, was slain by Absaloms servant: and some
covetous persons, through their covetousness have been their own murderers, 1 Samuel 25. Chap. Nabal through covetousness, and drunkenness, his very heart dyed
within him. Acts 5. Chap. Ananias and Saphirah his Wife were both smitten down
dead at the Apostles feet. Ahab would not believe the Lords message by Micah,
and was slain at Ramoth Gilead.

And now consider a little further, all you that wonder at Gods people, what do
you think men go hear the Word of God so often for? do you think it is
sufficient for you, if you hear the Word preached to be saved? can you hear the
Word and receive it? and practice wickedness? what answer will you make God at
the last day? when he shall say unto you, at such a Congregation thou wast, and
I there reproved thee for thy drunkenness, thy swearing and thy lying but thou
regarded not my word, thou despised in thine heart both my Prophets and my
people? like to those Ezekiel. 33.30, 31, 32. ver. Also thou Son of m^n, the
children of thy people still are talking against thee by the walls, and in the
doors of the houses, and speak one to another, every one to his brother,
saying, come I pray you, and hear what is the word that comes forth from the
Lord. And they come unto thee as the people comes, and they sit before me as
my people sits, and they hear my words but do not do them: for with their
mouths they show much love, but their hearts goes after covetousness, etc.
Beloved this is the condition of most of our worldly carnal persons: they w^l
go to the Church and hear the Word, and it may be condemn others by it, but
they will not look to their own hearts, they will not condemn their own
wickedness by it, they will not see their own sin to be that that the Word
condemns: and this is that that makes Gods people to wonder at them so much,
because they live as if they never intended to dye, they are as men both out of
the way and out of their wits, Psalm. 14.1. And thus the folly and madness of
wicked men does appear, and yet in their wickedness, they wonder greatly at
one another: wicked men are become wonders to themselves, they wonder greatly
at one another, the covetous man he wonders at the drunkards careless life, and
he labors to make a prey of him, the drunkard he wonders at the covetous
person, that he has no good fellowship with him, the proud man, he wonders at
the drunkard that he clothes his back no better, but that he is so bare in
apparel, and he wonders at the covetous Usurer, that he does not lay out some
of his corrupted moneys on his back, that he goes in clothes of old fashion,
and plain clothes: and the Usurer, he wonders both at the drunkard and the
proud person: and wicked men are not only the wonders of others, but also
wonders to one another. Now I have one word more, and it is to those that are
really godly: you that are,

First, Both a wonder to the world, and a wonder to wicked men: here is your
comfort, you may know by this what centry you are of: If you were of the world,
the world world love you, you are not of the world, John 17.16. As Christ is
not of the world, so are you not of the world, you are such as Christ himself
prays for, ver. 9. I pray not for the world, but for such as thou have given
me: here is your comfort, a most noble overcoming, Saints of the most high God,
even the same glory that the Father has given to Christ, even with the same
glory shall you be glorified, ver. 22.

Secondly, Godly men will own thee, and wicked men cannot but subscribe that
all things thou do are right in the sight of God.

Thirdly, The work that thou do is the very work of God, that Saints have
done, and do, to the end of the world: thy work is the work of Angels, thou art
heir of Heaven, and if there be any happiness to be had, it is to be had in
Heaven.

Fourthly, Though the world wonder at thee yet the Lord wonders not at thee,
the Lord loves thee, the Lord himself regards thee, and the Lord will own thee
in ye day that he makes up his jewels, Mal. 3.17. The Lord is thy Shepherd,
thou shall have no want, Psalm. 23.1. O most noble overcoming, the Lord is your
counselor, Psalm. 33.11, 12. The counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the
thoughts of his heart to all generations: blessed is the nation whose God is
the Lord, and the people whom he has chosen for his own inheritance.

Now here is thy comfort, thou art chosen for his own inheritance: therefore
the Lord loves thee, O therefore most noble overcoming Saints and Servants of
the most high God, be exhorted to praise the name of the Lord your God for
ever, and declare the wonderful works he does for the children of men: consider
your God is a God that does wonderful things for you, he is a wonderful
Counselor. O then let us in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, labor and
strive to be of that number, that are accounted the worlds wonder, and let us
praise the name of the Lord with the Psalmist, Psalm. 77.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. I
will remember the works of the Lord, surely I will remember thy wonders of old,
I will meditate also of thy works, and talk of thy doings thy way O God is in
thy Sanctuary, who is so great a God as our God? thou art the God that does
wonders thou have declared thy strength among thy people, thou have with thy
Arm redeemed thy people, the seed of Jacob and Joseph.

Now the great God of Heaven and Earth, give us understanding in all things,
and keep us now and evermore in knowledge of thy truth, that we may walk before
him in fear all the days of our appointed eime, Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by Thomas Pessinger, at the Three Bibles on the
middle of London Bridge.
THe Christians Combat, or his true spiritual Warfare: by C. Love, late
Preacher of the Word in the City of London. The Wise Merchant, or the pearl of
price: by T. Calvert, Mintster in York. The Book of Graces, with Prayers for
Morning and Evening: These are but three pence a piece. The Sinners warning
piece, or Heavens Messengers: by T. Robins B. of D. Englands golden legacy, or
a brief description of the manifold mercies the Lord has bestowed upon this
sinful Nation. Gods Message from Heaven to sinners on earth: By T. P. B of L.
The Virtuous Wife is the glory of her Husband, being a new Book showing the
rare qualities of the Virtuous Wife. Christ upon the Cross suffering for
sinners, by S. S. The School of Learning, or a guide for Children, being
Prayers for every day in the week, with grace before and after Meat. Gods Call
to unconverted sinners: by T. P. Now or never work out your salvatioon with
fear and trembling: by B. R. These Eleven last are sold for two pence a piece,
and all very useful for these times.
FINIS.

