A SERMON Preached at the ANNIVERSARY MEETING OF THE ETON-SCHOLARS, At St. Mary
le Bow, on November 18. 1679.

By THOMAS HORN, Fellow of King's-College in Cambridge, and Chaplain to the
Right Honorable HENRY, Earl of St Albans.

Published at the request of the Stewards.

London, Printed for Samuel Carr, at the King's-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1680.

PROVE. 22.6. Train up a Child in the way that he should go, and when he is old,
he will not depart from it.


IT is delightful not only to me, but, I believe also, to every one of you
(worthy fellow Scholars, as you have lately given me leave to call you) to
behold the luster of this solemn day: The intent of it is so commendable, the
circumstances so harmonious and beautiful. Behold how good and pleasant a thing
it is to see Brethren to dwell together in Unity! So many Brethren of one
fruitful Mother, the Daughter of a King! to see them so well united to pay
their Gratitude and Honor to that Pareut in the face of the World! (a work so
becoming her Children) especially to see them begin with a dutiful
acknowledgment to the great God, in whom all gratitude should terminate! a
design so worthy the nurture of our pious Mother. I was glad (as the Royal
Prophet speaks) when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord:
glad to see that thither the Tribes go up to give thanks to the Name of the
Lord. And now since you have assembled and met together to render God thanks
for that blessing of Education, and all other benefits that we have received at
his hands, and to beg his blessing upon us; I hope this pious Beginning will
give an auspicious influence upon the following part of your Solemnity.
Especially seeing that you seem to revive in some measure the Primitive Feasts
of Charity. I intend therefore to improve, as much as I can, these your
Religious and grateful purposes, by offering to your consideration some of
those blessed advantages which a careful Education affords, according to the
intent of the Text; that you may more effectually pursue your design of being
in this House of God, rendering to him all the Glory of all the gains you have
made in that Royal Seat of Literature.

When Solomon says, Train up a Child in the way that he should go, we may
understand the catechizing and informing him in the way of Religion, in which
every one should go: And also the training him up in other profitable Learning
and Skill suitable to his state, his capacity, his way of life that he is to
follow, as the Margin says, in his way. By training him up when a Child, he
seems to mean the taking the first opportunities of infusing into him each part
of Wisdom, as soon as he appears capable of receiving it. And to encourage the
Parent in this care of his Child, he adds, and when he is old he will not
depart from it. The weight of which seems to consist in this, That the
advantages of Education are unquestionably great, so great, that the duration
of them is as much as need be added for encouragement; for who is so solicitous
about the continuance of a trifle? But as any thing appears valuable, our fears
of the losing it are anxious, and our thoughts are busy about the preservation
of it, so that the greater the benefits of Education appear, there is the more
force in that consideration, that they will last 'till old Age. Wherefore the
more fully I can represent the advantages of Education, first in Religion, and
then also in other commendable knowledge, especially when it is early; the more
fully will both the Exhortation of the Text, and the Argument of it be
answered, and the design of our being here satisfied.

First Part
And as we have begun our Solemnity with God, so let us take our first
considerations from him, who is the Fountain of all Wisdom, and whose Fear is
the beginning of it.

1. First, The teaching us to remember our Creator in the days of our Youth,
lays that great Foundation of Wisdom, The designing a good end of all our life,
the preferring the best End, and prudence to choose and pursue the directest
means to that End; lest we should snatch up vile designs, or live we know not
why, or ramble in our pursuit of that which is good. This makes all our Actions
regular and uniform, tending all to the glory of the Creator, as the
circumference of an Arch to the Center, which is both the beauty and strength
of it, under all pressures. This persuades us to value our time, and improve
all our Powers with oar, as Talents once to be accounted for. It teaches us to
request comfortably the blessing of God upon all our endeavors, that Dew of
Heaven that enriches all. And when we succeed, it invites us to return all to
his honor; which makes the knowledge of nature, and all other skill, truly
useful, subservient to a great purpose, and sanctifies all our temporal Affairs.

2. Secondly, It Is of great use through all our life to have the Foundation of
Religion (the Christian especially) laid even; because the more lofty and
magnificent the Building is, the more remarkable a flaw in the top, does a
little error in the Foundation make. They that have been taught the great ends
of Religion, who know which are the weightier matters of the Law of God, and
which are the less weighty, which are to be preferred, which are to be
subservient to a farther end; will not be scrupulous, or troublesome to
themselves, and the World about Mint, and Cumin, and neglect Judgment, Mercy,
and Faith. They will not be led away with any Religious pretense that
overthrows the grand Ends of true Religion, and his full wicked and secular
Design: They will be apt to search the Scriptures for that End for which they
were written, which brings them to the Native sense, and pious use of them in
their life and conversation. This will not let them dare to vex any portion of
Sacred Writing, wresting it to serve a turn, and keep up the opposition of
Doctrine, falsely so called. Finally, this prevents dishonorable thoughts of
God, and the superstitions, or presumptions, consequent thereto.

3. Thirdly, The initiating Youth in the Principles, and using them to the
practice of Religion, is the most approved Antidote against the infections of
bad conversation, and other manifold Temptations, which a young Man meets with
when he first enters into the World. And he had need put on the whole Armor of
God to stand against so many importunate persuasions, so many bad Examples,
such secret allurements to wickedness: He had need be well persuaded of the
value of Innocence and excellence of Piety: He had need be fully resolved in
his Heart not to depart from the fear of his God, lest the rampant
importunities of profane wretches in their full cry, silence the softer
whispers of his Conscience. For how cheap a prey is a young unsettled Man! How
soon is he run down by an unruly sort of talk; and forced to shelter his
Modesty from the imperious rebukes of a frolic Humor, by entering in, and
being one of the Herd! But he only is armed against these assaults, whose mind
is filled beforehand with the bright Idea's of God and Goodness, and whose
Heart is engaged with the love of them.

4. The laying a good Foundation of Religion at first, renders the Man useful
to others, obedient to Superiors, profitable to Church and State, peaceable,
just in his Dealings, meek and courteous in his Converse, charitable in his
Thoughts and Words, of Things and Persons, steady in that Station in which God
has placed him, without breaking the Harmony of the World, conscientious and
industrious in his proper Calling. It fills the Mind with large benevolous
Thoughts, good Desires toward all, and an aim at public Good in all he does.
You your selves are a great commendation to Education in the work of this day.
It Is a credit to our School, the very Design upon which you meet, such benign
public thoughts are a sweet Fruit of good nurture, and I hope there will more
of it ripen every day; that we may once be full of Goodness and Charity, as now
of sower humor and Religious spite. Would to God that happy day would once
arise, when Men would use so much Charity, as to permit the old wounds in the
Body of Christ to heal, and not industriously pierce his Hands and Feet, and
Side afresh! That the solid Duties of Humility and Christian love would rise,
while pride and variance were conjured down into the darkness from whence they
came; that we might learn with one mind, and one mouth to glorify God! If ever
God will be pleased to grant that desirable Blessing; the Seeds of it seem to
be lodged in places of good Education. And such designs as these are the
promising Buddings forth of Peace. However, let us do our utmost, and fear we
not, but that God will bless us in it. For it is said of the Peace of Jerusalem,
They shall prosper that love thee. Psalm. 123.6.


5. That which enlivens all human endeavors, and is the greatest encouragement
to Parents, to take care of the pious Institution of their Children in the fear
of the Lord, is this, That the Dedication of their first years to the honor of
God, shrouds them under the shadow of his Wings; it is a waving their first
Fruits of their days before the Lord, which blesses all the rest; for he has
given us illustrious Testimonies of his kind acceptance of such Oblations, and
of his Blessing upon them. When Samuel's Mother had by Prayer obtained him of
the Lord, she devoted the Child gratefully to him. 1 Samuel 1.27, 28.
For this Child, said she, I prayed, and the Lord has given me my Petition,
which I asked of him; therefore also have I lent him unto the Lord as long as
he lives: He shall be lent unto the Lord. And this was as kindly received. For
though Samuel were not of that Sacred Tribe, which God had chosen to minister
in Holy things (being descended from Ephraim) and therefore had no Right to
stand before the Lord in the Tabernacle; 1 Samuel 1.1.
though his Mother seems not to have received any Command to bring him to the
Tabernacle; though nothing appears but her pious Gratitude; yet this was so
well pleasing to God, that he wore his Linen Ephod, and ministered before the
Lord. So blessed was the Child, c. 2. v. 26.
that he is said to be in Favor both with God and Man. So much was he in God's
favor, that while he was a Child, God conversed with him from Heaven, that he
revealed to him then his great secret Counsel of destroying the sacred Family
of Eli, and he made him his Priest, and great Prophet, and Judge of his People.
There was no command for building the Schools of the Prophets; but there was a
good and Religious design in it, and God so well accepted of it, that his holy
Spirit overshadowed them, and they received the Gift of Prophecy frequently,
and seldom was there a Prophet but out of these Colleges. Religious Education
is a Consecration of Children, a returning them to the hand that gave them:
Which pious intention being so acceptable to the Father of Lights, the Giver of
every good and perfect Gift, puts them into the likeliest way of that Heavenly
Benediction, which gives the increase to the plantings and waterings of Men.

Second Part.
This last Consideration is therefore of more moment, because if we pass to the
Second sort of advantages of good Education, viz. the improvement of our
natural Faculties, and adorning them with Sciences and Arts: This Heavenly
influence goes thither too, and meets our Industry; it overshadows all Learned
Education, it facilitates and accomplishes that. Wherefore as we enter into
this second Head, let us not leave behind us the last Consideration.

It has not pleased the Wisdom of the Creator to give us the power of adding
much to the Body, there is little for Discipline to do there; and that is only
in such motions as the Mind has the guidance of. We cannot alter the pulse of
the Heart, we cannot change our Complexion, nor give our Bodies another
Constitution: We cannot add a Cubit to our stature, nor make one Hair white or
black. But though his Wisdom has not made us improvable in that part in which
we resemble Beasts; yet his good Providence has made us exceedingly capable of
improvement there where we are like himself. We may add Cubits, great additions
of knowledge to the Mind; its constitution and temper is capable of great
amendments; of rough it may be made smooth and pliable; its vehement
Inclinations moderated, its wanderings regulated, and brought into good order.
The very first appearance that the Soul makes, is in a capacity of receiving
increase; which excellent things (the excellency and honor of Man) are the
Fruits of a prudent and manly Education, which I intend to represent more
particularly.

But, as I said, we must not forget that influence which Religious nurture, and
the Divine blessing, has even upon the improvements of the natural Powers in
the ways of Learning, and all useful and commendable knowledge in the World.
God himself pleading with Job, Job 38.36
puts this question, Who has put Wisdom in the inward parts? Or who has given
Understanding to the Heart? Solomon, who exhorts to educate Children, Prove. 2.6.
answers thus, The Lord gives Wisdom. There is a Spirit in Man, says Elihu,
and the inspiration of the Almighty gives Understanding. God gave to the four
Children which the King of Babylon brought up, Knowledge, Dan. 1.17.
and skill in all Learning and Understanding. Solomon after his improvements
under the care of his Father, (a wise and religious Ruler) received a mighty
addition of Wisdom, of skill in Government, and natural knowledge by his
Prayer, who still recommends Education. The skill of the Husbandman and the
Artificer, the Art of Trafficking, and the power of gathering Riches, the
conduct of Warriors is from the same Blessing on the Labors of Men. Isa.
28.24.
Does the Plowman Plow all day to Sow? Does he open and break the Clods of his
Ground? Says the Almighty in Isaiah. Who taught him the way? Verse. 26.
His God does instruct him to discretion, and does teach him. God likewise
changes his People of Israel, lest when they enter into the good Land, and
dispossess their Enemies, and grow Rich, Dcut. 8.17, 18.
they should say in their Hearts, My Power, and the might of my Hand, has
gotten me this Wealth: But thou shall remember the Lord thy God, for it is he
that gives thee Power to get Wealth. The wisdom of the Captains, the valor of
the Soldiers, the victory in the day of Battle, the power of getting Riches
when they were settled, came all from the same bountiful hand. There is an
imperceptible Spring that guides our motions, and secretly gives speed and
happiness even to our thoughts. And though the Operation be smooth and silent,
yet it is not therefore the less powerful; for the mightiest Operations are
most unobservable. Our blessed Savior speaking of the Spirit of Regeneration,
compares it to a breath of Wind, John 3.8
of which one cannot tell whence it comes and whither it goes: One cannot
say, lo! here it comes, or lo! there it goes: We cannot sec at what passage the
good thought entered, nor observe how the good Spirit infuses a pious desire; so
is every one that is born of the Spirit. The Power by which the Gospel
conquered Nations, and subdued mighty Kings, was not a boisterous force, but a
calm might: The Kingdom of Heaven comes not by Observation. The great ruling
Powers* in nature are as undiscernable in their way, as irresistible. We see
the Sunshine, and we feel indeed his warmth; but we discern not how he enters
into the Bowels of the Earth; how his little Atoms steal into the secret pores
of Plants; how he impregnates Nature with new life. He seems to our Eye to
stand still, when he comes forth like a Bridegroom out of his Chamber, and
rejoices as a strong Man to run his Race, and works wondrous things as he
goes. We feel not how our own Spirits move, how they start and fly as quick as
we think, from one end of our Nerves to the other: If we say go, they are gone,
and our Limbs are moved; but how, we know not: We do not feel them run, we
cannot find their Channels and Posts, we cannot discern the meaning of our
Commands over them, how they reach them, and are applied to them: Neither are
the Springs of our own thoughts apparent to Observation. So undiscernable, and
so puissant is the blessing of God on the studies and labors of Men. How else
came it into the Plowman's mind to venture the first Experiment of flinging his
Corn away into the Dirt? What skill in the Laws of Nature, what Rules in Logic
would assure him, that he should see a rewarding Resurrection of it again, any
more than if he sowed a Pearl, or a Diamond? He did not learn it from the
springing of the scattered Seeds of the first voluntary Crop of the Earth;
Psalm. 129.6, 7.
for these are but as the Grass, upon the House tops, which withers before it
grows up, wherewith the Mower fills not his hand, nor he that binds
sheaves his bosom. It was his God that did first instruct him to Discretion,
and did teach him. From whence else came the Invention of the many
unaccountable Medicines in Physic? The many Arts which Men seem rather to have
stumbled on by chance, than found by strength of Reason and Method? Such as the
Notes in Music, Printing, Prospective Glasses, and the like? Whence comes it to
pass that one Age is Learned, and another Dark? Or how came this days public
thought into your minds, passed by, by so many of our Predecessors? There is an
unseen Hand that guides all our thoughts and reasonings, which gives you your
powers to manage your Studies, Trades, and Business; which overrules the
success of all, and orders them to your private, and the public ends, as God
pleases.

While this unseen Spring moves in our setting out, and all the course of our
Life, the effects of careful Institution of Children are very great and useful,
and will appear in some measure in these following instances.

1. For first, Discipline teaches them to learn to live by Government, to gain
some sway over their own desires; it keeps them within compass, and in order,
which puts a manliness into the Mind, and a good composure in their Thoughts.
The very disusing them from the fond Caresses of home, from the tenderness of
the Parent, and the compliance of the House, which makes them peevish and
untoward in their Humor, unsatiable in their Desires, cross and unruly, and
lays the Foundation of a miserable life; the very disusing them, I say, from
these expectations, teaches them to content themselves with less, and inures
them by little and little to self-denial, one of the happiest portions in this
life. The fear of a watchful Eye over them, takes away that negligent looseness
of Spirit which is apt to sway in that Age, and begets Care and Observation.
They are apt also through fear to grow quick in observing the measures of
Justice and Equity; because they quickly feel the smart of the contrary in
their Governor, and are ready enough to complain of it; and because also their
own Injuries are frequently called to an account.

2. Good Education lays the Principles of sound Knowledge, which though small
at first, at last becomes great and useful. The Masters leading their
Observation, as they read of great examples, and wise sayings; their
illustrating and helping them to gather into their Storehouses profitable
Propositions, instilling also frequently their own good Counsels, furnishes
them with a greater Treasure than themselves are aware of; for though the Seeds
be little, and scarce resemble the after-Fruit, yet they increase and branch
forth, as their Reason grows, and what seems to lie buried at first, and
unobserved even by themselves, sprouts forth of it self afterward. And
opportunity awakens the Memory, and shows the usefulness of the Note; as a
Proposition in Mathematics gives a clearer sight of the fullness of an Axiom,
which at first reading seemed to have little in it. And this is the more
advantageous, by reason of a certain strange, but natural readiness in Men, to
remember the first impressions of their Childhood; in so much that the things
which we heard or saw when we were Children, return more quickly to our
thoughts oftentimes, than what we met with but a few days since.

3. That which fructifies all the Knowledge they have got, and is of more
profit than the bare stock gained at School, is the enlarging and strengthening
the faculties of the Soul, the impowering her to increase her Treasure farther.
As in learning to Write, we value not the Copies we have written out, we scarce
ever cast an Eye upon them afterward. That which we aimed at was the dextrous
use of the Hand, by which we are able easily to do much more; so it is likewise
the growth of the faculties that is the chief improvement of Education, by
which the Mind is able to enrich her self, though her former stock should be
lost.

The settling the Mind constantly upon Employment, teaches a Man afterward to
fix upon business. The not suffering his Childhood to taste of idleness, but
keeping him constantly going on, at last makes Labor as delightful as Play;
partly by the power of custom, partly by the pleasure of gaining little
victories over things that were difficult, by Commendations, by Emulations, and
Triumphs over others, and a taste of some sweetness in Knowledge.

Again, the frequent change of their Work, does both make the Labor easy (one
being a recreation to the other) and that change also makes a Man afterward
more ready to turn himself quickly to the sudden importunities, and various
changes of Affairs.

The care that is used in examining the expressions of Authors, and every
little thing in a Word, 'till the meaning be hit exactly; teaches them to do
the same afterward, to dive more readily into the minutes of business, and to
let nothing pass.

The very agitation of the Mind makes its faculties lusty and healthy. The
exercise of the fancy teaches it to open its Wings and flutter, and then to
venture from shorter to more large and bold flights, 'till at last it soars
freely and loftily, and looks upon things, the Prospect opening it self
endlesly to the imagination as she passes on, and giving the Mind an
opportunity of viewing the varieties of the World, and of comparing things, and
surveying their similitudes and differences, 'till at length by little degrees
we learn in the operations of the fancy, to judge.

The using Children to gather Observations, is one of the first occasions of
kindling a love of Learning. For thereby they see they have done something, and
rejoice in their strength, they compute their Gains, and look upon their
Wealth, and learn to hoard up, and grow into a generous covetousness after
more; and when that design once grows into them, Industry and Vigilance carry
on the Work apace. Especially when the manly reasonable Invention begins to
open like the breaking forth of the Morning: When the Soul examins her stores,
and finds some Reasonings glittering like Jewels upon the entrance of light
into a dark Room, and she rejoices to find a Treasure within her self, which
she never dreamed of.

Finally, the frequent correction of the Errors of Invention, teaches both to
observe the indecencies of the fancy in her flights, and also to examine her own
steps exactly, to go back and consider all over again, to observe what
occasioned her mistakes, and how to prevent them for the future. This use
teaches us afterward to correct our own reasonings, and put our thoughts in
order, and to try in what method we may more easily expedite our doubts, and
find out truth, when we enter into deeper searches; a thing of wonderful use in
all our following progress in Knowledge. And on these two last Considerations
vast things depend.

It is not improbable, that that mighty difference which we see between the
famous Men of the World, and others, proceeds not so much from the natural
Parts which they brought into the World, as first from a felicity in well
placing a few early thoughts upon some noble design, which inflamed their
Spirits, reigned in all their thoughts, and infused an earnest care of persuing
their beloved end: And then, secondly, from an exact Observation of their
own-steps, which settled them in good methods of considering and reasoning. The
famous Henry Stevens says of himself, That while he was a Boy, he fell in love
with the Greek Tongue, so fond and amorous he was, (so he expresses himself)
that he courted it day and night with all the importunity, care, and address
that he could possibly. And how much he gained upon that difficult uncertain
Dame, his Thesaurus Graecae linguae, and other Labors witness to the World.
Tully seems to have lighted, when young, upon some such glorious thought as
this, that Rome might as well outdo Athens in Eloquence, as her and the rest
of the World in other great things; for he is very often touching upon the
string, and his design of the glory of Eloquence was reigning in him very
early; for his Book of Rhetorical Invention was written when he was little
above Twenty years old. Demosthenes, (whom Tully particularly emulated) was,
before him, smitten with the like thought, by hearing an excellent Oration, to
which his Master carried him when he was a Boy, and one it seems of no
excellent Parts, but mightily set upon a design in a lucky hour. And this
became to him quickness, invention, and eloquence. Of late days the great De
Carts was blessed in his youth with an unsatiable desire after Philosophy, and
in all things clear evidence of truth. In order thereto, one of his fruitful
thoughts was the keeping his reason true to her Work; the care of proceeding
methodically and steadily in all his Meditations. And his constancy in this one
care produced excellent Fruits in him, before he wrote himself Man. As if, when
it pleases Almighty God to produce some glorious Lights in the World, he need
only to put a good quality of motion into great Orbs of dark and sluggish
Matter, fixing some Laws to be observed in all their motions: And immediately
the Vortices go on with the Work themselves, as if they were inspired, and
taken with the design: They sort themselves and gather together their lucid
parts in heaps at their Centers, and forthwith there appear glorious Lights,
and all is transparent from the bottoms to the vast Superficies. As if one
great Man differed from another great Man in Glory, according as one chose a
greater, the other a lesser Sphere to move in, together with the different
celerities and conatus that were put into them. As suppose, one youth lighting
upon a pleasant conceit, and meeting applause and smiles, pleases himself, and
being taken with it, plays with the ambition of the like wit, and spins in that
narrow Circle all his days, and never goes beyond it. Another designs a more
noble study, but still is straightened by selfishness, and vainglory. Another
aims at the best part of knowledge, and designs it the glory of his God, and
the good of Men, and moves in a large Sphere, and shines with a greater luster,
and a more commending influence.

And in this respect the places of public Education have an advantage above the
private, that they afford fairer opportunities of kindling and cherishing these
great designs. I need not trouble you with the envious comparison; for,
allowing that private places are in some respects safer, viz. by reason of a
narrower inspection than the larger, etc. yet it must be allowed, that private
Schools usually fare best, under the care of such who have brought with them
the experience of their public nurture, and moreover public and Royal
Encouragements draw to those places Men of greater skill. But, letting that
alone, this is that which I aim at, That the sparks that would go out of
themselves for want of Fuel, or be suffocated in too narrow a compass, have
larger play here, and more encouragement to feed their Flame. Here we have
opportunities of comparing our own endeavors with others, of polishing our
selves by them that do better, of raising our hopes by seeing others whom we
seem to gain upon. The emulations here are more frequent among our equals, and
the success of Battles being uncertain, sometimes we are flusht with a Victory,
and anon ashamed a little by the cross chance of War. So Industry is kept up
between Glory and Shame. And these ingenuous strifes turn the Toil into Play:
-- Studio fallente laborem. In public places also the Contentions are more
warm, for here the Victories on the one hand are more open and conspicuous, and
so more desirable; and on the other hand the shame more dreadful. For, to these
youthful combatants, it is as if either the Senate were decreeing them a
Triumph, and the neighboring States were to send them in their aurum
coronarium; or else they were to be led in scorn behind their insulting Enemies
Chariot.

There are two special advantages of this kind, almost proper to the place of
our Education, designed questionless by the Religious Wisdom of our Royal
Founder for our good; whose design seems a little to resemble the policy of
that great Shepherd Jacob, Genesis 30.37, 38, etc.
by which he gained the stronger Lambs. For first we were placed in a
retirement from the World, and yet in the midst of an eminent Society, adorned
with Learned Men, and grave Divines, who (besides their good Counsels they may
instill, their oversight of the youth, the reverence they infuse into them, the
encouragements they can give to the pregnant and virtuous, and checks to the
lazy and extravagant) afford also by their presence and example, a lively
influence to them that are to be brought up there; who beholding every day
something of goodness to be imitated, of excellency to be admired, are apt to
desire and endeavor to be like them. They see that in its perfection which
they are laboring after, which is a ready way to put that Spring into their
young heads which I have been speaking of, that sets them on work. There also
they have before them an excellent pattern of Unity. Secondly, the Royal
Founder designing his School partly for Collegiats, and partly for others
indifferently, the former (whose hopes necessitate them to a greater Industry
than ordinary) are helps to the latter, for their industry spurs on the rest.
And in a large number of Persons of different parts, it is much if there be not
one Egregious, who will put Life and Spirit into the whole Company. Which is
the more likely to take effect for this reason, because it is natural for all of
them, from one end to the other, to observe who is the leading lad; he is their
Master of boasting, they rejoice in him, they speak of him with bragging
wherever they go.

Third Part.
These are some of the advantages of Education in Religion, and other
Knowledge, all which in the Third place turn to a greater account, the more
early Children are imbued therein, whether we consider,

1. First, The gaining of Time, which so insensibly passes, and so
irresistibly, that all the Powers in nature can neither command, nor oblige a
moment of it to stand still for us, and when it is past, is impossible to be
purchased again; the loss of which is lamented most heartily by the wisest of
Men. And no wonder, since the whole Portion that is allotted to any of us, is
so short for the business we have to do in it, that there is little to spare for
the quickest Man. Now the sooner we begin, the greater improvements may be
timely made; and when we are fitted early for the business of life, the longer
time we have of making good use thereof. Instruction comes too late when we are
going out of the World, or when we should be using of it.

2. As for Religious Education, it is necessary to begin that early, because of
the evil Inclinations which proceed from the corruption of our Nature; for let
us begin as soon as we can, Nature is beforehand with us: Wherefore we have no
reason to give her more advantage against us by delay. The Weeds need not be
sown, you need not Plow, nor manure the Ground for them: It Is but letting them
alone, and they rise and spread apace, as if they had an original Right to the
Ground, and the very dirtiness of the Earth were their Seed: So that wickedness
comes up so fast, and so soon grows into rank Habits; that as it is impossible
totally to prevent its being, so it is very difficult to prevent its quick
growth, soon enough to overcome it. Religion wants a cultivated Ground, and an
extraordinary Seed; and much of that (when it is sown) is apt to be scattered by
the way, or devoured by the Fowls of the Air, or choked by Thorns, or withered
by Heat. It Is a tender Seed, subject to sundry injuries, none of which Sin is
liable to. There needs no care to be wicked, nor serious thought, nor wise
consideration; the abandoning all thought of what one does, gives it increase.

3. Early nurture of Children in Religion is necessary, because of the evil
Examples, and treacherous Instruction, which they are otherwise apt to be
misled by, after which all better Institution becomes feeble and useless, for
what good is to be done with a Lad, after a corrupt Nature has been made worse
by Art? After he has fallen into the Education of a Slave, or the management of
the impious Hangby's of the Family, who instruct their young Master in Pride,
and swell his Heart with the expectation of an Estate, 'till they have made him
impregnable against the fear of God, and all prudent Advice, lest he should
grow wise, and good enough to discard them? But if you begin betimes to plant
pious Principles into the Child; before he be misimproved; Religious thoughts
may be infused into him, and through the blessing of God, become powerful
enough to rectify the byas of natural inclination in a great measure, for we
have some helps on Nature's side too; the apprehension of a God is Natural, and
a part of us, and so is the sense of Good and Evil, and the presagings of
Immortality.

4. Timely Education is of like benefit in the gaining human Knowledge, because
of that Docility, and yielding Humility that is at first in Children; and
because it is easier to guide the Reason before it has used it self to wandering.
Moreover, the Mind is capable of a directer view of Truth, before it is filled
with prejudices, and perverse notions of things. Cogitation is natural to the
Soul, and solid Knowledge is that which delights her. She is made to desire
Truth, and Truth is made to satisfy her; but for want of care and order she
becomes often alienated from her own Nature, and delights in Trash rather than
her proper Food, by reason of a delight we take in variety. For it is equally
hard to us not to think at all, and to think on steadily upon one thing; and
the Mind had rather play hard (like a Child) than work easily. For because
Truth does not lie open to the first easy Thought, but dwells in a difficult
and obscure recess; the Mind is amazed at the difficulty, and is afraid to go
in and pursue her, but runs away scared with the darkness, and delights with
the first appearances, and so passes away from one thing to another, 'till she
be filled with mistakes, and used to wandering; and then it is hard to bring her
to consider orderly. To prevent this, there must be timely care taken to make
the first steps easy and delightful, to use the Mind to care and constancy.

5. The early Education of Children (as their years and capacity require)
prevents those ominous discouragements which they meet with, who enter later
than ordinary; for he that comes late is prejudiced the first moment, because
he must be placed below those of his own Age, which makes him looked upon as
the dull Child. And that is apt to damp him in his own conceit, and make him
think that he is so; 'till by desponding he become what he feared others
thought, and what himself imagined. Whereas, on the other hand, he that has
gained a step before his Equals in years, is impregnated with hopes, and a
desire of maintaining his Post that he has gained; and finding auspicious Eyes
upon him, and a love to assist the pregnant, he receives, and gives himself
encouragement to go on and succeed.

6. To this we may add Solomon's weighty reason, Train him up early while he is
a Child in a good way, and then he will not forsake it when he is old. The
sooner you give him Instruction, the more likely it is to last 'till Age.
Whereas one would think that the later any thing was received into the mind,
the more likely the memory should be to retain it 'till we grow old, and what
was learnt very early, should wear away by degrees in such a length of time,
and disappear quite before old Age; (so many Actions intervening, so many
anxious Thoughts and Designs in Manhood entering into the Mind, likely to
dispossess the former, and so many things being more freshly pictured in the
memory, so great length of time remaining to make the first lively Colors look
faint, if not decay quite.) It Is here all quite contrary. The sooner you begin,
the more certainly all things retain their liveliness, though there be the
longer time for them to be defaced. Neither is this without reason. For the
sooner the apprehensions of Goodness, and worthy Knowledge are impressed upon
the Soul, the fairer and lovelier are the Idea's. The Table is the clearer for
you to draw upon, the Mind has no misapprehensions and prejudicate Notions,
which sully the Soul: There are no vicious Habits, nor perverse Reasons to keep
out Goodness and Truth. The Mind at first is more tender and sensible, and
therefore receives the impression the deeper into it. Wherefore the earlier the
impressions are made, they are more delightful, and are retained with greater
pleasure, and that pleasure increases every day, as experience shows the
sweetness and usefulness of Religious and Wise Counsels, which makes them grow
into the Mind: Add to this, that fast retention in the Memory, of things done
in our minority, which was mentioned before. It is as true also on the other
hand, that if you train up a Child in the way that he should not go, when he is
old he will not depart from that neither. This is apparent, as well in the
faults of the Will, as in the mistakes of the Understanding. It Is almost
impossible to deal with an overgrown Sinner, that from his Childhood has given
himself over to wickedness. There is also a fixing of Errors in old Men, (who
have not been used to the ingenuity of examining their Opinions, and doubting
of their Abilities) you may as well draw Blood from some, as convince them of
an error or conceit, that was in repute in their youth; for they grow Axioms in
them; by them they judge of all arguing, and therefore there is no way for a
new Argument to take place.

Lastly, The earlier we are improved, the greater Power, the longer Season, and
so the more opportunities we gain of bringing Glory to the great God, and doing
good to Men, which two things are the grand Ends of the best institution, and
the most glorious happiness of this life; they are the true Reasons for which
one would desire to be well Educated. A Man had even as good have been born a
Fool, or dropped into some dark corner of the World, and never see what Breeding
or Learning means; as be furnished with great Abilities and Knowledge, only to
do mischief, to manage Treasons, to head Seditions and Schisms, and to be witty
against God and Virtue, and the common sense of Mankind.

I have named as many of the Benefits of training up Children in the way they
should go, as I could think of; because the Consideration of them leads to a
just value, and so to a grateful acknowledgment of them to the great Founder of
the World; for who ever was thankful for what he never esteemed, or esteemed
what he never thought of? I thought it not amiss to take notice of some things
which seem small, both because their Effects are great, and because also they
lead us to a higher value of the greater. For how much Gratitude do you owe to
God, who after he had endowed you with natural Abilities, took care to plant
you in a fruitful Soil, where they might increase, and you might excel other
Men in that which is the Glory of Man? Who took care to place you where your
Minds might be imbued with a sense of true Religion and Virtue, and improved
with such Knowledge, as might make you shine, and adorn the Church and State?
What should we render to God, who inspires the Hearts of Kings with such
charitable Thoughts toward us? What should we return to the living God, who
took care to lay in our Minds the Seeds of a blessed Immortality? Not only an
Immortality in Fame and Glory among Men, which gives but little refreshment to
the ashes of the Ambitious; but an Immortality in real Glory and Happiness.
This was a Care which we were incapable of bestowing upon our selves, then when
we most needed it; and if we had stayed 'till we became Men, it would have been
too late, for by that time our Reason had been snarled, and all our Powers had
become untuneable.

I cannot better represent to you this great goodness of God, than in the words
of the wise Son of Sirach. Eccles. 38.24, etc.
The Wisdom of a Wise Man comes by opportunity of leisure, and he that has
little business shall become Wise. How can he get Wisdom that holds the Plow,
that glories in the Goad, that drives Oxen, and is occupied in their Labors,
and whose talk is of Bullocks? He gives his mind to make Furrows, and is
diligent to give the Kine Fodder. Verse. 28.
The Smith also sitting by the Anvil, and considering the Iron-work, the Vapor
of the Fire wastes his Flesh, and he sigheth with the heat of the Furnace: The
noise of the Hammer and the Anvil is ever in his Ears. And so he describes the
Carpenter, Verse. 32.
the Graver, the Potter: Men without whom a City cannot be inhabited. But they
are confined to an Employment too narrow for Knowledge, and converse of Wise
Men. They are not likely to be called forth to a larger Sphere of public
Service. Verse. 33.
They shall not be sought for in public Counsel, nor sit in the Congregation,
they shall not sit in the Judges Seat. Cap. 39.1. etc.
But he that gives his mind to the Law of the most High, and is occupied in
the Meditation thereof, will seek out the Wisdom of the ancient, he will keep
the sayings of renowned Men; he shall serve among great Men, and appear before
Princes, he will travel through strange Countrey's, for he has tried the Good
and Evil among Men. And so he goes on elegantly. I will not trouble you with
all of it, only conclude with his Exhortation so suitable to this Assembly.
Verse. 13.
Hearken unto me ye Holy Children, and bud forth as the Rose growing by the
Brook of the Field. And give ye a sweet savor as Frankincence, and flourish as
a Lilly; send forth a sweet smell, and sing a Song of Praise; Bless the Lord in
all his Works.

FINIS.

