A SERMON, Preached at the Solemnity of the FUNERAL OF Mrs. DOROTHY St. JOHN,
Fourth Daughter of the late Sir Oliver St. John, Knight and Baronet, of
Woodford in Northamptonshire. In the Parish Church of St. Martins in the
Fields, on the 24th of June, 1677. BY ANTHONY HORNECK, Preacher at the Savoy.

Published at the desire of her Relations:

LONDON, Printed for James Collins, in the Temple Passage from Essex Street,
MDCLXXVII.

Imprimatur,

Guil. Sill, R. P D. Episc. Land* a Sac. Dom.
Julii 26. 1677.
TO THE HONORABLE THE LADY BARBARA St* JOHN.
MADAM,
UPon Your Request I have adventured to appear in Public, and exposed that to
common view, which I thought would never have gone farther than my Study. Not
to have yielded to your desires had been uncivility; and though I am sensible
of the weakness of the Discourse, yet to pleasure you, I have resolved to deny
my self in that thing we call Credit and Reputation; the rather because in this
Sermon I have proved it to be Vanity. The Text was of your Daughters choosing;
whether she regarded the sound more than the sense, I will not enquire; but as
the different sentiments of Divines about this passage, have allowed it a place
in the Catalogue of the sublimer mysteries of the Gospel; So if I had had more
time to view and correct my Comment, it might have come abroad more polished,
and fitted more to the palate of the Age. What nicer men would have made the
Scene of curious Speculations, I have endeavored to make as practical as I
can, being sensible that our work is to convert Souls, not to paint them. In an
Age so loose as ours, so full of Vanity and Sin, we had need be very serious
and earnest with men to come away from these Idols, to serve the Living God,
and as this shall be my sincere endeavor, while the Great Master of my Life is
pleased to continue me in the station I am in; So if I can contribute any
thing, either to your Ladyships, or your Relations Spiritual Advantage and
Edification, it will be no small Satisfaction to

MADAM, Your LADYSHIPS Most Humble Servant, ANTHONY HORNECK.

Romans viii. 20. For the Creature was made subject unto Vanity, not willingly,
but by reason of him, who subjected it unto the same in hope.
THE (...), or things hard to be understood in this 2 Pet. 3. 16.
Epistle, would almost justify a Man's wish, for St. Paul's return to this
valley of Tears, to explain them. As this Epistle has occasioned more
differences in the World, than any other Book of Scripture: So we seem to want
some heavenly Interpreter, more infallible than St. Peter's pretended Successor
at Rome, to compose them; and yet I cannot deny, but that by Prayer, and
industry, and assiduous reading, and laying aside partiality, and prejudice,
and superstitious reverence to our education, and by attending to the scope and
drift of the Writer, and the circumstances he then was in, and the
controversies that vexed the Church in that age; the mind of the Holy Ghost,
though not in every particular, yet in most things may be known to our comfort
and satisfaction.

In this Chapter the Apostle partly directs the Roman Christians, and partly
comforts them, shows them their duty, and their cordial; lets them see how they
must be qualified, if they claim an interest in Christ Jesus, and how much God
is concerned in the midst of all their afflictions, and persecutions.

In his directions which reach from the 1. to the 16. v. he acquaints them,
That if they lay hold on the love and favor, and merits of Christ Jesus, they
must mind spiritual things more than temporal, change their bvass, and the
spirit of God must be predominant in their souls, govern their inward man, make
all their passions stoop, and all their desires bow to his command.

In his comforts he is ever stately and magnificent, and does as it were empty
Heaven, to bring the Blessed Trinity, and all the treasures of that Glory down
into their souls, and having mentioned Heavens glory, the reward of all
troubled and weary souls; he knows not how to be large and copious enough upon
so rich, so illustrious a Subject: And therefore by way of a Prosopopoea or
Figure, whereby we ascribe actions and postures of rational Creatures to things
either inanimate, or sensitive, he brings in the whole Creation longing for
that glory, as if the universe sympathiz'd with all the suffering servants of
God, and together with them breathed after that splendid manifestation of God's
power, and majesty, v. 19. For the earnest expectation of the Creature waits
for the manifestation of the sons of God; and because the more curious among
the Christians, he writes to, might ask how Creatures corruptible and vain come
to pant after that glorious day, he in my Text lets them know that it is the
great Commander of Heaven and Earth, that has so ordered it, and intends to
bring Light out of that Darkness, and make that vanity they are subject to,
subservient to their future perfection.

For the Creature was made subject unto vanity, not willingly, but by reason of
him, who subjected it unto the same in hope.

In which words we find, 1. A peremptory assertion of a signal change made in
the Creature. The Creature was made subject unto vanity. 2. The manner of this
change, or rather the cause of it. Not willingly, but by reason of him, who
subjected it unto the same. 3. Something which qualifies and mitigates that
change, or vanity. It is subjected in hope, and of these in order.

I. A signal change made in the Creature.

The Creature was made subject unto vanity. There is hardly any word in Holy
Writ, that Expositors have toiled more to find out the meaning of, than that of
Creature in the Text. Not to mention, that some by it have understood Mankind
in general, others the Christian World, others the Blessed Angels, who minister
unto those that shall be heirs of Salvation; some eminent men of late have
undertaken to make out, that the Apostle means the Gentiles, or Heathens, which
were to be brought over to the Christian Faith. But if we admit of this sense,
it must follow, that the Apostle in the foregoing Verse, where he begins to
speak of the Creature, falls abruptly upon a new subject, which seems
altogether improbable, that verse being joined by the particle FOR to v. 18. in
which we have him comforting the afflicted Christian with that glory, which ere
long should be revealed in him, and then immediately it follows, the earnest
expectation of the Creature, etc. So that what is said v. 19. and in my Text,
must have relation to the same subject he had spoke of v. 18. and if by the
Creature we understand all creatures in this visible World, in a word, Heaven
and Earth, and the things that are therein, the coherence is elegant, and the
sense perfect, easy, and natural; and it is an argument, a minori ad majus,
from the less to the greater: If the whole Creation hopes to be delivered from
her bondage and oppression, you may with far greater reason both look for a
happy deliverance and comfort your selves with the thoughts of it.

And indeed, he will soon be convinced, that the Creature was made subject unto
vanity, that shall observe how much its gloss, and beauty decayed after the
fall of Adam; how the Earth, that before was a stranger to all noxious herbs
and plants, brought forth Thistles and thorns now; how her former fertility was
lost in a dismal barrenness, and the ground that before required no labor,
would yield little now, but what Men forced and squeezed out of it by the sweat
of their brows; how the Blessing that enriched and adorned it before, exspir'd
into a Curse; and Nature, which before knew no poison, no enmity to Man,
degenerated now into Hostility, and from a friend became a foe; how her former
lovely face is all disfigured with spots and freckles now, and that which was
all charm to a rational soul before, is now become an object, which few wise
men, indeed none but fools delight in; how the Heavens which before dispensed
their kindly influences to Man, and seemed to be proud of the employment, soon
after became Gods Arsenal, from whence he sometimes fetches water to drown, as
he did the first World, sometimes fire to consume, as he did Sodom and Gomorra,
sometimes hailstones to kill, as he did the Amorites, sometimes winds to
overturn, as he did Job's houses; how the Creatures which were commissioned
only to seed, and cherish man, are now very ordinarily made use of to punish
him, and they that before served him for the noblest uses in his integrity, at
the best do now relieve him in his misery; how the Creatures, which before did
reverently observe and bow to him, do now as often seize on him, as if Nature
were inverted, and they had got the dominion over him, whose primitive right it
was to have dominion over every living thing that moves upon the Earth; and how
many things, which before might have made him truly happy, serve only now to
make him an object of scorn to God and his holy Angels. So much of this change.

II. The manner of the change, or rather the cause of it. Not willingly, but by
reason of him that subjected it unto the same. Men and the Apostate Angels
indeed were made subject to vanity with their own consent, and their own
wilfulness lost them that glory they once enjoyed; but the other creatures in a
manner against their will, because it was not for any fault of their own, but
for Man's sin that God doomed them to* their vanity; Cursed be the Earth for
thy sake (says God to Adam) Genesis 3. 17. And that no man may think it strange
that the curse of God should light on things innocent and incapable of sinning,
we must remember that God in punishing the creatures with their vanity,
punished Man himself for whose use and service chiefly they were created; as a
Magistrate that confiscates the offenders goods, inflicts Justice on the
offender, and puts him in mind of the error he has committed, and of the
injury he has done to the public: So that he that has subjected the Creature
unto vanity, is God, by whose just sentence it came to pass, that the Creatures
all glorious before, became suitable to Man's corrupt and miserable condition,
and were permittied to be stings and thorns in his side, and so far from
yielding true content and satisfaction, that they ordinarily lead to trouble
and vexation of spirit.

I will not here enlarge upon Adam's sin, nor show you what unbelief, what
pride, what contumacy, what ingratitude, what want of love, what Apostasy may
be discovered in it. We may be confident, God had reason for what he did, and
that he saw the crimson dye of the transgression, which made him issue out this
order, that upon this Great Princes fall, the whole Creation should go into
Mourning.

III. That which in a great measure qualifies and mitigates this Vanity, the
Creature has been suffered to sink into, is this; That it is subjected in
hope. God has as it were endowed the Creatures our eyes behold with hopes of
their restitution to their pristine beauty, usefulness and glory; For according
to his promise we look for new Heavens and a new Earth, wherein dwells
righteousness, the old Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat; the old Earth also, and the works that
are therein, shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3. 10. 13. Thus the Creature will one
day undergo a kind of Glorification and participate of the splendour which shall
encircle all righteous and sanctified souls; and as Gold in the fire is
refined, it is dross purged away and comes out more splendid than it was before:
So the World that now lies under corruption, purified by that future fire, will
put on a face more pleasant and beautiful than now it has; and let no man
scoff at this assertion under a pretense that the Earth at that time will be of
no use, for good men will be in Heaven, and the wicked in Hell, and
consequently the Earth will have no need of Renovation; for can any man be so
irrational as to think that there is no use of the Creature, but what consists
in eating and drinking and sensual pleasure? And though I will not say with
Tertullian, who favors the Millenary opinion, Tertuli. lib. 3. adv. Marc.
that the new Heavens and the new Earth will be in compensationem eorum, quae
in seculo vel despeximus, vel amisimus, to make amends for what we have either
lost or despised in this World; yet how are we sure that the glorified Saints
shall be so confined to that place we strictly call Heaven, as not to descend
upon this glorified Earth, which for ought we know will be filled with God's
glory in a manner as much as Heaven, and will together with Heaven, make one
great Theater of bliss and happiness? And who knows but these triumphant
Saints, as at that time they will know things perfectly, and see through a glass
no more, are to read the wisdom, and goodness, and bounty of the Great Creator
in the several Creatures that shall adorn that new World? And this is that
(...), that restistution of all things, foretold of all the Holy Prophets since
the World began, mentioned Act. 3. 21

That this stately Fabric of the World is to be at last consumed by fire, and
whatever we see before us to be lost in an universal Conflagration, is not only
the import of the Apostles discourse here, but has been the opinion of the
most ancient Heathen Philosophers, Pythagoras, Heraclitus, Zeno, and of all the
Stoics, who therefore talked much of an (...), and seem to have received it by
an immemorial tradition from Adam himself; who as Josephus tells us, Prophesied
that the World should once be drowned by Water, and another time destroyed by
Fire. And this conflagration whereby the World shall be renewed and reinstated
into its primitive splendour; all the Creatures groan for, and travel as it were
in pain together until now: to use the Apostles phrase v. 22. with hopes to be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the
Children of God.

Thus far the sense of the words, which sense I do the rather pitch upon,
because both Ancient and Modern Divines, some few only excepted, agree in it.
And now what subject of discourse can be fitter for this present occasion, than
THE VANITY OF THE CREATURE.

Can we see a curious Fabric here all broke to pieces, and a Creature that was
made a little lower than the Angels, cut off before half her race was run, and
tumbling down as she was going up the Hill, and forbear crying out with
Solomon, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity?

There are few men that pretend either to sense or reason, but will freely
acknowledge the vanity of all sublunary Objects, and yet to see them dote on
things, which by their own confession are fickle, inconstant, and
unsatisfactory; to see them hug this Vanity, as if it were Mount Sion, which
shall never be moved, as if it were the rock of ages, against which the gates
of Hell shall not be able to prevail, would make any contemplative man bless
himself, and wonder

-- Quis demon subiens praecordia flammam Concitat, and raptam tollit de
cardine mentem: What evil spirit makes them act contrary to those convictions,
cross those principles, give themselves the lie, and love such contradictions.
But it is no new thing to speak well, and to act ill, and to make a learned
Harangue of the emptyness and weakness of things below, while the affections
are so set upon the World, that you had as good attempt to move the Pyramids of
Egypt out of their places, as hope to disentangle the heart from these briars
and thorns.

The great Idols of this Earth, Riches, Honors, Pleasures, Life, Health,
Children, etc. which the World adores with preposterous Devotion, alas! what
are they all but vanity in grain?

I. Riches, when the Magnificent Croesus sat upon his Throne, decked with
beaten Gold, adorned with a thousand Jewels and precious Stones, he had the
curiosity to ask Solon, whether he had ever seen a more glorious sight? Yes
Sir, says Solon, for I have seen Hens and Phesants, and Partridges more
gloriously arrayed than you. The Philosopher saw the vanity of all this wealth
and cost, and laughed at it. The covetous man indeed, that Son of the Earth,
sees with other eyes, and cannot think himself solidly happy, except he swims
in Wealth: This is it engrosses the secret wishes of his mind, and to have as
much as other men, is that his soul does chiefly long for: So have I heard a
man in a Feavor wish for a cup of cold water, which when he has obtained, has
proved his death and ruin. What happyness does the wretch fancy in a little
shining clay! He sees no vanity in great Possessions, and he thinks that man
lived like a God, that could say, I will pull down my Barns and build greater,
and Luc. 12. 17, 1^
there I will bestow all my fruits and my goods: What ever other men think of
Nabal, he commends him, and calls that living like himself, when he scrapes
what wealth he can together to feed his appetite and luxury.

Have not you read of whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear Matthew. 23. 27.
beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all
uncleanness? So here there is a veil drawn over this glittering dust, and the
veil is painted and gaudy, and takes the eye; but that man which has courage
to lift it up and to see what is underneath, will quickly find that these are
things, which to day caress their favorite, and to morrow make themselves
wings and flee away; and that they can neither preserve the Body from
disasters, for in despite of all my Treasures Lightning from Heaven may strike
through my sides and kill me, and Vapors of the Earth may infect my spirits
and blow my life away, and sickness may breed in my bones and rack me; nor
afford any real content to the Soul, for when I see a Judas tremble with his
purse full of money, and Gehazi walk in fear while he brings home his talents
of Silver, and an Alexander in the midst of all his opulency dissatisfied and
tor^ured with Ambition, and Belshazzar with all his Golden cups about him, grow
pale as Ashes, and quake at the sight of the fatal hand; when I see how their
outward plenty entices men to that which will undo them, and how strong a
temptation it proves to run away from him who is the proper center of their
Souls; how it does teach men to sin, and fills their carnal minds with car^s,
and carkings, and anxieties, makes Man, the noblest work of the Creation, a
slave to Dust; dethrones his reason, thrusts him into Vassallage, and (...).
Diog. Laert. lib. 6. de Diog.
trrnsforms that part which is like to Angels, in o a beast, and consequently
prepares him for shame and confusion in the end, and by degrees breeds in him
the Worm that dies not: What name, what title can I bestow upon it, but that of
the Apostle, Deceitful riches, which lead men into snares, and drown them in
destruction and perdition, 1 Timothy 6. 9. Not but that our of this Mercury, a
wholesome Medicine may be drawn, and men may lay up in store for themselves a
good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on Eternal
life; But where one prepares an Elixir of it, thousands makes nothing of it,
but Sublimate, so strong a Poison, as does not only kill the body, but lays
force on the soul, makes it sick to death, and which is strange, for morte
carent animae, murder that part, which the great Creator has blessed with
immortality.

II. Honor. What a stir do men make about greatness and reputation in the
world, and what is it all but the breath of dying men! He that sees the
ambitious clamber that Mountain, as if it were the Hill of God, and there lay
the way to Heaven, would wonder what the man means to labor so hard, when in
good truth he only leaps to catch an atom tumbling and playing in a Sunbeam.
He stands on firm ground, and nothing will serve him but a slippery place, from
whence the least frown of a Monarch throws him down. Consul Bibulus surrounded
with Acclamations and Euge's knows not where he is, whether he is riding in his
Chariot, or treading air: But see the sad reverse which waits on humane
triumphs, while his fond thoughts and the numerous multitude, with their
praises, swell him above himself, a Tilestone falling accidentally from a
house, puts an end to his life and all his glories together before he can reach
the Capitol. Sejanus is honored like a God to day, to morrow kicked by
Scullions and Serving-men. Belisarius that commands an Army this year, the next
is forced to cry Date obolum Belisario, Pray remember the poor. It was
therefore ingeniously said by one of the Royal slaves that drew Sesostris his
triumphing Chariot; when the King asked him why he looked back so often upon
the Wheels; That he could not but with a great deal of pleasure observe how
that spoke which was uppermost now, was lowermost by and by, giving the haughty
Tyrant to understand that he who wears a Crown to day, may handle a Spade to
morrow.

Where are the mighty Honorable men, who have made whole De 300 Statuis
Demetrii Phalerei null^ corrupit aerug aut situs, sed omnes vivent ipso eversae
sunt. Demadis statuae co^ flatae sunt in matulas. Plutarch. de Rei^ Ger. praec.
Nations tremble, and shook the habitable World into subjection? Was their
dignity able to preserve them from the burning Lake, or has Vengeance been
afraid to fling them into Hell, because they were clad with Silk and Purple? So
airy, so transitory a thing must needs be vanity, and to build upon it, is to
make a nest on the waves of the Sea, which the least angry Billow shatters into
nothing. What signifies a Chair of State while the Colic rages in my bowels!
Or what ease can my soul find by the bowing of a thousand knees, while my own
must bow to pain and anguish! And indeed the greatest Emperor makes no better
dust than the meanest slave, and in the Grave it is impossible for Menippus to
tell the Son of Jupiter which was the Potter and which the lofty Macedonian
Hero.

Honor! This is the Goddess to which Hecatombs are offered, and most of the
Wars and battles that are fought, are but to vindicate her cause. This is it
that tempts the man of birth to sacrifice himself, and estate, and family; and
if his credit be sullied never so little, to wash away the stain with his
neighbors blood; and he that can see with what care and trouble popular
applause and a changeable Princes favor is acquired, with what fear it is kept,
what enemies it raises, what dangers it precipitates it is Clients into, and how
it causes them to prefer a punctilio of Honor before all the Laws of Heaven,
and a great man's smiles before the courtships of the Blessed Trinity, and
makes them careless of that incorruptelae superindumentum, the Carthaginian
Tertullian.
Father speaks of, i. e. of being clothed upon with their house from Heaven,
and regardless of that splendour and Kingdom, which the mighty Rewarder of them
that diligently seek him, has to bestow on those that obey him more than men.
He I say, that can see all this, and fancy real and solid Bliss in these
Castles of air, must have a heart of lead, a soul altogether immerst in sense,
drowned in sensuality; and it may more truly be said of him, than of the man in
the Gospel, that traveled from Jerusalem to Jericho, that he is fallen among
robbers, who have plundered him of his reason.

III. Pleasure. There is indeed a pleasure which arises from a serious and
conscientious discharge of our duty to God and Man, which has nothing of
vanity in it, for it is a foretaste of Heaven, a glimps of Paradise, and a
preface to those joys which no eye has seen, no ear has heard, no heart has
conceived. This pleasure makes us men and partakers of the Divine Nature. T^^s
is the water of life, whereof whoever drinks, shall never thirst again after
broken cisterns which can hold no water. This pleasure has substance in it,
and the soul moves then in her own proper element, when bathing in rivers of
such delight. This pleasure drop^ from above, and is restless till it mingles
again with those C^^e^tial joys, from which treasury it is sent into the soul.
But the pleasure which we condemn as vain, consists in gratifying the flesh in
all its extravagant wishes and desires. This is the sensual man's darling, and
he despairs of any satisfaction except he can crown his days with Rosebuds, and
walk in the way of his heart, and in the sight of his eyes, and fan his senses,
and give them that liberty and elbow-room they crave: So the Great Solomon
thought, and tried it, but found by sad experience that this was the way to the
chambers of Death, Prove. 7. 27.

Pleasure, like the Harlot spoken of v. 13. catches the heedless Youngster, and
kisses him, and with an impudent face, says unto him, I have decked my bed with
coverings of Tapestry, with carved Works, with fine linen of Egypt; I have
perfumed my bed with Myrrh, Aloes, and Cinnamon. Come let us take our fill of
Love until the morning; let us solace our selves with Loves, for the good man
is not at home, he is gone a long journey; he has taken a bag of money, and
will come home at the day appointed. With her much fair speech she causes him
to yield, with the flattering of her lips she forces him: He goes after her
straightway, as an Ox goes to the slaughter, or as a Fool to the correction of
the Stocks, till a dart strike through his liver; as a Bird hastes to the
snare, not knowing that it is for life. Like a fatal pit which some spreading
(...) Philo.
flowers have covered and hid from the eyes of the unwary passenger, it tempts,
but kills, laughs upon you, but gripes, invites, but betrays; it never offers
honey without a sting; and if it courts the weak sinner with milk and butter in
a Lordly dish, it is but to strike a nail into his Temples, and to mingle that
milk with his blood. The Wine it presents him with, is to bite him like a
Serpent, and when it shows him the blood of the Grapes in a Crystal glass, the
intent is to sting him like an Adder, Prove. 22. 31, 32.

What are these sensual delights but burdens to a rational soul! Beasts have
greater enjoyment of them than we. The modish Gallant that courts them, and
obtains his desires, too often like Actaeon, is devoured by his own Hounds, and
the Roses he smells to leave nothing but pricks behind them to wound and tear
his conscience; And like Phalaris that dangerous Host, when Voluptas bonum
pecoris est Senec.
they have feasted him, they torture him, fill him with Infamy and Diseases,
with pain and poverty; and he that went joyful out comes mourning home, and is
ready to curse the day that he listened to these deceitful Sirens, which did
but sing, first to lull him asleep and then to poison him; like Dalila,
flattered him, that his strength might depart from him, and as Judith did
Holofernes, made him drunk, the better to exercise their cruelty upon him.

Hannibal Campana luxuria perquam utilis ci^itati nostrae ^uit. Invi^tum enim
artis Hanniba^em, illicebris ^uis complexa, ^incendum Romano militi ^ibuit.
Val. Max. lib. 9. ^ 1.
that could not be overcome by arms, is overcome by pleasure; and he whom all
the Roman forces could not weaken, is made feeble by luxury. By this Rome it
self fell; and long before, the Macedonian Empire perished. This is it has
ruined Kingdoms; destroyed the most flourishing Monarchies; and foreign enemies
have not done them so much harm as this inward and homebred adversary. Aelian
Aelian. Lib. 5. de Animal. c. 40.
tells a strange story of his Pardalis, a beast of a sweet scent, but dreadful
shape; and as the one attracts company, so the other frights them. Therefore to
get prey to feed on, she retires to a place which Nature has adorned with
trees and bushes; and there covers her self with leaves, so that her scent is
only perceived; but her body remains unseen. The wild Goats and such other
creatures ranging in the Wood, and delighted with the rich Perfume, approach,
and now outleaps the mighty Murderer, and leads the captive wretches in
Triumph home.

Whether St. Chrysostom's Libyan Monster be a fable or no, I will not dispute,
the moral I am sure cannot be improper for our purpose. This Creature he
represents to be of a shape partly Humane, partly Serpentine: The upper part of
its Body like a Woman, its face beautiful, its skin white, its breasts large, a
strange liveliness and briskness in its eyes; but the the lower part full of
Scales, and rough, ugly, and intractable, and its Tail like that of a Viper,
swift and running very fast, having no voice but that of a hiss, laying force
on all Animals it meets withal, except Man, whom alone it deceives by guile and
cunning; for to him it threatens no danger, makes no noise, fixes its eyes with
some modesty on the ground, now and then looks up to allure Man into its
embraces, and if any be so ignorant as to come near and handle it, it then
leaps upon his back, and shoots its poison through his bowels, and when he
falls the rest of its companions come all out of their dens and help to devour
so fair a prey.

The application of these passages is easy enough, and who sees not that
sensual pleasure is that Panther and that Dragon, that in the end destroys the
fond man, that is either delighted with its smell, or with its glorious
outside. And here I remember what the noble Plutarch says, Pleasure (he means
that pleasure which Lust and Luxury affords) is a Brute, but not a Savage one;
It tears indeed like a wild one, but does not seem to be so; Did it appearin
its proper colors, it would be shunned as Bears and Leons; and there would be
no difficulty in catching and killing of it; but coming in the habit of a
friend, it does both hurt and cheat, murders by adulation, and while it
pretends to give liberty, makes a prisoner of the man; and enslaves him to a
Prodigy, the man does not so much buy Pleasure as sell himself to it; and his
reason is turned out into exile; and he is banished from himself, for it makes
him venture upon the basest, most childish, most sneaking, and most impertinent
actions, things below a man, and below those excellent faculties he is endowed
withal, and like some ill natured Physician, gives a pleasant Potion and cures
him for the present, keeps up his spirits, and supports him, that he may abuse
his body more, and venture upon new diseases.

Xerxes knew what he did when he forbad the Babylonians the use of arms, and
permitted them to give themselves over to Wine and Women, and all manner of
luxury. He was sensible this would emasculate their virtue and make them
objects of Scorn, who once had made the most puissant Monarchs tremble. Indeed
this is it which dissolves courage and makes the greatest valor melt into
cowardice. It debases a Sardanapalus to a spindle, and roots out all sense of
greatness and ingenuity: Whatever conceits men have of it, in the end it leaves
them miserable, and instead of pity, their neighbors cannot but laugh at them,
as much as the World did at the attempts of that Prince, who tired with variety
of pleasures at Land, had a mind to try their sweetness in a more unruly
Element, the Sea. A Ship is built, liker a Palace than a Vessel; Here are
erected Chambers for himself, there Apartments Max. Tyrius Dissert. 21.
for his Concubines, a Garden is planted too, set out with Aromatic trees and
herbs, no splendour is wanting, no cost spared, all the rooms dazzle the
Spectators eyes with the Gold that glistered there; The Egyptians admire it,
all are ambitious to go aboard of it; The mighty Vessel being launched, the
King enters, and while the Calm lasted, nothing could appear more glorious; But
a boisterous wind soon turns that calm into a tempest, and now the vast bulk
sinks, and the World seems to suffer shipwreck; So that it may be truly said of
Pleasure what was In Strab. lib. 1^.
said of the Honey that was given to Pompey's Soldiers; it drives men into
madness, and what they intended for their Cordial, proves their Death, and that
which they hoped would have refreshed them, does but intoxicate them, and the
sweetness turns into Gall and Wormwood.

IV. Life. This has in all ages been counted so vain a thing, that wise men
have been at a loss for words to express its vanity. A shadow, a dream, a
bubble, a tragedy, a wheel, a vapor have been thought Epithets too great for
it; and therefore some have adventured to call it nothing. I confess I cannot
but smile when I find what admirers of long life the Chinese are, and what
pains they take to preserve themselves here on Earth from mortality. It Is
pleasant to read how one of their Kings being by some Impostor Vid. Trigant.
Com. de Exped. apud Sinas. Et Martin. Hist. Sin. lib. 8.
promised a cup of Liquor to make him immortal, would by no means be
discouraged from his strong persuasion, that upon the drinking of it he should
certainly be freed from death for ever, till a friend of his more, wise than
he, snatched the cup from the place where it stood, and drank it off. The King
mightily incensed at the insolence, immediately drew his Sword to kill him, to
whom the Gentleman wittily replied: Either upon the drinking of this Liquor, I
am immortal, or I am not; If I am, then in vain do you attempt to kill me; if I
am not, you have reason to thank me because I have delivered you from a cheat.
Which answer pacified the King, and made him commend his friends prudence and
fidelity.

Yet, it seems, so bewitching a thing is this desire of Immortality here on
Earth in that kind of men, that this very King not long after that modest
reprehension of his friend, attempted the impossibility afresh, and commanded a
House to be built of all sorts of fragrant and odoriferous Trees, as Cedar,
Cypress, Camphire, etc. The scent whereof perfumed the Air for two or three
miles together. In this large and splendid Palace, was placed an ample Basin,
togather the soft Dew that fell, in which dew, pearls were every day dissolved,
and from this rich draught the unwise King promised himself no less than
Eternity on this side Heaven; But his death which soon after followed,
manifested the folly of the attempt, and discovered the vanity of the King, and
of his life together.

Where men live in contempt of a better World, no marvel if they magnify this
present life and wish for the longevity of the ancient Patriarchs, and would be
glad if they might arrive to the age of Methuselah, but these are sickly
desires which their blind appetite causes, desires as vain as the life they
praise, for in praising that, what do they commend but misery and calamity! and
he that protracts his age to some hundreds of years, does but protract it to
labor and sorrow. Who can express the innumerable disasters, discontents, and
vexations life is subject and exposed unto? We come crying into the World and
go weeping out. The various Masters and Tutors we are forced to have while Vid.
Plat. in Axioch.
young and tender, do but make us a better sort of slaves; soon after our
houses and hearts are filled with cares and contrivances, what we shall eat,
and what we shall drink, and wherewithal we shall be clothed! and these waste
our marrow and the flame that burns in our breasts. Here an injury we receive,
torments us; There a loss we sustain, afflicts us. Here our endeavors are
crossed; there our expectations disappointed. Here our hopes decay in the bud;
there the most promising flower in our Garden withers. Here a friend deceives
us, there an enemy pursues us, now a thousand fall at our side; by and by ten
thousand at our right hand, we are neither free from the terror by night, nor
from the arrow that flies by day; we have no security against the pestilence
that walks in darkness, nor against the destruction that wastes at noon day;
when one trouble is over, another comes, and the wave we have passed, is
seconded by another. The Messenger that brings us word, that the Oxen were
plowing, Job 1. 14. and seq.
and the Asses feeding besides them, and all on a sudden taken away by the
Sabeans, has no sooner done speaking, but another is ready to acquaint us,
that the fire of God fell from heaven, and burnt up the Sheep and the Servants,
and consumed them: The words are hardly out of his mouth but another tells us a
sad story of the Chaldeans, that fell upon the Camels and carried them away,
and when he has finished his dreadful news, the fourth comes running in with a
message, that a great wind from the Wilderness has smote the four corners of
the house, and that it is fallen upon our Sons and Daughters, and they are
dead. He that has escaped perilsl by land, soon is forced 2 Cor. 11. 26.
to make a trial of perils by sea; and to a deliverance from Robbers succeeds a
new danger from our own Countrymen.

Afflictat fortuna viros per bella, per aequor, Iras insidiasque, catenatosque
labores Mutandos semper gravioribus. The Candle of the Lord that shines over
our heads to day, exspires, Job 29. 3. 6. 19. etc. 31. 4.
may be, into darkness before the morrow; and the rivers of oil, which the
Rocks pour us out this hour, are turned into streams of blood the next; our
root, which now is spread out by the waters, by and by is dried up; and the dew
that lay upon our branch all night, before we are aware, changes into a moth to
consume what we have gathered; and he whose glory was fresh in him this moment,
is soon forced to cut up mallows by the bushes, and juniper roots for his meat;
and thus the greatest contrartieties plenty and poverty, love and hatred, peace
and anger, rest and trouble, quietness and rage, right and wrong, justice and
injustice make up man's life; and what is all this but a sea, where opposite
winds continually blowing endanger the Vid. Senec. Consil. ad Polyb. c. 28.
Ship, and the Passenger that is in it, and then sure this must be vanity.

V. Health. This indeed is a Jewel which men pass great commendations on, but
it is inconstancy shows it is vanity, and he that trusts to it, relies but on a
broken reed, on a Scepter of glass, and will soon be convinced, that like April
weather it is dashed and changed in the twinkling of an eye. If it be true what
the Poet says, That of all creatures Nature has produced, there is Hom^*
nothing so weak and tender, and infirm as man, he has but small encouragement
to glory in his strength: When a draught of drink can discompose him, when a
Fly can choke him, when a puff of pestilential air can cause a Civil War in his
constitution, when the least disorder can unsettle him, how little reason has
he to boast of the harmony and agreement of humors in his body? How should he
continue sound long that has so many enemies within, and without him, to
shatter his earthly Tabernacle into dust and atoms? Nothing for ought I see
deceives the unwary sinner more than his state of health, this tempts him to
offer violence to his nature, and run out into extravagancies, and because he
feels no distemper for the present, he flatters himself with a perpetual
freedom from it, goes on in his debauches, and while he pleases himself, that
his nature is made of iron, he finds, when it is too late, that it is weaker
than clay, and thus precipitates himself into perpetual groans; one would think
he is weary of his health, and tired with continuing so long without a change;
one would think he has his health given him for no other use, but to shorten
it, and that he finds pleasure in having it checkered with diseases.

Indeed Health is a thing of so nice a contexture, and heat and cold must be
mingled and tempered to that degree, and the Scales must hang so even, that we
may justly wonder, that so many men enjoy it, and that they enjoy it so long as
they do. What can we judge of so curious a frame, in which so many slender
wheels and veins do move, but that the least jog should put the Clock out of
order, and spoil the music, which is so pleasing and ravishing to the ear?
There is but a paper* wall betwixt health and sickness, and how soon may that
wall be broken down, and the fair Summers morning turned into clouds and
tempests?

How have I known men hug themselves for carrying a sound mind in a sounder
body, and what care have they taken to preserve it! They have ransacked Nature
for restoratives, forced Metals into Spirits, dissolved Minerals into
Antidotes, distilled Herbs and Plants into a quintessence; pounded Pearls into
Powder, used themselves to such a diet, eaten their meat by weight, avoided the
coldness of the air, shunned those dishes that might tempt them to a surfeit.
But alas! in despite of all their care, maugre all the preventing Medicines
they have used, how has a distemper they neither feared, nor dreamed of,
seized on their limbs, and delivered them up to the King of tertors, and
unexpectedly sent them to their long home, from whence there is no returning?

Mere fancy sometimes breeds diseases, and the sight of a disfigured face
causes an illness, which brings as great a disfigurement upon the spectator; if
we may believe men that have made observations of that nature, the very looking
on sore eyes will Via. Helmont. ^^ Sympath.
cause an inflammation in our own, and sitting on the seats of persons diseased
will bring the same distemper into our bones; and how many are the daily
accidents which crush the healthiest bodies into the greatest pain and anguish!
How does death arrest a Samson with all his vigor and sortitude about him, and
how little is sickness afraid to enter into rooms where the various odours seem
to be intended as spells to keep out the Enemy: so that it may be said of
health, as of Jonas's Gourd, it comes up in a night, and perishes in a night,
Jon. 4. 10. and those with whom it continues longer, are every hour in danger
of losing it.

VI. Children. See how the fond Parent dotes on those Pictures, and how
enamoured he is with those Representatives of his person! one would think he
had found cut something that will satisfy the great soul of man, and lighted
upon that which can give an immortal spirit true and solid satisfaction. See
how he views these lively images of himself, as if he had eyes for no other use
but to look on them, and how his soul seems to be bound up with theirs! But
while his sparkling eyes convey, and shoot all their rays on these Darlings of
his affections, grim death, unmannerly as it is, a stranger to respect of
persons, steps in, marrs all his triumphs, and snatches the Fondlings out of
his hands.

How have I seen a tender Mother carry her Babe in her arms, feed him with her
breasts, dandle him in her lap, and embrace the comely boy with a love as
strong as death, and which many waters cannot quench! she breeds him up,
watches his steps, her eyes are over him, and like the Angels of God, she
preserves him in all his ways, and with his age her affection grows, and she is
concerned for his welfare, she studies how to advance him, plots how to make
him great, rejoices to hear her Neighbors speak in commendations of him: And
now the Lad being grown up, and understanding what the tenderness of a Mother
means, the Mother justly expects some returns answerable to the mighty
expressions of her love: but we see too often that when all these pains are
taken, and all this industry and care is bestowed, and the kind Mother hopes
that the measure of his love to her will be good measure pressed, and shaken
together, and running over; behold the inhumane wretch, Viperlike, preys upon
the bowels that did feed and nourish him, grows surly to her that bare him, and
it is not all her fire that can kindle any reciprocal flames in his breast; and
thus he that was expected to have been her greatest comfort, proves her
scourge, and the Staff that in her old age was to support her, turns into a
Serpent to hiss at her, and to sting her. He whom she looked upon as her glory,
becomes her shame; and he whom once she did rejoice in, brings her down with
sorrow into her grave. And this it is like Eve had experienced in her eldest Son
Cain, and therefore when Abel was born she called him vanity, for that is the
true import of the name, Genesis 4. 2.

Augustus at last is forced to put that Daughter from his sight whom formerly
he looked upon with a favorable eye, and her lewdness makes him hate that name
which once he delighted in. Absalom, formerly his Fathers Darling, at last
invades his Crown and Scepter, and the indulgent Prince lives to see that Son
he doted on, attempt his life, and defile his Bed. And suppose the kind Son
with Coriolanus does that for his Mother, which neither the Peoples tears, nor
the Senators prayers could effect, and with Cotta rescues his Father from
death, yet the losses, Vid. Valor. Max. lib. 5. c. 4.
reproach, disgrace, and disasters which often befall even the most dutiful and
best natured Children make wounds in their Parents breasts. And thus these
certain cares and uncertain comforts by the instability and mutability of their
condition proclaim to the world, that they are but Vanity.

And having thus with as much brevity as the subject would bear, led you to a
prospect of the vanity, the creature is involved in, I must not dismiss you
without some practical reflections.

We see how necessary Illumination of Gods holy Spirit is in matters of
Religion; without it the generality of men Ixion. like, embrace a Cloud for
Juno, and are so far from seeing vanity in the creature, that they do securely
build Tabernacles here, and make the creature their highest and their chiefest
good, which was only intended for stairs to raise them into contemplation of
the glory, and goodness, and power of their Maker. This irradiation from above,
the consequent of earnest prayers, clarifies the mind, dispels the clouds and
mists that are upon it, teaches the Soul to examine the inside of things, as
well as the outside, and by that means to discover the cheat, if there be any
in the alluring object; and where this dayspring does not visit the mind, men
must necessarily continue in ignorance and folly, and call darkness light, and
light darkness, and count that gold which is nothing but gilded brass, and
look upon that as satisfactory to their souls, which indeed leaves them empty
and destitute of proper food. It Is for want of these beams, which he may be
blessed withal, if he will but open the door, and let them in. It Is for want of
admitting these heavenly beams, I say, that the Drunkard, the Lascivious, the
Proud, the Glutton laughs at the Preacher discoursing of vanity, because he
sees not with our eyes, and his intellect is not so clear as ours; therefore he
thinks that vanity a fable: and how should he perceive it, whose eyes of
understanding are not enlightened into contemplation and observation of the
nature, quality, imperfection, and insufficiency of all sublunary objects: So
that we may speak our spirits away into the Air, and read all Solomon's
Ecclesiastes to him, and we do but talk to him as we do to a blind man of
Colors, he hears our notions, but like empty notions they go in at one ear,
and out at another.

Vanity, says the Sinner! I know nothing that is more solid, more pleasing, or
more charming, than those Riches, and Honors, and Pleasures, and the other
comforts you brand with an odious name. These are things I can grasp and feel,
and I know the satisfaction they will afford, my eyes see how happy these
things make the men that can creep out of dust, and advance themselves above
the common Level; I have not seen that glorious Eternity you speak of, nor was
I ever wrapped up with Saint Paul into Paradise; I never took a view of those
spiritual Crowns and Scepters, you talk of. Shall I leave a certain
satisfaction for I know not what? for a thing uncertain and out of sight? These
outward conveniences I see must help me in distress; and if I hope for ease and
content, it must arise from these. It Is not a Notion I can feed upon; and I may
starve if I have nothing but your spiritual food to rely on. It Is the World, as
you call it, that must refresh, maintain, and feed me: And it is but reason it
should have my choicest thoughts and affections: And do you charge that with
Vanity, which alone deserves my industry and care?

And do thou talk like a man of reason, Sinner? If a Beast could speak,
would not this be his language? Has God given thee no higher faculties? Has
not he endowed thee with nobler desires? Are these o^^ward Goods indeed the
things thou chusest for thy treasure? How brutish is thy Soul, that thou can
fancy any proportion betwixt that and the Creature! Have thou a soul capable of
grasping a God, and do thou run into the embraces of an Idol? Thy soul wants
an Everlasting object; and are these the things that will endure for ever? Thy
soul must have an all-sufficient Being in her arms! and are these Butterflies,
that perish in the handling, fit to ingross thy affections? Thy Soul must have
an Anchor that can give it rest, and will these thorns and briars do it? Thy
Soul must have an individual companion that will never leave it nor forsake it,
and will these deceitful props stand by it at the great Tribunal? Thy Soul must
have a friend that must conduct it to Everlasting Mansions, and will these
miserable comforters, that shake hands with it at the brink of Eternity, serve
for guides?

Rouse, rouse thy slumbering Soul, vain Man, and let not thine eyes be always
shut. Thy blindness is not incurable; if thou will not stand in thine own
light, thou may see through all these shadows, and burst these entanglements.
There is certainly Vanity in the Creature, and God will discover it to thee, if
thou will but call upon him with the same earnestness that blind Bartimaeus
used to Christ Jesus. God is pleased with the cry of him that longs to be
delivered from his misery. O the wonderful difference that is betwixt an
illuminated and darkened understanding! One pities the Creature, the other
admires it; one looks upon it with tears in his eyes, the others heart leaps at
the sight of it for joy; one uses it soberly, the other gluts himself with it;
one sees so much of its weakness as drives him from this barren Wilderness to
make his nest among the stars of Heaven, the other so adores its beauty that he
can be contented to sweat and toil, and labor in its service for ever; one
salutes it as a stranger, the other embraces it as a wife; one looks beyond it,
the other sixes his eyes upon it as if he were in an ecstasie.

So great a difference does Illumination make; and indeed without it, you must
needs continue strangers to God's designs and your own duty; you walk in the
dark and see not how the Devil imposes upon you, how your Lusts cheat you, and
how the World cozens you, how far you run from Heaven, and how near the burning
Lake you come; you run on blindly upon Eternity, and delude your selves with a
few formalities of Religion, you know not how the case stands betwixt God and
your own souls, and cannot avoid falling into errors; you prepare for endless
sorrows, and make way for bitter, though vain lamentations at last: O that I
had known in my day what belonged unto my peace! but it was hid from mine eyes:
You delay your conversion, because you know not the great importance of it, and
make light of that which, were your eyes but opened, would make you tremble to
think what pains you have taken to procure your own ruin.

II. Men, Fathers, and Brethren, If you do believe that the Creature is subject
to Vanity, let me entreat you to act like men, that do believe it. Let your
faith be known by your works, and let us but see you live like persons that do
despise this Vanity and seek a better World. When the primitive Christians (O
happy, O blessed times!) gave out that they looked upon this World as vain and
transitory, their enemies saw that they were in good earnest when they said so,
for they saw them forget what was behind them, and press toward the mark for
the high prize of God's calling in Christ Jesus. They saw it, and thought them
mad. They saw how they fled from the satisfactions of this World into flames,
as if those were the fiery chariots, they were proud to ride to Heaven in.

Their faith lay not in talking, and as they believed the Creature to be
subject to vanity, so they raised their thoughts from Earth to Heaven, and
lived as much above the World as mortality would give them leave. They made no
more of the honors and preferments of this life, when inconsistent with God's
honor and a good conscience, than they did of glasses and rattles, and the
Prince that offered them riches to be enamored with Vanity as much as he, was
repulsed this Heroic answer; Offer these things to Children, and not to
Christians.

They made their houses Oratories, and their dwelling-places were but so many
Churches, where you might hear the praises of God resounding day and night. The
husbandman that followed his Plough, fancied himself in Heaven, and sung
Psalms as cheerfully as if he had been placed in the Quire of Angels: The
injuries they suffered for the testimony of Jesus, they smiled at, and they
that had an incorruptible Crown to look after, justly thought it below them to
be concerned at the slanders and reproaches of a poor envious World; as if
Heaven had been the Country from which they had been banished, and which they
hoped they should be shortly restored unto, they made all the provision they
could for it, secured the riches of another World, and bestowed a great part of
their goods on Christ's distressed members, because they knew they should find
them again after a few years in Heaven: They believed Christ's promises, and
looking upon him as the Son of God, they had as great a confidence that they
should be recompensed in the Resurrection of the just, as if they had the
reward already in their hands.

They could keep a calm and serene mind under the wars and tumults of this
world; and while men raged about them, they fed upon peace of conscience, and
joy in the Holy Ghost. They used the World as if they used it not, and one
might see that they had practically learnt the great Lesson, You cannot serve
God and Mammon. This Earth they looked upon as a desert, and their perpetual
wishes were, When shall we come to appear before God in Sion! The great things
of this World, which their Heathen neighbors magnified, they made light of;
and well might they renounce the glories of this Earth, when they were assured
from the Word of God that they had a greater inheritance laid up for them in
God's Paradise. They regarded not the censures of their carnal friends and
relations, and were contented to be made a spectacle to the World, and to
Ange's, and to Men. They rejoiced when they could express their love to Christ,
and were troubled when the World made any encroachment upon their affections.
They denied themselves in all superfluities, that they might have the more to
give to pious uses; nay, would not allow themselves conveniences, that they
might be in a better capacity to cloth the Naked. They stooped to the meanest
offices, and were not ashamed to converse with men of the lowest rank, as with
Brethren. They laid aside their grandeur, to obey the precepts of the Gospel,
and would not suffer any outward respects to take them off from a close
adherence to God's will. They would visit Hospitals, and with their own hands
dress meat for them that lay upon the bed of Languishing. This World seemed so
contemptible to them, that they prayed day and night to be delivered from it;
and it might be truly said of them, that the World was crucified unto them, and
they unto the World; And thus they despised the vanity of these sublunary
objects, and by despising, believed it.

Disparage not your great immortal Souls, Beloved Hearers; they are capable of
another happiness than this World can afford; and when God has provided for
them Angels food, and bread of Heaven, why should you feed them with trash and
husks to impoverish and weaken them for ever?

Arise Christians, and depart, for here is not your Rest. Advance into yonder
regions of Bliss, and live there where you may hope to live for ever. Let the
World be your Slave, and God your only Master. Let it not be said that your
Souls are subject to Vanity as well as your Bodies, and do something to
convince the World that you dare to have your conversation in Heaven. The
Creature was made subject unto Vanity, on purpose that you might flee away from
it, and breath after a more solid good. Will you do less than Pagans? Will you
fall short of Men that never heard the Gospel? Will you sink beneath those that
never had any other light but what the glimmering Candle of Nature gave them?
Can you see Philosophers contemn this Vanity, and dare you be in love with it?
Shall a Diogenes, to show how little these things, which sensual men admire,
ought to be valued, take as much delight in his Tub, as Xerxes in his Babylon,
and in dry bread, as much as Smindyrides in his sauces; in ordinary
spring water, as much as Cambyses in his richer fountains; in common Sunshine,
as much as Sardanapalus in his purple; in his staff, as much as Alexander in
his Spear; and in his Mallet, as much as Craesus in his treasures? Shall a
Pagan look on these outward glories as unworthy of his affections, and will you
suffer yours to be entangled with them? Shall a Plato, a Socrates, an
Agesilaus, a Spartan, look upon these outward things as dross and dung, trample
them under his feet, look upon them between anger and scorn, and think it below
a Creature made after the image of God, to dote on Earth, and dust; and can you
that pretend to have learned Christ, and pretend to be followers of the humble
self-denying Jesus, come behind Heathens, whom you call Blind and Wretched?
Will not they be your Judges one day? Will not their temperance and abstinence
condemn your greediness after these perishable objects? Will not they shame
you, that did more by the strength of nature, than you with all the
encouragements of the Holy Ghost? Will not this aggravate your neglect, and
change your Rods into Scorpions? Will not this make your furnace hotter? Will
not this fill your faces with greater confusion? Will God let your
unprofitableness under the richest means of grace go unpunished? And does the
clearest manifestation of Heaven add no weight to your guilt and stubborness?
If you turn the grace of God into wantonness, will God play with it, do you
think, as you do? It was a Mohammedan King, could cause the Vid. Olear. Rosar.
p^rs. lib. ^. c. 2.
following words to be written upon the Gates of his Pleasure-house, and the
story says his Life was answerable to the grave Sentences. This World will not
continue long; it is pride and luster will soon be gone. Remember, Brother, and
apply thy heart to him, who only intended this World for our Inn. Let not thy
life be united to this bitter sweet, for it has drawn in many; first jested
with them, and then butchered them. If thy Soul can but come away from her
prison, pure and undefiled, and reach the Mark, it is no great matter whether
thou die on a Throne, or on a Dunghill.

O Christians, delude not your own souls, God is resolved they shall be
withdrawn from this world while you live here, or they shall never arrive to
the inheritance of the Saints in light: God is resolved they shall be loosened
from this Earth, even in the midst of your strength, and health, and plenty,
and liberty, or they shall never ascend his Holy Hill. Away then with those
fond conceits that glue your hearts to things below. Let God be the great and
dear object of your souls. Let the rivers of your delight run all into that
Ocean. For him spend your strength, your labor, and your care. Make room for
him in your hearts, and whatever has had supremacy or priority there, pull it
down, and show it the ruler it must for the time to come obey. Breath after
another Country where true and lasting pleasures are, where the presence of God
makes hearts cheerful, and ravishes souls for ever; where the society of Angels
gives content, and endless bliss shuts out all imperfection and vanity; and as
they say of Boleslaus King of Poland, that he used to wear his Fathers Picture
in his bosom, and whenever he was to do any thing of moment, he pulled out the
Picture, looked upon it, and begged of God that he might do nothing unworthy of
so great, so good, so wise a Father: so you, let the Landscape of that celestial
Country hang always before your eyes, and whatever you are doing, whether you
are rising or sitting down, whether you are walking or standing, whether you
are traveling or conversing with men, still look upon that Pourtraiture, and
let this be your resolution to do nothing unworthy of that Heaven you are
aiming at.

And then when you come to die, and no friend, no relation, no acquaintance, no
riches, no honors, no children can give you ease; this remembrance, that your
mind has been endeavoring to extricate it self from the vanity of the
creature, and that you have lived like persons, that have indeed looked (...)
Debarim Rabba.
for a City which has foundations; this remembrance I say will give you ease,
this will make you die with joy at the kiss of God, as the Jews say of Moses,
and enable you to triumph over death, O Death where is thy sting! O Grave where
is thy victory! But thanks be to God, that gives us the victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ.

III. The Creature is made subject unto vanity; but what shall we say to those,
that subject the creature to greater vanity than ever it was condemned to. The
Idolater, that melts his Gold, and makes a God of it, as the Israelites in the
Wilderness, breaks down the limits of that vanity, outdoes Adam that was the
occasion of it; nay, goes beyond the Judge, that doomed that Gold to corruption.
The Creatures labor under vanity enough, because they cannot serve us in that
innocence and integrity we once stood in, but to abuse them, now they are under
a state of misery, and to force them to serve us in our sins, is a bondage
which will bear witness against the daring sinner in that day, when God shall
judge the secrets of men's hearts by the Gospel of Jesus. Sinner, that wine thou
abusest to besot thy understanding suffers violence from thee; thou do ravish
it serve thy lusts, and it groans as it were under thy oppression, and thou
make it vainer than Heaven ever made it. God made it serviceable to thy
infirmity, and intended it as a remedy against the weakness of thy nature; but
when thou swallowest it to destroy thy nature, to throw down the (...), that
which must guide thy actions, and shed discretion into thy speeches and
converse; forcest it to make thee a beast, and leave nothing in thee but the
brutal part, indeed scarce to leave thee sense and appetite; thou do offer
greater insolence to it than Amnon did to Thamar.

Surely every man is vanity, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 39. 11. But he that
tempts his neighbor to run with him into excess of riot, Makes him worse than
vanity; the Adulterer and Fornicator, that is restless till he has caressed
his Mistress, as he calls her, to consent to his folly; The ill companion that
solicits his associates to be lewd and profane with him: such persons make the
creature so vain, that a devout soul cannot but stand amazed at the enterprise:
vain indeed, for they double and treble its misery; and he that entices his
friend into sin, makes him besides his vanity a creature of the Devil. The man
before this sin was born to trouble as the sparks fly upward, but the sin he is
drawn into makes his burden greater, increases his load, and makes his pound of
vanity, a talent, and as if his weakness and frailty here on earth were too
little, sinks him into Hell, and as if the curse of God of old were too light a
punishment, makes him obnoxious to Gods everlasting malediction.

And such men must necessarily be of the first form in the Devils Kingdom; for
these make Devils, help to increase the number of the Fiends, and are
Familiars, that make men sinck with them into endless torments.

The Covetous, who confines his money to his Chest, and makes that lie still in
his Coffers, which like blood should have its circulation, and as it is given
him from Heaven, should return to Heaven again by way of charity, and doing
good, seems to be angry with God for giving that Creature so small a touch of
vanity; and therefore as if God had not made it frail enough, makes himself
Gods Officer, renders the Dye deeper, drowns it in misery, and inflicts vanity
upon it with a witness, and Gods little finger he makes heavier than his loins,
for he wants in the midst of plenty, and is indigent, while he knows not how to
consume that which he has already: and this vanity increases if extortion and
oppression join with it, and tempt hm to wade through Orphans tears, and Widows
blood, through the necessities of the Fatherless, and through the cries and
lamentations of the needy, to make his heap much greater; and certainly, if the
Creature is to be purged from its vanity by fire, it is but reason his body
should be the fuel, who has loaded the Creature with so much vanity and
misery, and against Gods will and order too. His stripes will be justly
doubled, for his sin was so, and he deserves to be punished, both for his
cruelty and disobedience. The Scripture excludes such men from the Kingdom of
Heaven, and good reason, for they are so given to vanity, that they would
attempt to make Gods Joys and Hallelujahs so.

IV. In the vanity of the Creature, let us behold our own, and whenever we take
a view of the decay of terrestrial glories, and see day die into night, and
Summer into Winter, one hour, one moment into another, and herbs and plants
shed their blossoms, let us reflect upon our own death and departure hence. The
Stoics were in the right, when they defined Philosophy or Religion to be a
Meditation of death. He that is frequently engaged in such meditations,
embitters his sensual delights, crushes his fondness of the world, dares not
live in those sins which other men allow themselves in, and takes the readiest
way to overcome himself; for how should he be enamoured with earth that looks
upon himself as leaving of it! and what delight can he take in the laughter of
fools, or in jovial company, that expects every hour to be summoned to the Bar
of Christ! how should he set his heart upon his Farm and Oxen, that looks every
moment to be called to give an account of his Stewardship, and knows not how
soon the Arch*Angels Trumpet will sound, and the Judge of Quick and Dead awaken
the world with his thundering voice, Arise ye dead, and come to judgment. This
even the Heathens were so sensible of, that the Egyptians, as every man knows,
had a Sceleton, or Death's head set on amidst their greatest dainties, and at
their greatest Feasts, to check vain mirth, and to put their Guests in mind,
what they were shortly to come to. This made the Patriarchs of old dig their
Sepulchers in their Gardens, while their glory was yet fresh in them, that
neither the pleasure of a Garden, nor their business might take them off from a
continual contemplation of mortality. This made others order their
Winding*sheet to be carried before them; others command their Servants to call
to them every night they went to bed, That their life was spent; for their
going to sleep they looked upon to be but a kind of going to their Graves.

And indeed he that thus thinks of death, cannot be surprised when it comes,
for it is but what he looked for, and when it knocks at his Chamber door he can
let it in, and embrace it as a welcome Messenger with Simeon, Lord, now let
thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

V. In the vanity of the Creature, let us take notice of the odiousness of sin,
and it is large demeri^s* when God for man's sin has subjected the Creature unto
van^^y, it shows what an abhorrency he has from sinful actions, and how
displeased he is with transgression of his Laws, in that he confines not the
punishment to Man alone, but extends it to the Creatures, or to his Servants
too.

To the generality of men sin seems but an inconsiderable thing, and they fancy
God to be altogether such a one as themselves; they will not believe that sin
has that poison in it, which all true penitents find, nor that there is that
Hell in it, when ever the Conscience awakes, which Cain, and Saul, and Judas
found. They apprehend God childishly merciful, and because he knows their frame
forsooth, that they are frail and weak, he cannot be angry with them for not
observing his injunctions. They make him a Being without justice, and though
they could wish he would revenge their quarrel, whenever they receive any
signal affront of their neighbors, yet they would not have him revenge their
ingratitude to him, and because they would not have him angry with them,
therefore they believe he will not; and from their loose behavior infer his
good nature, and please themselves with thinking that he will overlook their
wilful errors, because their nature abhors every thing that looks like pain and
torment.

But these fancies, Sinner, are so far from extenuating, that they but
aggravate thy folly. Alas! it is not thy unwillingness to suffer that will
allay Gods wrath, nor thy tenderness to thy self that will make him express
less hatred and indignation against thee. If unwillingness to endure pain were
a sufficient bar to justice, what Malefactor would be put to death? and if this
plea will not serve on Earth, sure I am it will be insignificant in the Court
of Heaven; and as light as sin seems now, there will a time come when it will
be weightier than Rocks and Mountains. Though thou losest the sense of it, yet
God does not forget the dishonor done unto him by it; and when the monstrous
load sunk the Son of God, and pressed him that was infinite into a sweat of
blood, and made the immortal die: think what a pressure it will be for thy
impenitent soul (for from such Christ has not taken away Gods anger) when the
whole burden shall be thrown upon thee at the Revelation of the righteous
judgment of God.

VI. Does the whole Creation hope to be delivered from her bondage? Then lift
up your heads, ye mourners of Sion, and learn to imitate the Creature in its
hope. Does the Creation as it were support it self with this hope from sinking
into its primitive Chaos, and cannot this hope of your everlasting deliverance
keep your hearts from fainting under the darkest providence? Behold the
Husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the Earth, and has long patience
for it, until he receive the early and the latter rain, Jac. 5. 7. You sow in
tears now, the day will come when you shall reap in joy! It Is but a little
while, and he that shall come, will come: The hope of a Kingdom keeps a captive
Prince from murmuring, and should not the hopes of that Kingdom which fades not
away, bear up your spirits against despair? Have you fought the good fight so
long, and will you give over now? Are you within reach of the Crown, and will
you lay down your weapons? Are you within sight of the Haven, and will you
suffer shipwreck? Behold that Jesus, who was dead and is alive, and is the King
of the Princes of the Earth, is hastening to your rescue; you will see him ere
long coming in the clouds of Heaven, and all his holy Angels with him, your
afflictions then will all be changed into Eternal Freedom, your waters of Marah
into rivers of delight, which make glad the City of God, your prison into
perfect liberty, your Lions Den into a Palace, your fiery Furnace into the
light of God's countenance, your Dungeon into Heaven, your poverty into plenty,
your sickness into Eternal health, your losses into solid possessions, your
shackles into kisses, your setters into the kindest embraces, your briars into
glory, your thorns into a Crown.

O joyful day, when this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal
shall put on immortality, and your rags be changed into splendid robes! Who
would not suffer a while to enter into that rest! Who would be afraid of being
destitute, tormented, afflicted, when these storms are all to expire into
Eternal Sunshine! The Spirit and the Bride, say, Come; and let him that hears,
say, Come; Even so, Come Lord Jesus!

Having thus led you from the Creature to the Creator, I must crave leave to
lead you back again from the Creator to the Creature, viz. To the party
deceased. And here I could wish I were able to give you that account of her
Life and deportment, which in all probability you expect upon this occasion;
But when I shall have told you, that it was not my happiness to be acquainted
with her before she died, you will soon pardon my silence in her Commendations;
And yet I dare not be so injurious to her Memory, as to conceal the Character,
which those that knew her intimately, were pleased to give of her. Her Piety it
seems was great and early, and her Soul big with Devotion in an Age which is
exposed to the greatest Temptations. What Solomon learned by sad experience in
his latter years, she practiced in the days of her youth; and the fear of God
which he found to be the only true happiness, when he had run through all the
risks of sin, she embraced before she had tasted any of the Worlds pleasures.
She no sooner came to years of discretion, but she saw that her greatest
interest lay in loving God, and understood that to remember her Creator, before
the evil days do come, was the greatest prudence and policy. As young as she
was, her eyes were fixed upon a better World, and it was hard to say which had
her greatest care, God's glory, or her own Salvation. Her affection to Goodness
appeared in her, when Vice begins to flourish in other persons, and she began
to shoot out buds of Grace, when others look upon it as a piece of necessity to
run out into Sin and Vanity. The Word of God was the food, her Soul delighted
in, and she thought no provision comparable to the Bread of Life, which feeds
men into Eternal content and satisfaction. She had learned, that God was one
that did hear Prayers, and to address her self to him, was not the least part
of her employment. In these tender years she was already arrived to that
knowledge, which Philosophers formerly attained not unto, till they were grown
aged, and was become Mistress of the greatest virtues at a time, when others
are apt to laugh at strictness and severity as a mellancholy humor. She had
already learned to scorn reproaches for Righteousness sake, and did clearly
apprehend that her greatest glory must be Religion and God's favor. At those
years when others hardly know what Heaven means, she had already felt it in her
Soul, and she could guess at what Angels did above by her praising and
magnifying the beauty and bounty of her Maker. The fruits of the Spirit which
are not seen in others before fifty, appeared in her at eighteen, and the joys
of the Holy Ghost, which are not counted modish till fourscore, became familiar
to her, as soon as her reason began to exert it self into action. She had
already practiced to lay up her treasure in Heaven, and as if she had foreknown
her death, she made preparation for it at a time, when others make provision
for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof.

What would this Plant have come to, if it had grown up to its full height and
stature, and how glorious would this Tree have been, if it had been permitted
to spread its branches like the Cedars in Lebanon. She that did already, like
Aarons rod, bud and blossom, and bear fruit; how rich would the fruit have
been, if it had been warmed some years longer by the Sun of Righteousness! But
the flower was too costly for this valley of tears, and the soil here below too
course for this curious Plant to thrive in; God therefore cropped it to
transplant it into Paradise, and withdrew it from the eyes of men, because it
was a fitter spectacle for Angels.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for James Collins.
THe Duke of Albermarl's Complete Body of Military Discipline, Fol.

The Great Law of Consideration in order to a Serious Life, by Anthony Horneck
Preacher at the Savoy, Octavo.

Essays on several Important Subjects in Philosophy and Religion, by Joseph
Glanvil Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Quarto.

Two Discourses, viz. A Discourse of Truth by Dr. Rust, Lord Bishop of Dromore
in the Kingdom of Ireland, and the way of Happyness and Salvation rescued from
vulgar Errors, by Joseph Glanvil Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Twelves.

Bishop Wards Sermons before the King, and other occasions, Oct.

Doctor Parkers Answer to Marvel, Oct.

Bishop Bramhall's Vindication of the Church of England, Oct.

Private Conference twixt a rich Alderman and poor Country Vicar, by Dr.
Pettis, Oct.


