A Plain Discourse Showing how we are to WALK After the Lord's Supper:
Necessary for every Communicant.

From 1 Col. 10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing.

Being the Substance of Several Sermons. Preached to a Congregation in
Hatton-Garden.

By John Horsman, an unworthy Servant of Jesus Christ.

Vivimus, non loquimur, magna. London, Printed for E. Richardson, at the Naked
Boy in Blowbladder-Street, over a^gainst St. Martins le Grand. School.

TO THE Serious Reader.
IT was not without great conflict and struggling within my self, that this
comes forth into Public View, being very sensible of my great unfitness for
such an appearance; for though, as one says, the plain thread bare suit may do
well enough at home, yet when persons go abroad a better habit is required and
expected. But such as have not this change of Apparel must be content with what
they have.

If it be the bravery and gaudery of Language that thou expectest in the
following Discourse, thy expectations will be frustrated; for however such a
garb might suit the airy humor of the Age, yet it would no ways be agreeable
or suitable to the weightyness and gravity of the Subject treated on, which is
not to show how we may please Men, but how we may please God, how we may walk
worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing. I am not unsensible that this Piece will
fall into diverse and different hands, and according to the hands it falls into,
such will be the Treatment it must expect. By the Profane it is probable it
will be Derided. For to such as have no sense, nor relish, nor savor of
Spiritual Things and Serious Matters, such things as these are will be the
Object of their Scorn and Derision, with whom the deep things of God are
counted no better than Mysterious Nonsense. And whatever has but the Face and
Show of Seriousness, with such it is accounted Canting, and Affected
Singularity. By the Curious, and Captious, it is most probable it will be
despised; because such will not meet with that exactness and accuracy of Method
and Style, with those flights and strains of Rhetoric which is most pleasing,
and grateful to this sort. By the Learned it also may be but little set by,
because they will not find a Margin filled with Quotations of Fathers and
Schoolmen, nor with the Sayings of Poets and Philosophers. It may possibly pass
for a Plain, Honest, Well-meaning-Discourse. And indeed were it otherwise, it
would not Answer its Title, nor would it be so suited to that sort of Reader
for which it was chiefly and principally designed, viz. The Serious Reader. For
such it was chiefly designed, and to such it is humbly Dedicated. Whatever
relish it may have with others, yet I hope it may be as Manna, sweet to the
Taste of all serious Christians. How weak soever the manner of handling this
Subject is, yet the Subject it self is very weighty and seasonable. The Duty
pressed to is very necessary, but too much neglected. We are ready to take up
with the Theory of Religion, and the Speculative part of Piety, but are too
great Strangers to the Practical part thereof. We may know many things, and
believe many things, but yet if we do not put into Practice the things that we
know and believe, we only have a name to live, but yet are dead. We have only a
form of Godliness, but are strangers to the Life and Power of it. We are for
Reading and Studying, and Hearing of Notions; but the Apostle James his Advice
is, Not to be Hearers of the Word only, but Doers of the Word also, 1 Jam. 22.
The Beauty and Power and Life of Religion lies in the Practice of it. It is not
enough that we make a Profession, that we are taken into Church Fellowship, and
Partake of the Ordinances of the Gospel, unless we do adorn this Profession
with a suitable and agreeable Walk, and Conversation, according to that advice
of the Apostle Paul, 1 Phil. 27. Only let your Conversation be as becomes the
Gospel of Christ. The neglect of this among the Professars of this Age, is very
much to be lamented and bewailed. Now to quicken and direct us herein is the
main drift and tendency of the following Discourse. And particularly, how we
are to Walk after that Great Ordinance of the Lord's Supper. I hope it will not
be judged to be altogether needless, nor prove altogether useless. And that it
may not be altogether fruitless and successless, I commend both thee and it to
the Divine Benediction, which crowns all our Labors, and gives Success to all
our Lawful Endeavors. Paul may plant, and Apollos water, but it is God that
gives the increase; for neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
waters any thing, but God that gives the increase.

I am Thine in our Blessed Lord, J. Horsman.

A PLAIN DISCOURSE, SHOWING, How we are to WALK after the Lord's Supper.
From 1 Col. 10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing.
THESE words are the Matter of the Apostles Prayer for these Collossians. In
two things, among others, the Apostle did express and demonstrate his great
love to them. The first was, in giving Thanks for them. The Second was, in
Praying for them. He gave Thanks for them, and he Prayed for them, v. 3. We
give thanks to God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always for
you. Now the matter of his Thankfulness for them he refers to Two Heads. 1.
Their Graces. 2. The Means by which they are wrought.


Their Graces, which were chiefly Three, viz. Faith, Hope and Love. Their Faith
by the Object. Their Love by the Extent. Their Hope by the Place, v. 4. Since
we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, there is the Object of their Faith; and
of the love which ye have to all the Saints, there is the Extent of their Love;
and for the hope which is laid up for you in Heaven, there is the place of
their Hope.

The Means by which these Graces were wrought, which was the Word, from verse.
5. to verse. 9. Thus much for the Matter of his Thanksgiving. The Matter of his
Prayer for them was this, viz. That they might be filled with the knowledge of
Gods will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, that they might walk
worthy of the Lord to all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and
increasing in the knowledge of God.

From whence we may take notice of this by the way, that next to our own good
and welfare, we ought to rejoice at, and be concerned for, the good and welfare
of others.

Thus it was with this blessed Apostle. He was not only thankful to God for his
goodness to himself in particular, 1 Timothy 1.12, 13. But he is thankful for Gods
for goodness unto others. We give thanks to God and the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, for your faith in Christ, and for your love which ye have to all
the Saints, and for the hope which is laid up for you in heaven, etc.

And then, shows himself greatly concerned for their good and welfare, in
praying always for them. For this cause we also since we heard of it, do not
cease to pray for you, v. 9.

See what concernedness he manifests and expresses for his Brethren his Kinsmen
according to the flesh, Romans 9.1, 2, 3. I say the truth, I lie not, my
conscience bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost, that I have great heaviness
and continual sorrow in my heart, for I could wish my self accursed from
Christ, for my Brethren my Kinsmen according to the flesh. It is a very strange
expression, but it notes his zeal, and affection, and concernedness for their
good and welfare. Romans 10.1. Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for
Israel is, that they may be saved. It is a great sign that Grace has taken
hold of our hearts, when we are really concerned for the good of others, that
the same Grace that has taken hold of us, may take hold of others too. By
this, says the Apostle John, we know that we are passd from death to life
because we love the brethren, 1 John 3.14. And truly our love to others cannot
be more fully expressed, and truly demonstrated, than by an affectionate
concernment for their spiritual good and welfare. If they be wholly ignorant of
God and Christ, that they may be brought to a saving knowledge of God and
Christ: Or if they be such as have been in any measure brought to a saving
knowledge of God, then that there may be a daily increase of it. And this was
the Apostles Prayer for these Colossians, having heard of their Faith in
Christ, and their Love to the Saints, and their Knowledge of God, he prays that
they may be filled with it in a daily increase of it for a stronger Faith in
Christ, and for a farther increase in the Knowledge of God. He is not, you see,
of a little narrow, private spirit, swallowed up in his own private
concernments, but of a brave noble generous spirit, employing his desires and
endeavors, not only to his own good, but to the good of others too. And this
is one character and property of a gracious Soul, of a sanctified person, that
he is full of constant and ardent desires after the good and welfare of others.
The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Member to profit withal, 1
Cor. 12.7. Religious love seeks not her own things. 1 Cor. 13.5. We should
not seek our own things as many do, but the things which are Jesus Christ's,
viz. that which tends to his Glory, and the Good of his Members. Christians
should serve one another by Love. Certainly what a Man is in Religion, he is
relatively so. If not fit to serve the Body, than not fit to be of the Body. He
is no Saint that seeks not the Communion of Saints. Having taken notice of this
by the way, I come now to the words themselves.

In which words we have not only the Apostle's Desire and Prayer for them, but
we may also read our own Duty in them, and that is to walk worthy of the Lord
unto all pleasing. This is the end of all our Knowledge of God and his will,
which in the 9th verse he desired they might be filled with. Why filled with
the Knowledge of God's Will? Why, That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto
all pleasing. To this end we should be filled with the Knowledge of God's Will,
that our Conversations may be rightly ordered to the Glory of God, that our
Lives may answer the Profession we make, and the Knowledge we have obtained,
and the Mercies we receive, and the Means we enjoy.

The Papists would find Merit of Works in this Verse. Both because holiness of
Life is so much urged by it; And also because here is the word Worthy used; as
if the Apostle should grant that they might be worthy of, or Merit the
Blessings of God.

Now to this might be returned a Twofold. Answer. 1. That Merit cannot be
founded upon Scripture. 2. That it cannot be founded upon this Scripture.


First. It cannot be founded upon Scripture. The Scripture does abundantly and
in many places declare against it. It cuts off and excludes all glorying and
boasting in our selves, as if by our worthiness we could procure any thing of
favor at the hands of God, or by our goodness any way recommend our selves to
the favor and acceptance of God. You see your Calling, Brethren, how that not
many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called, for
God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, etc. And
all this that no flesh should glory in his presence. But he that gloryeth let
him glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28. Alas, we are so indebted to the
Divine Bounty and Goodness that gave us our beings both in Nature and Grace,
that when we have done all we can, we are forced to acknowledge, that we are
unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10. Whatever good we do it is from God, and
therefore cannot Merit any thing at the hands of God. 2 Cor. 3.5. So says the
Apostle, Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our
selves, but our sufficiency it is of God. 1 Cor. 4.10. For who makes thee to
differ from another? And what have thou that thou have not received? Now if
thou did receive it, Why do thou glory as if thou had not received it?
Were there no other Scriptures, these were sufficient to overthrow the Notion
of Merit

2. Nor can it be founded upon this Scripture. This expression of walking
worthy of the Lord cannot be applied to Merit by any means, in as much as the
Lord had bestowed many of his Blessings and Favors and Benefits already. They
cannot by any good Works afterward, be said any ways to Merit what is past; now
it is very absurd to think, that we can by any after good Works Merit what was
given us before. But we will pass by this and come to the true meaning of this
expression.

To walk worthy of the Lord, is no more than to walk suitably and agreeably,
and some way answerably and becomingly to the many-fold Favors of God
vouchsafed to us; which will be better understood by comparing it with the
parallel places, Ephesians. 4.1. I therefore the Prisoner of the Lord beseech you
that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called. Walk worthy of
your vocation, that is, answerably and suitably and becoming your Calling, as
appears by the following words, which fully explain it, viz. With all
lowliness, and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in love,
etc. This is such a kind of Walking as is becoming and agreeable to our High
and Holy Calling, Phil. 1.27. only let your Conversation be as becomes the
Gospel of Christ. This is the true meaning and explication of this Expression
of walking worthy. He means no more by it than this, a becoming walk, or a
suitable walk, but let your Conversation be worthy of the Gospel of Christ. So
in the 1 These. 2.12. That you would walk worthy of God who ha h called you into
his Kingdom and Glory. It is the same word in the original in all these places,
(...) which is in the forquoted place rendered becoming, Let your Conversation
be as becomes the Gospel. Let your Conversation be worthy of the Gospel, or
becoming the Gospel of Christ. So here, walking worthy of God is no more than
walking suitably to the Nature of that God who is the true and living God. That
ye may walk like a People that are taken into Covenant with God, and express
the Virtues and Praises of him who has called you out of Darkness into his
marvelous Light, in your Lives and Conversations; according to that which we
have in the 1 Pet. 2.9. Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people, that you should show forth the praises of him who
has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light. Or that ye should
walk suitably to this great Mercy and glorious Privileges and Benefits ye have
received from him. So that to walk worthy of the Lord, is to live and behave
our selves as becomes those to whom God has vouchsafed so great a Mercy, that
passing by many Thousands of a nobler extraction, of a sweeter disposition, and
in many outward respects better than we. That he should out of his mere Grace
and Love in Christ, choose and call us out of the World to be partakers of
Eternal Life with him. That he should take us and leave others, choose us and
pass by others, as it is wonderful and astonishing, so it ought to influence us
into a walking some way suitable and becoming these great Mercies bestowed upon
us. And if we would know what this suitable walking is? why the next words
explain it; It is a walking unto all pleasing, so that the observation is this,
viz.

Observe. That where a Person or a People receive great Mercys, Benefits, or
Privileges from God, there ought to be a suitable, answerable, and becoming
walking thereunto; or thus, It ought to be our study and endeavor to live and
act suitably and becoming the Mercies and Favors we receive from God.

God has dealt Bountifully and Graciously with us, remembered us not only with
Common and Temporal, but with Special and Spiritual Mercys too. Do we enjoy
Peace and Quietness, when many other are involved in great Troubles and
Perplexities? Is Plenty and Fullness our Inheritance, when Scarcity and Want is
the lot of many others? Do we enjoy such a competency of Health and Strength,
when many others are Sick and weak, Languishing and Dying? Has God set any of
us at Liberty from our Confinements, wrought out a Recovery for any of us from
any tedious and dangerous Distemper, which detained us from waiting and
attending upon God in the Public and Solemn Dutys of his Worship, when many
others are still confined to their Chambers, and many to their Beds? How does
it concern such to walk answerably and suitably to the Mercies they have
received. Let such remember that advice of our Savior to the man upon whom he
had wrought a great cure, John. 5.14. And he said unto him go thy way, behold
thou art made whole, sin no more lest a worse thing befall thee.

God has done great things for us, and in some respects for all of us; In
bearing so long with our renewed and repeated Provocations, insomuch that we
are under a necessity of acknowledging and confessing that it is of the Lords
Mercys we were not consumed, that our Bodies are not in the silent Grave, and
our Souls roaring in Hell; That notwithstanding all our Barrenness and
Unfruitfulness under the means and Seasons of Grace, that yet the day and
season of Grace should be lengthned out to us; that after so many denyals and
refusals, Christ should still continue to knock at the door of our Hearts. That
when we have so frequently turned a deaf Ear to the calls and invitations of
Christ in the Gospel, that he should still continue to call and invite, and
promises a kind Reception and hearty Welcome to all those that will come unto
him. That he should still continue wooing and beseeching us by his Ministers
and Ambassadors to be reconciled unto God, after our so long continuance in
ways of Enmity and Rebellion against him. O the Patience, Long-suffering and
Forbearance of God! that ever he should so long put up the affronts and
indignitys that are every day offered to his Blessed Majesty, by such crawling
Worms of the Earth, bear so long with the Rebellions and Ingratitudes of his
Creatures! Lord how good art thou to the worst of Men, and the vilest of
Sinners? in sparing and forbearing them, in protecting and providing for them,
in calling and inviting them, in waiting to be gracious to them, in offering
Mercy and Pardon, and Grace and Christ to them, in affording them time and
space and opportunity for Repentance and turning unto God, in vouchsafeing to
them many Temporal Blessings and Favors in the midst and face of such daily
Provocations, and abuse of his Bounties. Thus I say in some respects God is
good to us all, and has done great things for us all, even for the worst and
vilest Sinner now in his Presence. And to some of us he has been more
peculiarly and specially and distinguishingly good, In choosing and calling us
not only by the outward call of his Word, but by an inward and effectual call
of his Spirit, out of darkness unto light, and from the power of Sin, and Self,
and Satan, and the World, to Himself; out of a state of Nature, unto his
Kingdom and Glory; unto his Kingdom of Grace here, and in a little time longer
will call us to his Kingdom of Glory. In Justifying us freely by his Grace, and
Sanctifying us by his Holy Spirit throughout, and adopting us into his Family.
In remembering us in our low and lost estate and condition, when we were blind
and naked, and wretched and miserable, cast out into the open field to the
loathing of our Persons, in the gall of bitterness and bond of Iniquity, held
in the snare of the Devil and led captive by him at his pleasure, under the
power and dominion of many vile Lusts and Corruptions; in bondage and slavery
to Sin and Satan; subjected and enthrawl'd to Death; under the Wrath and Curse
of God; liable to all the miseries of this Life, and to the pains of Hell for
ever; ignorant of God and Christ, and Spiritual things, nay enemies to God and
Christ, nay enmity it self. When we were in such a forlorn, helpless and
miserable state and condition as this, he pittyed us, and helped us; when none
other eye pittyed us, nay, when we had no pity for our selves he pittyed us,
and helped us when none other could help us. Others passed by us and took no
notice of us, but he looked upon us, and behold it was a time of Love with us.
He threw his Skirt over us and covered our Nakedness, and poured Water upon us
to wash away our filthiness. He Swear unto us, and entered into Covenant with us
to be ours, and we to be his; he to be our God, and we to be his Peculiar
People. He has given Himself, his Son, his spirit to us. Himself to be our God
and Portion, Jer. 31.31, 32, 33. But this shall be the Covenant that I will
make with the House of Israel, after those days says the Lord, I will put my
Law into their hearts, and write it in their inward parts, and will be their
God, and they shall be my People. And what Tongue can express? What Pen can
describe the happiness of that People who have God to be their God? David in
the 144 Psalm, v. 15. says, Happy are the People whose God is the Lord. He does
not say how happy, for it is beyond express. But this we may truly say, that
all our happiness and felicity, and comfort, lies in this, in having God to be
our God. If there be no want to them that fear God, I am sure there can be none
to them that enjoy God, who is a Soul-comforting, Soul-refreshing,
Soul-satisfying Object. It matters not what our Circumstances and Conditions
are here in this World, be they never so low, and inconsiderable, if we have
but God for our God we are happy. Happy is that People whose God is the Lord.
He has given us not only himself, but his Son too, John 3.16. God so loved the
World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life. Given him for us. To obey and
suffer, to bleed and dye, and suffer and satisfy for us, to rescue and redeem
us from those evils and miseries under which we lay, viz. the Wrath of God, the
Curse of the Law, by laying down his life for us, a life more precious than the
lives of all the Angels in Heaven, or Men upon Earth.

Not only given him for us, but given him to us, to be believed in, and rested
upon, for Life and Salvation, to dwell in us, and be united to us; to be made
of God Wisdom and Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption; to be to us,
and do for us all that God has appointed and designed him to be.

Again, he has not only given us himself, and Son, but his Spirit also to us.
To open our Eyes, to enlighten our Minds, to incline our Wills, to change our
Hearts, to Turn and Convert us to himself, To convince of Sin, to lead to
Christ, to be the guide of our ways, to be the death of our sins, to quicken and
enliven and strengthen our Graces. To witness with our spirits that we are the
Children of God. To comfort us in all our Troubles, to succor us in all our
Temptations, to resolve us in all our Doubts, to help us against all our
Infirmities. To conduct us safe through this evil World, and to seal us up to
the day of Redemption.

But yet farther, he gives us liberty to wait upon him in the solemn Dutys of
his Worship. He gives us Praying seasons, and Hearing seasons, and
Communicating seasons, for the carrying on begun Grace in our Souls. Thus
richly does he furnish our Table in this howling Desert, and bountifully
provides for us in a strange Land. We have not only Food for our Bodies, but
Food for our Souls, not only the Bread that perishes, but that which endures
to Everlasting Life. The Lamb is slain and behold all things are ready. The
Marriage Supper is prepared, and a welcome ready for all that come to it. This
is Christ's language to all his guests, O friends drink ye, eat ^e, drink and
eat abundantly O beloved. And what do you think is the matter of this Feast?
Why it is Christ with all his saving Benefits, even Peace and Pardon and
Comfort. This is the Gospel Feast unto which poor Sinners are invited. The Lord
Jesus Christ is both the master and the matter of this Feast. This is that
Bread which came down from Heaven, which is othergates Food than that Manna was
which fell in the Wilderness, of which it is said, Our Fathers did eat and they
are dead, but whosoever eats of this Bread lives for ever, John 6.48, 49, 50.
This is the Lamb that was slain from the Foundations of the World, whose Flesh
is Meat indeed and whose Blood is Drink indeed.

Thus bountifully has God provided for our Souls, we have not only the sincere
Milk of the Word that we may grow thereby, but more substantial Food, even that
sealing, strengthening, confirming Ordinance of the Lords Supper, where Christ
and all his Benefits are represented sealed and applied to Belivers, who was
not only offered up upon the Cross for the Satisfaction of Divine Justice and
the expiation of our Sins, but offered upon the Table for the satisfying our
guilty minds and for the Food and Nourishment of our Souls. Here it is that we
may take a view of Christ's dying love. Here we see him Bruised and Broken and
Bleeding for our sakes and for our Sins. Here we may see him broken and bruised
by his Father in the day of his great Wrath, when his Body was torn, his Soul
in a dreadful Agony, his side pierced, his Blood shed; these are in a most
lively manner represented by the breakof the Bread, and pouring out of the
Wine. Here is a Wounded, Broken, Bleeding, Jesus represented to us. The
Elements in this Sacrament signify, and set forth the unconceivable Sufferings
of our blessed Lord, both in his ^ody and in his Soul. The Bread signifies the
Sufferings of his Body. And the Wine which is a representation of his Blood,
the Agonvs of his Soul, because the Spirits whereby the Soul acts are in the
Blood.

All the Sacraments that ever were instituted since Adams fall to this very
day, both ordinary and extraordinary, both Old Testament and New Testament
Sacraments, they all of them principally represent and point at Jesus and him
Crucified. Adams Sacrifices were Types of Christ the true Sacrifice.
Circumcision a pledge of our Hearts Circumcision through Christ's Blood, Col.
2.11. In whom also ye are Circumcised with the Circumcision made without hands,
in putting off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh by the Circumcision of Christ.
The Passover was a token and Type of Christ our Passover Sacrificed for us, 1
Cor. 5.7. Baptism, this does point at the Death of Christ, we are said by
Baptism to be Baptized into Christ, and into his Death, Romans 6.3, 4, 5. And the
Lords Supper is a most lively representation of the Death of Christ, 1 Cor.
11.26. As often as ye eat this Bread and drink this Cup ye show the Lords death
till he come. This is a standing memorial and a lasting monument of our blessed
Lords love in bleeding and dying for us, and is to continue to the end of the
World, even till the coming of our Lord to Judgment. So that Christ and his
Death, Christ as Crucified, is that which is represented and pointed at in this
Sacrament. Here it is that Christ Jesus is as it were afresh Crucified before
our eyes, bruised by his Father, pierced by the Soldiers, bleeding for our
sins. Here is a sweet love-token indeed betwixt Christ and his Church, betwixt
Christ and Believers. What greater love can be imagined than to dye for us.
Greater love has no man than this that a man lay down his life for his friend.
Ay but here was greater love than this, here was Blood shed and a Life laid
down for very Enemies. This Ordinance may truly be styled a Love Feast. Every
thing in it speaks love. The Mysteries in it speak love. Here is Christ's Body
not whole but broken, Christ's Blood not in his veins, but shed and freely
poured out for poor sinners. The benefits intended to us by it speak great
love. Here is complete Provision and full Nourishment for our Souls, for our
Faith and all the graces of the inward man intended by it. A fresh seal of the
Pardon of our Sins in the Blood of Christ. Fuller and clearer discoverys of
God's reconciled face in and through the Attoning Blood of the Lord Jesus, that
Blood of the Everlasting Covenant. A more full confirmation and a more close
application of the New Covenant and all the Promises, Comforts, Benefits and
Privileges thereof to our Souls, and a more full Communion with Christ in his
Grace and fullness, in his Death and Sufferings, in his great Undertakings, and
glorious Transactions, in his high Dignitys and Relations, in his great
Victorys and Achievements, and in those necessary offices of Prophet, Priest,
and King to his Church, these are some of the great benefits that are intended
to us by this Ordinance.

Now we that have been so lately entertained at this Table of the Lord, that
have or might have been feasting and satiateing our Souls upon this Banquet of
Christ's love; it behooves and concerns every one of us to walk worthy of the
Lord unto all-pleasing, to walk worthy of this love of Christ in doing and
suffering, in bleeding and dying for us. That is, to walk suitably and some way
becoming those expressions of love that have been exhibited and represented to
us in this Ordinance. I say it highly concerns every one of us, who have been
feasting at this Banquet of Christ's love, it concerns us to keep up and
maintain a suitable and becoming walk after it. Remembering that it is not
enough to Eat and Drink worthily at this Supper, but we must also walk worthily
after this Supper: we have oftentimes bills put up for a prepared heart and a
suitable frame, that persons may come prepared to this Ordinance of the Lords
Supper, that they may not eat and drink unworthily. But I do not remember that
ever I saw a bill for a suitable walk and behavior afterward. It is not enough
that we duly prepare before, act worthily in, but we must also walk suitably
after Communicating. And there is as much need to put up a Prayer, and to
dispatch a cry to Heaven, that we may walk worthily after, as well as come
preparedly to this Supper. By walking worthily I mean no more than walking
suitably and becomingly.

But here it may be asked what is this suitable walking? or wherein does it
consist? or how is it that we are to walk after this Supper Ordinance? To this
we shall answer. I. More Generally. II. More Particularly.


I.
The general answer to this is, more Holily; after this Supper of the Lord we
are to walk more Holily. Now to this holy walking there must be a Principle of
Grace wrought in the heart. I say, before there can be any holiness in the
life, we must first suppose that there be Grace in the heart. A person must be
holy before his actions can be holy. For till a Man be Regenerated, and act
from a Principle of Grace in his heart, all he does is but the shadow and
imperfect imiation of a good action, as an Ape would imitate a Man, or as an
artificial motion does resemble that which is natural. Grace must first be
infused to beget life, and then we are visibly to express it in a course of
godly walking. And then there must not be only a Principle from which we must
walk, but there must be a Rule by which we must walk, and that is the Law or
Word of God, which meets and sets out the bounds of Sin and Duty, which tells
us what evil we are to decline, and shun, and what good we are to prosecute and
pursue. Now there is a twofold Holiness. Internal and External.


Internal, which lies in the hatred of sin, and a love of that which is good.
External, and that is expressed in avoiding of the one, and persuing after the
other.


Now this Holy Walk does consist, in a careful avoiding that which is evil and
sinful, and in an eager persuite after that which is good. It has two parts.
The one Privative, The other Possitive.


The Privative part which is called Mortification or a dying to sin. The
Possitive part which is called Vivification or a living unto Righteousness.
The one is the purging out of Sin, the other is the spiritual refining of the
Soul. The one is a ceasing to do evil, the other is a learning to do well. The
one is a strenuous opposition of Sin, the other is a vigorous exercise of all
Grace.

Now after this Supper Ordinance we are to walk more Holily. To hate sin more
than ever, and to love God and Christ, and the things that are spiritually good
more than ever. To dye more unto Sin, and to live more unto Righteousness. It
is true we cannot be more Elected, we cannot be more justified, after
Communicating than we were before. But we may and ought to be more sanctified
than before. Sanctification is a progressive thing; it is compared to seed that
grows, first the blade springs up, then the ear, then the ripe Corn. We are not
so much sanctified but we may be more sanctified. We do not walk so holily but
we may walk more holily still, there is none so good, but he may be better, 2
Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the
fear of the Lord. So I may say having these love Banquets, these Sacrament
seasons, and Supper Ordinances, dearly beloved, time after time returning upon
us, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit,
perfecting. Holiness in the fear of the Lord. Though Justification does not admit
of Degrees, yet Sanctification does, that is still increasing like the shining
light, or Morning Sun, that shines more and more, and brighter and brighter
unto the perfect Day, Prove. 4.18. and should be daily growing more and more in
Knowledge, in Faith in Patience, in Love, in all Grace and Consolation, until
all be perfected and swallowed up in Glory.

II.
More particularly. And we may take the Answer in these following things, which
indeed are but branches of the other; but for Method and Memory sake, I choose
to put them into so many Particulars. As,

1. More Watchfully and Circumspectly. After Communicating, there must be a
watchful circumspect walking. As a Man that has a Treasure in his house is
very watchful and careful least he be robbed of it. Now it is to be supposed,
and hoped, that we have received that in the participation of that Ordinance,
which the Devil would be glad to deprive us of. Whatever comfort and
refreshment we have had, whatever Assurances and Evidences of Gods Love we have
had anew and a-fresh; whatever lights of Christ, and resolutions against sin
we have had, he stands ready to undo all that has been done, and to deprive
us of all that we got. Upon this account we have need to walk watchfully and
circumspectly. We had need to have our eyes upward, and our eyes inward, and
our eyes round about us. Did we find, through Grace, our hearts wrought up to
any gracious frames? Did we find that our Souls were refreshed, that our hearts
were enlarged, that our affections were inflamed to Christ, that we received
any virtue from, and had communion with Christ? Did we make fresh vows and
resolutions, that through the Grace of Christ enabling us, we would walk before
him in holiness and newness of life all our days? Why then we may depend upon
it, and look for it, that the Devil will be very busy to undo all this. We
must expect that he will have a fling at us; for he is never more busy in
tempting, then when we have been Worshipping. He is never more busy in Tempting
us to sin, then after we have been making new and fresh resolutions against
sin. When we have been at the Lord's Table renewing our Covenants with God, and
establishing our resolutions of better Obedience: After these things the Devil
will come with all his forces and endeavors to make us break our Vows, and
neglect our Covenants. He will be courting us to return to our old sins, and
our old frames, to our coldness and deadness, and lukewarmness, and
worldly-mindedness, to our fears and doubtings, to our old manner and course of
living. Therefore we had need to walk watchfully and circumspectly, watching
our words, thoughts, actions, lives and conversations, that we do not return to
our old vain light frothy conversations, that better becomes the Profane than
the Professor. The liberty that some do allow themselves this way, Communicants
I mean, in frothy, I had almost said, in filthy Discourses, and unseemly
Actions, is a thing that is much to be lamented and bewailed in our day. It is
a hard matter to distinguish the professing from the carnal part of the World,
who are very near as airy in their Dresses as light and frothy in their
Discourses, and as vain in their conversations as the Carnal Crew. And is this
a walk becoming those who sit down at their Lord's Table? O no: such ought to
walk very watchfully and circumspectly, that they may not occasion the ways of
God and Religion to be reproached and blasphemed. We had need walk watchfully,
that we do not lose those sights of Christ, those comforts and refreshments,
those enlargements and enjoyments that we had in the Ordinance. That the
fellowship and communion we had with Christ be not quickly interrupted and
disturbed. It is a great mistake in Persons, to think, that when the Supper is
ended, their Work is ended; that they have nothing more to do, nor nothing
farther to mind, as if now they might return to their former courses again, and
be as vain and worldly, and wicked as before. It is to be feared this is the
practice of too many Communicants in our day, that no sooner, or soon after the
action is over, they return to their old course of sinning; Receive the
Sacrament one day, and may be, be Drunk before the next; nay, it may be, have
their Oaths and Curses in their Mouths, before the Bread and Wine is well out
of their Mouths. It were well, if that which was laid unto Israel's Charge,
might not be laid to the charge of too many Communicants in our day, Exodus
32.6. The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. O how many sit
down at the Lord's Table to eat and drink of the Sacramental Elements, and rise
up to play, return again to their old courses, playing and sporting and fooling
with sin, to their Cursing and Swearing and Sabbath-breaking, to their
Adultery, Uncleanness, Injustice, Drunkenness, etc. Like the Dog to his vomit
and the Sow when she is washed to her wallowing in the mire. Thus do many
return again to their former lusts and sins, with as great nay greater strength
than ever, so making themselves twofold more the Children of hell than before.
There ought to he a mighty careful, heedful, circumspect, watchful walking
after we have been at the Table of the Lord remembering that the Sacramental
efficacy and bond does not oblige us for a day only or a week only, but it
binds us for our whole lives. But to conclude what I intend to say upon this
head, was it the sincere and earnest desire of our Souls before we came to this
Ordinance that we might bring suitable frames and affection; to it, and did the
Lord answer our cries herein? why now we ought to be as careful and as much
concerned that those gracious frames of heart may be maintained and kept up in
our Souls. Did we beg to come with bleeding and broken hearts to this
Ordinance? why now it is our duty to beg that they may be kept bleeding and
broken. Did we beg for a stronger Faith? for more glowing burning affections to
this loving lovely Jesus? why now we are to watch and pray against unbelief,
against coldness and luke-warmness of love and affection. Did we purpose to
forsake our Sins? why now we are to watch more narrowly against it, and to beg
of God strength and Grace that those purposes and intentions may be forthwith
put into execution.

2. More Humbly, entertaining low and mean thoughts and opinions of our selves,
acknowledging our own baseness and vileness, and sinfulness and unworthiness,
loathing and abhorring our selves under a sense of our daily weaknesses, and
sinful Infirmities, renouncing and rejecting all Righteousness of our own as
being altogether insufficient any ways to recommend us to the Divine Love and
Favor, looking upon our selves as loathsome and odious and no way lovely and
amiable in the fight of God, accusing, judging and condemning our selves,
owning and admiring and adoring free Love and free Grace in all that Christ
has done for us, and in us. Having done all for us in a way of Purchase and
Merit, and all in us in a way of sovereign Grace and Almighty Power; owning and
acknowledging whatever Grace there is already in our hearts, we had it from his
fullness in whom it pleased the Father that all fullness should dwell. And what
farther supplys of Grace we shall stand in need of, we must still have it from
him who is not only the head of Government to his Church, but the head of
Influence too, in whom dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. A
fullness of wisdom as the Prophet of the Church. A fullness of Merit as the
Priest of the Church. A fullness of Power and Efficacy as the King of the
Church. A fullness of all habitual created Grace, not for himself only, but in a
way of Communication and Derivation to others, the Godhead continually emptying
it self into the Manhood by virtue of that near close, intimous union of the
Humane with the Divine Nature in the Person of Christ: from this fullness it is
that we are still expecting fresh supplies of Grace and Comfort. Distrusting
our own strength as well as renouncing our own Righteousness, submitting to all
the commands and ordinances of the Lord Jesus Christ. A proud heart shakes off
the Yoke of Christ, and will not be subject to the Lord the Redeemer, and will
be under the government of none but his own will, and his own lusts, like those
proud Citizens we read of in Luke, who said, We will not have this man to reign
over us. We walk humbly when we lie at Christ's foot, desiring to know his
pleasure, claiming no power over our selves, or any thing that we have, but
entirely submit our selves to be commanded and governed by him, submiting our
selves wholly to his command and conduct. This is to walk humbly, and thus we
are to walk after this Supper.

3. More Thankfully. What Christ has done and suffered for us, calls for the
highest and most raised Thanksgivings from us. We are to screw our Praises to
the highest note. Let us say to our Souls as holy David did to his, Bless the
Lord O our souls, and let all that is within us bless his holy Name; for his
redeeming love, who loved us and gave himself for us, an Offering and a
Sacrifice to satisfy Divine Justice. O how should we be singing that new song
of the heavenly Jerusalem above, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and
to open the seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us unto God
by thine own Blood, out of every Kindred and Tongue and People and Nation, and
have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the earth,
etc. Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive Power and Riches, and Wisdom
and Strength, and Honor and Glory and Blessing. The work that Christ came to
do and finish for us had in it all the expressions of love, and calls for the
greatest expressions of thankfulness and praise. This is a just debt that we
owe to Christ. All the evil and misery we are freed and delivered from, and the
good we are possessed and made partakers of, is owing to the Obedience and
Sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Now that our hearts may be the more affected with this love of Christ, and
drawn out in thankfulness to him, let us consider the evils we are delivered
from, and the good we are possessed and made partakers of by the Lord Jesus
Christ.

First. The evils and miseries we are delivered from, and they are very great
indeed. But what are they you will ask? why the guilt of sin, the curse of the
Law, the wrath of God, and the flames of Hell. Man's state was once an holy
state, and, whilst such, an holy state. But it was not long that he continued
in this state, being left to the freedom of his own will, he quickly fell from
that state in which he was created, by sinning against God, which sin was the
Inlet of all misery. It woefully corrupted, depraved, and debased our Natures,
robbed us of the Image of God, which once was the greatest ornament and
perfection of our Nature, deprived us of all comfortable Fellowship and
Communion with God, laid us open and obnoxious to his wrath and curse, to all
the miseries of this Life, and to the pains of Hell for ever. O the depth of
misery that all Mankind is plunged into! O the innumerable evils that do
encompass and surround us! Temporal, Spititual, and, if not found in Christ,
Eternal evils too will befall us; but in and through Christ Believers are
delivered from all that evil and misery that the Fall and Apostasy of our First
Parents involved all. Mankind into. Through him the Guilt of Sin is removed,
the Wrath and Anger of God appeased, the Thundering Law silenced, the Image of
God restored, many Powerful and Potent Enemies Conquered and Subdued.

Secondly. The good which we are possessed and made partakers of, this also is
owing to Christ, to what he has done and suffered for us, even the good of
present Grace, and future Glory; the good of Justification, Sanctification,
Reconciliation, for all these great benefits and good things we are beholden to
Christ. We are Justified by his Righteousness, Sanctified by his Spirit,
Reconciled by his Attoning Blood, Adopted by virtue of our Union with him, and
relation to Christ's Person, as he is God's Natural Son. All these blessed
Benefits and Privileges that we are made partakers of, are owing unto Christ.
As the evils we lay under were too great for any mere creature to remove; so
the good things we stand in need of, are too great for any mere creature to
procure. None beside that Person who was God as well as Man, could either
remove the one or procure the other. Had not Christ himself undertaken the work
nothing could have been done; had not this Samaritain taken pity and
compassion on us in our miserable and forlorn condition we must for ever have
dispaired of mercy or relief. The Lord looked and there was none to help, at
length his own arm brought Salvation. As for us we lay under an eternal
incapacity, and impossibility of helping or relieving our selves; as for Angels
they could not help us, could any creature have done the work God would have
employed that creature and spared his own Son. But God very well knew that
Redemption work was no work for an Angel, no not for the whole Body of Angels.
If the whole order of them had come from Heaven, and united all their force and
strength together they could not have redeemed so much as one Soul. How far God
by his Almighty power could have enabled an Angel to have born up under the
greatest sufferings we will not dispute, but suppose an Angel might have been
furnished with so much strength as to have been able to undergo and suffer all
that Christ did, yet under the highest communications of grace and strength to
him, he being still but a mere finite Creature, could never satisfy for what
was past, nor Merit for what was to come; he could neither expiate Sin, nor
procure Eternal Life. No, these are things which could only be accomplished and
brought about by him who was more than a mere finite or Created Being, even by
the Lord Jesus Christ, who was not only Man but God too: you see then we are
beholden to Christ for all. He it is that fetches sinners from the lowest
Hell, and lodges them in the highest Heavens, that snatcheth them from the
deepest Misery, and advances them to the highest Glory that poor finite beings
are capable of. O the great obligations that are upon us to walk thankfully all
our days. Every time we partake of this Supper-Ordinance, we come under new and
fresh obligations of thankfulness. We that have been so lately feasting upon
his love, so lately put in mind of the great things he has been doing for us,
before whose eyes Jesus Christ in the greatest expressions of his love has
been evidently set forth and Crucified amongst us, and the blessed benefits of
his Death and Crucifixion represented, sealed and applied to us. Our Blessed
Lord would not have his love in doing and Suffering for us be forgotten by us,
and therefore has appointed this Supper as a standing monument and memorial
thereof to his Church. When we eat the Sacramental Bread and drink the
Sacramental Cup, we are to do it in remembrance of him, of what he has done
and suffered for us. This was a kindness never to be forgotten, at the
Institution of which Supper we find he himself gave thanks, Rob. Communicant,
page 178.
1 Cor. 11.23.24. For I have received of the Lord, that which also I delivered
unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took
bread, and when he had given thanks he break it, etc. after the same manner
also he took the cup. Now what was the matter or form of this thanksgiving is
not expressed, but it is most likely it was in reference to the work or action
then in hand, and not only for the bare outward Elements, but more chiefly and
especially for the inward Mysterys and excellent benefits to be represented and
sealed by them. For the Grace and love of God which he came to discover to
Mankind, and was now about to seal with his own Blood. The Baptism he was to be
baptized with was now approaching, viz. his death, wherein his Body was to be
broken, and his Blood shed for the life of the World, and for the nourishment
of the Elect, which he delighted to accomplish, or as he himself expresses it,
was straightened till it was accomplished. These were the things that were chiefly
and specially the matter of his thanksgiving. Now did Christ give thanks at the
first Institution? why then proportionably we are still to give thanks in all
after Administrations of this Supper. And not only just in the participation of
it, but after we have partaken we are to walk thankfully all the days of our
lives, considering ^ 1. (...) The inward moving cause of all, which was the
great love and mercy of God to us, John 3.16. God so loved the world that he
gave his only begotten Son. 1 John 4.10. Herein is love not that we loved God,
but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a propitiation for our sins. Now
this first inward moving cause of all, viz. the love of God, must not be
overlooked, because it is commended to us, Romans 5.8. But God commends his
love to us in that white we were yet sinners Christ died for us. Some things
are barely related to us but this is commended to us, that we may be sure never
to forget it, and to be continual matter of praise and thanksgiving to us;
considering (2.) The outward occasion or procuring cause, which is Man's misery
by reason of sin. This was the outward occasion of Christ's coming into the
World, and doing what he did, and suffering what he suffered. He came to
reconcile and propitiate God offended by Man's sin. To remove that enmity that
was betwixt God and us, to appease the anger and wrath of God toward us; now
before this can be brought about and effected the Son of God must become Man,
obey and suffer, bleed and dye to expiate our offenses. And does not this
afford us continual matter of thanksgiving. Once more, considering the effect
and fruit and benefit of all that he has done and suffered for us, and that is
life, that whether we wake or sleep we should live together with him. This was
the white that Christ aimed at in all that he did; next to his Fathers glory
was the salvation and life of poor sinners, that we might live, how? why a life
of pardon and acceptance in Justification, a life of grace and holiness in
Sanctification, a life of joy and peace in Consolation, and a life of bliss and
happiness in Glorification. These are things that our thoughts should be much
employed about and affected with at the Table, and shall we not henceforward
look upon our selves as laid under the highest obligations of thankfulness, of
walking thankfully all our days. We never have been so much beholden to any
person, but we are infinitely more beholden to the Lord Jesus Christ, therefore
the whole of our lives should be nothing else but continual expressions of
thankfulness to Christ. But here it may be asked how should we express our
thankfulness?

To this I Answer,

1. By often thinking of it our selves, and speaking of it to others to his
glory. We are to express our Thankfulness to Christ for what he has done, by
giving and ascribing all the Glory to him, attributing and ascribing nothing to
our selves, but all to the riches of his Grace, and freeness of his Love. To
look upon our selves as any ways deserving what he has done for us, does
greatly detract from his Glory, and argues a base disingenuous ungrateful
temper to be in us. Alas, Who are we, or what are we, poor worthless worms, not
worthy that he should spend a thought upon us, and much less that he should lay
down his Life, and shed his Blood for us? Pray let us a little reflect, and
consider what we were not long ago; Dead in Trespasses and Sins, wallowing in
the filth and mire of Sin and Lust, alienated from, nay enemies to God and
Christ, poor, and miserable, and blind, and naked, cast out into the open
Field, to the loathing of our persons, polluted, and defiled in our Blood, not
worth the taking notice of. Now than ever we should be the Objects of his Love,
who deserved to be the Objects of his eternal disdain, and the everlasting
Monuments of his Displeasure. How ought this to be continually acknowledged by
us to the Praise of the Glory of his Grace. This is one way by which we express
our Thankfulness for any kindness or favor received, when we think of it, or
speak of it, to the Praise and Renown of him that showed it. So this is one way
by which we are to express our Thankfulness to the Lord Jesus Christ for what
he has done and suffered for us, by often thinking of it our selves, or
speaking of it to others, to the eternal praise and renown of our dear Redeemer.

2. Another way, by which we are to express our Thankfulness, is by magnifying
and setting an high esteem and value upon what he has done for us. Estimation
of Benefits received is one way of expressing our Thankfulness for them.
Unthankfulness always lessens, and vilifyes, and makes light of a kindness or
benefit received, as Israel did the Manna, Numb. 21.5. And the People spoke
against God, and against Moses, Wherefore have you brought us up out of Egypt
to dye in the wilderness? for there is no bread, neither is there any water,
and our soul loatheth this light bread, Numb. 11.5.6. We remember the fish we
did freely eat in Egypt, the Cucumbers and the Melons, and the Leeks, etc. but
now our soul is dried away, there is nothing at all besides this Mannah before
our eyes. Oh what unthankful, ungrateful People were these? to make light of
such excellent Food, which yielded such excellent nourishment, and in the
strength of which they were able to go so many, and such tedious Journeys.
Their entertaining such base, low, mean thoughts of it, argued their great
unthankfulness for it. Thus unthankful wretches do by Christ, even as these
Israelites did by the Mannah, they make but light of Christ, the greatest Gift
that God could have bestowed upon the Sons of Men. But yet at the same time,
they despise both Giver and Gift it self; by despising the Gift they affront
the Giver. They see no lovelyness, no beauty, no excellency in Christ, that
they should desire him. What is thy beloved more than another beloved, was the
Answer to the Spouse, when she was so earnestly enquiring after her Beloved,
Cant. 5.10. A Lust, a Pleasure, is by many preferred before Christ. A Lust that
will Damn them, before a Savior that will Save them. A Carnal Pleasure shall
be embraced, when Christ and his Benefits shall be despised, this argues great
Ingratitude and Unthankfulness, vilifies and lessens both the Person that shows
the kindness, and the kindness it self; when as true Thankfulness esteems and
values both Person and Benefit; both he that has done, and what he has done
for us. Now this way we are to express our Thanfulness to the Lord Jesus
Christ, by our esteem of him, and the Benefits we receive by him. Now what
esteem have we for Christ? Do we esteem him as the Apostle did, who desired and
determined to know nothing else but Christ, 1 Cor. 2.2. He looked upon all
other knowledge as vain and unprofitable in comparison of Christ and him
Crucified; this showed his value and esteem for Christ. And such an esteem had
he for Christ, that he counted all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ; yea, all things but dung that he might win Christ, and be
sound in him, Phil. 3.8, 9. He could despise and trample upon the pleasures and
profits and preferments of this present World, that he might but win Christ and
be found in him. Endure and undergo the greatest hardships and sufferings for
the Name and sake of Christ. The greatest of his glorying and boasting was in a
Crucified Jesus; God forbid, says he, that I should glory in any thing save in
the Cross of Jesus Christ, by which the world is crucified unto me, and I unto
the world. Nothing had that place in his esteem as Christ's had. And then is
our esteem of Christ right indeed, when we esteem him above all, and before
all; above Estate, above Relations, above all other outward comforts and
conveniences, when we are willing to let go all for Christ. I am sure there is
that worth and excellency in Christ, both Personal and Relative, whether we
consider him as he is in himself, or in those comfortable relations he stands
in to his People; I say, consider him which way we will, in his Offices, in his
Grace and Fullness, in his Honors and Glorious Titles, and there is that in
Christ, which truly deserves our greatest and highest esteem. Thus we are to
express our Thankfulness by our high Esteem of Christ of his Person, and as of
his Person, so of his Deeds and Actions, of what he has done and suffered for
us, and the great Benefits that issue and proceed from thence. Is it not
wonderful, that a Person so high and honorable, so excellent and glorious,
that the Son of God, and God by Nature, who was equal with God in Glory, Wisdom
and Power, and in all other Divine Excellencies and Perfections, that he should
suffer this Glory of his to lie obscure for a time, under the Vail of his
Humane Nature? That a Person so far above and beyond us should come and join
himself to us, Marry into such a poor broken beggarly Family as ours? That he
who was Lord of the Law, should be made under the Law, under the Observation of
the Law, to fulfill the Righteousness thereof; and under the Malediction of the
Law, to undergo the Penalty and Curse of it? That the Judge of Quick and Dead
should become Undertaker for Guilty Condemned Wretches? That he who knew no
sin, should be made sin, and submit to be dealt with as if he had been the
Chief of Sinners, bruised and broken upon the Wheel of Divine Wrath,
Reproached and Vilifyed by Men, forsaken of his Father, vir dolorum, a Man of
Sorrows and acquainted with Grief? O the pains of Body, and the anguish of
Spirit that he underwent, the wearysome Life, and at last the Painful and
Accursed Death that he endured, and all this to save an handful, that were not
worth the looking after, or taking notice of, who neither desired it, nor
deserved it. Well might it be said, That he had mercy upon whom he will have
mercy; and that he loved us because he loved us. Alas! Who are we, or what are
we, that Christ should fix his heart's Love upon us? Would we know what we
were? why lost undone miserable Sinners, Enemies, nay Enmity it self, dead in
Trespasses and Sin, in the Gall of Bitterness, and Bond of Iniquity. Many of
them, for whom Christ has done and suffered such things, were, it may be,
Blasphemers, Persecutors, and Injurious to Christ and his Followers. Such an
one was that eminent Servant of Christ the Apostle Paul, as he himself
acknowledges, 1 Timothy 1.12.13. And I thank Jesus Christ who has enabled me, for
that he counted me faithful, putting me into the Ministry, who was before a
Blasphemer, and a Persecuter, and Injurious, but I obtained mercy, etc. Some of
them, it may be, have been guilty of the foulest and grossest Sins, as some of
the Corinthians were, Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, Thieves, Drunkards,
etc.yet these obtained Mercy, were Washed, were Sanctified, were Justified in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, as we read 1 Cor.
6.9, 11. Even then when there was nothing but unworthyness and abominableness
in us, did Christ-dye for us. Now is this a thing to be made light of? or to be
lightly esteemed of by us? this argues us to be the most ungrateful, unthankful
wretches living upon the Face of the Earth. The very Angels stand and wonder,
and vent their astonishment at what Christ has done for us; And shall not we
admire at it our selves? Never was there such love manifested before nor since.
Greater love than this has no Man, than that a Man lay down his life for his
friends, John 15.13. But Christ has evidenced greater than this, in doing and
dying, and laying down his Life for his Enemies Hereby perceive we the love of
God, because he laid down his Life for us; What for us Friends? no: but for us
Enemies, Romans 5.10. nay for us Enmity it self, Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is
enmity against God. Was ever love like this love? The Apostle Prays for the
Ephesians, That they may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
breadth and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ
which passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3.18, 19. Here are Four Dimensions that the
Apostle measures this love of Christ by; Philosophy knows but Three, viz.
Longitudo, Latitudo, and Profunditas. Length, Breadth, and Depth. But Divinity
adds a Fourth, viz. Altitudo, Height. To intimate, that Christ's Love is beyond
all ordinary Measure and Dimensions. There is Depth in it, says Roberts
Communicant, p. 186.
one, without bottom. There is Height in it without top, Breadth in it without
side, and Length in it without end. Yea, it infinitely surpasses the capacity
and grasp of a finite limited understanding to comprehend and take in. And O
that every one of us who have been so lately Celebrating and Commemorating the
Death and Sufferings of our Loving Lord, that have had such Lively
Representations of what he has been doing and suffering for us, may find our
esteem in some measure and degree answerable and proportionable to the love
that was manifested and evidenced in it.

But yet farther there is another consideration in what Christ has done and
suffered which if rightly and duly weighed, might be a means of raising and
heightning our esteem of it, and that is the sufficiency, efficacy,
acceptableness and merit of his Obedience and Sufferings. This was an odor of
a sweet smell, most acceptable to God. The Law was fully answered, and Divine
Justice was fully satisfied in their fullest and highest demands. Though his
Sufferings were but short, yet what was wanting in the duration of them was
infinitely and abundantly made up in the dignity and excellency of the Person
that suffered, for it was infinitely more that the Son of God should suffer one
moment than if all the Angels in Heaven, and Men upon Earth had suffered to
Eternity. Such a sufficiency there is in what Christ has done and suffered,
that there needs nothing more to be done, nothing more to be suffered in a way
of satisfaction to the Justice of God, for he by once offering up of himself
has for ever perfected them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. There needs no
more sacrifice for sin. There is sufficiency enough in the Death and Blood of
the Lord Jesus Christ to procure pardon for the greatest of sins and the
chiefest of sinners, to redeem and save the whole World, nay ten thousand
Worlds. And if it should be asked why are not then all redeemed and saved? To
this I answer it is not upon the account of any insufficiency of the Blood of
Christ, for it is sufficient to have redeemed as many Worlds as there be Stars
in the Firmament; it was sufficient to have redeemed all, but it was not shed
for all, but only those that the Father from all Eternity gave to him. For
these and these only it was shed, to these and these only it becomes effectual
unto redemption and Salvation. It pleased the Father from all Eternity to elect
some to everlasting life, these in the Covenant of Redemption he gave to Christ
to redeem and save, these Christ undertook and engaged for in that same
Covenant transaction, for these he dyed and suffered, and shed his hearts
Blood, which was a sufficient price for their redemption, it being the blood of
that Person who was God as well as Man. The dignity of the Person was that
which highly dignified his Passion. This was that which put such an
All Sufficiency into the Death and Blood of Christ, that made it sufficient for
all the ends for which it was designed. O that poor trembling souls and
misgiving hearts would consider of this and take hold of it, and plead it
against all the accusations of the Law, against all the accusations of
Conscience, against all the subtle charges of the Devil. Poor Soul, it may be
thou art terrified and amazed at the sight and sense of thy sinfulness and
guiltiness, it may be many doubts and fears and scruples are ready to arise in
thy mind whether ever God will look upon, or accept of, or receive into favor
such an one as thou art, but know this for thy comfort whoever thou art, that
there cannot be so much Unrighteousness in thee to render thee loathsome, but
there is more Righteousness in Christ to render thee lovely in the sight of
God. There is sufficiency enough in what Christ has done and suffered to
procure God's favor and acceptance, only do thou steadfastly rely upon it, and
put thy whole trust in it; never did any miscarry who ventured their all upon
this bottom. There is sufficiency enough in the Blood of Christ to procure
pardon for as many sins as there are moments in thy Life, or thoughts in thy
heart. Be thy sins never so many for multitude, or never so great for
aggravation, yet the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all Unrighteousness.
Not only from lesser, but from greater Transgressions; not only from some, but
from all Unrighteousness. Tho it is true, there is one sin which is called a
sin unto Death, or the unpardonable sin, which shall never be forgiven, neither
in this Life nor that which is to come, and that is the sin against the Holy
Ghost. But it is not upon the account of any insufficiency in the Blood of
Christ that this sin is Unpardonable; but he that sins this sin is rendered
altogether incapable of laying hold of, or applying the Remedy, viz. the Blood
of Christ, which, in it self, is sufficient to cleanse from all Unrighteousness.

The last consideration is the blessed Benefits that do issue and proceed from
hence, and so we are to express our Thankfulness by an high esteem of them.
Hereby sinners are Justified and sin purged away, the guilt of sin that was so
wounding to the Conscience is removed. Hereby enemies to God are reconciled,
and peace with God procured, the distance, nay the enmity is removed, and God
and the Soul walk together, as those that be well agreed. God and the Soul
holding a most delightful converse with each other, whereas there was a shiness
before, now there is access with the greatest freedom and boldness. Hereby
Death, and he that had the power of Death, that is the Devil, with all
Principalities and Powers are subdued, the Kingdom and Interest of Sin and
Satan overthrown in the Soul, and freedom from spiritual thrauldom is obtained;
The Son having made us free we are become free indeed. These are great
privileges, and O that our esteem of them were some way answerable to the
greatness of them. Though we come easily by them, yet they cost Christ dear to
purchase. He was at a greater expense to Redeem one Soul than he was to create
a whole World, the one was done by the word of his Power, he spoke and it was
done, but the other is done by the blood of his heart, and he must dye before
it be done. His life must be laid down, a life more worth than all the lives of
Men upon Earth, or Angels in Heaven. They came freely unto us, but he must dye
and suffer to purchase and procure them. O that our Souls may with Mary
magnify the Lord who has regarded the low estate of his servants, for he that
is mighty has done great things for us.

3. Another way by which we are to express our Thankfulness, is by rendering
again according to the Benefits we have received. But when F speak of rendering
back again according to the benefit received, I do not mean in a way of
recompense, but in token of our Thankfulness. Alas we are in no capacity of
recompensing or making him amends for his kindness to us, his love in doing and
dying for us infinitely exceeds all our returns. There is more proportion
betwixt the light and heat of a Spark to the light and heat of the Sun, than
there is between his kindness and our returns. When we have done all we can,
and suffered all we can for him it is nothing to what he has done and suffered
for us. But though we cannot make proportionable returns, yet we are to make
suitable and becoming returns for the Mercys and Benefits we have received from
him. It is said in 2 Chronicles. 32.25. That Hezekiah rendered not according to the
benefit he had received. That is, he did not make suitable and becoming returns
for the great benefits he had received, viz. that wonderful Victory he obtained
over the Assirian Army mentioned in the 25. verse. And that miraculous
restoration and recovery from a very dangerous illness, and the confirmation of
that work by a strange and supernatural motion of the Sun. All which instead of
keeping him low and humble, probably raised him up to an high conceit and
opinion of himself, as if these great things had been done, if not by his own
power, yet at least for his Piety and goodness. And instead of walking humbly
with his God, and giving the glory of all entirely and wholly to God, he took
the honor to himself and vainly showed his Riches and precious Treasures to
the Babylonish Ambassadors. Now this was not a return any way suitable or
becoming the great benefits he had so lately received. So that I say though we
cannot make proportionable returns, yet we must look to it that we make
suitable returns to our loving Jesus for the great and wonderful benefits we
are made partakers of in and through him. That as his heart was enlarged in love
and pity and conpassion toward us, so our hearts should be enlarged in returns
to him. We should be putting that question to our own Souls which holy David
did to his, Psalm. 116.12. What shall we render unto the Lord for all his
benefits toward us?

But here it may be asked what is it that we ought to render unto the Lord
Jesus for those expressions of his love in doing and suffering for us, and for
all the great and blessed benefits that do flow and proceed from hence?

To this I Answer. We must and ought to render our whole selves to him, Romans
12.1. I beseech you therefore Brethren by the mercys of God that ye present
your bodies a living sacrifice, Holy, acceptable unto God which is your
reasonable service. Here is an Exhortation, and the motive or argument by which
he does urge it. The Exhortation, and that is, to present our Bodies a living
Sacrifice Holy, acceptable to God; or to give, dedicate, devote, or offer up
our whole selves, Souls and Bodies, unto God. It is true, the Body is only
mentioned, but the Soul must not be excluded, it is a Synechdochical expression
where a part is put for the whole. That then which we are to render unto Christ
in token of our Thankfulness and gratitude, is our whole selves, Souls and
Bodies, all that we are and have, to live to him, to suffer for him, when ever
he shall call us out thereto, to be saved by him, and not only so, but to be
ruled and governed by him. Submitting our selves to the conduct of his wife
Providence and to the laws and rules of his most Spiritual Government: That is
to say, when no Lust or Corruption bears Rule or Sway in our hearts, but when
every thing within us, and every thing without us is captivated and brought
over to the obedience to the Lord Jesus. When Christ, by his Spirit, makes
entrance into our hearts, and takes full possession of all the powers and
faculties of our Souls, and of all the members of our Bodies, that whereas they
have once been strongly and deeply engaged in the ways and service of Sin, they
become now as deeply and strongly engaged for Christ, and in his ways and
Service. As when we see a Person in the full height and carreer of sin,
prosecuting with all his might his carnal corrupted desires and designs, at
the beck and command of that corrupt Principle that is within him, employing
that Reason and Understauding, and Parts which God has endowed him with, in
the contrivance of any sinful thing or action, his power and strength, for the
perfecting and accomplishing, and obtaining what he had so contrived and
plotted; why such a Person may be said to be given up to his Lusts and
Corruptions, but not to Christ. So on the other hand, where we see a Person at
the beck and command of Christ, employing his Reason and Understanding, his
Strength and Parts for the Honor and Glory of Christ, obedient to, and
complying with every call and command of Christ, industriously prosecuting the
Glory of Christ, as the great end of Life, heartily submitting to his Laws and
Commands, as the great and only Rule of Life; why such a Person may truly be
said to be given up to Christ. The Apostle Paul, in 2 Cor. 8.5. speaks there of
Persons that had given up themselves to Christ, and speaks it in praise of the
Macedonians. This they did, says he; Why what did they do? why they did
liberally and bountifully Communicate to the Necessities of the Poor Saints at
Jerusalem; they did to their Power, nay, they did beyond their Power, their
Charity was larger than their Ability; thus open-handed, and openhearted were
these Macedonians. Where shall we find such Charitable Professors in our days?
Well then, this they did; And was this all that they did? No: they did not only
give the greatest parts of their Estates toward the Relief of the poor
distressed Saints, but they gave their own selves unto the Lord. This they did,
not as we hoped, that is, Erasm.
Multo amplius quam sper are audebamus; much more than we could hope; they
exceeded our hopes and expectations. But wherein? why, Quia non suas tantum
facultates habuerunt expositas, sed seipsos impendere parati fuerunt, Calvin.
says one. Because they were ready not only to bestow their Goods, but to
offer also themselves. They gave themselves, says he, first to the Lord, and
then to us by the will of God. The giving of their Estates toward the relief
of the Saints, was highly commendable in them. Their relieving others was very
well, especially when they were so low themselves. But this was not all, there
was still some thing higher than this, they gave themselves to the Lord. To
give their Estates was vety much, but to give themselves was much more, and
this was that which was given by these Believers. Non solum res suas sed
semetipsos dederunt domino quasi sacrificium immaculatum Anselm.
. They did not only give their Substance, but Themselves unto the Lord, as an
unspotted, undefiled Sacrifice: Now to this great work and business of giving
up our selves to the Lord, I would hope there be none of us strangers to it,
who have, this day, been sitting down at our Lord's Table. I would hope that
this has been, in some measure, done by every one of us, before we did first
venture to sit down at this Table. Else from the time we first ventured upon
this Ordinance, we have been eating and drinking Damnation to our selves. All
that draw nigh to this Table, who have not first given themselves to the Lord
Jesus Christ, are unfit and unworthy Guests indeed. We find that these
Macedonians, first gave themselves unto the Lord, before they sat down in
Church Fellowship and Communion; They first gave themselves unto the Lord, and
then to us by the will of God. They first joined themselves to the Lord, before
they joined in this great Ordinance of Communion. And this I have reason to
hope concerning every one of you, that before you did venture upon this Solemn
Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, that you were such as had solemnly and
seriously given up your selves to the Lord Jesus Christ. But yet there are none
of us so much given up to Christ, but we may be still more given up to him.
Alas, there is a great deal of Carnality, and Corruption, and Unhelief, in the
best and holiest on this side Heaven, which is the occasion of frequent
backslidings, and Apostacys from God. And often times puts us upon doing those
things that are very much unbecoming the Dedication of our selves to the Lord,
too much harkening to the whisperings of the Old Man. Too much compliance with
the Solicitations of the Flesh. Top great an Adherence to the World, and
Conformity to the Vanities and Pleasures, to the Fooleries and Fopperies, and
Fashions, and Customs thereof. Too much Self-seeking, Self-love, and
Self-pleasing, all which are wonderful unbecoming this Serious and Solemn
Dedication of our selves to the Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore there is great
need that this work be often and frequently renewed. It is not enough that it
be done once, but it must be done often, and daily. It ought not to suffice us,
that we be in some measure given up to Christ, but we must still be more and
more given up to him. Daily Backslidings call for frequent and daily Renewals
of our Dedication. David renewed the Dedication of his House after Absalom's
Sins, and also renewed the Dedication of his Person, after his own Foul and
Personal Miscarriages. Times of great Affliction call for the Renewal of our
Dedication. Thus when Jacob was reduced to great straits, and knew not what to
do, then he sets upon the Renewing the Dedication of himself to God, If God,
says he, will be with me in the way that I shall go, and will give me bread to
eat, and raiment to put on, etc. then shall the Lord be my God, Genesis 28.20, 21.
Again, renewed Mercys call for renewed dedication of our selves to God. And
lastly, great dutys call for this renewal of our dedication. Every time we Pray
we are to renew our dedication. But in Sacramental work we must do it in a more
solemn and explicit manner, not only before and at but after that Ordinance, as
coming under new and fresh Obligations and Engagements to be the Lords. Thus
much for the Exhortation, Present your Bodies a living Sacrifice holy
acceptable to God, that is, give up your whole selves Souls and Bodies to the
Lord. Now the Argument or motive by which he presses it is the Mercies of God
in that Romans 12.1. I beseech you Brethren by the Mercys of God that ye present
your Bodies, etc. The Mercys of God are a great Argument or Motive to press us
to this very thing, of giving up our selves to God. The Temporal, but
especially the Spiritual Mercys of God; he does not say Mercy but Mercies, in
the Plural number, because they are many, viz. Election of Grace, Calling to
Christ, Justification by Faith, Sanctification by the Spirit. By all these
Mercies which are every one of them, more worth than a thousand Worlds, he
beseeches them to give up or present themselves to God. As if an indulgent
compassionate Mother should beseech her child to do something, by the womb that
bare him, by the paps that gave him suck, by the knees that dandled him, by the
hands that fed him, by all her tender compassions and indulgence toward him.
Certainly the heart of this child must be harder than any Flint, not to yield
to her, it would argue a temper very ungrateful not to comply with her. So it
would argue our hearts very hard, and our tempers very ungrateful, not to yield
to God, when he that might condemn us does entreat and beseech, even by those
tender Mercies whereby he begat us, pardoned us, called us, renewed and saved
us. If Love and Kindness and Mercy will not win us and prevail upon us, pray
what will? So the love of the Lord Jesus Christ, his love in coming into the
World, in assuming our Nature, his love in doing for us, and dying for us, and
suffering for us is a great Motive and Argument to persuade us to give up our
selves, and all that we are and have fully, and seriously and solemnly, to him
in token of our gratitude and thankfulness. And O that the sense and feeling
and apprehension of this love of Christ, might constrain every soul of us to
give up our selves to him. Are we bought with a Price? Are we Redeemed from the
greatest slavery and tyranny that ever poor creatures were under, from the
Wrath and Vengeance of God who is a consuming fire? From the Curse and
condemnation of the Law, from the dominion of Sin and Satan and the World? Why
this is a great and unspeakable Privilege and happiness indeed. Ay but how
came we to be thus Redeemed? Why it was by a great price that was laid down and
deposited; ye are bought with a price, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.20. But what
price was this? Was it Silver or Gold? no; it was by the price of Blood. But
what Blood was it? The Blood of Bulls and Goats? no; it was the Blood of the
Son of God, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. It was the Lord Jesus Christ the eternal Son of
God that redeemed us with his own Blood. What can we do less then glorify him
with our Bodies and Spirits. O how Thankfully ought we to walk all our days,
and we cannot better express our Thankfulness than by dedicating and devoting
our selves to his service and glory. This is the greatest return that we can
make and the highest gratitude. You know the first fruits were in former times
dedicated unto God, partly to show God's right to the whole crop, and partly in
token of thankfulness from the people for all the rest. Now this giving up our
selves to the Lord Jesus is the best expression of our thankfulness that we can
make. This exceeds the most melting acknowledgments, and the highest verbal
resentments of all his love and kindness to us. When a poor creature is deeply
affected with a sense of the love of Christ to him, falls down at the foot of
Christ, and says Lord Jesus I am one of thy Redeemed ones, whom thou have
redeemed unto God by thine own most precious Blood, from the slavery and
tyranny under which I lay, thou did freely lay down thy life to save mine,
thou did shed thine own Blood, and offeredst thy self upon the Cross a
Sacrifice to satisfy Divine Justice, and make Atonement for my sins, and to
bring me nigh unto God who once was alienated from, and an enemy to Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, in my mind by wicked Works. And thou wast not only offered upon
the Cross for me, but thou have been lately in the Supper Ordinance exhibited
and offered to me with all the virtues, and benefits, and victories, and
purchases, and privileges of thy death, for the strengthening and nourishing of
my Faith, for the enlivening, and quickening and raising my hope, for the
filling up my joy and increasing my comfort, for the carrying on the Spiritual
life with greater vigor and power in my Soul, for all this dear Jesus, how
shall I express and testify my Thankfulness? Why I will do it thus, I do here
solemnly and seriously and fully give up my self to thee to be thine and only
thine both now and to Eternity, that is to say everlastingly thine. This is the
best way of expressing our Thankfulness, and this we are every one afresh
obliged to, who have been sitting down this day at our Lords Table. For one end
of this Ordinance is to be a seal of the Covenant, all the Blessings and
Benefits and Privileges and Promises and Grace of the New Covenant are
confirmed to Believers by it. Now the Covenant binds mutually, God binds
himself to give Grace to us, and we bind our selves to live to him. In all
Covenants there is not only something to be done for us, but there is something
to be performed by us, God seals the Benefits of the Covenant on his part, and
we seal to the Durys of the Covenant on our part. The exhibiting the signs is
the seal on God's part, the receiving the signs is the seal on our part. Every
time we receive, we bind our selves to new and better Obedience, to live more
to God, and to die more to sin. I have Read, that Pliny should say, (he learned
it of some Christians) That, at their Meeting, they did Sacramento se
obstringere, ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent, etc. Bind
themselves by the Sacrament, that they would not commit these sins of Theft,
and Robbery, and Adultery. And so should every one that have been eating the
Sacramental Bread and Wine, look upon our selves as bound to live more to God
and Jesus Christ, and to cleave to the Lord with fuller purposes of heart, and
more steadfast Resolutions of Soul. Our Blessed Savior never Instituted this
Holy Ordinance to qualify Persons for some advantageous Post, and to sit Men
for Public Places and Offices, or to be a Stepping-stone to Worldly
Preferment, as it is now adays only used by many, to the great shame of a
Protestant Nation may it be spoken, that so Sacred an Ordinance should be thus
Abused and Profaned. But he designed it to be a stronger Tie and Obligation
upon us, to a more Holy Life and Circumspect Walk; and indeed if we do not
answer this end, we do but Profane this Ordinance every time we partake of it.
And instead of eating and drinking to our own Salvation, we shall but eat and
drink Damnation to our selves.

4. We are to Walk after this Ordinance more Believingly and Fiducially; that
is, with a stronger Faith, and Trust in Christ, and Relyance upon him, 2 Col.
6. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him,
rooted and built up in him, and stablisht in the Faith, as you have been
taught, abounding therein with Thanksgiving. None are so stablished but they
may grow still in Faith. None have taken so much root, but they may take yet
more root. Faith is such a Grace as is capable of farther improvement. A weak
Faith may become strong, and a strong Faith may become yet stronger. The
Apostles prayer was this, Lord increase our Faith, Luke 17.9. Many are crying
out for more Riches, for more Honor, for more Wealth, for more Pleasure. But
let this be the desire of our Souls for a stronger Faith. This is a Petition
very proper and suitable to be put up by us after we have been at this Supper,
Lord increase our Faith. What the Apostle said of the Thessalonians, concerning
Brotherly Love, You need not that I write unto you, for you your selves are
taught of God to love one another, and indeed you do it toward all the
Brethren which are in all Macedonia. But yet he saw it necessary to press after
a farther growth, and increase of it. But we beseech brethren, that ye increase
more and more. The same I trust may be said of many here concerning Faith. Ye
are taught of God to believe, and indeed ye do believe; but however this
Exhortation or desire is not needless, viz. That ye increase more and more.
Those that have any measure of Faith already, are to be endeavoring after a
growth and increase in it. For the stronger our Faith is, the greater revenue
of Glory we bring to Christ. It is said of Abraham, He was strong in Faith,
giving Glory to God, Romans 4.20. But how did he glorify God? why, by believing
in hope against hope. He glorified the Faithfulness and Truth, and the Power of
God, that notwithstanding the outward Discouragement, under which he lay, though
it seemed to be a very unlikely improbable thing to the eye of Sense and Reason
that he should have a Child, considering his own Age, and the Deadness of
Sarahs Womb, yet he believed in the Power and Faithfulness of God, that he was
able to perform what he promised to him, and that he would be true and
faithful to perform it. Thus Abraham, by his Faith, Glorified God's Power,
Truth and Faithfulness. And thus by believing we bring a great Revenue of
Honor and Glory unto Christ. When we steadfastly rely upon the Merit and
All Sufficiency of his Blood for the Pardon of all our Sins, and under the
fresh guilt we are contracting daily; we daily apply and betake our selves to
this Blood of Christ for fresh Pardon and Cleansing, when we steadfastly rely
upon his Righteousness for our Justifycation before God; not mentioning a word
of our own Inherent Righteousness or Holiness for our Justification and
Acceptance with God, but make mention of his and of his only, when under all
our Temptations we rely upon his Mercy and Faithfulness to help and succor us.
In all our ways to rely upon his Wisdom for our guidance and conduct; when in
every act and duty of Worship we rely upon him for our access to God. We never
bring more honor and glory unto Christ than when we go most out of our selves,
and rely most upon Christ. This is to walk believingly, and thus we are to walk
after this Supper, viz. with a stronger Faith and trust on the Lord Jesus
Christ. We walk by Faith says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.7. And in another place,
The life which I now live in the Flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God. Gal.
2.20. And thus we are to live and walk, viz. with a stronger Faith, with a more
steadfast trust and reliance upon Christ, upon his Obedience and Satisfaction.
To this end was he lifted up upon the Cross, and offered there, viz. to be
believed in and rested upon, Joh. 3.14, 15. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in
the wilderness, even so must the son of man be lifted up that whosoever
believes in him, etc. To this end did God the Father give Christ, viz. to be
believed in and rested upon, verse. 16 For God so loved the world that be gave
his only begotten Son that whosoever believes in him should not perish, etc.
To this end is he lifted up in the preaching of the Gospel, viz. that poor
sinners might believe on, and put all their trust and confidence in him for
life and for Salvation. Mark 16.15, 16. Go into all the World and preach the
Gospel to every Creature, he that believes and is baptized shall be saved. And
to this end is he offered to us in the Supper, viz. to be believed in and
rested upon, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. The Lord Jesus Christ the same night in
which he was betrayed took Bread, and when he had given thanks brake it, and
said, take eat, this is my body which is broken for you. After the same manner
he took the Cup when he had supped, saying, this Cup is the New Testament of my
blood this do ye as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me, And in another
place, drink ye all of it, this do in remembrance of me. In the Bread broken
upon the Table we have a lively representation of Christ's broken Body. In the
Wine we have a lively representation of the Blood of the Lord Jesus the price
of our Redemption. By Eating and Drinking we are to understand believing, so
that we see the Lord Jesus Christ is o^ered to us in this Supper to be believed
in and rested upon. It is true, there is nothing but bare Bread and Wine
presents it self to the eye of our Bodies; But under these outward Signs and
Elements of Bread and Wine, there is a broken Crucified Savior offered and
presented to the eye of our Faith. O there is great need' of Faith and great
work for Faith in our receiving and after our receiving, in our partaking and
after we have partaken of this Supper, whilst we sit down and after we are
risen up from this Table.

There is great need of Faith and great work for Faith in our receiving. We can
no more turn Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ without faith,
says one, than a Chemist can transmute one Metal into another without the
operation of the fire. He that comes to this Supper without faith, says
another, is like a Man that thinks to quench his thirst by sucking the Ale
bowl. Alas what is it that we receive at this Supper? why it is but a little
morsel of Bread, and a small draught of Wine without faith, and what can this
do to the nourishing and strengthening of our Souls? As the word profits not
unless it be mixed with faith in those that hear it, Heb. 4.2. So the Lord's
Supper profits not unless mingled with faith in those that receive it. It is
true, were we only at this Ordinance to receive the Bread at the Ministers
hands that gives it, then there would be no such need of Faith at this
Ordinance. But at this Ordinance we are to take Christ out of God's hand, who
is offered to us there, and this cannot be done without faith; were we only to
eat the Bread and drink the Wine at this Supper, this might be done without
faith, but we are to eat Christ's Flesh and drink Christ's Blood, to seed upon
a broken Crucified Savior, who is not only the Master but the Matter of this
feast, and this cannot be done but by faith. It is faith that feeds upon
Christ, and derives virtue and vigor from him. His Flesh is meat indeed and
his Blood is drink indeed, John 6.55. Meat to be eaten not with the teeth but
by faith. Meat indeed not in Nature but in Effect, because it nourishes the
Soul, and gives Eternal life to them that eat thereof, v. 54. Whosoever eats my
Flesh and drinks my Blood has Eternal life, etc. Has Eternal life, ay has
it already in a just Right and Title and shall have it in a certain actua
Possession.

There is great need of Faith, and Work for Faith in this Ordinance, to discern
and spy out those great Mysteries, that are wrapped up in the outward Elements.
The want of which, viz. a right discerning of the Mysteries that are pointed at
by these signs in this. Ordinance, is the cause of Persons miscarrying under
it, is the cause of Persons eating and drinking unworthily; and, as a
consequent of that, of their eating and drinking Damnation to themselves; when
Persons in their eating and drinking at this Table, look no farther than at
what presents its self to the eye of the Body. at the outward signs and
Elements only, not discerning the broken Body and the shed Blood of Christ, to
be wrapped up in them, and represented by them; Putting no difference between
the Sacramental Bread and Wine, and common bread and wine, putting no
difference between the Body and Blood of Christ, and the body and blood of a
mere Man. Between Bread Representing the Body of Christ, and bread the ordinary
staff of Life: Between Wine, as representing the Blood of Christ, and Wine that
is the ordidary Cordial, and refreshment to the natural Spirits. Why such a
person, when he cats and drinks at this Table, eats and drinks unworthily, not
discerning the Lord's Body. Eats the Bread, and drinks the Wine, but does not
cat the Body and Blood of Christ spiritually. And well may he be said to eat
and drink unworthily, because by thus eating and drinking, he violates in those
outward Signs and Elements the honor and regard due to the Majesty and Glory
and Merit of the Lord Jesus Christ. Now Faith is that eye which pierces
through the Clouds and Shadows of the outward Signs and Elements, to those
Heavenly great and glorious Mysteries in, and beyond them, even Christ's Body
broken, and his Blood shed for us. Christ's Sweating drops of Blood in the
Garden, and dying a Painful, Shameful, and Accursed Death upon the Cross. Faith
eyes the great and wonderful Mysteries that are in this Death, and the great.
Benefits slowing from thence to Believers Faith gives us a discerning of these
things in the Supper; not a Speculative discerning, but a Spiritual and
Practical apprehension of them, such as stirs up suitable reverence, and holy
Affections, as if we had seen him hang bleeding upon the Cross, Sweating under
that load and burden of Divine Wrath and Displeasure due to the sins of the
Elect World which he bare, the least of which would have broken the back of the
Whole Creation to have stood under it. Many a Man may be able to Discourse very
well and understandingly about these Great Mysteries of the Supper: To tell
what is the meaning of the Bread, and what the meaning of the Wine is, that
have no Spiritual discerning, but is merely the Fruit of an Historical Faith,
or Tradition, that is current in the Age or Country he lives in. But Faith
gives a Spiritual Discerning, such a sight and sense of these great Mysteries,
as does impress an holy dread and a we upon the Soul, and an holy rejoicing and
delighting in the Soul. So that upon this account we see what great need there
is of Faith in our Receiving and Partaking of this Supper.

Again, There is great need of Faith, and work for Faith in this Ordinance, to
reconcile us to the meanness and despicableness, as to outward appearance of
this, as well as other Ordinances of Christ. Ordinances are simple in
appearance, and therefore the Creature is ready to carp at them. It is a Saying
of one, Nihil adeo offendit hominum mentes ac simplicitas divinorum operum,
etc. There is nothing does so much offend the Minds of Men, as the Simplicity
of God's Ordinances. As in Baptism, there is but a little common Water, And
what can this do, to cleanse the Soul from Sin? So in the Lord's Supper, there
is but a little Morsel of. Bread, and a small Draught of Wine, a poor Feast to
a Carnal Man. Carnal and corrupted Reason is greatly prejudiced, stumbled, and
offended at so mean and despicable an appearance. Therefore see the need of
Faith, and the Great Work for Faith in this Ordinance. How mean and despicable
soever these may seem, as to out ward appearance, yet they are high and
Mysterious Instruments of our Peace, Growth and Comfort. And although Carnal
Sense, and Corrupted Reason cannot see it, yet Faith does. How mean soever, as
to outward appearance, these may seem, yet Faith eyes the Institution and
Blessing that goes along with them. And where the Institutions of Christ are
attended with his own Blessing, there Ordinances, though never so simple in
appearance, yet shall become effectual for producing great Effects, and for
obtaining high and glorious Ends.

Lastly. There is great need of Faith, and Work for Faith in this Ordinance,
for a real and close application of those great Benefits and Mysteries that are
represented to us, and discerned by us in this Ordinance. Faith is not only the
Spiritual eye of the Soul, whereby we discern Christ Crucified, and the
Mysteries and Merits, and Benefits of his Death in this Supper, Veiled under
the outward Signs and Ellements; but it is also the Spiritual hand of the Soul
whereby we take Christ, his Merits and Benefits offered and tendered to us in
this Supper, and apply to our own Souls benefit, comfort, and advantage. Of
what advantage will the finest dainties be, that can possibly be provided, for
nourishment and refreshment, if not fed upon and digested by us? Or the most
excellent Medicine that ever was compounded, Of what advantage will it be to a
Sick Person for Health and Recovery, if he do not take it and apply it? So, of
no more avail or advantage would Christ be, and all his excellent Benefits to
us in this Ordinance, without a real and close application of them to our own
Souls; unless taken and received, fed upon, and digested; and this must be the
work of Faith, to take and eat, to take and drink, What? Bread and Wine only?
no: these are the least matters, but Christ's Body and Blood also, and all the
Benefits thereof, must, by Faith, be taken, and received, eaten, and digested
to our Spiritual Nourishment and growth in Grace. This may suffice to show the
great need that there is of Faith, and the great Work that there is for Faith,
in our partaking of this Supper.

There is also great work for Faith after our receiving and partaking, and that
is steadfastly to rely upon what Christ has done and Suffered for us, upon his
Righteousness and Satisfaction, upon the efficacy and sufficiency of his Death
and Sufferings, of his Blood and Merit, all which have been in a most lively
manner exhibited and represented to us in this Supper. And our work and
business is to walk with a fiducial dependence upon the Lord Jesus Christ in
every act, and duty of worship, for access to God for asistance from God. In
every fresh perplexity of Mind, does Satan accuse, Conscience accuse, the Law
accuse? why yes it may be all these accuse us, why then our work and business
is to plead the fullness of Christ's satisfaction, and the sufficiency of his
Merit against all these charges and accusations, and here is enough in this
Righteousness and Satisfaction of Christ to answer all. And the great work of
Faith is to rely and depend upon it. Under a fresh sense and feeling of Guilt
we are to have a recourse to this blood of Christ, for the removal of it; and
under the daily sense and feeling of the working of innate, inbred Corruption,
we are to have a daily recourse unto this blood of Christ, that it may be
subdued: we are to eye the Death of Christ for sanctification, as well as for
Justification; for Mortification and killing of Lust, as well as for the taking
away and removal of Guilt. Alas, we are no more able to subdue our own Lusts,
than we are to remove our own Guilt; but are as much beholden to Christ for the
one as for the other. In a word, throughout the whole of our Christian Race and
Course, our eye must be unto Christ, Looking unto Jesus, who is the Author and
Finisher of our Faith. Every day, by fresh acts of Faith, casting and
committing all the concernments of our Souls into the hands of our dear
Redeemer. This is to walk fiducially, and thus we are to walk after this
Supper. One end of which Supper was, for the strengthening of Grace in our
Souls; not only for the inflaming our Love, but for the strengthening our Faith:
Not only that our love to him might wax hotter and hotter, but that our Faith
in him, and Relyance upon him might be stronger and stronger.

5. We must walk with a greater hatred of, and indignation against sin. We
have been Commemorating a Crucified Bleeding Dying Jesus, And pray what was the
occasion of this shameful ignominious and Reproachful Death? Why it was sin.
But not any sin of his own that he was brought to this Death and Sufferings,
but for the sins of his People. The Lord laid upon him the Iniquity of his
People, Isa. 53. And there was not only an act of God the Father, in laying
these sins upon Christ, but there was also Christ's own voluntary consent to
take them upon him. So that it was sin, the sins of his Elect People, that he
took upon him, which was the occasion of his bitter Sufferings. He was wounded
for our Transgressions, and bruised for our Iniquities; Ay, and these were far
more wounding and painful to him than was the piercing of his natural Side with
the Soldier's Spear. This was that which occasioned that Agony of Body and
Anguish of soul, even the Wrath and Displeasure of God, manifested against the
sins which he bare. And who of us is able to conceive of that which he felt, of
that Torment he felt in his Body, and of that Anguish he felt in his soul. My
Soul, says he, is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; and upon the Cross, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Surely fin must be an exceeding great
evil, which was the occasion of so great Sufferings. And indeed there is no
Glass does so fully and clearly discover to us the evil and heinous nature of
sin, as the Glass of Christ's Death and Sufferings. Now, in this Supper
Ordinance, we have a lively Representation of a broken Crucified Christ, broken
and Crucified for our sins; his Body broken, and his Blood shed for our sins;
this is that which our Faith is to eye in our participation of this Ordinance.
Have we seen Christ in this Ordinance Broken and Crucified, and bruised for our
sins, and shall we dare to live in sin? Is this a walk suitable and becoming
those that have been at the Table of the Lord? Suitable to those expressions of
Love that are manifested, or suitable to those Mysteries that are tendered
there, or to those great Benefits that are represented there? Surely no: After
we have been at this Table, we come under deeper Obligations of abandoning and
hating sin than before. Have we received the Lord's Supper as a Seal of the
Remission of our sins, And shall we dare, after this Supper, to fall a-fresh
into the Commission of the same sins? What is this but to profane the Blood of
the Covenant, and to trample under foot the Blood of the son of God? And is
this our kindness to our Friend? who so freely parted with his Life, and
Heartsblood; Surely they greatly mistake the nature and end of this Supper,
that go from it with a purpose to return to their Vice and Wickedness, and use
it only for a Protection and Tolleration for their sins. It is a sure and
certain sign, that our hearts were never rightly, and truly humbled, and broken
for sin before we came to this supper, if there be any secret purposes, and
resolutions kept up and maintained in our Souls of returning to our sins
afterward. If it was necessary to bring bleeding hearts to this Ordinance*
then certainly it is as necessary to carry away broken and bleeding hearts for
sin from it, especially when we have had such an affecting sight presented to
us, viz. a Christ bruised and broken for our sins. Methinks every time we
partake of this Ordinance, it should stir up in us a greater abhorrency, and
hatred of sin than ever. O consider what wrath our sins did derive upon Christ,
in order to the kindling our hatred and indignation against them. What shall we
make light of that which Christ found so heavy and heinous, which fetched from
him such great drops of Blood, and extorted from him so bitter and dreadful a
Lamentation, My Soul, says he, is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; and
upon the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Did Christ shed all
his Hearts-blood for thy sins, and do thou think much to shed a few
Penitential Tears for them? Or will thou hug such a Viper in thy bosom, which
was such a sting in the heart of thy Savior? Will thou pretend to have had
Fellowship with Christ in this Ordinance, and afterward hold fellowship with
the unfruitful works of Darkness? What a contradiction is this?

6. We must walk with a greater weanedness of affection from the World. God
forbid, says the Apostle, that I should glory in any thing, save in the Cross
of Christ, by which the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world, Gal.
6.14. He was arrived to such an holy indifferency, as to care no more for the
World than the World cared for him, and this he did through the Cross of
Christ. Remembering how the World dealt with Christ, and how little he regarded
the World. Now shall we who have been so lately Celebrating and Commemorating
the Death and Crucifixion of Christ, love that, and cleave to that which dealt
so unkindly by him, or esteem that which was so little esteemed by him? Is this
a walk worthy of his Dying-Love? no: this is no way becoming those that have
been entertained at this Table. Therefore, where we see Persons, after they
have been at this Table, conforming to the World, to the Fashions and Vanities
thereof, their Hearts and Affections glued to the World, and the Things of the
World, persuing after it with the greatest vehemence and eagerness, why this is
such a kind of walking as is no way suitable and becoming the Guests of Christ.

7. We must walk with a more inflamed Love and endeared Affection to the
blessed Lord Jesus. This Supper-Ordinance is a Love-token betwixt Christ and
his Church, where they mutually seal up their Affections to each other. In it
we have had the highest and the fullest demonstrations of his Love to us;
Greater love than this has no man, that a man lay down his life for his
friends. Why such love there was in the heart of Christ to poor finners, as to
lay down his life for them. Hereby perceive we the love of God, says the
Apostle John, because he Laid down his life for us, 1 John 3.16. Ay, here was a
full demonstration of it indeed; This was a demonstration of that love which
was in the heart of Christ from Eternity to poor sinners. O wonderful Love that
he should open his Breast to receive into his own heart the sharp point of that
sword which was directed against us. Where shall we find love to match this
love? Rather than we should be Sacrifices to Divine Justice, he himself would
become the Sacrifice. Have we had such demonstrations of his love represented
to us in this Ordinance? O then with what an inflamed love, and endeared
affections to the Lord Jesus Christ ought we to walk after this Ordinance of
the Lord's Supper. As we are to hate sin more, so we are to love Christ more.
Let us therefore, as the Apostle exhorts us, walk in love, as Christ also has
loved us, and given himself for us, an offering and sacrifice to God for a
sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2. The most intense love, and purest affections
are due from us to Christ, who loved us, and dyed for us, and rose again for
our Justifycation, and is gone before to prepare Mansions of Glory for the
seeing God's Face, and enjoying God's Presence to all Eternity. These are
endearing considerations, and should mightily endear Christ to our Souls. And O
that we could find and feel more of the constraining power and efficacy of this
Love of Christ, every day drawing out our hearts and affections more after
himself.

8. We are to walk more inquisitively, that is to say, more upon the search and
enquiry, not so much into the affairs and concerns of others, as into the
frames, and conditions, and affairs of our own Souls. Many are busy in making
their reflections and observations upon others, and in the mean time overlook
themselves. The Mind has many turnings, but the best is, when it turns in and
reflects upon it self. This was holy David's way and practice, Psalm. 77.6. I
commune with my own heart, and my spirit made diligent search. Ay, this is a
commendable walk indeed, when we are much in communing with our own hearts,
enquiring how matters go there. As the wise and prudent, and careful Tradesman
is often looking into his Accounts, that he may know how it is with him,
whether he goes backward or forward in the World. So should we be often looking
into our hearts, that we may know how it is with us, whether we go backward or
forwards in our Souls. That we may know what our losses have been, and what our
gains have been. This is a walking that is pleasing to God, as is evident from
the many Injunctions of his Word and Will to this purpose, Lament. 3.40. Let us
search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord, Hag. 1.5. Now therefore
thus says the Lord of hosts, consider your ways. 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your
selves, prove your own selves, etc. In order to the preparing our hearts to
approach the Lord's Table, the Apostle recommends to us this excellent duty of
Self-examination, 1 Cor. 11.28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat, etc. The Apostle is here laying before them the sin and danger of unworthy
participation of this Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, and gives them to
understand, that such as eat and drink unworthily, are guilty of the Body and
Blood of the Lord. Here he lays before them the sin. And in the 29th Verse he
lays before them the danger, and tells them plainly, that such as eat and drink
unworthily, eat and drink Damnation to themselves. Now to prevent such a
mischief as this, he recommends to them this excellent duty of
Self-examination. It is as much as if he had said, If ye would not eat and
drink unworthily, and thereby eat and drink damnation to your selves, then set
upon this business of Self-examination; Let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup.

Truly as this is necessary before we venture upon this Ordinance, so it is as
necessary after we have partaken of it. Let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat, etc. So also let a Man eat and drink, and so let him examine himself.
An after reflection is as necessary as a previous examination. We examine our
selves before, in order to receive good. And we must examine our selves after
to see what good we have received. After our performance of any duty we should
be upon the enquiry what good we have got? This Question we should put to our
selves, after every Prayer we make, after every Sermon we hear, after every
time we Communicate, at the end of every Duty, and at the end of every day. We
have been lately partaking of this Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, and as we
are frequently exhorted to examine our selves before we sit down at this
Ordinance; So the Exhortation now is to examine our selves after we are risen
from it. What Warmth of Affection had we in it? and not only so, But what
Warmth of Affection do we now find remaining and abiding upon us? Is not that
Heat and Warmth in a great measure abated, and lost already? This is that which
we should look to, that we do not easily or quickly, after Duties are over,
lose that Heat and Warmth which we got in the Duty. at the end of every Duty,
and at the end of every day, we are seriously and faithfully to examine, and
consider, what of God, and what of Christ has been discovered to me this day,
or in this or that Duty? What discoveries have been made of our selves to our
selves, of the baseness and vileness and corruptions of our own hearts? What
expressions of love to God, and Christ? What expressions of Sorrow for sin?
What delight in Christ, and desires after Christ have been working in my Soul
this day? What lively vigorous acts and exercises of Grace has been put
forth, not only in the Duty performed, but since the Duty was performed? What
Power has been exerted this day, in a way of opposition and resistance against
Temptations, and against Corruptions? What Backfildings and Apostacys, and
defections from God have I been guilty of since the last time I renewed my
Covenant? And what Sorrow and Contrition of heart has been expressed for it?
What guilt and defilement have I a-fresh contracted, and what application in a
way of Faith of the Blood of Christ has been made for pardon and cleansing?
What growth and increase of comfort and refreshment and joy do I find in my
Soul? What increase of strength do I find to perform Dutys? To bear
Afflictions? To resist Temptations? To mortify Corruptions? To walk with God?
Thus we should be upon the enquiry every day, and after every Duty, and
especially after this Ordinance of the Lord's Supper. Is my Soul more knit to
Christ, my heart more ravished with his Beauty and Excellency? Does Christ
appear more Fair, and Sin more foul to me than before? Christ more sweet, and
Sin more bitter? Sure I am it ought to be so with every one of us who have been
Guests at our Lord's Table, where we might see Two affecting, heart-melting,
heartbreaking sights: The one was Christ broken for us. The other was Christ
broken by us. A Christ broken for us, and there was an heart over*flowing with
love, pity, and compassion to us, which should beget in us hearts glowing and
burning, and flaming with love to him. And then we have seen a Christ broken by
us, wounded and bruised, and pierced, and broken by our sins, which were the
occasion of his bitter Agonies and Sufferings. Now as in the first we saw the
fullness of Christ's love, so in this we see the foulness of our sins, that
nothing but the blood of Christ can cleanse us from it. There is nothing that
represents to us the bitterness of sin, like the Su^^erings of Christ. These
things have been lately in a most lively manner represented to us, and set
before the eye and view of our Faith in this Supper-ordinance. But how have our
Hearts and Souls been affected with these lights? Does Christ appear more fair,
and Sin more foul than before, Christ more sweet, and Sin more bitter? thus it
ought to be with us who have been at this Ordinance of the Lord's Supper. And
our work and business now is to look to it, that indeed it be so.

9. More Courageously and with greater resolution for Christ. We that have had
such Tokens of Christ's love, and such Instances of his zeal and courage for our
good, as to encounter the greatest difficulties that lay in the way of our
Salvation and Happiness; not only the rage of Men, and Devils, but the Wrath
of his Father too: How should the consideration of this arm and fill our Minds
and Souls with an holy zeal and courage for him, 1 Pet. 4.1. For as much then
as Christ suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves likewise with the same
mind. At this Table of the Lord we have seen what Christ has done and suffered
for us. It therefore concerns us to give a proof of our zeal and courage for
him, by owning his ways, and defending his truths, by withstanding Temptations,
and turning a deaf ear to all the Solicitations of the Flesh, not betraying
the Interest of Christ into the hands of Enemies, standing our ground as long
as we have ground to stand upon, suffering the loss of all things, rather than
part with Christ; Honors, Pleasures, Preferments, Liberties, Livelyhoods, nay,
Life it self, rather than part with Christ. With such a zeal for Christ was
the Apostle Paul filled, Acts 21.13. What mean ye to weep, and break my heart?
For I am ready not only to be bound, but to suffer at Jerusalem for the Name of
the Lord Jesus. Where shall we find such a bold Lyon-like spirited Man for the
Lord Jesus Christ again, as this blessed Apostle was. He feared neither Bonds
nor Death; I am ready, says he, not only to be bound, but to suffer and dye at
Jerusalem for the sake of the Lord Jesus, rather than deny or disown Christ.
Neither the flatteries of the World on the one hand, should entice him away,
nor the frowns of the World on the other hand fright him away from Christ Such
a zeal and courage for Christ should our Minds be armed with, as to hold fast
the Profession of our Faith without wavering in the view and face of the
greatest opposition and difficulty that may be in our way to Heaven. A
Christian, of all Men, should be armed with the greatest Courage and
Resolution, because he is like to meet with the soarest and sharpest Assaults.
In the world ye shall have Tribulation, John 16. ult. Whilst we are in this
World we must not expect much ease or quiet; Storms and Tempests we must expect
in our Voyage or Journey to Heaven. The Christian's Life is a continual
warfare. From our Spiritual birth to our Natural death; from the hour and
moment we did first set our face Heavenward, till we come to set our foot in
Heaven, we shall have trouble and molestation on one kind or another. There is
no place which the Christian can call Privileged Ground. O then what need have
we of Courage, to hold on, and hold out to the end. The Devil will never leave
Tempting, nor the World Alluring, nor the Flesh Soliciting whilst we are upon
our March. The Israelites, you know, had no Peace till they lodged their
Colors in Canaan. Fresh Troubles and Difficulties did arise in their March
from Egypt to Canaan, so it will be with us in our March to Heaven. We must
bear the Cross before we wear the Crown, through much tribulation must enter
into the Kingdom of God, Acts 14.22.

10. With a more endeared love and affection one to another, Ephesians. 5.2. And
walk in love as Christ also loved us, and gave himself an offering and a
sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. This is the Apostles Exhortation
to the Ephesians, viz. To walk in love. And the Argument by which he presses
this, is taken from the love of Christ to us, in laying down his Life, and
offering up himself a Sacrifice to God for us. Now this Love we have been
lately Celebrating and Commemorating in this Ordinance of the Lord's Supper,
where we have seen Christ broken and Crucified for us; And can we have a
greater Motive to love one another than this, who have been Celebrating the
love of Christ together. It highly concerns every one of us to walk in love, as
Christ also loved us, and has given himself for us. But here it may be asked,
what is it to walk in love? Why to walk in love, Non est simpliciter diligere,
sed totam vitam in Charitate transigere. Zanch. inlo^.
Not simply to love, but to pass our whole life in love; Ita ut omnia a
Charitate sluant, and in Charitate fiant, and in Charitatem desinant: So that
all may flow from love, and may be done in love, and may end in love. This is
to walk in love; and so ought we to walk in love one toward another.
Performing all Offices of love and kindness, and respect one toward another,
pitying and praying one for another. Admonishing and reproving one another in
love and meekness. Bearing one another burdens, assisting and helping one
another, kind. and tenderhearted one to another, forbearing and forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's-sake has forgiven us. All bitterness, and
anger, and wrath and clamor, and evil speaking being put away from us, with
all malice.

Indeed it is much to be lamented and bewailed, that there should be such heats
and divisions, and animosities, such anger and clamor, and evil-speaking, and
I wish I could not say malice too, amongst Professors and Church Members. Is
this a walk any way suitable, or becoming the expressions of Christ's love in
dying and bleeding for us? Surely no. O how contrary is this to a Gospel
spirit, which is a Spirit of Love, and meekness. What, members of the same
Body, and mutual Members, members one of another, and shall we not own one
another, embrace one another, be cordially affected Zanch. inlo^.
each to other? What, Members one of another, and yet carry it with that
strangeness, and distance, and disaffection, as if we stood in no relation at
all one to another? What never agree but just when we are under the lash, just
under the Rod? How just is it with God to bring us into our former straits and
difficulties again? that we may learn to love one another better, that there
may be a greater harmony and agreement amongst us. There never was more need of
such a Prayer as the Apostle put up for the Thesalonians, than now, The Lord
make you to abound in love one toward another, 1 These. 3.12. I say, a Prayer
never more needful since Christ had a Church upon Earth, than it is in this day
amongst us in this Nation, where love amongst Brethren was never at a lower
Ebb. Divided heads have made divided hearts. Division in Judgment has made
division in love and Affection, so that the love of many is waxed cold. Now the
good Lord who only can make dry bones to live, revive this Affection where it
is dead or dying, and confirm it where it yet continues, that being thus
Members of Christ and Members one of another, we may fulfill that great and
everlasting Commandment, that as it has been taught from the beginning. of the
World, so it is to be practiced to the end of the same, yea even to Eternity,
that we love one another, 1 John. 3.11. This is that we are most frequently
exhorted to, Heb. 13.1. Let brotherly love continue. Romans 12.9, 10. Let love be
without dissimulation, be kindly affectioned one toward another with brotherly
love, 1 Pet. 3.8. Finaly brethren be ye all of one mind, having compassion one
of another, etc. 1 John 3.23. And in many other places. This is that which as
it is the bond of all Christian Virtues, so it is the bond of all Christian
Societys, in both which respects it is called the bond of Perfectness, Col.
3.14. A most perfect bond knitting and uniteing hearts together, which no other
bond can do, and being so it is in the first place to be put on by all those
who would join themselves to the Mystical Body. (...), above all things, says
the Apostle, put on Charity which is the bond of perfectness. This also is laid
down for a mark and character of Christ's Sheep and Disciples, and laid down by
Christ himself. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples if ye love
one another, John 13.35. This is that which is so highly applauded and
commended in Scripture, Psalm. 133.1. Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is
for brethren to dwell together in unity. And where this is kept up and
maintained even there the Lord commands the Blessing even life for evermore.
Now by all this it appears that to walk in love is a very suitable and becoming
walk, especially after this Supper of the Lord, which indeed is a Sacramental
seal and token not only of our communion with Christ, but also of our communion
with his Members, of our fellowship with the Saints, and of our communion and
fellowship one with another. This the Apostle clearly intimates, 1 Cor. 10.16,
17. For we, says he, being many are one bread, and one body, for we are all
partakers of that one bread. This Supper as it is a bond of our union and
communion with Christ, so it is a bond of our union and communion one with
another as his Members. Therefore every time we partake of it we should be more
and more, faster and faster knit in love and affection one to another. This is
a confirming Ordinance, and as it is to confirm and inflame our love to Christ,
so it is to confirm and inflame our love one to another.

11. After this Ordinance we are to walk more cheerfully and comfortably. Of
all persons Believers have most reason to be cheerful and joyful at all times
and in all conditions, in times of Adversity as well as in times of Prosperity,
though he feeds upon Bread and Water yet he has greater reason to rejoice than
the greatest Monarch in the World. I do not say a Believer always walks
joyfully and cheerfully, no, sometimes he walks dejectedly. Tho a child of
light yet sometimes he walks in darkness, but yet I say a Believer has most
reason to walk joyfully and cheerfully, and it is his duty so to do and has
frequent calls and exhortations to it, Phil. 3.1. Finally my brethren rejoice
in the Lord, etc. Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always and again I say
rejoice. 1 These. 5.16. Rejoice evermore. Now a Believer has evermore matter of
rejoyceing, and reason to rejoice, inasmuch as all that which is really matter
of dejection is removed and taken away, viz. the guilt of Sin and the Curse of
the Law, and the Wrath of God, now these are all removed and taken away by
Christ who came to procure peace by the Blood of his Cross, and in whom we have
Redemption through his Blood. A Believer has evermore matter of rejoyceing, upon
the account of that fullness that is treasured up in Christ, in whom it pleased
the Father that all fullness should dwell, Col. 1.19. Now what is there that a
poor creature can desire or stand in need of in order to the making him
completely happy and blessed but what may be found in this All-fulness of
Christ. Here is wisdom for his Direction and Instruction, included in it. Here
is a complete Righteousness for his Justification. Here is Grace and Holiness
for his Sanctification. Righteousness to give him a Right and Title to Heaven,
Grace and Holiness to give him a meetness and fitness for Heaven, and power and
ability to bring him safe thither; upon these considerations amongst others a
Believer has always ground and matter of rejoyceing; And by this they are
described as by their vital act, Phil. 3.3. We are the Circumcision which
worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence
in the Flesh. A Believer should rejoice always, walk joyfully and cheerfully at
all times, and especially after Sacrament seasons, when he has been renewing
his Covenant with God. God a fresh making over himself and his all to the
Believer, giving him a fresh sense and seal of his love and the pardon of his
Sins when Christ with all his Benefits and Purchases and Merit, Christ in all
his Offices, Christ in all his Grace and fullness has been afresh made over to
him. His Blood in all the virtue and efficacy of it sealed and applied to the
Believers. The new Testament with all its Promises and Privileges and Benefits
thereof, this is all ratified and confirmed in the Blood of Christ to the
Believer, and assured to him in this Supper-Ordinance. They who have been
entertained at this Gospel Feast who have been feeding upon the Provision of
God's Grace, and have received fresh Tokens and Pledges of his Love; for such
to walk dejectedly, and Mournfully, reflects great dishonor, and highly
affronts the Master of the Feast, and greatly disparageth the Matter of it too;
it is a great undervaluing of Christ and his Blood, as if the guilt or filth of
thy sin did exceed the Merit of his Blood, or was too great for his Blood to
remove and cleanse. After this Ordinance we are to walk more joyfully and
cheerfully, rejoicing in the Lord, and joying in the God of our Salvation. We
should go home to our Houses and Habitations Rejoicing; and go on our way,
through this Pilgrimage, with Joy, as the Eunuch, when Baptized, did, it is
said, He went on his way rejoicing, Acts 8.39. So should we, after we have been
at this Supper, go on our way, through this World Rejoicing, saying to our
Souls, as David did to his, Return to thy rest O my Soul, for the Lord has
dealt bountifully with thee.

12. With more earnest Breathings and Longings of Soul after fresh Communion
with the Lord Jesus Christ. It is not a little of the World that will satisfy a
Covetous Man; nor a little Pleasure that will satisfy a Carnal Voluptuous Mind;
Nor a little Honor and Preferment, that will satisfy an Ambitious Aspiring
Mind. Nor is it a little of Christ that will satisfy a Gracious Renewed Heart.
See how David thirsted after God, Psalm. 63.1, 2. O God, thou art my God, early
will I seek thee, my Soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee in a
dry land where no water is, to see thy power and thy glory as I have seen thee
in the Sanctuary. David had tasted of the Sweet of Enjoyment and Communion with
God, and this sets his Soul a longing and thirsting, and breathing after more
of God, Psalm. 42.1, 2. As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants
my Soul after God; my Soul thirsts for the living God, when shall I come and
appear before thee? The like breathings of soul we find after Communion with
God, in Psalm. 84.1, 10. How amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord of Hosts, my
Soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord; my heart and my
flesh cries out for the living God. For a day in thy Courts is better than a
thousand: I had rather be a doorkeeper in the House of my God, than to dwell in
the Tents of Wickedness. Such breathings and longings of Soul after Communion
with Christ should be kept up and maintained in our Souls after every time we
partake of this blessed Ordinance. Have we this day sat down under the shadow
of Christ, and has his fruit been sweet and pleasant to our taste? Have we had
any taste of the Grace and Fullness of Christ at his Table? Have our Souls been
filled as with marrow and fatness, delighted and solaced with Communion with
Christ? Have we met this day with any fresh assurances of the love of God in
Christ to our Souls, of the pardon of our sins in the precious blood of Christ?
Has there been any fresh life, and vigor, and grace communicated from Christ
our everlasting head to our Souls this day? Have we been fed with hidden Manna,
with the Bread and Water of Life? Have we seen any thing of the Power and Glory
of Christ at his own Table? O then how should we be breathing and longing after
the returns of such seasons and opportunities as these are? O when will this
Supper return? When shall I come and appear before thee? O that I might still
be feasting my Soul upon these dainties. Thus we should be walking with more
earnest breathings of Soul after fresh Communion with Christ, not only in this
Ordinance, but in all other Ordinances of Divine Worship, and not only so, but
long to be for ever with him, after complete enjoyment of him in Heaven above.
If it be so sweet to enjoy him in Ordinances here, O what will it be, nay, How
far sweeter will it be to enjoy him in Heaven, where we shall enjoy him freely,
fully, familiarly and eternally, without any interruption or intermission. Thus
we have seen how we are to walk after this Supper Ordinance; and, that we may
thus walk, it is necessary that we be strengthened with all might, according to
the glorious power of God. The Devil to be sure will be opposing, with all his
might, such a walk as this; and our own wicked, base, deceitful, treacherous
hearts will be too ready to side and comply with him: Therefore, that such a
walk may be kept up, and maintained, that we may walk worthy of the Lord, unto
all pleasing, it is necessary that we be strengthened with all might, according
to his glorious power, 1 Col. 11. Let us therefore be often dispatching a cry
to Heaven for that strength and assistance whereby we may be enabled to
maintain such a walk, and daily depend upon Christ for strength, in whom we
have not only Righteousness, but strength too. That through daily
Communications of Grace and Strength from him, we may be enabled so to live,
and act, and walk, whilst we are here, that we may finish our Course with joy,
and, at last, an entrance, yea, an abundant entrance, an entrance with joy and
triumph, may be administered to us into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, that from his Kingdom of Grace, we may be received into
his Kingdom of Glory; and from the provisions of Grace we may be taken to the
provisions of Glory, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob at an Eternal
Feast, eat and drink at Christ's Table in Christ's Kingdom. Now whosoever is wise
and will observe these things, even they shall understand the Loving Kindness
of the Lord: They shall go from strength to strength, their Souls shall be fat
and flourishing, and made to increase with the increases of God.

FINIS.

