THE EVIL Of Our Days. WITH The Remedy of it.

A SERMON PREACHED At a VISITATION at Rothwell in Northamptonshire, October. 12.
1697.

By John Howard M. A. Rector of Marston Trussel in the same County.

LONDON, Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultry, School.

A Visitation-Sermon.
EPHESIANS. V. 16. Redeeming the time, because the days are evil.


AS all the Churches under St. Paul's Care, were great Instances of his Wisdom
and Diligence in the Ministry; so none more than that of Ephesus. He had been
Resident with them about Three years together, and by God's Blessing upon his
Zealous and Painful Endeavors, Converted many, both Jews and Gentiles, to the
Faith of Christ. At his departure from them, he left Timothy to be their
Bishop, a Man excellently qualified for that Office, and fit to carry on the
Great Work which the Apostle had so happily Advanced. And that he might do it
the better, he sent his First Epistle to him not long after, wherein he gave
him full Instructions about all the Duties of his Holy Function. Yet some years
after this, when he was Prisoner at Rome for the sake of the Gospel, fearing
loast his Sufferings might discourage the Christians at Ephesus, and
considering also what Temptations they had at home to shake their Faith; that
no means might be wanting for their further Confirmation and Perseverance in
it, he Writes this Epistle to them for those ends. Wherein he first Praises God
for those Admirable Privileges they enjoyed by virtue of Christ's Redemption,
and for the Constancy of their Faith, Praying that they might Increase in
Wisdom and Holiness. Then he puts them in mind of their sinful and miserable
estate before Conversion, and of the rich Mercy and Grace of God in delivering
them out of it. To this he adds an account of the particular Grace of God to
himself, in Calling him to the Ministry, in making Extraordinary Revelations to
him, and sending him to Preach among the Gentiles, the unsearchable Riches of
Christ: whereby not only Men, but the holy Angels too, would be further
Instructed in the Mysterious Effects of Man's Redemption. Wherefore he Exhorts
them not to faint at his Tribulations for them; and Prays for the increase of
their Spiritual Strength, their Faith, Love and Divine Knowledge, and that they
might he filled with all the fullness of God. And having spent near half the
Epistle upon these Subjects, which were most fit to confirm and encourage them;
he does in the following part of it exhort them to those necessary Duties which
the Privileges beforementioned do call for: Beseeching them first in the
general to walk worthy of their Vocation, and then particularly directing them
in their whole Behavior toward God, and the World. And amongst other
excellent Rules, he gives them many particular Cautions, both in the fourth and
fifth Chapters, against all the Sins of the Age and Place they lived in;
arguing from the danger of them to their Souls, (notwithstanding what some
deceivers might suggest to the contrary,) from that great and admirable Change
which was wrought in them, from the proper Fruit and Efficacy of the Holy
Spirit, their Duty on the contrary, to reprove such things, and the shame that
belonged to them, that they must by all means avoid those Sins. And having now
in many instances directed and warned them, he seems to sum up all in the
Verse before and in that of my Text -- See then that ye walk Circumspectly,
etc. (...), see therefore how Circumspectly, Diligently or Exactly ye walk --
Which words do imply, seeing by the free Grace of God, and his infinite Love in
Jesus Christ, ye were called out of Darkness into Light; from a State of
Ignorance, Infidelity, and Misery, to that of a Divine Knowledge, Holiness and
Salvation; since ye enjoy the glorious Privileges Christ has purchased for you
by his own Blood, for the increase of Spiritual Graces and Comforts in your
Souls, and Security of your Eternal Happiness; since you live amongst many
Adversaries and great Temptations to Sin against God, whereby you would forfeit
his Blessings and incur his Displeasure; -- (...) -- therefore look to your
selves, that ye walk with all that exactness and caution which these things
require in you, as it becomes wise Men to do. Which Precept is yet more briesly
comprehended in the words of my Text, Redeeming the Time; for which the Apostle
adds this one Reason, instead of many, because the days are Evil.

In speaking to these words I shall first show the meaning of them, and how far
they concerned the Ephesians; and then apply them to our own case.

The Precept here, (...), would (I think) be more fitly rendered, Buying the
Season, For (...) and (...), signify to Buy or Purchase, as well as to Redeem,
and (...) is a Season or opportunity, in which sense time is also sometimes
used. This is a Metaphorical expression taken from Merchants who will deny
themselves, and take great care and pains, especially in a difficult time, to
purchase Goods to their best Advantage. So the Ephesians are here exhorted to
walk with the greatest Caution and exactness, that as wise Merchants, they may
purchase that Treasure, the valuable Season which is put into their hands, and
make it their own, by the most prudent and pious improvement of it; and the
rather, because the days are Evil.

There are two things which make the time Evil, namely, Sin and Suffering. And
for both these it was an Evil Time, when St. Paul wrote this Epistle,
especially at Ephesus. There the Gentiles were more than ordinarily Zealous for
their vain Superstitions, chiefly in the Worship of their Diana. There all
those Sins which the Heathens too generally lived in, did very much abound, and
against which the Apostle does particularly warn the Ephesians in this Epistle.
Here, in some of their Feasts, they Murdered all they met with in the Streets,
and at last put Timothy to Death, (as Photius tells us) because he forbad them.
Yea here, as if this was the chief Seat of the Devils Kingdom, were very many
of his most professed Disciples, Magicians or Sorcerers, as appears from the
great number of them St. Paul had converted, the price of whose Books was fifty
Thousand pieces of Silver, Acts 19.19. Besides, here were already many false
Teachers, as the followers of Simon Magus, the Nicolaitans, and about this
time, or soon after, the Ebionites and Cerinthians, who endeavored as much as
they could, to corrupt the Doctrines of Christ by their pestilent Heresies.
Yea, from among themselves arose some Seducers too, as Hymeneus, Alexander,
Philetus and others, mentioned in the Epistles to Timothy. Which things were
exactly according to the Apostles Prediction, Acts 20.29, 30. Where speaking to
the Elders of Ephesus, he says, I know this, that after my departing, shall
grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the Flock. Also of your own
selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after
them. So evil were the days wherein these Ephesians lived, in respect of Sin.
Therefore the Church could not be secure from the other evil of suffering.

But to say nothing of the secret Temptations of the Devil, which are common to
all Christians in every time and place, though they must be supposed most
violent where that enemy had such an interest to lose, and in so great danger,
as at Ephesus. To pass by many other Troubles, which almost constantly attend a
sincere Profession of the Gospel; Here the Disciples were always liable to
Persecution for the sake of Christ, from the blind Heathens on the one hand,
and the more obdurate Jews on the other. Here, as it is most probable, St. Paul
and his Companions met with those great Troubles, which he complains of, 2 Cor.
1.8. which pressed them out of measure, above strength, insomuch that they
despaired even of Life; and had the Sentence of Death in themselves. For it is
certain he was in danger at Ephesus of being carried to the Theater, ( Act.
19.29, 30.) to be devoured there, as we may suppose, by Wild Beasts kept for
the Execution of Malefactors, and to which Christians afterward were sometimes
exposed. Therefore he says, That, after the manner of Men, ((...), according
to Man, or, so far as was in Man's Power) he fought with Beasts at Ephesus, 1
Cor. 15.32. And it cannot be supposed, but the Church must be always in a
Suffering State, and receive daily Affronts from the Rage and Malice of such
Enemies among whom they lived; though St. Paul does not directly mention it in
this Epistle; for this Reason, it may be, least it might have Exasperateed
their Enemies the more against them; and therefore he gives only such general
hints to it, as this in the Text. Now because they endured these and some
following Persecutions, with a true Christian Courage and Patience, our Savior
mentions this to their honor, Rev. 2.3. Thou have born, and have patience, and
for my Names sake have labored, and have not tainted. Thus it appears these
Ephesians lived in an evil time, both in respect of Sin and Suffering; and it
is with relation to these especially, that the Apostle Exhorts them, (...), to
make the best Merchandise of the present season, by behaving themselves with
that wisdom and circumspection, which such evil Times did especially require.
And in this sense it will best agree with what appears to be the design of the
same Exhortation to the Colossians, Chap. 4.5. Walk in wisdom toward them that
are without, redeeming the time. That is, use that prudence in your
Conversation toward Unbelievers, that ye may preserve your selves from their
sins, and from suffering by their means, and gain upon them, if possible, in
order to their receiving the Faith of Christ.

Now this Exhortation, and the reason by which it is enforced, do nearly
concern all Christians at this day, and in this Nation, but especially
Ministers of the Gospel, who, of all Men, should be most sensible of the evil
of the Times, as indeed they usually feel the greatest share of it; and who
have a more considerable and difficult part to act with relation to it than
others. Therefore, in the following part of my Discourse, I shall chiefly
confine my self to them. And because the Apostle exhorts us to redeem the time,
with respect to the evil of it, I shall first represent to you the evil of our
present days, and then show how we are to redeem the time with respect to it.

First. I shall give some account of the evil of our days, both in respect of
sin and suffering.

1. In respect of Sin. And here I have a very Melancholy Scene before me, and
such as I had rather secretly lament, than describe to you, were it not
necessary we should know and consider this dreadful evil, in order to its Cure,
if it be not past remedy. We live in an Age and Nation, wherein too many are
Monstrously corrupted in their Judgment and Manners. Some are sunk so far below
the common reason and sense of Mankind, as to deny the God that made them,
though there is a thousand times more certainty of his existence, than their
own. Others will own no Religion but what is Natural, because, they cannot
comprehend those Mysteries God has revealed to us; and so they deny the Lord
that bought them. Some arrogate to themselves a Power of keeping the whole Law,
and attaining Perfection and Happiness by that means; others contend for a
Chimerical Faith, that has neither grounds nor effects, as sufficient for
Salvation, how bad soever Men are in their hearts and conversations; and so
make our Blessed Lord himself (as much as lies in them) a Patron of vice and
wickedness, and his Holy Religion a pretense for the vilest practices. What
shall we say of Popery, that Hydra of errors, which have been so often baffled,
and yet they live? Though, one would think, if the Men of that Religion would
seriously consult either Faith, or Reason, and that Law of Kindness, which is
naturally written in our hearts, they must needs be ashamed of their gross
Idolatry, of the many contradictions and absurdities they have received, and
that Cruelty practiced in their Church toward all Men, that dare be wiser than
themselves. To these I might add, the Dreams and Fancies of many Enthusiasts
among us, who conceive such Notions of God, and their Duty toward him, as are
unworthy of his Being, and so far below those excellent discoveries he has made
of his Nature and Will in holy Scriptures, that their own Reason, as imperfect
as it is, would in a great measure correct these mistakes, if they would but
attend to it.

Now what can be the fruit of such errors in Men's Minds, but a Corruption also
in their Conversation? which indeed is very great and common amongst us. What
horrid Oaths and Blasphemies, what scoffs at Religion and the sincere
Professers of it, are heard in many places? How is the Sacred Name of God, his
Ordinances and Providence despised? How are his holy Word and Ministers
Ridiculed, and made Subjects for the Profane Wit and Raillery of those senseless
Men, who thus abuse the gifts of God, to his dishonor and their own
destruction? And does not Profaneness, in some measure, enter into our very
Churches too? For even there we often observe a behavior in Men very unsuitable
to those Places, and the holy Duties performed in them. What irreverence is
used in Prayer? What indifferency in hearing the Word of God? Yea what
drowsiness is indulged by some, and what levities practiced by others, while
they are present at these Ordinances? And if the Sacred Rights of God are thus
violated by sinful Men, it is the less wonder they should also invade those of
their Neighbors, and that we so often hear of Contentions, Murders,
Adulteries, Thefts, Oppressions, False-witness, Malicious Slanders, Revilings,
etc. and that there is so much Pride, Covetousness and Intemperance amongst us.
To these I must add the many Rents and Divisions in the Church of Christ,
whereby Men do a great indignity to our blessed Lord himself, and frustrate, as
much as lies in them, one gracious end of his dying for us, the uniting all
into one body; the many Petitions also he made to God the Father, and the
excellent Precepts he has given us to this purpose. And hence it is, (as well
as from other causes beforementioned) that the Houses of God are so little
frequented, his Worship both in ^ublick and Private so strangely neglected, and
particularly the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that holy Feast instituted by
our Savior for a Commemoration of his dying Love to us, to engage us more
strictly in that service which is perfect freedom, and to convey Spiritual
Grace and Comfort to us. How is this neglected by most Men? as if they had no
sense of their Baptismal Engagements, which are here repeated, of the most
gracious work of Man's Redemption by the death of Christ here represented, or
the Interest and Happiness of their precious and Immortal Souls, which would be
very much promoted by a serious and frequent attendance on this holy Ordinance.
Hence also is that almost general indifferency in Religion, I mean in respect
of the great substantials of it; for there is too much Zeal in all parties for
those lesser things which distinguish them from other Protestants. They are
very fond of the occasions and marks of their Separation from their brethren,
as if needless divisions in the Church, which were of old condemned by our
great Apostle as works of the Flesh, had now changed their Nature, and were
become means of Grace and Salvation! The intemperate heats Men have for these
things, together with those of Worldly and Carnal Affections, have almost
exhausted that true Zeal for God, and that sincere Affection to one another,
which are the distinguishing Marks of Christ's Disciples. It is because Iniquity
does so abound, that the love of many is grown cold: though for this very
reason, it ought to have been more fervent, as will appear hereafter. Thus have
I mentioned some of the most common Sins amongst us, wherein we may seem a
parallel even to Ephesus it self, when this Epistle was written. If the
Heathens there were violent Idolaters and Persecutors of Christians, such are
our Papists too; if sometimes they practiced barbarous Cruelties upon any they
met with, and were ordinarily very dissolute and licentious in their Lives; we
are not without instances of the former sort, and do too much abound with those
of the latter: and our Atheist is such a monster as perhaps was not known
amongst them. If Errors and Heresies did infest the Church then, we have some
of the worst of them revived in our days, and have added many others to them.
If there were some perverse Men in the Church at Ephesus, that separated
themselves, and drew Disciples after them, these are far outdone by the many
Schisms and Divisions amongst us at this day. If the believing Ephesians were
accused, some time after the writing of this Epistle, for having lest their
first love, Rev. 2.4. how much more may we be condemned for almost the entire
loss of ours, and falling into a luke-warmness, like that chargd upon Laodicea,
and for which our Blessed Savior so severely threatens her? We may therefore
say of our own days, in respect of the Sins that abound amongst us, as the
Apostle did of those he lived in, that they are Evil. And the more, because
those in our days that commit the same Sins with the Heathens at Ephesus, have
been better instructed than they, and prosess a pure and undefiled Religion;
and all wilful Sins amongst us, are committed against as many gracious
Providence of God toward us, as were ever showed to any Nation.

2. Our days are Evil too in respect of Suffering. But here I will acknowledge,
to the praise of Gods Goodness and Patience, that we are not liable to such
bloody Persecutions, as the Ephesians were daily in danger of. We live not
under Laws that make our Religion a Capital Crime, or Magistrates that are
ready to Judge and Condemn us for it to the most Cruel Deaths. Yea, though the
Protestants, in several Neighboring Nations, have been thus barbarously dealt
with by the Papists, and we our selves were in imminent danger of the same
sufferings, it pleased God, of his insinite goodness to prevent them by an
unexpected and wonderful deliverance: and now at last to confirm this more, and
free us from many sensible effects of a long and dreadful War, by the Peace
which is so happily concluded. But notwithstanding these undeserved effects of
God's Mercy, I have said enough already to prove one of the greatest
Persecutions at this time, and in this Nation, that can befall good men, but
especially faithful Ministers. St. Augustine ( Hom. 10.) speaking of those words
of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.12. All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus shall
suffer persecution; brings in this Question, by way of Objection, When the
Church is in a state of Peace and Tranquillity, Protected by Laws, and Defended
by Princes, How then do they, who live Godly, suffer Persecution? To which he
Answers, Qui inter malos vivunt persecutionem patiuntur; quia omnes mali
persequuntur bonos, non ferro and lapidibus, sed vita and moribus. They who
live amongst Evil Men, do suffer Persecution; for all Evil Men Persecute the
Good, not with Sword and Stones, but by their Life and Manners. And then he
Instances in the case of Lot in Sodom, whom none Persecuted or Molested there,
but only by their Wicked Lives With which, as St. Peter tells us, (...) he
Racked or Tortured his Righteous Soul from day to day. And indeed this
Persecution has been always very Grievous to Good Men. It drew Rivers of Waters
from the Psalmist's Eyes, and made the Soul of Jeremy weep in secret places.
Yea, for this, as well as for the Judgments it would bring upon Judah, he
passionately wishes, That his head were waters, and his eyes a fountain of
Tears, that he might weep day and night for them, Jer. 9.1. And none will
wonder at this, that consider how Injurious sin is to the Honor of Almighty
God, how contrary to the Temper of every Good Man, and in what danger it puts
them that are guilty of eternal Damnation. And if these sinners be under our
own charge, our Affliction is the greater on their account. If St. John had no
greater Joy, than to hear that his Children walked in Truth, nothing could
afflict him more, than their defection from it. If it was the Joy and Crown,
yea the very Life of St. Paul, that the Churches, under his Care, stood fast in
the Faith, it must be a matter of great trouble, and humiliation, yea something
like Death it self to him if they deserted it. Nay, if in some cases, as St.
John Teaches, we ought to lay down our Lives for the Brethren; that is, in a
time of Persecution, when it may appear necessary for the Confirmation of them
that Believe, and the Conversion of others: then their wilful continuance in
sin, or manifest defection from the Faith, ought to be more grievous to us than
Death it self. And alas! How many such cases as these do we see in our
Parishes? Some who have been under our Preaching many years, and, it may be,
received private Instructions from us too, are yet grossly ignorant of the
plainest and most necessary Principles of Religion. Others who have Improved
more in Knowledge, are notwithstanding very loose and scandalous in their
Lives. Some that cannot be much accused, either of ignorance, or gross
Commissions, are very defective in their Piety toward God, Charity toward
their Neighbors, or those Relative Duties they are particularly obliged to.
Others that would seem, it may be, to have a regard to all these, for want of a
sound and settled Judgment in Religion, are easily imposed on by the subtilty of
seducing spirits, and drawn away from our Communion. Now can any thing more
sensible grieve a Faithful Minister, who has the Care of those Souls, and has
taken much pains to Instruct and Edify them in the Faith of Christ, than to see
them thus despise or desert him, and hazard their own Eternal salvation? God
has set us over our People as Pastors over their Flocks, yea as Fathers over
their Children. And can we be supposed the only Shepherds that are indifferent
what becomes of our Flocks; or the only Fathers that have no Compassion for
our Children, or Concern for their Eternal Happiness? The Care, Diligence and
Watchfulness of all the Faithful servants of Christ, do plainly bespeak the
contrary.

Therefore, though these unhappy Men, who thus frustrate our Pains with them,
intend it not as a Persecution to us, yet the Devil, who Tempts them to it,
does really intend this, who knows how much it is his Interest, to discourage
us in our Great Work, and he cannot more effectually do it, than by this means.

But this is not the only Persecution which we suffer more than other
Christians, but our Holy Office, the Honor of which ought to be dearer to us
than our Lives, does, at this day, ly under a very great, and almost General
Contempt. And hence it is, that the worst Construction is so often put upon our
Words and Actions, that many Calumnies are so easily cast upon us by some, and
so readily believed by others, etc. Thus are we Persecuted even with Swords,
though not in St. Augustin's sense before mentioned, yet in that of holy David,
who Complaining of the Malicious Speeches of his Enemies against him ( Psalm.
59.) says, That Swords are in their Lips. I may add to these things the
Invasion of our Sacred Office by many, who have neither Gifts nor Opportunities
to fit them for it; and therefore while they presume to be Teachers, do justly
fall under the Apostles Censure upon some such Men at Ephesus, that they
understand neither what they say, nor whereof they Affirm. I might mention also
several other Injuries we often suffer as Ministers, but it is time for me to
come to the other part of my Text; and I have been the longer and more
particular upon this, because the knowledge of these things, I will not say,
(For who does not know them?) but a serious sense of them will be a great step
toward their Cure, which I shall now

2. Consider, in speaking to the Precept in my Text, Redeeming the time, or
Buying the Season. Here therefore I must show how we are to use, and improve
our time, with respect to the Evils be forementioned.

1. The Evil of Sin. 2. The Evil of Suffering.
First. The Evil of Sin. And here we must take care,

First. To preserve our selves from it. Secondly. To do what lies in us to
Remedy it.

First. To preserve our selves from this Evil, and lead a Conversation as
contrary to it as is possible. And this the Apostle does exhort the Ephesians
to, in many particulars before my Text, and must be supposed to intend it in
this Precept, as much as any thing else. There ly indeed very great Obligations
upon all that Name the Name of Christ, to depart from Iniquity, and be
followers of him, in a pious and useful Conversation; but especially Ministers
of the Gospel, whom he has appointed in his own stead, not only to Instruct
others in the way to Heaven, but also to lead them in by a holy Example. And it
concerns them, for the honor of God, and the safety of themselves and others,
to be the more circumspect, as Sin is more common amongst us. Therefore, if
Errors and Heresies do so much abound in this Nation, we ought to be more
diligent in searching after the Truth, and constantly adhere to it. If others
are so vicious in their Lives, it lies upon us to be the more Sober and
Innocent, to watch carefully against Temptations, and to preserve our selves
not only from all gross Commissions, but also (as far as may be) from the very
appearance of Evil. If the Duties of Religion, both toward God and Men, are
strangely neglected, by many that would go for Christians, let us be the more
zealous and constant in the performance of them. If a great Indifferency in
Religion has obtained amongst all Orders of Men, and there remain but few
Sparks of that Holy Fire of Zeal and of Devotion, which makes our Service an
Acceptable Sacrifice to God; let us by all means, endeavor to Revive and
Cherish it in our selves, and make it the more intense, by reason of that
Coldness with which we are encompassed. For in so General a Defection from the
Life and Power of Godliness, What will become of the Honor of God and his
Cause in the World, if we desert it, or are cold in it? And what greater
Judgments than any we have yet felt, may reasonably be expected for this
Apostasy, if the Righteousness of our Lives, and Sincere Importunity of our
Prayers, do not prevent them?

Secondly. We must do what we can to remedy this Evil. And what I have already
mentioned, the Holiness of our Lives, will do very much toward it. For this
will naturally create a Veneration for us in the Minds of Men, and give us more
Authority in the use of other Means. It will provoke them that have any remains
of Piety in their Hearts, Confirm such as are wavering in the Faith, and half
persuade those who were before Averse to Religion, of the Truth and Excellency
of those Doctrines, which they see have had so much power upon our selves, and
produce such amiable fruits in our Conversation. For there is a beauty in
Holiness, which every eye (one would think) may in some measure discern. There
is a greatness in Self denial and contempt of the World, which commands
admiration; and there are those charms in Humility and condescension, in
meekness and compassion, in a civil and courteous behavior toward all Men,
that must needs abate something of the most inveterate prejudices against the
ways of God, and win very much upon those that are in some measure prepared for
them. Yea, they will give us such an interest in their affections, as will make
them more apt to consider, and receive good Instructions from us. And which is
more than all this, our faithfulness to God in such an holy Conversation will
qualify us for his blessing upon the endeavors we use for the good of others.

The other means necessary to remedy the Evil of Sin, are especially these
following.

1. We must endeavor to convince those that are guilty. 2. We must warn and
instruct others. 3. We must pray to God for his blessing upon these things.
1. We must endeavor to convince those that are guilty.

In order to which it will be necessary.

1. To use the fittest arguments with such as err in Judgment. 2. To reprove
those that are guilty of other Sins. 3. To show kindness both to the one and
the other, as there may be occasion.
1. To use the fittest arguments with such as err in Judgment. The Principal of
these, if he be properly reckoned amongst them, is the Atheist; but I think his
Error is rather in the will. Some Men (if they deserve that name) have so much
improved their Natural Affection to Sin, by indulging themselves in it, that
they cannot with any comfort think there is a God, who will Judge and Reward
them according to their deeds, and therefore heartily wish there were no such
Being. Which seems to be the Psalmist's meaning, when he says, Psalm. 14.1. The
fool has said in his heart (that is, in the desires of it) that there is no
God; and in the next words tells us whence this Atheism proceeds, They are
corrupt, they have done abominable works. And therefore while they talk as if
Atheism was their belief, it may be, these bold Efforts against Heaven are
intended only for some excuse of their Wicked Lives. For it is hard to think,
that they who have the least remains of Reason in them, should be able to
resist all the plain and most sensible evidences of God's Existence. While they
open their eyes, they see as many proofs of it, as there are beings in their
view, or Motions and Properties in those Beings: and if they shut them, every
thought of their Hearts is a demonstration of it. So that one would think, a
Man must go out of the World, and from himself too, before he can be altogether
insensible of the Divine Existence. But if his mind can be so far besotted with
Sensuality, as to lose all sense of it, it is in vain to use any rational
Arguments to convince him. Some indeed have taken pains to answer this fool
according to his folly, in showing the inconsistence of his dreams and fancies;
it may be, with respect to that Rule, Prove. 26.5. that he might be no longer
wise in his own conceit: and have excellently set before him the most
considerable Arguments of God's Being and Providence. But he that can shut his
eyes against all the visible Testimonies of these things, will probably have
very little sense of the force of their Arguments. Yea, it is like, this way of
dealing with him, will make him but the more conceited of himself. For while he
is treated as a Man of Reason, he will take encouragement to shuffle off all
that can be said against his Principles; and there is little question but he
will find as good pretenses for it, as for his former unbelief. But I confess
these discourses are of great use to others, to confirm their Faith, and assist
them upon every observation of those things, from whence the Author's arguments
are taken, to be more sensible of God's presence with them, and of the dominion
he exercises in the World. One would think the most proper Argument to work
upon this sensualist, (if he be capable of any) would be from the delight and
safety of true Religion, whose ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths
are Peace. Of which, if the little Reason he has left will not convince him, he
might at least make Trial, and preser that course which he finds to be best.
But why do I speak of arguing with a Beast? For if it be Religion which
distinguishes Man from the brute Creatures, as some great Authors have
resolved, the Atheist who is fallen from it, must be reckoned amongst them. And
I think the Wise Man does direct the proper method of dealing with him, when he
says, A whip for the Horse, and a bridle for the Ass, and a rod for the fools
back, Prove. 26.3. It is sense, through the pleasure of Sin, that has betrayed
him to this Error; and it must be Sense, through the smart of Suffering, that
will cure him of it. It Is therefore the Magistrates work chiefly to convert
this Apostate. And we cannot sufficiently lament it, that while Humane Laws are
so jealous of every invasion of our own Rights, and so severely executed upon
them, the most bold and dreadful Impieties against God, whose cause we should
prefer a thousand times before our own, do escape Punishment.

The next I shall mention are the Socinians, who have showed so much confidence
of late, in publishing and defending their notions, as if they might appeal to
the reason of Mankind for the Justice of them. These Men seem to own Revelation
in the general, but at the same time assert such Principles as overthrow it;
but whether this be owing most to their Reason or their Piety, I leave it to
themselves to determine. Some amongst us, who I believe have been far from
their Opinions, have notwithstanding paid a great deference no their Reason.
But though they themselves have set up this Idol in opposition to Almighty God,
to judge of his deep and holy Mysteries, it is pity and others should fall down
and Worship it. And had these Men but carefully examined, what they have
blindly adored, they would have been of a very different Opinion. The fittest
way, I think, to deal with these Adversaries, is, instead of magnifing their
Reason, to show them the weakness of it. Which seems no hard matter to do, if
they had but Humility enough to think it fallible. For, when there is an equal
Evidence of the Divine Authority of several books of Scripture, what reason is
there they should receive some of these, and reject others? If they cannot deny
there are unaccountable Mysteries in the connection and divisibility of the
parts of matter, in motion, in the union of the Soul with the Body, and many
other things, whose existence they are assured of; with what Reason do they
deny these in Religion, which has for its object an Infinite God, all whose
Attributes must needs be incomprehensible to sinite Beings, and the whole
intercourse between him and our Souls, as to the manner of it, above the reach
of an Humane Judgment? Spiritual things are certainly further remote from our
understanding, than those that are Natural; and yet these Men of Reason will
allow no Mystery in them, while they are forced to acknowledge very many in the
other. To this we may add their rational way of Interpreting Scriptures,
whereby they would make those Divine Oracles appear as void of good Sense and
Reason as themselves. But neither these, nor any other efforts of their exalted
Reason, want any confutation from me, since they have been sufficiently baffled
of late, as well as formerly, by several worthy Authors. But it become's all
true Ministers of the Gospel, (and indeed every good Christian) that
acknowledge and adore the ever-blessed Trinity, together with the Infinite
Wisdom, Justice and Goodness of God, in the Incarnation of our blessed Lord and
Savior both God and Man, and that great Redemption he has wrought for us;
that are sensible of Original, as well as Actual Sin, and what need the World
had of that meritorious Sacrifice, offered by our glorious High Priest, in his
own Body upon the Cross, to reconcile them to God, and the imputation of his
Righteousness for their Justification: It becomes us, I say, upon all fit
occasions, to declare our abhorrence of such Antichristian Principles, as those
of the Socinians are, which strike at the very foundation of our Religion, and
were doubtless instill^d into Men's minds by our great Adversary, in order to
the Destruction of it. But we know it is defended by a stronger than he, who
will one day call this Enemy, and all his adherents, to an account for these
things. And here I cannot forbear mentioning another detestable notion of these
Men, or their Friends, lately published, that there is but one Article of Faith
proposed in the New Testament, as necessary to be believed in order to
Salvation; namely this, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. But these
discoveres don't perceive that he who made this confession, Acts 8 37. believed
all other Articles of our Faith before; and that this, rightly understood, does
include and suppose all the rest. What a strange degree of Pride and confidence
is this, that makes Men dare to vent new notions in Religion! As if all the
Learned, Wise and Holy Men, from the Apostles time till this Age, never rightly
understood the conditions of Salvation! And then, how will this reflect upon
the Wisdom or Sincerity of the sacred Writers of the New Testament, yea of the
Holy Ghost himself, if by them he has so obscurely delivered truths of this
moment, that they could never be rightly understood for above sixteen hundred
years together? But the design of these Men is to disparage the Holy
Scriptures, and therefore they deal with them as with a System of Natural
Philosophy, that is liable to be changed in every Age, as new truths are
discovered, or pretended so in that Science. It behooves us therefore with all
the Zeal of Good Christians and Faithful Ministers, to represent, as there may
be occasion, the Wickedness and danger of such Innovations, and prevent, as
much as lies in us, the growth of them amongst our People. And we should do the
same also against all other false Notions in Religion, common in these days,
which I have not time now to mention. I shall therefore only add something in
the general, concerning those lesser differences in Opinion amongst
Protestants, which are the causes of Divisions in the Church. These I think,
might, in a great measure, be reconciled if they were once but rightly
understood, and fairly argued by the Parties concerned in them; especially if
that mutual condescension could be used on all hands which the Rules and
Interest of our Religion do require. And it must be always remembered, that
when we have to do with Persons Erroneous in Judgment, (if there be any hopes
of convincing them) all our arguments must be used with great kindness and
compassion toward, them, that if possible we may gain upon their affections,
and then their Judgment will much sooner surrender to us. For, to accuse a Man
of Errors in this kind, seems most directly to reflect upon his Wisdom, which
Men have usually a greater opinion of in themselves, than any thing else; and
therefore it had need be done in the softest and most obliging manner. Besides,
this way o^ de^ling with Men, shows we have a respect for them, and gives them
also a greater opinion of our Piety and Wisdom, as well as of our good will
toward them, on which accounts they will be more apt to consider our
arguments, and yield to them.

2. We must Reprove the sins of Men's lives; such as I before mentioned, and all
others that appear to us: as the Apostle exhorts, verse. 11. Have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. This is
required of all Men, as a necessary act of Charity to our Neighbors, Lev.
19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart; thou shall in any ^ise
rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. But Ministers must
especially do this with all Authority, Tit. 2.15. and with all long-suffering,
2 Timothy 4.2. Yet these Precepts do not oblige us in respect of all Men; for we
are Cautioned not to Reprove a Scorner, Prove 9.8. That is, one so hardened in
sin, that he will despise the Means we use to reform him, and return evil upon
us for our Charity to him. Such our Blessed Savior calls Dogs and Swine, and
has left us this Rule concerning them, Mat. 7.6. Give not that which is Holy
unto the Dogs, neither cast ye your Pearls before Swine, lest they trample them
under their feet, and turn again and rent you. But I think there are few that
we ought to account such, till we have made some trial of them, and Admonished
them according to our Savior's Command, both Privately and before Witness;
and, if this course proves ineffectual, they are to receive the Censures of the
Church. But we must not always Reprove Men so soon as they have sinned, or we
come to the knowledge of it, but when we have most reason to hope for the good
effect of it; and, in such a manner, as is most suitable to the temper and
condition of those we have to deal with in order to it. For, next to the Glory
of God, the main end of Reproof is the gaining of our Brother; which, if it can
be done by a discreet use of this means, the Eternal Happiness of his Soul will
be secured, the Honor of God most promoted, and our own Consciences best
discharged by it.

3. We must show Kindness to all evil Men, as there may be occasion for it;
what Enmity soever they may bear to us: according to our Savior's Precept,
Mat. 5.44. I say unto you love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good
to them that hate you, and pray for them which despightfully use you and
persecute you: and this he enjoins as a matter of great advantage to our
selves, as in the Verse following, that ye may be the children of your Father
which is in Heaven. St. Paul (after Solomon) gives us a like Precept, in order
to the Spiritual good of our Enemy, Romans 12.20. If thine enemy hunger feed him;
if he thirst, give him drink; for in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on
his head. Which is a Metaphor taken from Metals, that are soonest melted when
fire is cast upon them. And therefore the Sense of these words seems to be, by
these means thou shall soften thine Enemy, and reconcile him to thee. For
though they will bear another Sense, yet this is most probably intended by the
Apostle, because he adds in the Verse following, Be not overcome of evil, but
overcome evil with good. Now if an Enmity conceived against us, upon the
account of the Gospel, may be thus conquered, a Person is thereby reconciled to
Religion, and so brought into the way of Salvation. And what greater Motive can
we have to show kindness to our Enemies, next to the Glory of God, and the
Happiness of our own Souls, than the probability of convincing them of sin, and
bringing them to Repentance and Reconciliation with God by this means? This
Kindness will also give a great advantage (as was before hinted) to such other
menas as we use to convince any Sinners. It will add strength to our Arguments
with them that err in judgment, and make all our Reproofs and Instructions come
with greater Force and Authority upon others.

2. As we are to use these Means to convince the Guilty, so we must also Warn
and Instruct others, that they fall not into the same Errors, either in
Judgment or Practice. To this end it will be necessary, with all plainness and
earnestness, to Represent to our People the Sinfulness of our Nature, the evil
and danger of Sin, the many Temptations we are encompassed with, and the
Judgments of God denounced against Sin, both in this and a future State. And on
the other hand, the natural goodness of God to his Creatures, his Infinite Love
in Christ to all that truly Repent of their Sins, believe in the Lord Jesus,
and obey his Commands, the Comfort and Happiness of a Holy Life here, and the
Glorious Salvation which will be the Reward of it hereafter. To these things we
must add particular Cautions against those Sins and Errors which are most
common amongst us, showing the dangerous consequence of them. And all this with
such a Sense and Zeal, as may convince them we believe it our Selves, that we
have a true Compassion for their Souls, and desire of their happiness. But our
greatest care should be employed about the most hopeful part of our Charge, the
Children in our several Parishes, to Instruct them in the Principles and Rules
of our Religion, that they may know whatsoever is necessary to be Believed and
Practiced in order to Salvation. To which end, we must not only take care that
they are perfect in the Form of their Catechism, but endeavor, by explaining
it familiarly to them, to make them understand it, as far as they are capable;
that the Fear of God, and a Sense of their Duty to him, possessing their Hearts
betimes, may preserve them from the sins of the present time, and fit them to
do eminent Service to God hereafter. And we have the greater reason to hope for
this success, because the habits of Sin being but weak in them, are more easily
subdued by good Instructions, and their Minds not yet prepossessed with other
Notions, will receive the deeper and more lasting Impressions from them; and
not only for the Informing their Understanding, but Governing their
Conversation too, according to that of the Wise Man, Prove. 22.6. Train up a
Child in the way he should go and when he is old he will not depart from it. So
that if we have but little success in Reforming the present Age, this will
conduce much to the Innocence of the next, and thereby to the Glory of Almighty
God, the Prosperity of his Church, and the Eternal Salvation of many Souls. But
here we shall need all Assistance from their Parents too, who, by that Interest
they have in them, and being so much with them, may do this Good Work, with
greater Advantage than our selves, especially if it be seconded by their good
Example.

3. To these Means, we must add our daily and fervent Prayers to that God, who
searches all Hearts, and can change them as he pleases, who is Light and Truth
it self, and can reform all the Errors of Men's Minds; who sees and hates the
Ungodly Conversation of some, and the Lukewarmness of others amongst us; who is
ready to bless all proper Means, that are Zealously and Prudently used for the
Correcting Men's Errors, and Reforming their Hearts and Lives; and with whom the
Effectual Fervent Prayer of a Righteous Man avails much: that he would be
pleased to direct and assist us in all our Endeavors to these Ends, and Crown
them with his Blessing.

2. I am to show how we are to redeem our Time, or make the best use of it,
with respect to the evil of Suffering: And this I shall do in Two Particulars.

1. We must carry our selves prudently toward the Enemies of Religion. 2. We
must bear patiently those Sufferings we meet with for the Sake of Christ.
1. We must carry our selves prudently toward the enemies of Religion; that we
may not give them any occasion to offer Indignities to us; according to the
Rule our Savior gave his Disciples, Mat. 10.16. Behold I send you forth as
Sheep in the midst of Wolves: be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and harmless as
Doves. The enmity which many bear to Religion, will make them apt to take up
any new Pretenses against it; and therefore they will the more curiously
observe our Conversation, and be ready to charge us with the least appearance
of evil in it. How much does it concern us therefore, to the take the Apostles
Caution in the Verse before my Text -- (...). See therefore how circumspectly
or warily ye walk; and that Col. 4.5. Walk in wisdom toward them that are
without, redeeming the time. Thus we shall make the best use of our time, with
respect to them, if we also show that kindness to them, which was mentioned
before.

2. We must bear patiently those Sufferings we meet with for the sake of
Christ, in doing our duty. Though I confess that Persecution which comes upon
us from the bad Principles and Conversation which comes upon us from the bad
Principles and Conversation of Wicked Men, whereby the Honor of God and the
Interest of Religion suffer so much in the World. and many Souls are in so
great danger of eternal Damnation; will justify our Impatience more then any
other. To be quiet and easy in the observation of these things, is the effect,
not of a great, but of a sensseless Mind; and to be satisfied before we have
tried all Veans to remedy such evils, would argue a great want of Charity to
the Souls of Men. Notwithstanding, even while we have a due Sense of their
danger, and are zealously attempting to rescue them out of the Snare of the
Devil; yea, if we have tried all fit Means in vain, or with but little success,
we must not be very much discouraged on this account. For though the natural
Seed usually springs up quickly, and rewards the Labors of the Husbandman in a
few Months, yet the spiritual Seed, the word of God, with which we instruct and
warn our People, does often produce its effects many years after. Therefore let
us here take the advice which the Wise Man gives with respect to works of
Charity, Eccles. 11.6. In the Morning sow thy Seed, and in the Evening withhold
not thine hand, for thou know not whether shall prosper, either this or
that, or whether they both shall be alike good. But whatsoever the success of
our holy endeavors may be, we our selves shall not lose the reward of them.
For if a faithful Minister has cause to complain with the Prophet, Isa. 49.4. I
have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught and in vain: he may
add with him too, yet surely my Judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my
God. And v. 5. Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the
eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. As for other Afflictions
which befall us for the same cause, we ought to bear them as persons that have
sufficient motives to encourage and comfort us under them all. If Men despise
our Profession, we know that God has highly honored it. And indeed there is
nothing in our holy Office below (the greatest Men, shall I say? or rather) the
most glorious Angel to perform. The subject of our Preaching is the Word of
God, wherein are all the Treasures of Wisdom and Grace; the end of it is to
save Men from Eternal Misery, and bring them to a state of Eternal Happiness.
The Sacraments we Administer are Pledges of the Love of God in Christ to
Penitent Sinners, Engagements upon them to be Faithful to their great Lord, and
means to convey those Divine Virtues which will enable them to be so. When we
visit the Sick, it is to instruct and Pray for them, that they may be fitted
for Glory, if they dye, and to serve and honor God more, if they recover. When
we bury the Dead, we do an act of Charity both to them, and to the Living. To
us God has given Authority to bless his People in his Name, yea to Remit and
Retain Sins. All which things are so far above the contempt of Men, that the
holy Angels might envy us in the doing of them, if they were capable of such a
Passion. And it is not for any meanness in our Office, but for other reasons,
that God has not employed those Glorious Creatures in it. The Work does indeed
highly deserve them, but we could not bear their Ministrations in it: and God
has committed this Treasure to earthen Vessels, to Persons that are mean and
frail, and of such narrow capacities as our selves, that the glory of its
Success may be wholly his own. 2 Cor. 4.7. Therefore if ignorant and senseless
Sinners will despise such an Office, it becomes us, with St. Paul, to magnify
it; and let them consider how much the Eternal God himself is concerned in this
case. For he that despises, despises not Man but God, 1 These. 4.8. And our
Savior tells the seventy Disciples, and in them all Ministers of the Gospel,
Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you,
despises me: and he that despises me, despises him that sent me. Having
therefore such partners in this contempt, it behooves us rather to glory in it,
than be discouraged by it. Whatever other Affronts or Injuries a faithful
Servant of Christ receives, he may be comforted, not only from the former
considerations, but the case of our blessed Lord himself; who came into the
World upon the most gracious design that was ever carried on in it; who was
perfectly Innocent, and continually went about doing good; and yet endured the
worst Persecutions of all sorts, from those very Men whose Souls he came to
save. Therefore a Patient enduring of Afflictions, will make us in a great
measure conformable to the Lord Jesus, and thereby work out for us an exceeding
and Eternal weight of Glory. It will also at present secure our own Peace and
Tranquillity in despite of any that would disturb it, and so make us better
Merchants of the present Season, in Redeeming it from such disturbing thoughts
and complaints as those injuries are apt to provoke in us.

Thus have I showed, in some part, how we must use our time with respect to the
Evil of it; and that there is most need of Redeeming the time, when the days
are Evil, to preserve our own Innocence, to reform the Age we live in, to bear
our Sufferings patiently, and to promote the Honor of God in the World. To
which I might add several other Reasons, as,

1. It is then most Praiseworthy. 2. Then it is especially necessary to
prevent the Judgments of God, denounced against Sin, particularly that which at
last came upon Ephesus (as well as the other Churches of Asia) for not making a
good use of their opportunities and means of Grace; namely, the removal of the
Gospel from them, according to our Saviors threatening, Rev. 2.5. Remember from
whence thou art fallen, and Repent and do the first Works; or else I will come
unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of his place, except
thou Repent. Which Judgment we have also too much reason to fear, and therefore
ought to use our best care and diligence to prevent it. 3. The improveing such
a Season will be more abundantly rewarded, both in this and a future Life.
I might also draw several inferences from what has been spoken, but the time
will not give me leave. Therefore I shall only add, that seeing this is a
business of the greatest importance, and very difficult too, seeing our time is
very short and uncertain, our own abilities insufficient for such a Work, and
we live in the midst of many and great Temptations to abate our Zeal and
diligence in it; we ought to look the more carefully to our selves, and use the
best means to fit us for it. Let us therefore Redeem what precious time we can
from all unnecessary avocations, and employ it diligently in Reading,
Meditation and Prayer. Let us confer often with one another, for our mutual
assistance and encouragement; and let us endeavor always to preserve such a
Temper of Mind, free from Worldly Cares and other distracting Passions, as will
make us capable of higher improvements by these means, and engaging more
entirely in the work of the Lord, for the greater honor of his holy Name, the
better success upon the Souls of our People, and a more glorious Reward to our
selves, hereafter in the Heavens.

THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 12. l. 20. r. teaches us. p. 14. l. 23. r. in it. p. 15. l. 5. r. Zeal
and Devotion. p. 18. l. 29. r. Magnifying. p. 2^. l. 21. r. differences.

THe True Interest of a Nation: or the Duty of Magistrates, Ministers and
People, in order to the further Settlement and Prosperity of these Kingdoms. A
Sermon Preached at the Assizes held at Buckingham, July the 5th. 1692. By the
same Author. Printed for J. Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultry. 1693.


