A SERMON Directing What we are to do, AFTER Strict Enquiry whether or no we
truly Love GOD. Preached April 29. 1688.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chapel. 1696.

The Epistle.
YOU may remember what a Solemn Awe was upon our Congregation lately at the
Preaching of this ensuing Sermon, and that not a few tears dropped at the
hearing of it. This engaged some of us to entreat our Reverend Pastor, to give
way, that by this Publication, it might be accommodated to your review. We know
it is no more than one single Thread, that belongs to many other Discourses upon
the same Subject, which have preceded, and to others, which we hope, will
follow; but such as by your Notes and Memories may easily be wrought into the
whole Piece: It is but a Thread, yet a golden one, and may contribute to the
service of the Tabernacle, as in Exodus 25. We know it is a great condescension
in him to suffer such an imperfect Piece to come abroad; but when the Reverend
Dean of C. and other learned Persons of the Church of England, have denied
themselves, by suffering such small Prints for the general good, we are
persuaded, though he gave not a positive Judgment for it, he will not dislike
that which is for your Service, and is intended to go no farther. Receive it
therefore, read it over and over, and allot some times for the putting in
practice the grand Examination urged upon us, and do your utmost to persuade
all under your Roofs and Commands to do the like, that that which was Preached
with so much holy Fervor and Affection, may beget in us and ours a bright flame
of Divine Love to our good LORD, to whom we commend you, and are

Your Affectionate Brethren and Servants, etc.

John 5.42. But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you.


YOU have heard several Discourses from this Scripture, and from another in the
same Gospel: That we spoke to alternately with this at several times: Thou
know all things, Lord; thou know that I love thee, c. 20.17. and that
which after Doctrinal Explication has hitherto been insisted on, was an
enquiry into the state of our own case in reference hereunto. Are we lovers of
God in Christ, or are we not? There have been many things signified to you, by
which this case might be discerned: And that which remains, and most naturally
follows hereupon, is to direct you what you are to do, supposing your case,
upon enquiry, to be this or that. Why such an enquiry, if it has been attended
to at all amongst us, it must have signified somewhat: It must, one would
think, have some or other result, and what should we suppose it to result into,
but either this, I do not love God, or I do? These are most vastly different
Cases; it is a Trial upon the most important Point that could have been discust
among us; and supposing there should be two sorts among us, the effect of it is
as if a parting Line should be drawn through a Congregation, severing the
living from the dead; here are so many living, and so many dead Souls: Indeed
it is a very hard Supposition, to suppose that there should be any one in all
this Assembly, that does not love God: A very hard Supposition: I am extremely
loath to make such a Supposition (...) me is, not suppose it. For truly it were
a very sad case that we should agree so far as we do in many other things, and
not agree in this: That is, that we should agree so many of us to come all and
meet together here in one place, agree to Worship God together, agree to sing
his Praises together, to seek his Face together, to call upon his Name
together, to hear his Word together, and not agree all to love God together:
The God whom we worship, whom we invocate, whose Name we bear, and unto whom we
all of us pretend: For who is there among us will say, I have no part in God?
And it were a most lovely thing, a most comely, desirable thing, that all such
Worshipping Assemblies, even this Worshipping Assembly, at this time, and all
times, could still meet together under this one common Notion, truly and justly
assumed, as so many lovers of God: We are sure there will be an Assembly, a
General Assembly, in which no one that is not a lover of God will be found, an
Assembly of Glorious Angels, and of the Spirits of Just Men made perfect, a
numerous, an innumerable Assembly, in which not one but a sincere lover of God.
What a blessed thing were it, if our Assemblies on Earth were such! But we
cannot speak more gently, than to say, there is cause to fear they are not
such: It has been actually otherwise among a People professing the true
Religion; They come before thee, and sit before thee as my People, and with
their mouth show much love with [their face] or in external appearance and show
[ ore tenus:] they are lovers of God, and they hear thy words, but they will
not do them, Ezekiel. 33.31. If such a Case has been actually, it is still
possible, and is still too much to be feared to be but too common a case.

But now supposing that there be different Cases amongst us; in reference to
these different Cases, there must be very different Deportments, and a very
different management of (...) selves. This Text more naturally leads me to
direct what is to be done upon the Supposition of the sadder case, most
deplorably sadder, that one is no lover of God; though we must be led on
thereto by some things common to both cases.

Therefore that I may proceed by steps, this is requisite in the first place;
that is, that we make one Judgment of our case or another; that is, that we
bring the matter some way to a Judgment, not let so great a thing as this hang
always in suspense: It Is very plain, (a little to press this:) That,

First, While the case hangs thus in suspense, it suspends the proper
subsequent Duty too that should follow hereupon: What can thou do that is
certainly fit and proper for thy own Soul, when thou do not understand the
state of its case? How can thou guide thy course, or tell which way to apply
or turn thy self? And,

Secondly, (to press it further) consider, That the not bringing, or omitting
to bring this matter to a Judgment, if it proceed from indifferency and
neglect, speaks the greatest Contempt that can be, both of God and thine own
Soul, the greatest that can be: That is now, supposing the Question be asked,
do thou love God? or do thou not? And thou unconcernedly answerest, I cannot
tell, I don't know: Why, what to be carelessly ignorant whether thou love God,
or love him not: There could not be a more concluding medium against thee,
that thou do not love him. It speaks thee at once to despise both God and thy
self: What, to have this matter hang in indifferency through neglect! whether
thou love God, or love him not? It shows that neither regard to God, nor a
just value of thy self makes thee care whether thou art an holy Man or a Devil.
For know, that the loving God, or not loving him, does more distinguish a Saint
from a Devil, than wearing a Body, or not wearing it, can do: A Devil* if he
did love God were a Saint A Man that does not love God, he is no other, though
he wear a Body, than an incarnate Devil: It Is the want of love to God that
makes the Devil a Devil, makes him what he is.

Secondly, For further Direction, Take heed of passing a false Judgment in this
case, a Judgment contrary to the truth; for first, That Is to no purpose, it
will avail thee nothing; you cannot be advantaged by it: for yours is not the
supreme Judgment: there will be another and superior Judgment to yours that
will control, and reverse your false Judgment, and make it signify nothing,
it is therefore to no purpose: And

Secondly, It is a great piece of Insolency, for it will be to oppose your
Judgment to his certain and most authorized Judgment: Who, if this be your
case, has already judged it, and tells you, I know you, that you have not the
love of God in you. It belongs to him by Office to Judge. The Father has
committed all Judgment to the Son, as a little above in this Chapter: From what
will you depose him? dethrone him? disannul his Judgment? condemn him? that
thou may be righteous? (to borrow that Job 40.8.)

Thirdly, It Is most absurd supposing such Characters as you have heard, do
conclude against a Man in this case, yet to judge himself a lover of God: If
against the Evidence of such Characters a Man should pronounce the wrong
Judgment, it would be the most unreasonable and absurd thing imaginable: For
then let us but suppose how that wrong Judgment must lie, related to those
forementioned Characters that have been given you.

Let me remind you of some of them.

He that never put forth the Act of love to God, cannot say he has the
Principle.

He that is not inclined to do good to others for the sake of God, 1 John 3.17.

He that indulges himself in the inconsistent love of this World, 1 John 2.15.

He that lives not in obedience to his known Laws, John 14.15. 1 John 5.3.
(with many more.)

Now, if you will pass a Judgment of your case against the Evidence of such
Characters, come forth then, let the matter be brought into clear light, put
your sense into plain words, and this it will be.

I am a Lover of God, or I have the love of God in me, though I cannot tell that
ever I put forth one act of love toward him in all my Life; I have the love of
God in me, though I never knew what it meant to do good to any for his sake,
against the express words of Scripture: How dwells the love of God in such a
man? I have the Love of God in me, though I have constantly indulged my self in
that which he makes an inconsistent love: Love not the World, nor the things
which are in the World. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is
not in him. I have the love of God in me, though I would never allow him to
Rule me, though I never kept his Commandments with a design to please him, and
comply with his w^ll: I have the love of God in me, though I never va^ued his
Love: I have the love of God in me, though I never cared for his Image, for his
Presence, for his Converse, for his Interest and Honor: I beseech you consider
how all this will sound! Can any thing be more absurdly spoken? And shall it be
upon such improbabilities or impossibilities as these, that any Man will think
it fit to venture his Soul! I Will pawn my Soul upon it, I Will run the hazard of
my Soul upon it, I am a lover of God for all this? Would you venture any thing
else so besides your Soul? Would you venture a Finger so? an Eye so* It Is to
place the name where there is nothing of the thing: It Is to place the name of a
thing upon its contrary: The Soul of Man cannot be in an indifferency toward
God, but if there be not love, propension; there is aversion, and that is
hatred: And what, is hatred to be called love? If you bear that habitual
disposition of Soul toward God, to go all the day long with no inclination
toward him, no thought of him, no design to please him, to serve him, to
glorify him: If this be your habitual temper, and usual course, will you call
this Love? Shall this contrariety to the love of God be called love to him? You
may as well call water fire, or fire water, as so grossly mis-name things here,
and therefore again: In the

Third place: That we may advance somewhat: Plainly and positively pass the
true Judgment. If the Characters that you have heard do carry the matter so,
come at last plainly and positively to pass the true Judgment of your own case,
though it be a sad one, and tell your own Souls: Oh my Soul, Though I must
sadly say it; I must say it: All things conclude and make against thee: The
love of God is not in thee. Why, is it not as good this should be the present
issue at your own Bar, and at the Tribunal of your own Conscience, as before
God's Judgment Seat? Why should you not concur and fall in with Christ the
authorized Judge? Whose Judgment is according to truth: Why, this is a thing
that must be done, the case requires it, and God's express Word requires it, 1
Cor. 11.31. Other previous and preparatory Duty, plainly enjoined, does by
consequence enjoin it, and requires that it follow, 2 Cor. 13.5. What is
Examination for, but in order to Judgment? It must therefore be done, and I
shall show how it must be done, and proceed to some farther Directions.

First, You must do it solemnly: Take your selves aside at some fit season or
another: Inspect your own Souls, review your Life: Consider what your wonted
frame and your ordinary course has been: And if you find by such Characters as
heretofore were given, this is the truth of your case, then let Judgment pass
upon deliberation, Oh my Soul! Thou have not the love of God in thee:
Whatsoever thine appearances hitherto have been: And whatsoever thy Peace and
Quiet has been, thou have not the love of God in thee: Let it be done with
Solemnity.

Secondly, Do it in the sight of God as before him, as under his Eye, as under
the Eye of Christ: That Eye that is as a flame of fire, that searches Hearts,
and tries Reins: Arraign thy self before him: Lord! I have here brought before
thee a guilty Soul, a delinquent Soul, a wretched, an horrid delinquent, a Soul
that was breathed into me by thee, an intelligent, understanding Soul, a Soul
that has love in its Nature, but a Soul that never loved thee.

Thirdly, Judge thy self before him as to the fact, and as to the fault: As to
the fact, I have never yet loved thee, O God, I own it to thee: Lord! I accuse,
I charge my Soul with this before thee, this is the truth of the fact, I have
not the love of God in me: And charge thy self with the fault: Oh horrid
Creature that I am! I was made by thee, and don't love thee: thou did breath
into me this reasonable immortal Spirit, and it does not love thee: It is thy
own Offspring, and does not love thee: It can never be blessed in any thing
but thee, and it does not love thee: And then hereupon in the

Fourth place, Join to this self-judging, self-loathing: That we are to Judge
our selves, is a Law laid upon us by the Supreme Lawgiver, the one Lawgiver,
that has power to save, and to destroy: And his Word that enjoins it, as
plainly tells us what must go with it, that this self-judging must be
accompanied with self-loathing, Ezekiel. 6.9. chapter 20.43. and 36.31. Do God that
right upon thy self, that thou may tell him, Blessed God! I do even hate my
self, because I find I have not loved thee, and I cannot but hate my self, and
I never will be reconciled to my self, till I find I am reconciled to thee:
This is doing Justice: Does not the Scripture usually and familiarly so
represent to us the great turn of the Soul to God: When poor sinners become
Penitents, and return, that they are brought to hate themselves, and loath
themselves in their own Eyes? And is there any thing that can make a Soul so
loathsome in it self, or ought to make it so loathsome to it self, as not to love
God, to be destitute of the love of God? And then,

Fifthly, Hereupon too: Pity thy self, pity thy own Soul, there is cause to
hate it, to loath it, and is there no cause to pity it? to lament it? Does not
this look like a lamentable case? Oh! what a Soul have I, that can love any
thing else, that can love Trifles, that can love Impurities, that can love Sin:
And cannot love God, Christ, the most desirable good of Souls? What a Soul have
I? What a Monster in the Creation of God is this Soul of mine! Methinks you
should set your selves, if any of you can find this to be the case, to weep
over your own Souls. Some may see cause to say: Oh my Soul, thou have in thee
other valuable things, thou have Understanding in thee, Judgment in thee, Wit
in thee; perhaps Learning, considerable acquired Endowments in thee; but thou
have not the love of God in thee: I can do many other commendable or useful
things, I can Discourse plausibly, Argue subtly, I can manage Affairs
dexterously, but I cannot love God: Oh my Soul, how great an Essential do thou
want to all Religion, to all Duty, to all Felicity! The one thing necessary
thou want, thou have every thing but what thou need more than any thing,
more than all things: And Oh my Soul, what is like at this rate to become of
thee? Where art thou to have thy eternal abode? To what Regions of Horror, and
Darkness, and Woe, art thou going? What Society can be fit for thee? No lover
of God! No lover of God! what, but of Infernal accursed Spirits that are at
utmost distance from him, and to whom no beam of holy vital Light shall ever
shine to all Eternity: Thou, Oh my Soul, art self-abandon'd to the blackness of
Darkness for ever. Thy doom is in thy Breast, thy own Bosom: Thy no-love to God
is thy own doom, thy eternal doom: Creates thee a present Hell, and shows
whither thou belongest.

Sixth place: Let a due fear and solicitude hereupon be set on work in thee:
For consider thy self as one shortly to be arraigned before the Supreme
Tribunal: And then here is the critical, vertical point upon which thy Judgment
turns: Lovers of God; Or no Lovers of God: All are to be judged in reference to
what they were and did in the Body, whether good or evil: As in 2 Cor. chap. 5.
ver. 10. What wast thou as to this point, while thou wast in the Body? For the
last Judgment regards that former state, what thou did; and what was thy wont
as to this whilst thou wast in the Body? Therefore by the way no hope, after
thou art gone out of the Body: Go out of the Body, no lover of God, the
departing Soul no lover of God, and this will be found your state at the
Judgment-day: You are not to expect after Death a Gospel to be preached, that
you may then be reconciled to God: No; but what did you do in the Body?
According to that you are to be judged: Did you love God in this Body while
here, yea or no? And this is a Trial upon the most Fundamental Point: For as
all the Law is comprehended in Love, as was formerly hinted, if you be found
guilty in this Point, that you were no lover of God, totally destitute of the
love of God, you were a perpetual underminer of his whole Government, of the
whole frame of his Law, a Disloyal Creature, Rebellious and False to the God
that made you, to Jesus Christ that redeemed you by his Blood: All Disobedience
and Rebellion is summed up in this one word: Having been no lover of God: And
will not it make any man's heart to meditate Terror, to think of having such a
charge as this likely to lie against him in the Judgment of that day; that day,
when the secrets of all hearts are to be laid open? Every work must be then
brought into Judgment, and every secret thing, whether it be good or evil:
Eccles. 12.14. And it will be to the confusion of many a one: It may be your
no-love of God was heretofore a great Secret: You had a heart in which was no
love of God, but it was a secret, you took not care to have it writ in your
forehead; you conversed with Men so plausibly, no body took you to be no lover
of God, to have a heart disaffected to God: But now out comes the Secret, that
which you kept for a great Secret all your days, out comes the Secret: And to
have such a Secret as this disclosed to that vast Assembly before Angels and
Men! Here was a Creature, a Reasonable Creature, an Intelligent Soul, that
lived upon the Divine Bounty and Goodness so many Years in the World below, and
hid a false disloyal Heart by a plausible show, and external profession of
great devotedness to God all the time of his abode in that World: Oh! What a
fearful thing would it be to have this Secret so disclosed? And do you think
that all the Loyal Creatures that shall be Spectators and Auditors in the
hearing of that great day, will not all conceive a just and a loyal Indignation
against such a one when convicted of not loving God, convicted of not loving
him that gave him breath, him whose he was, to whom he belonged, whose name he
bore? What a fearful thing will it be to stand convicted so upon such a Point
as this? And sure in the mean time there is great reason for continual fear why
a man's heart should meditate terror: One would even think that all the
Creation should be continually every moment in Arms against him: One would be
afraid that every Wind that blows should be a deadly blast to destroy me: That
when the Sun shines upon me, all its beams should be turned into vindictive
flames, to execute vengeance upon me! I would fear that even the very stones in
the streets should fly against me and every thing that meets me be my death.
What, to go about the streets from day to day with a heart void of the love of
God! What a heart have I? Fear ought to be exercised in this case: We are bid
to fear if we do evil against an Humane Ruler: If thou do that which is evil,
be afraid, for he bears not the Sword in vain, Romans 13.4. But if I be such an
evil doer against the Supreme Ruler, the Lord of Heaven and Earth: Have I not
reason to be afraid? And to think sadly with my self what will the end of this
be? But yet I will add in the

Seventh place: Don't despair for all this: God is in Christ reconciling the
World to himself: As in that 2 Cor. chap. 5. v. 19. that sin might not be
imputed: He is in Christ to reconcile you to win Hearts, to captivate Souls to
the love of God: For what else is Reconciliation on our part? He is in Christ
to reconcile, to conquer Enmity, to subdue disaffected Hearts, to make such
Souls call and cry, My Lord, and my God! I have been a stranger to thee: I will
through thy grace be so no longer, therefore don't despair: Despair that ever
you should do well without loving of God: But don't despair you shall ever be
brought to love him by no means: You have to do with him that is the Element of
Love, the God of Love, the Fountain of Love, the great Source of Love, the
Fountain at once both of Loveliness and Love, whose Nature is Love, and is with
his name in his Son, who was manifested in the Flesh full of Grace and Truth,
i. e. sincerest love. He was incarnate Love, Love pointed at us, and is upon
these terms able to transform all the World into Love; the Nature of God is all
Love, 1 John 4.16. and in Christ, he is Emanuel, God with us, so the Divine
Love has a direct aspect upon us: Why then apply your selves to him: Turn your
selves toward him, open your Souls to him; say to him, Lord, flow in with all
the mighty Powers of thine own Love upon my Soul, thou that (...) the true
genuine Sons of Abraham, and there can be no such Children, without Love: Oh
dissolve this stone, this stone in my Breast, mollify this obdurate Heart,
turn it into Love! How soon may it be done upon due application! He can quickly
do it, draw thee into a Love-Union with himself, so as that thou should come
to dwell in Love: And dwell in God, who is Love: And he in thee: Then the
Foundations are surely laid, for all thy future Duty, and for all thy future
Felicity: Then how pleasantly will thou obey, and how blessedly will thou enjoy
God for ever! But such application must be made through Christ, and for the
Spirit: Which Spirit is the Spirit of Love, and of Power, and of a sound Mind,
as you have it in that first of the second to Tim. v. 7. But these things I
cannot now further insist upon.

FINIS.
Books written by the Reverend Mr. John How, and Sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at
the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside.
1. OF Thoughtfulness for the Morrow; with an Appendix concerning the
immoderate desire of fore-knowing things to come.

2. Of Charity, in reference to other men's sins.

3. The Redeemer's Tears wept over lost Souls, in a Treatise on Luke 19.41, 42.
With an Appendix, wherein somewhat is occasionally discoursed concerning the
Sin against the Holy Ghost, and how God is said to will the Salvation of them
that perish.

4. Two Sermons Preached upon these words, Yield your selves to God.

5. A Sermon directing what we are to do, after a strict Enquiry whether or no
we truly love God.

6. A Funeral Sermon for Mrs. Esther Sampson, the late Wife of Henry Sampson,
Doctor of Physic, who died November. 24 th. 1689.

7. The Carnality of Religious Contention, in two Sermons, Preached at the
Merchant's Lecture in Broadstreet.

8. A Calm and Sober Enquiry concerning the possibility of a Trinity in the
Godhead; in a Letter to a Person of Worth.

9. A Letter to a Friend, concerning a Postscript to the Defense of Dr.
Sherlock's Notion of the Trinity in Unity, relating to the Calm Enquiry.

10. A View of that Part of the late Considerations addressed to H.H. about the
Trinity, which concerns the Calm and Sober Enquiry on the same Subject.

11. A Funeral Sermon on the Death of that Pious Gentlewoman, Mrs. Judith
Hamond, late Wife of the Reverend Mr. George Hamond, Minister of the Gospel in
London*

Some other Books Printed for, and Sold by Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside.
A Body of Practical Divinity, consisting of above 176 Sermons on the Lesser
Catechism, composed by the Reverend Assembly of Divines at Westminster; with a
Supplement of some Sermons on several Texts of Scripture. By Tho. Watson,
formerly Minister of St. Stephen's Walbrook, London. Recommended by 26
Ministers to Masters of Families, and others. Folio.

Sermons and Discourses on several Divine Subjects; by the late Reverend and
Learned David Clarkson, B. D. and sometime Fellow of Clare-Hall, Cambridge.
With an Epistle by Mr. John How, and Mr. Matthew. Mead. Folio.

The Grace and Duty of being Spiritually-minded declared, and Practically
improved. By John Owen, D. D. Quarto.

A Practical Exposition on the 130 Psalm, wherein the Nature of Forgiveness of
Sin is declared, the Truth and Reality of it asserted; and the case of a Soul
distressed with the guilt of Sin, and relieved by a discovery of Forgiveness
with God, is at large discoursed. By John Owen, D. D. Quarto.

An Exposition, with Practical Observations upon the Book of Ecclesiastes. By
Mr. Alexander Nisbet, Minister of the Gospel at Irwin. Quarto.

Theological Discourses, in Two Parts: The First, Containing Eight Letters, and
Three Sermons concerning the Blessed Trinity. The Second, Discourses and
Sermons on several Occasions. By John Wallis, D. D. Professor of Geometry in
Oxford. Quarto.


