A Postscript To the late LETTER OF THE RECONCILEABLENESS OF God's Prescience,
etc.

By John How, the Author of that Letter.

Imprimatur,

Aug. 3. 1677. Guil. Sill.



LONDON: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons, over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1677.

A POSTSCRIPT TO The late Letter of the Reconcileableness of God's Prescience,
etc.
FInding that this Discourse of the Reconcileableness of God's Prescience of
the sins of Men, with the wisdom and sincerity of his Counsels, Exhortations,
etc. has been mis-understood and misrepresented; I think it reqisite to say
somewhat briefly in reference thereto.

I wrote it upon the motion of that honorable Gentleman to whom it is
inscribed; who apprehended somewhat of that kind might be of use to render our
Religion less-exceptionable to some persons of an enqiring disposition, that
might perhaps be too skeptical and pendulous, if not prejudic't.

Having finished it, I thought it best the Author's Name should pass under some
disguise, supposing it might, so, better serve its end. For knowing my Name
could not give the cause an advantage, I was not willing it should be in a
possibility of making it incur any disadvantage. And therefore, as I have
observed some, in such cases, to make use only of the two last Letters, I
imitated some other, in the choice of the penultimate. But perceiving that
Discourse now to fall under Animadversion, I reckon it becoming to be no longer
concealed.

It was unavoidable to me, if I would, upon reasonable terms, apply my self to
the consideration of the matter I had undertaken, of showing the consistency of
God's Prescience of the sins of men, with the Preventive methods we find him to
have used against them, to express somewhat of my sense of (what I well knew to
have been asserted by diverse Schoolmen) God's Predeterminative Coucurrence to
the sins of men also.

For it had been (any one may see) very idle, and ludicrous trifling, to offer
at reconciling those methods with God's Prescience, and have waved that
(manifestly) greater difficulty of reconciling them with his Predeterminative
concourse, if I had thought there had been such a thing. And were a like case,
as if a Surgeon, undertaking a wounded person, should apply himself, with a
great deal of diligence and address, to the cure of a Finger slightly
scratch't; and totally neglect a wound (feared to be mortal) in his Breast.

And whereas I reckoned God's Prescience of all whatsoever futurities, and,
conseqently, of the sins of men, most certain, and demonstrable (tho it was not
the business of this Discourse to demonstrate it, but, supposing it, to show
its reconcileableness with what it seemed not so well to agree) if I had
believed his Predeterminative concurrence to the sins of men to be as certain;
Perfect despair of being able to say any thing to purpose in this case, had
made me resolve to say nothing in either.

For, to show how it might stand with the Wisdom and Sincerity of the Blessed
God, to counsel men not to sin, to profess his hatred and detestation of it, to
remonstrare to men the great danger they should incur by it; with so great
appearance of seriousness to exhort, warn, expostulate with them concerning it,
express his great displeasure and grief for their sinning, and conseqent
miseries; and yet all the while act them on thereto, by a secret, but mighty
and irresistible influence, seemed to me an utterly hopeless and impossible
undertaking. The other, without this (supposing, as to this, the case to have
been as some have thought it) a very vain one.

But being well assured, that what seemed the greater difficulty, and to carry
most of terror and affright in the face of it, was only a Chimera. I reckoned
the other very superable, and therefore directed my Discourse thither,
according to the first design of it, which was in effect but to justify God's
making such a creature as Man, and governing him agreeably to his Nature.

Now judging it reqisite, that he who should read that Discourse concerning
this designed Subject, with any advantage, should have the same thoughts of the
other, which was waved, that I had; I apprehended it necessary to communicate
those thoughts concerning that, as I did. Not operously, and as my business,
but only on the By, and as was fit in reference to a thing that was to be
waved, and not insisted on.

Now I perceive that some persons, who had formerly entertained that strange
opinion of God's Predeterminative concurrence to the wickedest actions, and not
purged their minds of it, have been offended with that Letter, for not
expressing more respect unto it. And yet offered nothing, themselves (which to
me seems exceeding strange) for the solving of that great difficulty and
encumbrance, which it infers upon our Religion.

Nor do I much wonder, that this opinion of Predeterminative concourse, to
sinful actions, should have some stiff adherents among our selves. For having
been entertained by certain Dominicans, that were apprehended, in some things
to approach nearer us, than others of the Roman Church; it came to receive
favor and countenance from some of our own, of considerable note for piety and
learning, whose Name and Authority cannot but be expected to have much
influence, on the minds of many.

But I somewhat wonder, that they who have had no kindness for this Letter,
upon the account of its dissent from them, in this particular, should not allow
it common justice. For because it has not said every thing they would have had
it say, and that would have been grateful to themselves, they impute to it the
having said what it said not, and what they apprehended would be most
ungrateful to all pious and sober men.

The sum is, they give out concerning it, that it denies the Providence of God
about sin, which all good men ought to abhor from; and insinuate that it falls
in with the sentiments of Durandus, which they know many think not well of.

All that I intend to do, for the present, upon this occasion, shall be to show
wherein the Letter is misrepresented, and charged with what it has not in it.
To remark what is said against that supposed sense of it, and give the true
sense of what it says touching this matter; with a further account of the
Author's mind herein, than it was thought fit to insert into so transient and
occasional a Discourse as that part of the Letter was. Whereby it may be seen,
wherein he agrees with those of that opposite persuasion, and what the very
point of difference is. Further than this, I yet intend not to go, till I see
further need.

There have two Discourses come to my view that have referred to that Letter.
The one in Manuscript only; which, because it is uncertain to me, whether the
reputed Author of it will own it or no; and, because it says little or nothing,
by way of argument, against the true sense of the Letter, I shall take no
further present notice of. The other is Printed, and offers at somewhat of
argument, which therefore I shall more attentively consider.

It does this Letter an honor, whereof its Author never had the least ambition
or expectation, to insert the mention of it into the close of a very learned,
elaborate Work Court of the Gentiles, part 2. page 522.
; with which it might, yet, easily be imagined, its simplicity, and remoteness
from any pretense to learning, would so ill agree, that a qarrel could not but
ensue. It is from one, who having spent a great part of his time in traveling
thorough some Regions of literature, and been peaceable, as far as I have
understood, in his Travels; it might have been hoped would have let this
Pamphlet alone, when, for what I can observe, he finds no fault with it but
what he makes; and is fain to accuse it of what is no where to be found in it,
lest it should be innocent.

It is an unaccountable pleasure which men of some humors take, in depraving
what is done by others, when there is nothing attempted that does interfere
with them; nothing that can, righteously, be understood to cross any good end,
which they more openly pretend to, nor the more concealed end (if they have any
such) of their own glory.

Common edification seems less designed, when every thing must be thrown down,
which is not built by their own hands, or by their own line and measure.

I plead nothing of merit in this little Essay, only I say for it, that I know
not what it can be guilty of toward this learned man, that can have occasioned
this assault upon it by his Pen. By how much the less it keeps his road, the
more I might have thought it out of the way of his notice. I am sure it meant
him no harm, nor had any design to pilfer from him any part of his Collections.

But he says, he may not let it pass. Then there is no remedy. But I wonder
what he should mean by he may not. It must either mean, that he thought it
unlawful to let it pass, or that he had a mighty strong and irresistible
inclination to sqabble a little with it. The former cannot be imagined. For
then, for the same reason, he would have attempted sundry others of former and
later days, that have said much to the purpose, which this Letter does but
touch obiter, and on the By; in its way to another design. But those were
Giants, whom it was not so safe to meddle with. Therefore he could very wisely
let them pass, tho they have wounded his beloved Cause, beyond all that it is
in the power of his, (or any) Art to Cure.

Whence it is conseqent, that the whole business must be resolved into the
latter. And this inclination cannot but owe it self to some peculiar aspect and
reference he had to the Author. Whom, tho he was in incognito, yet (as I have
been informed) he professes to have discourst with upon the same Subject many
times. And so, therefore, he might once more before this public rancounter, if
he had thought sit, and Nature could have been repel'd a while.

It is true, he has found me not facile to entertain his Sentiments in this
matter. And indeed I have deeply dreaded the portentous imaginations which I
found had more lightly tinctured his Mind, as to this thing, concerning the
Blessed God. Than which, upon deliberation, I do believe, no human Wit can ever
devise worse. As I have often freely told diverse of my Friends, and it is very
likely, among them, himself. Tho I do not suspect the contagion to have
infected his vitals; By a privilege, vouchsaf't to some, that they may possibly
drink some deadly thing that shall not hurt them.

But why must an impatiency of this dissent break out into so vindictive an
hostility? I will not say I expected more friendly dealing.

For, as I do well know it was very possible such a public contest might have
been managed with that candor and fairnes, as not at all to entrench upon
friendship. So, as it is, I need not own so much weakness, as, upon many years
experience, not to be able to distinguish, and understand there are some
tempers less capable of the ingenuities that belong to that pleasant relation.

But it was only a charitable error of which I repent not, that I expected a
more righteous dealing.

He pretends to give my sense, in other words. And then gravely falls to
combating his own man of straw which he will have represent me, and so I am to
be tortured in Effigy.

[It can never be proved, that it implies a contradiction, for God to make a
Creature, which should be capable of acting without immediate Concourse.]

This he puts in a different character, as if I had said so much.

And why might not my own words be allowed to speak my own sense? But that his
understanding and eyes, must then have conspired to tell him, that the sense
would have been qite another? It is only a [predeterminative] concurrence to
all actions, even those that are most malignantly wicked, p. 32. And again,
Gods concurring, by a [determinative] influence unto wicked actions, p. 36.
Which is the only thing I speak of; as what I cannot reconcile with the Wisdom
and Sincerity, of his Counsels and Exhortations, against such actions.

And if he had designed to serve any common good end, in this undertaking of
his, why did he not attempt to reconcile them himself? But the Wisdom and
Sincerity of God are thought fit, (as it would seem) to be sacrificed to the
reputation of his more peculiarly admired Schoolmen. If there be such an
universal determination, by an irresistible Divine influence, to all even the
wickedest actions (which God forbid!) methinks such a difficulty should not be
so easily past over. And surely the reconciling such a determinative influence
with the Divine Wisdom and Sincerity, had been a performance worth all his
learned labors besides, and of greater service to the Christian name and
honor.

But it seems the denying concurrence by such predetermining influence, is the
denying of all immediate concurrence. And I am sent to the Thomists, Scotists,
Jesuits, and Suarez, more especially to be taught otherwise. As if all these
were for determinative concourse. Which is very pleasant, When the very Heads
of the two first-mentioned Sects were against it, as we shall see further anon,
the third generally, and Suarez particularly, whom he names, have so
industriously and strongly opposed it. Yea and because I assent not to the
Doctrine of predeterminative concourse, I am represented (which was the last
spite that was to be done me) as a favourer of the Hypothesis of Durandus. And
he might, as truly, have said of Henry Nicholas, but not so prudently, because
he knows whose opinions have a nearer alliance to that Family.

Now I heartily wish I had a ground for so much charity toward him, as to
suppose him ignorant that immediate concourse, and determinative, are not wont
to be used by the Schoolmen, in this controversy, as terms of the same
signification. If he do, himself, think them to be all one, what warrant is
that to him to give the same for my sense? When it is so well known they are not
commonly so taken, and that determinative concourse is so voluminously written
against, where immediate is expressly asserted. Let him but soberly tell me,
what his design was, to dash out the word [determining] from what he recites Of
that Letter, and put in [immediate]. Which he knows is not to be found in any
of the places he refers to in it. Or what was the spring of that confidence
that made him intimate the Scotists, Thomists, The Jesuits, and particularly
Suarez, to be against what is said in the Letter, in this thing? If he could
procure all the Books in the World to be burnt, besides those in his own
Library, he would yet have an hard task to make it be believed in the next Age,
that all these were for God's efficacious determination of the Wills of men
unto wicked actions.

I need not, after all this, concern my self, as to what he says about the No
Medium between the extremes of his disjunctive proposition. Either the human
will must depend upon the Divine independent Will of God, etc. (as he phrases
it in the excess of his caution, lest any should think the Will of God was not
a Divine Will) Or God must depend on the human will, etc. Unles he can show
that the human will cannot be said to depend on the Divine, as being enabled by
it, except it be also determined and impelled by it, to every wicked action. A
created Being that was entirely from God, with all the powers and faculties
which belong to it; That has its continual subsistence in him, and all those
powers continued, and maintained by his influence every moment; That has those
powers made habile, and apt for whatsoever its most natural motions and
operations, by a suitable influence, whenever it moves or operates. Can this
creature be said not to depend, as to all its motions and operations, unles it
be also unavoidably impelled to do every thing to which it is thus sufficiently
enabled?

I again say, Was it impossible to God to make such a creature that can, in
this case, act or not act? It is here odly enough said, that the Author gives
no demonstration hereof. Of what? Why that it can never be proved (as the
reference to the foregoing word shows) that it implies a contradiction, etc.
It seems it was expected that Author should have proved by demonstration, that
it can never be proved, that it implies a contradiction, for God to make a
Creature, which should be capable of acting (as he feigns him to have said)
without immediate concourse. By what rule of reasoning was he obliged to do so?
But if the proving there is such a creature, as, in the case before expressed,
can act without determinative concourse, will serve turn to prove, that it
cannot be proved, it implies a contradiction there should be such a One: I may
think the thing was done. And may think it sufficiently proved, that there is
such a creature; If it appear (whereof there is too much proof) that there are
such actions done by creatures, as, for the reasons that were before alleged,
it could not stand with the Nature of God to determine them unto.

And was nothing said tending to prove this, that it could not consist with the
Nature of God, to determine men unto all the wicked actions they commit? It
seems unles it were put into mood and figure, it is no proof. Nor was it the
design of those Papers to insist upon that subject; but there are things
suggested in transitu, as such a discourse could admit, that (whether they are
demonstrative or no) would puzzle a considering person. That God should have as
much influence, and concurrence to the worst actions, as to the best. As much,
or more than the sinner or the tempter. That the matter of his Laws to Adam,
and his posterity, should be a natural impossibility. And I now add, the
irreconcileablenes of that determination, with God's Wisdom and Sincerity,
etc. These I shall reckon demonstrations, till I see them well answered.

However if mine were a bad opinion, why was it not as confutable without the
mention of Durandus? But that was, with him, an odious name; and fit,
therefore, to impress the brand, which he desired I should wear for his sake.
This is a likely way to clear the truth. Yet if it serve not one design, it
will another, he thinks, upon which he was more intent.

Are all for Durandus's way that are against a predeterminative influence to
wicked actions? I could tell him who have shown more strength in arguing
against Durandus, than I find in all his Arguments; who yet have written, too,
against determinative concourse to such actions, more than ever he will be able
to answer, or any man.

The truth is, when I wrote that Letter, I had never seen Durandus. Nor indeed
did I consult any Book for the writing of it, (as I had not opportunity, if I
had been so inclined) except, upon some occasions, the Bible. Not apprehending
it necessary, to number votes, and consider how many men's thoughts were one
way, and of how many the other, before I would adventure to think any of my
own: But, I have this day, upon the view of his Animadversions, taken a view of
Durandus too. And, really, cannot yet guess, what should tempt him to parallel
my conceptions with Durandus's, but that he took his, for somewhat an
ill-favored name. L. 2. Did. 1. Q. 5. D. 37. Q. 1.
Durandus, flatly, in several places denies God's immediate concourse to the
actions of the Creatures. Which I never said nor thought. But do really believe
his immediate concourse, to all actions of his Creatures (both immediatione
virtutis, and suppositi, that I may more comply with his Scholastic humor, in
the use of such terms, than gratify my own) Yet not determinative unto wicked
actions.

Again, Durandus denies immediate concourse, universally, and upon such a
ground, as whereupon, the denial must eqally extend to good actions as to bad;
Did. 1. Q. 5. ut supr.
viz. That it is impossible the same numerical action should be from two or more
Agents immediately and perfectly, except the same numerical virtue should be in
each. But (he says) the same numerical virtue cannot be in God and in the
Creature, etc. Whereas he well knows the concourse or influence (for I here
affect not the curiosity to distinguish these two terms, as some do) which I
deny not to be immediate to any actions, I only deny to be determinative, as to
those which are wicked.

Yea and the Authors he qotes (. 11.) Aqinas and Scotus, tho every body may
know they are against what was the notion of Durandus, yet are as much against
himself, if he will directly oppose that Letter, and assert determinative
concourse to wicked actions. They held immediate concourse, not determinative.
The former, tho he supposes Divine help in reference to the elections of the
human will, yet asserts the elections themselves to be in man's own power, and
only says that in the executions of those elections men can be hindered. That
(whatsoever influence he asserts of the first cause) men still, 1a. Q. 83.
habent se indifferenter ad been vel male eligendum. The other, tho he also
excludes not the immediate efficiency of God in reference to the actions of
men, yet is so far from making it determinative, that the reason he gives why,
in evil actions, man sins, and God does not, is, that the former of these
Causes, posset rectitudinem dare actui qam tenetur eam dare, tamen, qantum est
ex se, daret, si voluntas creata cooperaretur; in the very place which himself
refers to. Wherein they differ from this Author toto Coelo; and from me, in
that they make not determinative influence necessary in reference to good
actions, which I expressly do.

Thus far it may be seen what pretense or color he had to make my Opinion the
same with Durandus's, or, his own, the same with that of Thomas and Scotus.

But if he knew in what esteem I have the Schoolmen, he would hardly believe me
likely to step one foot out of my way, either to gain the reputation of any of
their names, or avoid the disreputation.

He, notwithstanding, supposed his own reputation to be so good (and I know no
reason why he might not suppose so) as to make it be believed I was any thing
he pleased to call me, by such as had not opportunity to be otherwise informed.

And thus I would take leave of him, And permit him to use his own reflections
upon his usage of me, at his own leisure. But that civility bids me (since he
is pleased to be at the pains of catechizing me) first to give some answer to
the Qestions wherein he thus expostulates with me.

Q. 1. Q. 1.
Whether there be any action of Man on earth so good, which has not some
mixture of Sin in it? And if God concur to the substrate matter of it as good,
must he not necessarily concur to the substrate matter as sinful? For is not
the substrate matter of the act, both as good and sinful the same?

A. 1. A. 1.
It seems then, that God does concur to the matter of an action as sinful.
Which is honestly acknowledged, since by his Principles, it cannot be denied;
tho most, of his way, mince the business, and say the concurrence is only to
the action which is sinful, not as sinful.

2. This I am to consider as an argument for God's predeterminative concurrence
to wicked actions. And thus it must be conceived. That if God concur by
determinative influence to the imperfectly good actions of Faith, Repentance,
Love to himself, Prayer: Therefore to the acts of enmity against himself,
Cursing, Idolatry, Blasshemy, etc. And is it not a mighty conseqence? If to
actions that are good qoad substantiam, therefore to such as are in the
substance of them evil? We our selves can, in a remoter kind, concur to the
actions of others: Because you may afford, your self, your leading concurrence
to actions imperfectly good, therefore may you to them that are downright
evil? because to Prayer, therefore to Cursing and Swearing? and then ruin men
for the actions you induc't them to? You Will say God may rather, but sure he can
much less do so than you. How could you be serious in the Proposal of this
qestion?

We are at a loss how it should consist with the Divine Wisdom, Justice,
Goodness, and Truth to design the punishing Man, yet innocent, with everlasting
torments, for actions which God, himself, would irresistibly move him to;
Whereas his making a Covenant with Adam in reference to himself and his
posterity, implied there was a possibility it might be kept; at least that he
would not make the keeping of it, by his own positive influence, impossible.
And you say, If he might concur to the substrate matter of an action as good,
(which tends to man's Salvation and Blessedness) he must necessarily conc^^^
(and that by an irresistible determinative influence, else you say nothing to
me) to the substrate matter of all their evil actions, as evil, which tend to
their ruin and misery, brought upon them by the actions which God makes them
do. I suppose S. Luke 6. 9. with Hos. 13. 9. show a difference. If you
therefore ask me, Why I should not admit this conseqence? I say it needs no
other answer, than that I take Wisdom, Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth, to
belong more to the Idaea of God, than their contraries.

Q. 2. Q. 2.
Is there any action so sinful that has not some natural good as the substrate
matter thereof?

A. Answ.
True. And what shall be inferred? That therefore God must by a determinative
influence produce every such action whatsoever reason there be against it? You
might better argue thence the necessity of his producing, every hour, a new
World; in which there would be a great deal more of positive Entity, and
natural goodness. Certainly the natural goodness that is in the Entity of an
action, is no such invitation to the Holy God by determinative influence to
produce it, as that he should offer violence to his own Nature, and stain the
Justice and Honor of his Government, by making it be done, and then punish it
being done.

Q. 3. Q. 3.
Do we not cut off the most illustrious part of Divine Providence in governing
the lower World, etc.

A. Answ.
What? by denying that it is the stated way of God's Government, to urge Men,
irresistibly, to all that wickedness, for which he will afterward punish them
with everlasting torments? I should least of all, ever have expected such a
qestion to this purpose, and am ashamed further to answer it. Only name any act
of Providence, I hereby deny, if you can.

In the next place, That my sense may appear, in my own words; And that I may
show how far I am of the same mind with those that apprehend me at so vast a
distance from them; and where, if they go further, our parting point must be; I
shall set down the particulars of my agreement with them, and do it in no other
heads than they might have collected, if they had pleased, out of that Letter,
As

1. That God exercises an universal Providence about all his Creatures, both
in sustaining and governing them.

2. That, more particularly, he exercises such a Providence about Man.

3. That this Providence about Man extends to all the actions of all men.

4. That it consists not alone in beholding the actions of men, as if he were a
mere spectatour of them only, but is positively active about them.

5. That this active Providence of God about all the actiens of men consists
not merely in giving them the natural powers, whereby they can work of
themselves, but in a real influence upon those powers.

6. That this influence is in reference to holy and spiritual actions (whereto
since the Apostacy, the nature of Man is become viciously dis-inclined)
necessary to be efficaciously determinative; such as shall overcome that
dis-inclination, and reduce those powers into act.

7. That the Ordinary, appointed way for the communication of this
determinative influence, is by our intervening consideration of the inducements
which God represents to us in his Word, viz. the Precepts, Promises, and
Comminations, which are the moral instruments of his Government. No doubt but
he may (as is intimated in the Letter, p. 141.) extraordinarily act Men, in
some rarer cases, by inward impulse, without the help of such external means,
(as he did Prophets or inspired persons) And when he has done so, we were not
to think he treated them unagreeably to their natures, Or so as their natures
could not, without violence, admit. But it has been the care and designment of
the Divine Wisdom, so to order the way of dispensation toward the several
sorts of Creatures, as not only not, ordinarily, to impose upon them, what they
could not conveniently be patient of, but so as that their powers and faculties
might be put upon the exercises whereof they were capable, and to provide that
neither their passive capacity should be overcharged, nor their active be
unemployed.

And whereas the reasonable nature of Man renders him not only susceptible of
unexpected internal impressions, but also capable of being Governed by Laws,
which reqires the use of his own endeavor to understand and obey them; And
whereas we also find such Laws are actually made for him, and propounded to
him with their proper enforcements. If it should be the fixed course of God's
Government over him, only to guide him by inward impulses, This (as is said, p.
142) would render those Laws and their Sanctions impertinencies, His faculties
whereby he is capable of Moral Government so far, and to this purpose, useless
and vain. And would be an occasion, which the depraved Nature of Men, would be
very apt to abuse into a temptation to them, never to bend their powers to the
endeavor of doing any thing that were of an holy and spiritual tendency (from
which their aversion would be always prompting them to devise excuses) more
than a mere machine would apply it self to the uses which it was made for, and
does not understand.

Therefore, lest any should be so unreasonable, as to expect God should only
surprise them, while they resolvedly sit still and sleep; he has, in his
infinite Wisdom, withheld from them the occasion hereof; And left them
destitute of any encouragement (whatsoever his extraordinary dealings may have
been with some) to expect his influences, in the neglect of his Ordinary
Methods, as is discoursed p. 90. and at large in the following Pages. And which
is the plain sense of that admonition, Phil. 2. 12, 13. Yea and tho there be
never so many instances of merciful surprisals, preventive of all our own
consideration and care, Yet those are still to be accounted the Ordinary
Methods which are so de jure, which would actually be so, if Men did their
duty, and which God has obliged us to observe and attend unto as such.

8. That in reference to all other actions which are not sinful, tho there be
not a sinful disinclination to them, yet because there may be a sluggishnes,
and ineptitude to some purposes God intends to serve by them, This influence is
also always determinative thereunto; whenever to the immense Wisdom of God
shall seem meet, and conducing to his own great and holy ends.

9. That, in reference to sinful actions; by this influence God does not only
sustain men who do them, and continue to them their natural faculties and
powers, whereby they are done, but also, as the first Mover, so far excite and
actuate those powers, as that they are apt and habile for any congenerous
action, to which they have a natural designation; and whereto they are not
sinfully dis-inclined.

10. That, if men do then employ them to the doing of any sinful action; by
that same influence, he does, as to him seems meet, limit, moderate, and,
against the inclination and design of the sinful Agent, overrule and dispose it
to good.

But now, if, besides all this, they will also assert; That God does, by an
efficacious influence, move and determine men to wicked actions. This is that
which I most resolvedly deny.

That is, in this I shall differ with them, that I do not suppose God to have,
by internal influence, as far, an hand, in the worst and wickedest actions, as
in the best.

I assert more to be necessary to actions, to which men are wickedly
dis-inclin'd; but that less will suffice for their doing of actions, to which
they have inclination more than enough. I reckon it sufficient to the
production of this latter sort of actions, that their powers be actually
habile, and apt for any such action, in the general, as is connatural to them;
supposing there be not a peccant aversion, as there is to all those actions
that are Holy and Spiritual; which eversion a more potent ( even a
determinative) influence is necessary to overcome. I explain my self by
instance.

A man has from God the powers belonging to his nature, by which he is capable
of loving or hating an apprehended good or evil. These powers, being, by a
present Divine influence, rendered habile, and apt for action: He can now love a
good name, health, ease, life, and hate disgrace, sickness, pain, death. But he
does also by these powers thus habilitated for action, love wickedness, and hate
God. I say, now, that to those former acts God should over and besides
determine him, is not absolutely and always necessary; and, to the latter, is
impossible. But that, to hate wickedness universally, and as such, and to love
God, the depravednes of his nature, by the Apostacy, has made the
determinative influence of efficacious grace necessary. Which, therefore, he
has indispensable obligation (nor is destitute of encouragement) earnestly to
implore and pray for.

My meaning is now plain to such as have a mind to understand it.

Having thus given an account wherein I agree with them, And wherein, if they
please, I must differ. It may perhaps be expected I should add further Reasons
of that difference on my part. But I shall for the present forbear to do it.

I know it may be alleged, that some very Pious (as well as Learned) Men have
been of their opinion. And I seriously believe it. But that signifies nothing
to the goodness of the opinion. Nor does the badnes of it extinguish my Charity,
nor reverence toward the men. For I consider, that as many hold the most
important truths, and which most directly tend to impress the Image of God upon
their Souls, that yet are never stamped with any such impression thereby; so,
it is not impossible some may have held very dangerous opinions, with a
notional judgment, the pernicious influence whereof has never distilled upon
their hearts.

Neither shall I be willing without necessity to detect other men's infirmities.
Yet if I find my self any way obliged further to intermeddle in this matter, I
reckon the time I have to spend in this World, can never be spent to better
purpose, than in discovering the fearful conseqences of that rejected opinion,
the vanity of the subterfuges whereby its assertours think to hide the
malignity of it; and the inefficacie of the Arguments brought for it.

Especially those two which the Letter takes notice of.

For as so ill-coloured an opinion ought never to be admitted without the most
apparent necessity, So do I think it most apparent there is no necessity it
should be admitted upon those grounds or any other. And doubt not but that both
the Governing Providence of God in reference to all events whatsoever; and his
most certain foreknowledg of them all, may be defended, against all opposers,
without it.

But I had rather my preparations to these purposes, should be buried in dust
and silence; than I should ever see the occasion which should carry the
signification with it of their being at all needful.

And I shall take it for a just and most deplorable occasion, if I shall find
any to assert against me the contradictory to this Proposition,

That God does not by an Efficacious Influence Universally move and determine
men to all their Actions; even those that are most wicked.

Which is the only true, and plain meaning, of what was said, about this
business, in the before mentioned Letter.

FINIS.

