THE HISTORY OF Religion.

Written by A Person of Quality.

Quae quidem Disquisitio, and ad Animi Institutionem pulcherrima, and ad
moderandam Religionem necessaria. Cic. de Not. Deor. L. 1. LONDON, Printed in
the Year MDCXCIV.

THE PREFACE.
SINCE Prefaces are so much in fashion, I presume it will not be judged
improper that I set one before this History of Religion; to clear the Design of
it, and prevent Misapprehensions.

Though the Title be the History of Religion, yet there is nothing contained in
it of a Polemical or Controversial Nature; no Dispute, or Arguments upon any
Controversy; the World has been stuffed with too many (useless) Wranglings of
that kind already.

The Subject of the following Discourse, arises from Matter of Fact; How
Religion has (from the beginning) been managed by Priestcraft of the Heathens,
to mislead the Vulgar and Profane (as they are pleased to term them) into a
Blind Implicit Obedience, to their Inspired and Divine Authority; Teaching the
Belief of many Gods, or Divine Powers, and Appointing so many various Ways of
Superstitious Devotions: such as the Worshipping of Idols, of Pillars and
Columns consecrated by them, Adoration of Sepulchers and Dead Men; all
Artificially calculated and contrived so, as they found would most easily make
Impression upon the Minds of Men. So also the Notions they taught concerning
the other World, were made suitable to what is seen and familiar to us in this,
that they might be more easy for Men's Digestion. By these Means the Priests
made themselves, and their daily increasing Numbers, be thought absolutely
useful to others. But yet to confirm, and preserve themselves in the Authority
and Dominion they had gotten, they invented two great Assistances, Mystery and
Persecution: by Mystery, to prevent the Use of Understanding; and by
Persecution, to punish any that should attempt to break out of the Brutal
Pound, and use their Reason.

Essays.
Montaigne says, That Persecution is a Trial full of Uncertainty and Danger; for
what would not a Man say, what would not a Man do, to avoid intolerable
Torments? Etiam Innocents cogit mentiri Dolor. Many Nations, less barbarous
than the Greeks or Romans that called them so, esteemed it cruel and horrible,
to torment and pull Men in pieces for doubtful and questionable Faults. He says
further, That Julian, called the Apostate, had experimented by the Cruelty of
some Christians, that there is no Beast in the World so much to be feared by
Man, as Man.

All these Practices of the Heathens I have endeavored, and I believe very
plainly, to make appear, that they are retained and followed to this day, in
what is called the Church of Rome. Where desembling Priestcraft, under
pretense of humbling and guiding the Understandings of the Vulgar and
Unlearned, has usurped a Power over both Faith and Conscience: they have made
it a terrible Thing for Men to trust themselves, or their own Reason, in any
thing relating to Religion; it is with them, an equal Crime for the Profane
Vulgar (as the Heathens also called them) not to submit their Understandings to
God, and their Priests. Not considering, that no Dictates of any Superiors, or
Learned Men, can engage a Man's Faith, without he has reason to believe, that
God had taught what they prescribe; but, then not to believe, is not opposing
the Humane, but the Divine Authority. So that in truth, the Business of
submitting our Understandings to Humane Authority, is but a Chimerical Notion,
and comes to nothing.

But being aware of this Reason, which is so obvious and plain, they clamor,
like Demetrius and the Silversmiths, Great is the Church: which, if fairly
examined, not any thing appears more unintelligible or ridiculous. I confess,
some of our own Learned Men (with too much Imitation of the Roman Clamor) when
they write with Presumption enough on some dark and difficult Points, insert a
Submission to the Judgment and Correction of their Holy Mother the Church; when
they themselves neither pretend to tell us, nor indeed know, when, or from
whence this Infallible Judgment should come. And until it does, they assume to
themselves the dictating and prescribing Power; and submit themselves to
nothings less than that Great Nothing. For if any should pretend to show it, or
expect it, from Tradition, or Fathers, or Councils, or the Popes; there is no
one almost so meanly Learned, as not to know, how fallible and contradictory to
one another, all these have been.

The Church of Christ is, no question, in Believers: the Household of Nymphas
was called a Church, and many other Places and Families where Believers were.
Much more must the Church of Christ consist of Believers in general: in which
diffusive Capacity, she cannot judge of particular Questions and Controversies,
because of the Division into Sects and Parties. The Divisions among us into
contrary Parties and Opinions, make it necessary, to judge of what we may call
the Church, by the Doctrine; not of the Doctrine, by the (pretended) Church.

To supply all possible Defects, they chiefly follow the Method and Pretense of
Mystery; as the surest Way to keep up their Authority: they frame most of their
Articles upon dark Places; affecting to make Religion become an Art, and
themselves the sole Masters of it. Plutarch tells us, that Alexander the Great
wrote a Letter to Aristotle, complaining of him, that he had set forth his
Books of Select Knowledge, to instruct others as well as himself: but Aristotle
answered, that those Treatises, which were his Metaphysics, were indeed
published, but so written as not to be exposed to common Capacities: so that in
effect, Alexander was indeed the only Person to whom he had yet communicated
them. I suppose he had the like reason, to write out of the reach of common
Capacity, that the Learned now a days have for their obscure Writings, and dark
Gibberish; even to keep the (Profane) Vulgar from daring to use their own
Understandings, about Matters which they see to be so perplexed and Intricate;
unless they will enter into their Society, and so become free of the Trade.

In my Opinion, it ought to beget Admiration, to see with what Boldness those
that pretend to extraordinary Share in Learning and Divinity, write upon the
most hidden and never to be determined Points: with what Confidence and furious
Difference some have wrote of the Trinity, asserting their Opinions to be plain
and easy, and (almost) demonstrable; while others, as Learned, call them
ridiculous Absurdities, and Heresy. Nor has the sacred particular Providence
escaped the impious Temerity of the Learned, wresting the Intention of it to
their own corrupt private Interests; making it a Sanctifier of any successful
Mischief or Murder, of any Side, of contrary Parties, and to patronize Men's
worst Imperfections. I will not enlarge into a Dispute, but (if possible) make
them blush; with a Character of Divine Providence, given them by a Heathen
Writer. The excellent Plutarch, in his Life of Pompey, by occasion of some
Discourse of that Nature, says, Providence is a Point of Divinity belonging
only to God, and ought to be let alone to act after its own Method.

Nothing has given a greater Blemish to the Christian Religion, than the
Controversial Writings of the Learned; those Disputes have engaged Nations in
more Blood and War, than the Ignorant or the Wicked could ever have occasioned
or caused, either by their Mistakes or their Improbity. The trivial Subjects,
and the doubtful and uncertain, that have been so sharply and definitively
argued and contested, show that it is Private Interest and Humor that has
occasioned and maintained them; without any respect to the Service of God, or
the Christian Religion, truly and undoubtedly so called. And when they have
once drove one another into extreme Notions in Religion, the Errors on both
sides become alike. Thus the Gnostics held, that 'twas no matter how Men
lived, so they believed aright: and the Encratites, who detested this
Libertinism, said on the contrary, that it is not material what Men believe, so
they live well. Yet by all this, we perceive that the Gospel of Christ, in
despite of all these (affected and sought) Clouds and Darkness, will and does
triumphantly extend its Light and Benign Influence, to the discerning and
honest Part of Mankind; its Truth and Power appear the more great and
wonderful, by the Opposition of the Falseness and Weakness of Men.

I remember that Montaigne tells a Story of one, Essays.
who went to Rome to see (as he had persuaded himself) the Sanctity of their
Manners; but he found, on the contrary, a great Dissoluteness in the Prelates
and People of that time; nothing less than Rome the Holy: but this settled him
more firmly in the Christian Religion; considering how great the Force and
Divinity of it must be, that could maintain its Credit and Dignity amidst so
much Corruption, and in so vicious hands. The Consideration of this, ought (in
my Opinion) to induce those that are Guides and Teachers, to make our Way plain
and easy, to follow the clear and uncontested Methods of the Gospel, to win and
excite People chiefly to the Love of God, and to encourage rather than distract.

If any one will but temperately consider it, he will with Horror perceive,
what Persecution and Mischiefs have been caused by the Imposing Power, assumed
by too many that call themselves the Followers of Christ: What Wars and Expense
of Christian Blood have been occasioned by their passionate and violent
Disputes, concerning dark and never to be decided Questions? Had their Teaching
and Learning been applied only to the right Use of the Gospel-Methods, the
World had enjoyed an undisturbed and (truly) Christian Peace; not been involved
in unnatural Wars, and barbarous Persecutions.

In short, I must publish it to the World, that I like such Sermons as Dr.
Tillotson's, now Archbishop of Canterbury: where all are taught a plain and
certain Way to Salvation; and with all the Charms of a calm and blessed Temper,
and of pure Reason, are excited to the uncontroverted indubitable Duties of
Religion. Where all are plainly shown, that the Means to obtain the eternal
Place of happy Rest, are those (and no other) which also give Peace in this
present Life: and where every one is encouraged and exhorted to learn, but
withal to use his own Care and Reason in the working out his own Salvation. I
will conclude this Preface therefore, with some Passages from that excellent
Person, which relate to the abovementioned Particulars.

He tells us, Sermon. on Luke 9.55, 56. that our Savior came to discountenance
all Fierceness, and Rage, and Cruelty of Man; to restrain that furious and
unpeaceable Spirit, which is so troublesome to the World, and is the Cause of so
many Mischiefs and Disorders in it. He came to introduce a Religion which
consults, not only the Eternal Salvation of Men's Souls; but their temporal
Peace and Security, their Comfort and Happiness in this World. For when
Religion: once comes to supplant Moral Righteousness, and to teach Men the
absurdest things in the World, to lie for Truth, and to kill for God's Sake;
when it serves for no other Cause but to be a Bond of Conspiracy, to inflame
the Tempers of Men to a greater Fierceness, and to set a keener Edg upon their
Spirits, to make them ten times more the Children of Wrath and Cruelty, than
they were by Nature: then surely it loses its Nature, and ceases to be
Religion; for let a Man say worse of Infidelity and Atheism if he can.

Sermon on 1 John 4.1.
Whatever therefore the Inconveniences of Men's judging for themselves, may be;
the Inconveniences are far less on that side, than a total and implicit
Resignation to the Pretenders of being Infallible; no Man being able to know
who they are. To try Doctrines, is to enquire into the Grounds and Reasons of
them; which the better any Man understands, the more firmly he will be
established in the Truth, and be more resolute in the day of Trial, and the
better able to withstand the Assaults and Arts of cunning Adversaries: and on
the contrary, that Man will soon be removed from his Stedfastness, who never
examined the Reasons and Grounds of his Belief; when it comes to the Trial, he
that has but little to say for his Belief, will probably neither do, nor suffer
much for it.

THE HISTORY OF Religion.
THERE never was yet any Country, or Society of Men, but did own some Religion:
as if all the Dictates of Man's Nature, joined in that one Principle; though
differing in the Particulars of it. As they were distinguished from Beasts, by
Reason, and the right Use of it; so they were directed to the superior
Consideration of an Eternal Being, by a certain Reflection on the Finite
Condition of themselves and of all living Creatures, which must be determined
by Time or Accident: it seemed no less than ridiculous, not to believe some
Power of an Infinite Nature, that was the Creator and Disposer of Beings; and
agreeably to that Position of the Apostles, the World easily consented that in
Religion is no Shame.

We have heard of some particular Men, that have been reputed Atheists; but
never of any Country or Society of Men, that professed Atheism: we have notice of
many very Ridiculous Opinions, that have possessed Nations; insomuch, that
Atheism seems the only Folly that has never prevailed, with any general Credit;
which may deservedly put one in mind of that Saying in Holy Scripture, Psalm.
14.1. and 53.1.
The Fool has said in his Heart, there is no God.

This Folly needs not a Laborious or Artificial Confutation; the Demonstrations
against it, are obvious and clear. That which seems most to stagger and
confound Apprehension, is the endless Search of something without a Beginning;
a Power derived from no Power, an Infinite and Eternal Omnipotency: but whoever
thinks this too much to be believed of God, must (of necessity) believe as much
of other things; and while he thinks he does not believe a thing so
incomprehensible, at the same time he believes it of most (if not all the)
Objects in the World: so whilst an Eternal Existence or Being seems too hard to
be believed of God, the same Difficulty must be believed of no God. For if
there were not an Omnipotent and an Eternal Power, by which all things are made
and disposed; it follows (necessarily) that all things must have been without a
Beginning: so that such a One must believe the World to be, what he cannot
believe God is. And while he doubts of a Creator of all things, he must believe
all things created themselves; or were Eternal and Infinite without a Creation:
the former of which, is to imagine not one God, but many; the other supposes
that Absurdity in Philosophy, Ex Nihilo Aliquid, or Effects without not only a
Competent, but) any Cause. Or if he imagins a thing called Nature, the Cause of
all things; he acknowledges a God, only under a borrowed name: for whatever was
without a Beginning, the Cause and the Disposer of all things, is that Infinite
Power and Wisdom. Hermes being asked what God was? answered well; the Maker of
all things, an Eternal and most Wise Mind. Diogenes calls him, the Soul of the
World. Plato says, God is a Mind, the Cause and Orderer of all things; and
Seneca, that he is Men's Vniversi. When Labienus desired Cato, to consult the
Oracle of Jupiter Ammon, in their (present) hard Condition: Ille Deo plenus,
tacita quem me^^^ gerebat, effudit di^^as Adytis e pectore V^c^s. Est ne Dei
seeds, nisi Terra and Pontus, and A^r; and C^^lum, and (...): superus quid
qu^rimus ultra? Jupiter est quo^cunque vid^, quocunque (...).
Cato answered, from a Breast more truly Inspired than any Oracle those Priests
could give, by a Divine Way of Questioning, What was the Throne and Seat of
God, but the Earth, the Sea, the Air and Virtue: What farther Inquiry
therefore, says he, ought to be made, when God is whatever is seen, or moves,
or has a Being? Thus all several Names, Titles and Appellations must determine
in an Infinite Power, which is the Life and Disposer of them: nor has any
Person entertained a (settled) Opinion, that things disposed themselves, or
that they gave themselves their own Life and Being; or that they were without a
Beginning as now they are, without being the Effects of an Infinite Cause.

The World in general was ever so far from believing no God, that they were
prone to believe many Gods; and from the Infancy of it, that Opinion grew, and
increased with it. An Opinion much cherished by Priests, in all Ages; because
their Dominion, Power and Riches increased of Course, and in the Nature of the
Thing, by the Multiplication of Divinities, or Objects of Adoration and
Worship: and it seems indeed impossible, that without some Direction and
Design, such various and phantastic Divinities and Opinions about them, should
enter into the Minds of Men, more ready for Impression, than Invention; and
having once made an implicit Resignation of their Sense and Reason, they follow
with even a zealous Submission those to whom they have resigned. Upon this
Foundation, Priests raised themselves to Veneration, and to an Equality with
Princes; mingling their Divine Interest with Earthly Ambition: Rex (...)* Rex
(...).
and Kings themselves thought it an Addition to their Titles, to assume the
Name of Priests. In Suetonius you may see with the Titles of Roman Emperors,
that of Priest joined. Among the Egyptians, the Priests were next in Dignity to
the Kings; and of Counsel to 'em, in all Business of importance: from among
them he was chosen; or if out of the Soldiery, he was forthwith invested in
the High Priesthood, and instructed by the Priests in their Mysteries and
Philosophy; which were delivered under the cover of Fables and Aenigmatical
Expressions. And as I design in this Discourse, to show how the Priestcraft
and Power have been continued to this time, by the same and like Methods and
Practices; so I shall begin, with taking notice of their continuing in that
Ambition, Dignity and Power, which is so evidently practiced and shown in the
Church of Rome.

The Pope, the High Priest there, has exceeded all his Priestly Predecessors,
in pretending a Power above all Princes; even to the devesting them, at his
Pleasure, of their Authority and Power over their own Subjects. This Paramount
Sovereignty was derived from Infallibility; in virtue of both, 'twas easy for
him to require Men to believe whatever was (any way) his Interest to invent;
taking his Pattern from the Heathen Priests, as well in their Methods and
Tricks of Devotion, as in their Ways of supporting and propagating what they
taught, in all Ages of Mystery and Persecution. The Heathen Priests however
seem more excusable in their Inventions than Christians that follow and imitate
them. For the former had no Word of God, in a revealing Gospel, to direct and
limit their Belief: so that they were at large, to teach and practice such
things as they believed must make the most (to them) advantageous Impression on
Men; as many Gods, and the lesser to be Mediators between the superior Gods and
Men, the Adoration of their Images, giving Sanctity to Shrines and Pillars. But
for Christians, who pretend to believe a revealing Gospel, to continue in those
Heathenish Doctrines and Methods, seems to be continued by somewhat a greater
degree of that Priestcraft, which had been so long practiced with Success.

God himself declares, with Jealousy, this Aptness in Men to receive and
believe in many Gods; and to worship strange and helpless things: in the First
Commandment he says, Thou shall have no other Gods but ME; and in the Second,
Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or the Likeness of any thing
that is in the Heavens above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Water under
the Earth. These large and comprehensive Words, forbidding every thing that was
in Nature to be worshipped, show plainly, that God saw and considered how ready
Mankind was to be misguided under a Notion of Religion, into extravagant
Worships. We hear very early of many Gods, which probably were Men Deified; as
Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury, Apollo, Neptune, Pluto, Bacchus: and also of diverse
Female Deities. Mr. Bochart observes hereupon, Geogr. L. 1.
that Noah and his three Sons were the same with Saturn and his Sons, Jupiter,
Neptune and Pluto. He takes notice of several Appellations in Scripture, as Vir
Belli, pro Milite; Vir Brachii, pro Robusto; Vir Sanguinis, pro Homicida: but
that of Noah is, Vir Terrae, and is so taken by the Mythologists; as if he had
married the Earth, or the Goddess Tellus; and the Earth were the same with Rhea
the Wife of Saturn. Genesis 9.2^.
Noe coepit esse Vir Terrae, and plantavit Vineam: but to Saturn also the
Ancients ascribed Agriculture, and the planting of Vines. And as Noah was drunk
with Wine; Genesis 9.21.
so the Feast of the Saturnalia was celebrated with Drunkenness. Cham was
cursed for seeing his Father Noah's Nakedness: and the Poets affirm, that such
a Law proceeded from Saturn, that none should escape unpunished, that saw any
of the Gods naked. Therefore in the Hymns of Callimachus, when Tiresias was
struck blind for seeing Minerva naked, the Goddess excuses it to his Mother,
saying, She was not the Cause of taking away his Sight, but that it was a Law
that came from Saturn. The Fable of the Punishment of Actaeon for seeing Diana
naked, relates also to this. Saturn and his Wife Rhea were said to come from
the Ocean; as Noah did: and Macrobius says, that in the Medal of Saturn, there
was a Ship on the one side, and his Head on the other: he cites also Alexander
Polyhistor, that Saturn foretold the Flood; which answers to Noah's being
forewarned of it by God, 2 Pet. 2.5.
and his taking on his thereupon to be a Preacher of Righteousness to that
Generation. Mr. Bochart shows farther, that Cham or Ham was worshipped under
the Name of Jove; the Egyptians calling him by the Name of Jove Amoun or
Hammon: by the like manner of Comparison, and by their various Appellations, he
finds Japhet to be Neptune, Canaan to be Mercury, Nimrod to be Bacchus; of the
Reasonableness and Probability of these Conjectures, any one may be satisfied,
by reading that Learned Author.

I have set down these things, to show how early the Corruption of Deifying of
Men, was: though at the same time, they acknowledged also a superior Sort of
Demons, who never were Men; as I shall show in the progress of this Discourse,
together with the Reason why I insist on this Variety of Gods.

There were also Household Gods, called Penates; which were Teraphim or little
Images. The Holy Scripture takes notice, that Rachel stole her Father's
Teraphim; Genesis 31.19.
and in the Prophet it is said, the King of Babel consulted the Teraphim, Ezekiel.
21.21.
and looked into the Liver. These were so relied on for Blessings and
Protections, that they were always carried about. When Hector's Ghost appeared
to Aeneas, he remembers him of this piece of Devotion; commending to him the
carrying these Penates (or Household Gods) with him, as Companions of his
Fortune; Suosque tibi commendat Troja Penates, hos cape Fatorum comites,
Virgil. lib. 2. So also in his third Book, when Aeneas takes Shipping to fly
from his destroyed Country, he takes care of the Penates, as a part of his
Family; Feror exul in altum, cum sociis natoque Penatibus and magnis Diis. When
Jacob fled from Laban, his Wife Rachel stole her Father's Teraphim, Penaies or
Images; and when Laban overtook them, he first expostulates with Jacob, why he
would use him so as to carry away his Daughters like Captives, and not suffer
him their Father to take a kind Farewell: but then secondly and chiefly, that he
had also stolen his Teraphim. Genesis 31.30.
Rachel in the mean time sat upon these Teraphim, to conceal them from her
Father; believing them to be useful for their Protection in their Travel to
Canaan.

The strange Readiness and Inclination to worship Images, by those very Persons
that made them, seems very unlikely to proceed from their own Opinion of their
own Work. The excellent Reasons of the Prophet Isaiah, seem to demonstrate
this: He says, Isai. 44.11. Et deinceps.
The Workmen, if they were gathered together, would be ashamed: The Smith with
the Tongs both works it in the Coals, and fashioneth it with Hammers: -- He
is hungry, and his Strength fails; he drinks no Water, and is faint. The
Carpenter stretches out his Rule, he marketh it out with a Line, he sits it
with Planes: -- He makes it after the Figure of a Man, according to the Beauty
of a Man, that it may remain in the House. He heweth down Cedars, he takes the
Cypress and the Oak; he planteth an Ash, and the Rain nourishes it: then shall
it be for a Man to burn, for he will take thereof and warm himself, and will
also bake Bread; of the Residue he will make a God, and worship it; a Graven
Image, and will fall down thereto. He burns part thereof in the Fire, with
part he eats Flesh; he also warms himself therewith: the Residue he makes a
God, worships it, prays unto it; says to it, Deliver me, for thou art my God.
Isai. 46.1.
Thus useless Gods are a Burden to the weary Beasts that carry them. They
lavish Gold out of the Bag, and weigh Silver out of the Balance; they hire a
Goldsmith, and he makes it a God: -- but they cry to him, and he cannot
answer, nor save out of Trouble. But to all this, the Prophet adds, Remember
this, and show your selves to be Men; bring things again to mind, O ye
Transgressors. These Words seem plainly to intimate, that the People who did
these things, were abused and misled by others: and therefore it is, that he
admonishes them to show themselves Men, by using their own Consideration; and
that they should bring again to mind what a ridiculous Fancy it is, that they
could make a God who had that Power, which themselves (the Makers of him)
wanted; or that there is so great a Difference in the same Piece of Wood, that
one part is fit only to serve them in Household Offices, the other part is
qualified to save them and their Families. Assuredly this Distinction arose not
from the Imagination of the Artificer, that used the Wood or Silver; but from
the Priests: who having gained an Opinion among Men of their Spiritual Power,
pretended by their Consecration to make the Difference; and pronounced, by
their Divine Authority, that these were Gods.

There are many Authorities that make it clear, that 'twas not the People nor
the Artisans, who first broached the Belief that their Images were Gods; but
the Priests, who by virtue of their Consecration pretended to make the Images
and Pillars Sacred, and sit to be filled with the Spirits of Demons. Hermes
Trismegistus says, In Asclep.
their Forefathers had devised an Art to make Gods, and to call the Souls of
Demons and Angels, and put them into those Images or Gods. Jamblichus calls
these Consecrated Idols, Images filled with Divine Spirits: Statuas animatas,
sensu and Spiritu plenas.
and again, Animated Statues, filled with Spirit and Sense. Arnobius sets down
the Excuse of the Heathens; that they did not worship the Gold and Silver, or
other Materials of which the Images were made: but they worshipped the Divine
Spirits, that were brought to inhabit those Statues and Images. Arnob. l. 6. ad
Gentes; Eos in his colimus, eosque veneramur, quos Dedicatio infert, and
fabrilibus efficit habitare simulachris. Which also extended to Pillars and
Columns; as may be inferred from Leviticus 26.1. Ye shall make you no Idols nor
Graven Image, neither rear you up a standing Image, (the Margin for standing
Image reads Pillar) to bow down unto it. This same Method of Priestcraft is
continued in the Church of Rome: the Romish Saints and Angels answer to the
Demons and Heroes, Deified by the Heathen Priests; and their Idol of Bread,
Divinity infused into Crosses, Images, Agnus Dei's and Relics, correspond to
the Pillars, Statues and Images consecrated by Pagan Priests.

When St. Paul, at Athens, preached Jesus Christ risen from the dead; they took
this for a Part of their Doctrine of Demons; which Word is expressly used in
the Original. Our Translation says, Others said, He seems to be a
Setterforth of strange Gods; but in the Original it is, of strange Demons. For
hearing of one, who after his Death had Divine Honors and Worship given to
him; they took it presently, according to their own Opinion, that he was
proposed as a New Demon. And such Doctrines and Opinions as these, might
probably be the Occasion that St. Paul afterward writes expressly; 1 Timothy 2.5.
There is but one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ
Jesus. But this Admonition and Caution has not been at all prevalent with the
Priests; it being a Limiting and Infringing their Jurisdiction and Interests:
therefore with an Obstante to Paul, they continue the old Methods of
Priestcraft, multiplying upon all Occasions the Objects of Worship; a thing
that serves to enlarge their Power, and increase their Interests and Wealth.

It would be almost infinite, to repeat the extravagant Honors and Opinions
which the Fathers and other Ecclesiastical Writers ascribe unto, and aver
concerning Dead Men. Chrysostom. Hom. 70.
They call the Bodies of Saints, Defenses and Fortifications of Cities: they
pretend, that these Carcasses defeat not only visible Enemies, but invisible
Fiends, and Ambuscades of the Devil. The Martyrs are styled Guardians of
Cities, Lieutenants of Places; Captains and Champions, by whom they were
protected; and Preventers of all Mischiefs from the Devil. In particular, James
Bishop of Nisibis was, by Order of Constantine, buried within the Walls of the
City; that he might be a Bulwark and Defender thereto. An Historian of those
good Times, inveighing against the Emperor Leo Isaurus, for demolishing of
Images, calls them, Turres atque munitiones religiosi cultus.

The Deifying and Invocating of Saints, prevailed in the Christian World
shortly after the Death of Julian the Apostate: and the Grounds of it were the
invented Stories, and (Reports of) Wonders showed upon those, who with Devotion
approached the Shrines of Martyrs, and prayed there to their Memories or
Sepulchers. And it is observable, that at first these Devotions were directed to
God; and these Places were chose, only to excite Devotion by the Memory of
those Sufferers for Christ's sake: but the Priests reduced that, to their own
Use and Interest; and prevailed by their Craft and Power, that the Saints
should be prayed to as Patrons and Mediators; just in the same manner, as the
worshipping of Demons was introduced by Pretenses of Miracles, of Signs and
Wonders, which the Priests were always as ready to invent, as others to follow.
But those evil Spirits insinuated themselves too into their own Statues and
Images, Eusebius. Praep. Evang. c. 3.
and assisted the impious Devotion that they saw Mankind misled into; even that
of Deifying the Dead, by erecting Statues to them, on a Pretense of Oracles,
and miraculous Cures of Diseases. Bale scrip. illust. Brit. c. 11.


One of our own Historians tells us, that about the Year 712, one Egwin of
Worcester published in Writing, Revelations and Visions that he had seen;
whereby he was injoined, that in his Diocese the Image of the Blessed Virgin
should be worshipped by the People. This was ratified by Pope Constantine, who
caused Brithwald the Archbishop to call a Council of the Clergy at London, to
commend this Image Worship to the People.

In the second Council of Nice there was an excellent Cause found for
worshipping of Images; a Tale of a certain Priest or Monk. This Monk used to
worship an Image of the Virgin Mary with Christ in her Arms: the Monk had been
long tempted by the Devil to Fornication; at last the ingenious Devil, under an
Oath of Secresy, told the Monk plainly, that he would never leave wearying him
with lustful Desires, till he forsook worshipping of that Image. The Monk,
notwithstanding his Oath of Secresy, revealed this to an Abbot called Theodore:
who first acquitted the Monk of his breach of Oath; and then added, that he had
better frequent bawdy Houses, than forbear worshipping such an Image: a Ghostly
Advice, that was not (perhaps) unacceptable to the Monk.

Thus was Religion corrupted, almost from the beginning, by Priestcraft; and
it is managed to this Day, in the Romish Church, by the same Arts and Methods:
even a Pretense to such a Divine and Insallible Power, as can give Sanctity and
Virtue to Stocks and Stones, by the Priestly Consecration; and may raise up
Altars to a piece of Bread, transubstantiated into a God by their Diviner
Power, so that they may pronounce of it, This is your Savior that redeemed you
from Damnation. I think it is not reasonable to believe, that the common People
should fancy of themselves, that one of their Fellow Creatures could make a
God: and the Baker that baked the Bread would hardly of himself have imagined,
that a piece of it should be his Savior. No, these and all other the most
idolatrous and fantastic Religions and Devotions were (first) taught, and
(afterward) enjoined by Priests.

When Hezekiah died, Manasses built Altars for Baal, and worshipped all the
Host of Heaven: when Josiah destroyed all those High Places, 2 Kings 23.5.
he (cautiously and prudently) put down there the Attendance of the Idolatrous
Priests. But the Jews were a long time after charged with the Idolatrous
Worship of High Places, and to be Priests of Trees and Proseucha's, which were
sacred Groves; and the Interpreters of Moses's Laws: They are the Words of
Juvenal, Nil praeter Nubes and coeli Numen adorant: and again, Interpres legum
Solymarum, magna sacerdos Arboris, ac summi sida internuntia coeli; Satyr. 6.
And in his third Satyr he complains, that the sacred Groves, where Numa used
with the Goddess Egeria, were let to the Jews for Proseucha's: and Philo
Judaeus, in his Embassy to the Emperor Caius, thanks him for allowing the Jews
their Proseucha's, where they assembled on their Sabbaths. The Synagogues were
within the Cities, and these Proseucha's without; it was in some such Place,
that Lydia met St. Paul. Acts 16.13, 14.
Solomon made such High Places, or Proseucha's, for Ashtoreth the Abomination
(or Idol) of the Zidonians, 1 Kings 11.5, 7.
Chemosh of Moab, Molech of the Ammonites: and when Josiah destroyed these, as
the only way to suppress the False Worship, 2 Kings 23.5.
he put down the Idolatrous Priests. Such a Place as a Proseucha, (which was a
separate Place for Devotion) where the Images of their Gods were, Virgil
describes; and makes the unhappy Priam choose it, as a most proper Place to die
in; when he saw his Kingdom sinking (under Flames) to ruin: he was taught by
his Priests to die in that Place, which they had made sacred; and among those
Images, which they had made Gods. Not unlike to which, is the Devotion or Fancy
that the Priests of Rome have put into Men's Heads, to die in the Habit of a
Priest or Monk, when they are to be executed: as if their very Habit carried
with it some Divine Assistance; accordingly I remember, that the Brother of the
Portugal Ambassador, who was beheaded on Tower Hill, died in the Habit of a
Monk.

It always appeared to be the Craft of Priests, to multiply Gods and Places of
Devotion, that their Numbers might not only be excusable, but necessary also,
to attend such various Worships and Opinions: at Jezebel's Table did eat 450 of
Baal's Priests, 1 Kings 18.19.
and 400 of the Prophets of the Groves; a goodly Company of Chaplains for one
Princess. From the Asiaticks and Egyptians to the Greeks, and from these latter
to the Romans, descended many Names of Gods: Homer mingles them in all Humane
Concerns, and makes them of Parties: and Virgil continuing the same Method, in
the Seventh Book of his Eneids, makes Juno stirring up the Aid of Hell against
the Trojans. Nor did the Partiality and Passions they were made subject to,
hinder the Veneration of them: nor yet their being represented as subject to
Lust, Revenge and Mischief, lessen their Veneration as Gods; though guilty of
those very Crimes which the Priests owned they would punish in Men. But the
credulous Minds of submitting Men received easily the Impressions, that those
sought to make upon 'em, whose only Design and End was, to bring things as near
as could be, to their own Interests, Inclinations and Fancies: and who
therefore taught, that the Management of Affairs belonging to the other World,
very much resembled the Ways and Methods of this. What is yet more gross, the
Egyptians were instructed to honor with Devotion, the most contemptible
things, for some Profit that was received by them, or to appease them from
doing Mischief: Quis nescit, Volusi Bythinice, qualia demens Aegyptus portenta
colat? -- Crocodilon adorat. Illa pavet saturam Serpentibus Ibim: Effigies
sacri nitet aurea Cercopitheci, dimidio Magicae resonant ubi Memnone chordae,
atque vetus Thebe centum jacet obruta portis. Illic caerule^^, hic piscem
fluminis, illic oppida tota canem venerantur. -- Porrum ac caepe nefas violare,
aut frangere morsu: O sanctas Gentes, quibus haec nascuntur in hortis Numina!
Juv. Sat. 15.
the Latin Poet describes their Wild Devotions, in adoring Crocodiles,
Serpents, Golden Monkies, Fishes, Dogs, and even Onions and Leeks; whereupon he
deservedly exclaims, O holy Nations! who have Gods growing in their Gardens.
All these Follies were of the same Prescription, and from the same Causes and
Authors: the Priests always watching the ready Inclination of the People, to
believe something that came easily to their Imaginations; and what else they
were most apt to be persuaded to, they presently enlarged their Devotions, and
thereby their own Interests and Dominion.

It may now be proper to show the several Distinctions of Gods and Divine
Powers, and the Uses of them: whereby it will further appear, how the
Priestcraft contrived Notions and Opinions, to engage People to submit
implicitly to their Directions; and finding them most apt to believe such
things, and in such Ways and Methods, as had some resemblance to this World,
they set forth the Enjoyments and Punishments of the other World, sutably to
their Apprehensions and Affections in this: through all Ages, the same sort of
Priestcraft has continued, and descends even to ours; as I doubt not but will
evidently appear by the following Descriptions and Comparisons. The first Thing
to be considered is, the Distinctions they made of Divine Powers; and the
several Uses of them, which they framed suitable to the common Method of
Affairs, here in this World; where all Suits and Applications that are made to
Kings and Princes, are done by great Men and Patrons, or Friends, as Mediators
between the inferior sort of Men, and those superior Powers. After this Model
they composed their Method of Devotion, under the Names of Heroes, and
(sometimes) of Demons; which (I say) is still continued, or however imitated in
the Church of Rome, under the Names of Saints and Angels.

Demons in the Theology of the Gentiles, were reckoned of, as an inferior sort
of Divine Powers: the Antiquity of this is derived as far as Zoroaster; and
'twas held, Plut. de Defect. Orac.
that these were constituted between the superior Gods and Men, to mediate,
and to reconcile them; the Superior Celestial Gods, being supposed so august
and pure, as not to be profaned or approached with the immediate Care of
earthly things; therefore these more inferior Divine Powers were to be engaged
between the superior Gods and Men. Plato says, Plat. Symp
Demons were Messengers and Reporters between Gods and Men; and again, from Men
to Gods; of Prayers and Devotions from Men, and the Return of Rewards from the
Gods: Neque enim pro Majestate Deorum Coelestium fuerit, ista curare. De Daem.
socr.
And Apuleius delivers the same Doctrine, giving the Reason of it, that it was
not agreeable to the Majesty of the Celestial Gods, to take such Cares upon
themselves.

There were too a sort of Demons, that were only Deified Men; as I have
observed before from Bochartus: this was as early as Noah. To which I may now
add, that Baal, or Bell, was the first King of Babel; but after his Death
deified and reputed a God; whence came the Names of Baalims or Lords, all one
with Demons: and their Rites, which were Cuttings and Lancings, 1 Kings 18.28.
(which were Funeral Rites) were used in their Ceremonies and Devotions. Hesiod
says, that when the happy Men of the first Golden Age departed from this Life,
Jupiter promoted them to be Demons, that is, Patrons of Mortal Men: but Plato
would have all those that died valiantly in the Field, to be declared Demons;
and that the Oracles should be consulted, Plato de Rep.
how they should be buried and honored: he would have their Sepulchers also to
be worshipped as the Sepulchers of Demons; and that all who excelled in Virtue
should be so treated. This Method too the Romish Priests have continued; but
keep the Power of the Oracle in themselves, namely to pronounce what Honors
shall be done to departed Saints: the Opinion and Doctrine of Plato for
deifying Men that died valiantly in the Field, was very exactly followed in the
deif^ing the Duke of Beufort, who was killed in the Fight against the Turks at
Candy; there was no other Cause to make him a Saint, or one of Plato's Demons,
but for Plato's Reason, Dying bravely in the Field. Praep. Evang.
Even Eusebius mentions it with a seeming Approbation, that it was the harmless
Practice of Christians to honor the Memory of Martyrs, by assembling at their
Sepulchers; to show, says he, to the Gentiles that we also honor Men that
have excelled in Virtue. Hermes Trismegistus says, that Esculaptus, Osyris, and
his Grandfather Hermes, were worshipped for Demons in his time; the Egyptians
generally worshipped them, and called them Sancta Animalia: but diverse Learned
Men are of Opinion, that the Egyptian Serapis, whose Idol had a Bushel on his
Head, was Joseph; in remembrance of the Preservation of Egypt by him, when he
first laid up, and afterward distributed the Corn of the seven abounding Years.

Cicero gives an exact Description of the Demons and Heroes; Divos and eos qui
coelestes semper habiti, and illos quos in coelum merita vocaverint.
or such as were always Gods, and such as their Merits had made so. Est and
superius aliud augustiusque Daemonum genus; qui semper a corporis compedibus
and nexibus liberi, certis potestatibus curentur. Ex hac sublimiori Daemonum
copia, autumat Plato, singulis hominibus in vita agenda Testes and Custodes
singulos dari. Plut. de Difect. Orac.
Plutarch tells us, that besides Men deified, there was another sort of Demons
who never were in Earthly Bodies; a Diviner sort never subject to the
Confinement of Bodies: and these sublimer Demons were the chief Guardians of
Men and their Actions; these differr'd in Degree from Heroes. This is continued
among the Romanists, in their Saints and Angels: and this Notion of worshipping
Angels gave perhaps occasion to that Advice by St. Paul, Let no Man beguile you
through Humility, and a Worshipping of Angels, Col. 2.18. Gregory of Tours, who
wrote long since, treating of the Miracles of the Martyrs, frames many fabulous
Stories to advance Saint-worship: and there is another Author equally fit to be
credited, Simeon Metaphrastes, who makes St. Katherine at her Martyrdom, pray
to God to grant those their Requests, that through her called upon his holy
Name: but in a higher Strain he makes St. Margaret pray, that whosoever should
for the Lord's sake worship the Tabernacle of her Body, or should build an
Oratory to her, and there offer spiritual Oblations and Prayers, and shall ask
Salvation and Mercy through her, that the Lord would grant them plenty of all
good things. Agreeably to all this, Theophanes greatly complains of it, that
the Emperor Leo Isaurus erred (says he) not only in opposing the Adoration of
Images, but the Intercession also of the Mother of God, and of all the Saints:
and the Historians of that Kidney, no less blame the Emperor Constantinus
Copronymus for the same irreverent Error; for he punished those that made
Prayers to the Mother of God and the holy Saints, through whom all Help is
conveyed to us: and in the 2 d Council of Nice, the Council of Constantinople
was condemned for being against Saint and Image Worship; which was then
established, and for which the Bishops of Rome had appeared with great Zeal.

I cannot here properly omit an Observation, that the Invocation of Saints and
Image Worship were brought in by the increase of Priests in Monkery. For about
the Year of our Lord 370, the Invocation of Saints began to be publicly
introduced into Churches; at the very same time when by Basil, Gregory Nyssen,
and Nazianzen, the Practice and Profession of Monastical Life were brought (out
of Egypt and Syria) into Greece. When the Empress Theodora designed to restore
Image Worship, she acquainted those in Authority with her Design, and then sent
for the chiefest of the Monks, and proposed to them the restoring the Worship
of Images: She found them very ready for the purpose; and thereupon called a
Synod, where the Idolatry was again erected, 120 Years after it had been
suppressed by Leo Isaurus.

Having touched upon the Craft of Priests, to frame the Worship and Scheme of
Religion suitable to what the People in some measure knew and understood in
things of this World; we must also take notice, that they contrived the Joys
and Punishments of the other so as should be most agreeable to their Fancies
and Apprehensions about what they saw here. And as they found their Craft
successful, in making some Powers their Mediators in the Court of Heaven, as
was usual in Courts below; and made also Deities of such Persons, whose Courage
or Virtue deserved well here, or of the Public: so also they framed the manner
of Sacrificing and Sacrifices, as such a Description of the other World, as was
most easy to Fancy and Imagination. In their Sacrifices they taught such and
such Offerings were to be made, as somewhat resembled the Powers they
sacrificed to: and had not this been an Invention, very probable and likely, to
entice and lead Men, especially the Vulgar, they would never have thought of
such Methods and Distinctions. Cic. de Not. Deor.
Tempest was consecrated for a God among the Romans; and as Storms and foul
Weather was dark and dull, so the gentle Gales of Zephyrus made the Weather
bright and cheerful: Nigram hiemi pecudem, Zephyris foelicibus Albam. Virgil.
l. 3.
therefore they taught, that black Cattle were to be sacrificed to the former,
and white to the other; as resembling their dark and bright Natures. When Dido
implored Juno, Ipsa tenens dextra pateram pulcherrima Dido, candentis vaccae
media inter cornua fundit. l. 4.
in the Concerns of her Love and Passion, she poured Wine between the Horns of
a snowy Heifer; representing by the Whiteness of her Sacrifice, that she
implored a gentle Compassion. A Bull was sacrificed to Neptune, because his
Noise and Violence seemed to represent a troubled Ocean. And when Aeneas
desired the Assistance of the Sybil, to descend to the dark Infernal World, she
proposes in the first place a proper Sacrifice of black Cattle to be offered;
Duc nigras pecudes, ea prima piacula sunto. Idem, l. 6.
representing to the Mind thereby an Image of those black Mansions.

Nor did they only fashion these Matters, so as that they might be easy to the
Minds and Fancies of Men; but they modeled also the other World, sutably to
such a taking and prevailing Method: they made the Enjoyments of their Elysium,
or Paradise, suitable to what they most affected in this World; whatever
inclined their Affections here, Eadem sequitur Tellure repostos. Virgil. l. 6.
their Enjoyments there were to be of that nature, and to be made perfect by
being made subject to no Disturbance or Alteration. For Infants that were not
arrived to Choice or Inclination, Vagitus and ingens, infatiumque animae
flentes in limine primo. l. 6.
there was a separate Place, filled with their innocent Mournings; an Opinion
that has also prevailed with some Christians: the warlike Heroes exercised
there Eternal Musters, driving their Chariots in large Plains; and others in
such Exercises and Divertisements, as they were inclined to in their Life;
Lovers in separated Groves, and the Poets in such Fields as had been the
Subjects of their Songs. On the other side, the Punishments there were made
suitable to the Crimes committed here: the wickedly Ambitious were thrown into
the lower part of Hell; the Luxurious punished with tempting Feasts, withheld
from them by watching Furies: restless and unquiet Minds that denied Peace to
others, were chastified with perpetual Rolling of Stones, which pressed to
return with their Weight upon them. The Doctrine about these Matters in
general, was, that the Punishments and Torments were suitable to the Offenses
committed here: Ergo exercentur poenis, veterumque malorum supplicia expectant.
Aliae panduntur inanes, suspensae ad ventos: aliis sub gurgite vasto infectum
^luitur scelus, aut exuritur igne. Quique suos patimur manes, exinde per amplum
mittimur Elysium, and pauci laeta arva tenemus. Virg. l. 6.
and direct Purgatory was described; where some were purged or cleansed, by
hanging in the Air exposed to the Winds; some were washed in vast Whirlpools,
some refined by Fire; and after the proper time of Purgation, all were
released, and sent to the happy Fields of Elysium, their Heaven.

Nothing can be more plain, than that the Priestcraft has continued such a
Purgatory to this Day. Mahomet's Paradise was framed after this manner; the
greatest and wickedest Sinners are to pass over a Bridge with heavy Sacks, and
by their Weight to be thrown off and pressed into Hell; the lesser fall only
into a Purgatory, from whence they are to be released, and finally received
into Paradise: but those that merited a happy Place, shall be blessed with the
Company of fair Virgins; who have large Eyes, and perpetually flourish in a
Bloom of Youth and Beauty; while Boys of Divine Figures, like so many Ganymeds,
shall attend with always renewing Feasts. The Purgatory of the Romanists, is
distinguished into diverse Apartments; there is a Place for Children, another
for the Holy Fathers that died before the Ascension of our Blessed Savior:
there are Lakes of Fire for such as have been long, or prosligatly wicked; and
Flowery Fields and Shining Garments for such as have indeed been good, but
wanted some degree of the due and required Perfection: thus is Purgatory
described by Cardinal Bellarmine, de Purgat. l. 2. cap. 6. and cap. 14.

Thus has the Craft of those that taught Religion, drawn the easy Minds of Men
to believe in such things as had a Resemblance to things of this World: and
having by these Ways involved Men in Submission to what they taught, they then
enlarged into Opinions and Doctrines more difficult, nay absurd and impossible.
Though the World from the beginning very readily, and with the greatest Reason,
consented to such a thing as Religion; yet there could not be on the one hand,
such an Artificial Scheme of some parts of it, and on the other such various
and strange Opinions about what Gods we must believe in, or in the Exercise of
our Devotion to those Higher Powers, but by the Contrivance of the Priests.
'Twas impossible that the People (or as we are now called, the Laity) should
busy themselves about, or should be capable to invent such Names of Gods; such
particular Applications of their Powers; such Methods and Ways of Devotion;
such Distinction of Sacrifices: and least of all is it probable, that they
should be the Inventors of sacrificing themselves; that is, of sacrificing
their own Persons, or the Persons of their Children. Agamemnon, to change the
contrary Wind, vowed to Diana, the fairest; which fell out to be his own
Daughter Iphigenia: I suppose he did not design the Cruelty upon his own
Daughter; but Chalcas the Priest, first suggested the Making, and then the
Performance of his Vow. In the War of Thebes, Maenaecias the Son of Creon vowed
himself to Mars; the Decii devoted themselves to the Infernal Gods; Marius, in
the Cimbrian War, sacrificed his Daughter Calphurnia; Curtius shot himself into
a Gulf, being first made ready by the Priests, and girt Cinctu Gabino: the
Saxons were so persuaded by their Priests, that many of them were even
ambitious of being sacrificed. Who doubts, that all these Deaths (or Murders)
are solely owing to the Doctrine and Institution of Priests?

The Proness of Mankind to believe, by degrees gave Encouragement and
Opportunity to those that pretended to separate themselves wholly to the
Service of the Gods; and by that Show of a nearer Attendance and Understanding
of them, they intit'led themselves to teach and to prescribe such Rules and
Ways of Religion toward the heavenly Powers, as they found might be useful to
enlarge their own Power and Interest. And the more various and intricate they
contrived the Methods and Rules of Devotion and Worship, so much the more there
would be need of their Interpretations and Directions, and also of their
Numbers. Things most ridiculous and improbable, nay impossible, were sometimes
most proper for them to pronounce and teach: for what is rational carries its
own Weight; and they could derive no Authority to themselves by such a Method
of Religion. But things that are sublime, above the reach of servile Reason,
things that Reason cannot understand or justify, if believed, must be an entire
Submission to the sacred Authority of these Divinely inspired Persons, that are
the Teachers of others: to this purpose they ever taught, that no Belief can or
ought to be hard to an Active Faith; the Difficulty not being in the things we
are taught to believe, but in the Perverseness or Imbecility of the Persons
who want Faith to believe. I wish, that among the most Reformed Christians
these Methods of Priestcraft were not so much, and violently pursued; the
Impositions to believe and profess unnecessary, and even extravagant things,
where neither Reason will justify it, nor does Religion require it.

Having thus laid open, how Religion was from the beginning managed by
Priestcraft, and always framed and modelled to support their Interests and
Power, prevailing by degrees on the Minds of Men; it will be proper to examine
in due place, whether it is probable that the Priests themselves believed what
they taught: but first I will (briefly) show, how the same Priestcraft
continues apparently in the Romish Church to this day.

The Pagan Doctrines of Demons and Heroes, are revived in that of Angels and
Saints; Saints are Canonized (or, as their Writers speak, Beatified) as
formerly the Heroes were Deified: and as I instanced before, the Duke de
Beufort dying valiantly in the Field, became one of Plato's Heroes, and one of
the Church's Saints. And as the Heroes and Demons were made Mediators with the
superior Gods, so it continues still, the Names of Heroes and Demons being only
changed into Saints and Angels: every private Christian is directed to choose
him a particular Patron in Heaven, that may intercede for him with God. Their
very Sepulchers are as much reverenced as formerly; their Relics are kept with
a sacred Veneration: and Prayers are made to them as Mediators, notwithstanding
St. Paul's Declaration before cited, 1 Timothy 2.5.
There is but one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, even the Man Jesus
Christ. The Reverence and Adoration paid to Images, is by some endeavored to
be extenuated; by pretending, that Images are only used as venerable Memorials,
to excite others to the Imitation of the Holiness of the Saints, represented by
those Images: this Pretense was also formerly used, in that Particular; and
also for the Ceremonies used at Sepulchers, which I mentioned before; because
the Priests perceived, that it looked too gross to pay Devotion to senseless
things. But when they had obtained the Power of an Implicit Obedience to their
Directions, they failed not to injoin the Veneration of the Images themselves.
Whoever has been in the Countries under the Dominion of the Church of Rome, has
seen this: I believe no such Person will deny the Adoration paid by the
Romanists, to the Image of the Virgin Mary. I knew a Person of Quality that was
at Bruxels, when the Image of the Virgin Mary was carried a little way out of
Town; the Priests attending it, and the People paying Adoration to it: and when
it came to the Place where it was to be fixed, the Priests had contrived a
Device to make the Image bow to the People; so that one of the Company was
overjoyed to see how gracious the Blessed Virgin in her Image had been to
them. In Padua, where the Body of St. Anthony lies, the People crowd to kiss
the Stones, and rub their Beads against them: The now Bishop of Sarum says, in
the Account he gives of that Place, that in the little Chapel of St. Anthony
these Words are written, Exaudit quos non audit and ipse Deus; they have reason
to rub Beads, and pay an extraordinary Devotion, to a Saint more ready to hear
than God himself is. A Person of Quality that gives an Account of his Travels
through France and Italy, was present when they took down the Jaw Bone of St.
Anthony and his Tongue in a Christaline-Glass; which being set awhile on the
Altar, first the Priests and all the Assistants paid their Devotions to it,
then it was carried in Procescession; and after that Ceremony was over, 'twas
full Employment for two Priests of the Cloister, to rub against it the Beads
that were handed to them by the People. In the Lady of Lauretta's Chapel, they
kiss the Walls, lick the Stones, and rub their Beads against them. In the
Church of St. John Lateran is the Scala Sancta, or the Stairs on which our
Savior went up to the Judgment-Hall; they are of white Marble: on one of them
it is believed some of our Savior's Blood dropped, after his Scourging. But the
Person of Quality that writes his (Ingenious and Candid) Remarks, says, He
could perceive no such Stains, though the Roman Catholics pretended that they
saw 'em very plainly. He discoursed with Cardinal Howard, how these Stairs were
preserved, and brought thither? The Cardinal freely confessed, they were not
the true Stairs on which our Savior went up to the Judgment-Hall; and that the
Error was not discovered, till some time after they were sixed there: but the
People being settled in an Opinion, that these were the true Stairs; it was
not, he said, thought advisable to undeceive them, their Devotion being however
very commendable.

The same Divine Infusion that Pagan Priests pretended to bring into Pillars
and Columns, the Roman Priests now imitate in Crosses, set up not only in
Places of Devotion, but (as the Heathen Pillars were) in common Highways: but
the Roman Priests have enlarged the Priestcraft of pretending to a Power of
Consecration, or a Divine Infusion, by their Consecrating such an innumerable
Multitude of Puppets, Agnus Dei's, and such like Trifles. And the Idolatry of
Bread-worship is much more impudent, than any of the Gentile Idolatries: the
Gentile Priests pretended indeed, that they brought the Demons into Images and
Columns; but they never had the gross Confidence, to own that they could
Transubstantiate their Images into Demons: but it seems, Priestcraft was not
yet enough refined; therefore not satisfied with the Power of such a
Consecration as might infuse some Influence into a Piece of Bread, they brought
the People to believe they could make the Bread to be God. As formerly it was
their Endeavor, by pretended Miracles, to enlarge the Opinion of their Divine
Power; so in these latter Days they have exceeded in such Devices. I need not
trouble the Reader or my self, with raking into their Kennels of Legends, and
other Fabulous Histories; but I cannot omit their strange and wild Endeavors
to prove, how certainly they can make a God of a Wafer or other little Piece of
Bread, not by the Authority or Testimony of Men, but of Beasts. There is a
Book, whose Title sets forth this incomparable Impudence; it is called, The
School of the Eucharist, established by the Miraculous Adoration paid to it by
Beasts, Birds, and Insects. I need not repeat many of the Particulars, of the
Impossible Follies there related; but I cannot omit one very remarkable Tale in
that famous Book, among many others almost as ridiculous. The Tale is of one
St. Malo, who being upon the Sea on Easter Day, prayed God to afford him the
Means to celebrate the Mass, and to those that accompanied him to hear it;
these are his Words: And one would wonder what kind of Vessel they were in,
that did not afford them room for that, as well as contain them. But in this
Distress, the Book says, a little Island appeared in the midst of the Sea; and
they went down into it (it should seem the Island was lower than the Vessel
they were in) to the number of 180 Persons: they set up an Altar, St. Malo said
Mass, and gave the Communion to a great number; after which retiring to their
Ship (now it is confessed 'twas a Ship, and yet not big enough to say Mass in
it) they perceived this Island, or rather the Fish, sunk to the bottom: 'twas
strange they should be upon the Back of a Whale so long, and yet not find the
Difference between a Fish and an Island. Many of these Impudences are published
in that Book, by Allowance: but if we must believe, that the Priest can make a
God, nothing that follows after that, or is told with it, can seem to be a
Wonder.

Another Part of modern Priestcraft is Purgatory, an Imitation directly drawn
from the Hades and Elysium of the Gentiles; but now improved into Gain, by
persuading People, that their Friends and Relations could be sooner or later
prayed out of Purgatory, as the Price they gave for such Prayers was more or
less: I have known this to be true, in a particular Accident; and Money hastened
that Prayers might begin, and no time be lost to free the Person from Pain.

I have endeavored to show, in several Particulars or Instances, that the
Priestcraft has continued to be the same: but there are two very important
Examples of it, that yet remain to be treated of, Mystery and Persecution; two
very necessary Points to preserve an implicit and entire Submission to Priests,
and to their Opinions. By Mystery, they keep Men from using their
Understandings; and by Persecution, force the Rebellious, Conceited, and
Over-weaning to believe, or however profess as the Priest teaches.

The word Mystery partly declares its own Nature, it (ordinarily) imports a
Divine Secret; and was always used to keep the Vulgar and Profane, so called,
from the Knowledge of, and from examining and inquiring into Religion. This was
the Use of Mystery, in the Theology of the Gentiles; Mystery was the secret and
extravagant Worship of the False Gods: for nothing was to be revealed, but to
those that were initiated into their Worship and Ceremonies, but to be kept
secret from the Vulgar, commonly called the Profane; without which Distinction,
or Nick-naming, it would have seemed unreasonable to keep them from
participating the Religious Mysteries; but the Profane were not permitted so
much as to ask a Question about those Matters. To this purpose, in Egypt, in
the Temple of Isis, was placed Harpocrates the God of Silence, with his Finger
on his Lips; as it were to teach, that the Mysteries and Secrets of Religion
are not to be divulged. In very deed, the Heathens sheltered all Abuses imposed
on the Credulity of the People, and all the Passions and Enormities of their
Gods, under the Vail of Mystery: and this was thought so necessary, that there
were Rewards and Punishments appointed, to keep the Priests themselves in a
strict Observance of Religious Secresy. Hinc matter cultrix Cybele,
Coribanti^que era, Idaeumque Nemus, hinc Fida Silentia sacris. Virg. l. 3.
In Crete the Mysteries of Cybele Mother of the Gods, Ex Creta ille mos in
Phrygiam pervenit, ut summo Silentio celebrarentur magnae Matris Mysteria: quae
his sacris Initiatis tam fideliter reguntur, ut nefas putent ea Profanis
violare.
were preserved in a most sacred Silence; and from thence this Silence was
brought into Phrygia: the Mysteries of the Great Mother, when celebrated by the
Initiated, were to be concealed so faithfully, that it was reckoned to be
downright Wickedness to discover them to the Profane. Horace, who had
other-ways so much Wit and Learning, Est and Fideli tut^ Silentio merces;
vitabo, qui Cereris sacrum vulgarit arcanae, sub iisdem sit Trabibus,
fragilemque mecum solvat Phaselum.
was yet so overcome by this Trick of Priestcraft, that he seems fully
satisfied a faithful Silence should be rewarded: and he declares, that though
he was in the same House and Ship, he would avoid the Man that had revealed the
Mysteries of Ceres. He was persuaded the House would fall upon his Head, and
the Vessel sink with him, o're-loaded with the Weight of the Profane. Some of
the Philosophers have themselves been guilty of affecting Mysteries; thus
Pythagoras charged his Disciples to keep their Thoughts dark and unexplained,
lest they should be understood by the People. And when we first find Philosophy
taught by Plato and Aristotle; for before we have but dark Accounts of it; we
find, especially in Plato, and sometimes in Aristotle, very Mysterious Notions:
which afterward gained the Character and Esteem of Learned and Divine Dogmes;
though indeed they were only hard Words, to puzzle Reason and Good-sense. But
the Priests, both Heathen and Christian, having been instructed by the
Experience of all Ages, that Mysterious and Unintelligible Things made great
Impressions on the Minds of Men; they have not failed to keep up the Method, of
making (as Grotius speaks) an Art of Religion.

Cato, that had not the Assistance of the Gospel, yet judged right of these
Mysteries, practiced by Priests to support and enlarge their Power and
Interest; for when Labienus pressed him to consult the Priests of the Oracle of
Jupiter-Ammon, in the Desert of Africa, to be by them instructed what to do;
Cato despised such an Inquiry: As if, says he, I were still to learn, An
noceat vis ulla Bono; -- Laudandaque velle, sit satis, and nunquam successu
crescat honestum? scimus, and hoc nobis non altius in^^ret Ammom. -- Nil
facimus non sponte Dei, nec vocibus ullis Numen eget; Dixitque semel
Nascentibus Author, quicquid scire licet; steriles nee legit arenas, ut caneret
Paucis, mersitque hoc pulvere Verum. Lucan. l. 8.
that Virtue is not to be depressed by any Force, nor enlarged by any Success;
this I know, and Ammon cannot more persuade me of it. Every Man's Soul
possesses enough of Divine Infusion, and without the Help of Oracles, may know
that all things are governed by a Providence of God: we need not be told by
Oracles, what from our Birth is known by all. Has God, think you, chose a
barren Part of the World, where his Divine Will shall be taught by a few; and
is Truth concealed in these Heaps of Sand? A Commentator on these Words, cites
Cicero very properly, who says, that an Oracle is the Divine Will declared in
the Mouth of Man: And what Priest can pretend to find more Divinity in himself
than Cato; who not only knew all that could be told him of the Difference
between Good and Evil, Virtue and Vice, but in all Conditions was an unshaken
Observer of all that which he knew must be pleasing to God?

It is Matter of Astonishment, that the Humor and Affectation of Mystery
should continue, when Religion and Faith were so wholly altered by the coming
of our Savior; who came with Design to redeem us from the Darkness of that
Condition we were in by the strange and puzling Methods of Religious Ceremonies
and Mysteries, and of various Rites of Sacrificing, good for nothing but to
confound and distract the Minds of Men. For there was almost nothing proposed
to be believed or done, that was plain to be understood; but all was to be
believed by a Faith in others: many Gods or Objects of Worship, various Ways of
Worship, extended even to an infinite Number of confused Particulars; and all
without any plain or direct Precepts of Virtue, or Moral Duties to be performed
toward one another. Through such Darkness the Light of our Savior broke; sent
by God to dispel the deplorable Night, in which the World was involved: and yet
they would continue Mankind in Darkness, though they profess to be his Priests
that brought the Light; not being able to part with that Mysterious Obscurity,
which so long preserved the Priestly Interest and Power, no not for the
Clearness and sincere Plainness of him whose Followers they ought to be.

Such as are Asserters of Mystery, choose rather to search into some dark
Places of St. John's Gospel or St. Paul's Epistles, 2 Pet. 3.16.
to fetch out from thence a Wonderful Divinity, than to attend to the general,
the plain, and easily intelligible Current of the Gospels and Epistles. But
when St. Paul says, Let a Man so account of us, 1 Cor. 4.1.
as Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God: by this proper
Appellation or Title, he plainly expresses the Dispensation of a Mystery now
revealed, though formerly kept secret; which Mystery (all confess) was the
Salvation of Mankind, or of all Nations, not of the Jews only. Now if the
Mystery continue, how could the Apostles be Stewards in Dispensing a Revealed
Treasure? it were strange to call a Man a Dispensing Steward, who had received
nothing to lay out. When the Scripture teaches Mystery, it is not to continue
Darkness and Difficulty; but to clear it. When St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 15.51.
I will show you a Mystery; which was, that at the Resurrection we shall all be
changed; which before was certainly a Mystery, but being declared, became (not
a Mystery, but) a Revelation: Here certainly he calls the Gospel the Revelation
of a Mystery; and so too, in these Words at Romans 16.26. The Revelation of a
Mystery, which was kept secret since the World began: the Words are expressly
(and confessedly) spoken of the Gospel and Preaching of Jesus Christ. Like to
which is also the Declaration of the same Apostle, Ephesians. 1.9. Having made
known to us the Mystery of his Will, according to his good Pleasure, which he
has purposed in himself. -- And now ye know, 2 Thessalonians. 2.6.
what withholds, that he might be revealed in his time; for the Mystery of
Iniquity does already work. If any one ask, whether a Mystery be not Mystery
while it is so called? he may receive a very familiar Answer; that a Secret told
to a Friend, is called a Secret, though when it is told it continues no longer
to be a Secret: as it is said in Scripture the Blind see; Mat. 11.5.
they are called Blind after they have received their Sight: and when our
Savior had healed some Lepers, yet they are called Lepers though freed from
their Leprosy.

It Is most clear, that Mystery and dark Notions vented in hard Words, are not
studied or maintained for the sake of Religion; but for the Priests particular
Interest and Power: and Dr. Sherlock says well, that nothing can be a greater
Injury to the Christian Religion it self, than to render it obscure and
difficult. The Mystery-mongers must be very imposing, to seek to make the very
modestest Man mistrust his Sufficiency to inquire into Religious Truth: if that
were so, it could not be justly required of any but the Learned and Wise, to be
of any Persuasion about controverted Points; but the Gospel does in no manner
seem to be particularly directed to them; rather on the contrary, Matthew. 11.25.
the Father of Heaven and Earth has hid these things from the Wise and Prudent,
and has revealed them unto Babes. Where is the Scribe, 1 Cor. 1.20
where is the Disputer of this World? The Gospel professes Plainness, and uses
no hard Words; every where directing us to apply our selves to search and
examine: which thing, if it were too hard, or to no purpose, were a
Mock-Invitation and Direction of the sacred Word. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
St. Paul recommends this to the Thessalonians; and gives Preference to the
Jews of Berea as more noble, Acts 17.11
because they searched the Scripture daily, whether the things which he taught
were true. Thus to a Free Inquirer he gives the Character of Noble; which the
Priests will by no means allow; as if the Person himself, whose Salvation
depends upon it, were an unconcerned Party. But without question, every Man is
obliged to work out his own Salvation with Fear and Trembling; and therefore
sincerely to use all possible Means for his best Satisfaction; for at the last
Day, 'twill be no Excuse to be deceived by another: a Man must be his own
Expositor, Minister, Bishop, and Council; for these will not bear his
Punishment, he must bear it himself. Those Powers and Authorities given to
others, was the Cause of making and multiplying Creeds and Rules of Faith;
which ever were modelled according to the present Interests and Animosities of
prevailing Parties: in very deed, Creeds were the spiritual Revenges of
Dissenting Parties upon one another.

It Is observable, that the whole Aim of our Savior in the Gospel, is to use a
Clearness of Direction for Practice. When he speaks in Parables, it is to make
Things familiar to those, whose Apprehensions more readily conceive and retain
what is expressed by Similitudes; because they are acquainted with them in
common Practice: such is the Parable of the Seed, thrown into barren Ground;
the Tares among the Corn, and many others, used in that easy and familiar
Manner to make every thing descend into the meanest Capacity, and be retained
by the shortest Memories. In all his Expressions in that admirable Sermon on
the Mount, there are no hard Words or dark Doctrines; it being his blessed Will
to give Light to all, not to reserve or keep any thing dark or veiled: 'twas
private Design, Interest and Faction, that invented hard Words, puzling
Expressions, or unintelligible Notions and Doctrines; had such a Method been
conducing to Salvation, he that was the Redeemer would not have omitted any
thing necessary to the Redemption.

I design to examine, whether any particular Points controverted in Religion,
if they had never been mentioned or thought of, had been a Prejudice to the
serving of God, and following the full Directions of the Gospel: But first it
may be proper, considering the strange and wild Fancies and Opinious that have
been taught and exercised as Parts of Religion, to examine (as I propounded
sometime before) whether probably the Priests themselves did or could believe
those most ridiculous things, which they themselves taught and imposed? Though
it is no Wonder that the People should be persuaded to believe such Variety of
Extravagancies: for, as I have shown, Men have ever had a Proness rather to
believe than to examine; and all Religions are alike easily taught and nurss'd
up, from Infancy; and every one is equally fierce, for that in which he has
been educated. Hence comes the strange Zeal of the poor Indians, to lay down to
be crushed to Death under the heavy Wheels that carry a Virgin representing
their Goddess Amidio; and of others of them, that stretch out an Arm in
Devotion toward Heaven so long, that they are never able to draw it back; and
thereupon presume that they are sufficiently sanctified. Some Turks have also
been so zealous, that after having seen the Alchoran they have put out their
Eyes; that they might never more see a Profane Sight: while Christians wonder
at these Extravagancies, they perhaps yield to others as much Detestation or
Scorn, for some of their ridiculous and impossible Doctrines, and superstitious
Parts of their Devotion. When the Morocco Ambassador attended King Charles the
Second at Newmarket; the King observing the large Sleeves they wore, asked
Lucas, one of the chief of the Ambassador's Retinue, How they could believe
that the Moon should come into a Sleeve; which they said they wore so large for
that Use? Lucas answered him, with another Question; How Christians could
believe* that our Lady's Chapel at Launretta flew through the Air 200 Miles,
and pitched it self where it now stands? This Lucas had been a great Traveller;
he had been at Lauretta, as well as at Mecha where Mahomet's Sepulcher is: I
believe there are equal Causes for the Miracles at both Places. Thus all
Religions are equally easy to be imbibed from the first Milk; and other-ways,
it were impossible the World should continue in such different, divided, and
absurd Faiths: but we see plainly, that Generations continue in the same
Opinions about Religion, as well as in the same Natural Descents; as if one
were as natural as the other. It Is true, that by the Help and Light of the
Gospel some have broken these Fetters, and stepped into the Freedom of Reason:
but then the Priests always apply themselves, to their last and best Argument,
Persecution; to prevent the Increase of reasonable and honest Men.

The Heathens were more to be excused, who continued in blind Obedience to
their Priests; for they had nothing to guide and direct them, but what their
Priests invented from time to time: but Christians have a Revealing Gospel,
plain and easy enough to direct to the Doctrines, Means and Ways of Salvation,
and to redeem People from dark and blind Obedience; by the clear Discovery,
there made of the Being and Unity of God, and the as clear Precept of Catholic
Love and Charity; thus laying an evident and certain Foundation of Eternal
Happiness, on what is equally rational and intelligible. He that has redeemed
us from Mystery and Sin, has insisted chiefly on the plain and decent Methods
of Justice, performed to one another: and in his Rule of Prayer, he makes the
Forgiveness we implore from God, to depend on a Covenant of doing the same to
others that we desire of him; Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us. In our Savior's Sermon on the Mount, all those
excellent Rules are delivered, after a most explicit and plain Manner: there we
find no Footsteps, nor the least Rise given, for such Mysterious Fancies and
Opinions, as the Priests teach and injoin in the Church of Rome: all such
Doctrines and Impositions arose from nothing but Priestcraft, to support and
to enlarge their Interests and Power. If they practiced only as true Disciples
of Christ, and taught after his plain and blessed Manner and Method; they would
then exercise themselves wholly in a sincere and plain Example of Life, and
make such an Example the Scope and End of their Teaching, and thereby by infuse
the Power of Religion into the Minds and Hearts of Men. But instead of this,
they teach and impose the Power of themselves: and their dark and disputable
Points cannot be necessary, no nor suitable to the Ends of the Gospel; there
being nothing there prescribed to breed Perplexities, or to alter and transfer
its own Rule and Power, to the Interpretations and Power of Men. Mystery
therefore is used only as a Means to this Persuasion, that Power and Knowledge
is in the Priests; and Persecution is the heavy Rod, to awe and terrify Men
from questioning their Doctrine.

But though Education shows us, that Men may be bred up to, and may be taught
all Religions alike; and it may be in part excused by the Ignorance of the
People, occasioned by the Multiplicity o^ Cares and Business: yet there is not
the same Cause or Apology for Priests, to continue in their old Elusions and
Deceits. The People are generally forbid to reason and examine; they must
submit to the Pretense of Divine Authority with an Implicit Obedience; but the
Priests that have any Abilities, and who withal may consider, must know the
Folly and Falsehood of what they teach; they cannot believe things to be true,
which they themselves invent. The Priests of Baal seemed to believe themselves,
when they ventured upon a Trial of Skill with Elijah; calling upon their God
for Assistance, with clamorous Ceremonies and Slashing themselves: but it was a
forced Put upon them; they were obliged to play the Tricks belonging to their
Way of Devotion, and probably they hoped that Elijah could do as little as
they, and so the Difference would be compounded in a Drawn Battle. Nor could
they of Bell more believe what they taught; they could not think, their God
devoured the vast Provisions got ready for him, when they themselves eat it up.
Did the Priests believe the Oracles, which they themselves invented; or that
they could find future Events in the Entrails of Beasts, or by the Flight or
Pecking of Birds, or by a Divination by such a Statue in the Highway, or by
Thunder on the Left Hand, or any such like? Do the Priests of the Church of
Rome believe the Miracles, invented by themselves? do they not know, that the
abused Purchaser has nothing for his Money, when he buys Indulgences; and as
little, when Money is got together with all Expedition (which I have known)
that Prayers may be begun to hasten a Soul out of Purgatory? Are they not aware
that the Virtue pretended to be given, by their Consecration, to an Agnus Dei,
a Cross, an Image, the Clouts of Infants, is nothing but a Pretense? When they
make an indifferent Man a Divine Saint, are they ignorant of the Cheat they put
upon the World?

But from this Digression, let us return to conclude the Point of Mystery; how
useful it has been thought by Priestcraft to enlarge their Interests and
Power: we may see this, in a short Account of Aristotle's Philosophy; which at
first was most fiercely and angrily exploded, but afterward received with
highest Veneration, so soon as ever 'twas perceived to be useful to maintain
Mystery. In the 13 th Age, as the French write, the Works of Aristotle were
brought into France, and for sometime taught in the Universities; but after a
little time, his Writings were publicly burnt, and Excommunication threatened
against any that should teach out of them. His Metaphysics were condemned by
an Assembly of Bishops at Paris; and six Years after the Cardinal of St.
Estienne (sent by Pope Innocent) forbad the Professor of the University of
Paris to read the Physics of that Philosopher: Which afterward also were
condemned by a Bull of Pope Gregory the Ninth. One Simon a Professor, and
Dinart a Master of Arts, were often accused of Heresy, for being Esteemers of
Aristotle's Opinions and Writings. Mezeray says, That in the Year 1209, one
Almeric a Priest, beginning to preach some Novelties, had been forced to
recant; for which he died of Grief. Several, after his Death, followed his
Opinions, and were condemned to be burnt: and he being condemned by the Council
of Paris, his Body was taken up, and his Ashes thrown upon a Dunghill. And
because 'twas believed, that the Books of Aristotle, lately brought from
Constantinople, had filled their Heads with these Heretical Subtilties, the
same Council forbids the Reading or Keeping them under Pain of Excommunication.

But during this Disgrace, there arose in Aristotle's Defense three famous
Divines, to whom St. John Damascen had opened the way, having abridged diverse
of Aristotle's Works; which had assisted him to put in order his great Body of
Divinity, the Four Books of Orthodox Faith: afterward others improved this,
and took as it were a Plan of Divinity from Aristotle's Philosophy.

Now the Tide turned as fast the other way, for in the Year 1366, two
Cardinals, Commissioners from Urban the Fifth, came to establish the Doctrine
of Aristotle in France; where it was ordered, that none should proceed Masters
of Arts that were not examined upon his Logic, Physics, Metaphysics, and
Books of the Soul: it was further injoined to study Aristotle carefully, so to
restore the Reputation of the University.

Pope Nicholas the Fifth, a great Advancer of Learning, commanded a new
Translation of Aristotle into Latin, for the Use of the Divines of the Romish
Church.

Pope John, who Canonized Thomas Aquinas, increased the Reputation of
Aristotle, from whom that great Doctor has drawn his Principles, and the
Grounds of his Arguments; that now Aristotle's Writings became the Fundamental
Laws of Philosophy and the New Divinity.

In the Fourteenth Age grew the hot Contention between the Thomists and
Scotists, or the Disciples of Thomas and Scotus, about subtle Nothings, or (as
Mezeray speaks) brangling Cobweb-controversies; these were pursued with
Passion, according to Interest or Inclination, or by Engagement of Parties: and
Disputes were so multiplied, that a Venetian Writer pretends to reckon up
Twelve thousand Volumes published in that Age about the Philosophy of
Aristotle; whose Reputation now so far increased, and was so established in the
University of Paris, that Ramus (who had found out some Observations to
diminish the Credit of Aristotle) was by the other Professors in that
University condemned in the Year 1543, as rash, ignorant, and impudent, in
daring to write against Aristotle; and an Order was made, that none should
teach any other Philosophy. Such a Religious Veneration was now raised for
Aristotle, though formerly condemned, that Dissenting from him grew to be
Heresy: and in the Massacre at Paris, Ramus was murdered with as much Zeal and
Fury as the Calvinists themselves.

The Credit of Aristotle's Writings, as being fit to support the dark Mysteries
and Opinions of the Church, so much increased, that in the Year 1611, the
Doctors of Paris made a Rule that all Professors should teach the Philosophy of
Aristotle. And in the Year 1624, a Request for some particular Theses to be
proposed against the Doctrine of Aristotle, was denied: and again, Anno 1629,
the Parliament there made an Arrest against some Chemists, upon the Information
of the Sorbonists, that the Principles of Aristotle could not be written
against, or lessened, without prejudicing the received Divinity of the Schools.

It Is no wonder if the Fathers and Sages of the Three first Ages, were not
quick enough to understand a sort of Mysterious Darkness which they had no use
for; the things not being then found out that it was to be applied to: but when
the Occasion was ready for it, the puzling parts of Aristotle's Philosopy being
found useful, and among all his dark Subtilties none more convenient than that
of Metaphysical or Abstracted Essences, which were Beings no where in being,
they were applied to support Transubstantiation; where there appears a
Substance that must not be believed to be there, and another must be believed
there which is not perceived.

Nothing can be a clearer Evidence than this violent Change, how desirous they
were to lay hold of every thing that was helpful to preserve Mystery, and
thereby to reduce the Power and Use of Religion to themselves, and so enlarge
their worldly Interest and Wealth. They easily apprehended that following the
plain Method of the Gospel, in a humble Example and zealous Persuasion,
ascribing all Honor and Power to God and none to themselves, would hardly make
a great Purchase of Interest and Honors to themselves; there would not have
needed a Statute of Mort-main here in England, to prevent (possibly all, at the
least) most of the Land to be given to what they call the Church, that is, the
Priests.

The last and most cruel Contrivance of Priestcraft to support Mystery, is
Persecution; to preserve their Power, by the Destruction and Oppression of
others. And as in all the Particulars of Priestcraft, before treated of, they
have differed from the Methods of the Gospel; so in none so much as their being
absolutely contrary to the Proposition of our Savior's coming, not to destroy
but to save, and to do to others as we would be done to our selves. It Is a
strange Way of performing those just and blessed Rules, to destroy and
persecute others; for most certainly cruel and bloody Persecutors would not be
willing to suffer the Torments and Severities they impose: Hatred, Violence and
Cruelty, are the Methods of their proceeding, while our Savior has made the
Doctrines of Love, Meekness and Charity, the Ingredients of his Gospel, John
13.34, 35.
and the Characters for his Disciples to be known by. The Christian Religion,
that brought Light to the World, began thus with Clearness, Meekness, Love and
Charity; winning Men to their Salvations by such wise and peaceable Ways, that
if Heaven and Eternal Happiness had not been added as our farther Reward, yet
the before-said Duties and Principles exactly practiced, contribute to preserve
every one in Health both of Body and Mind, and to the safe Enjoyment of
undisturbed Property.

The Impostor Mahomet pretended he was sent from God to convert the World, and
brought in his Religion with Destruction and Fierceness of Rage; yet we see
that now in a few Ages, that persecuting Madness is softened: it seems now too
cruel for their Natures as Men, and contrary also to their Interests; so that
now paying that small Tribute to the State which is agreed on, the Christians
enjoy the Use of their Religion, and Freedom of Trade and Commerce under a
quiet and peaceable Protection. On the other side, the Christian Religion that
was begun to be taught with so much Gentleness, Love and Charity, grew to be
changed into Fury, Hatred, Malice and Persecution: and though they justly
complained under the Persecution of the Heathen Emperors, especially
Dioclesian, Maximin, and Julian; yet they were no sooner freed from those
Miseries, but they practiced upon others all the Mischiefs and Crimes which
themselves had suffered, and had inveighed against; and Revenge, and its ready
Instrument Persecution, grew to be their Gospel-Methods: that which before they
called Fury and Rage, when used by themselves, must be called Zeal and Devotion.

The first Cause of this Severity that began famously among the Christians, was
from Athanasius and Arius; and the Council of Nice it self showed a Spirit of
Contention rather than of Peace and Charity: Constantine was forced to burn the
Records of their Quarrels and Animosities, to set their Faces toward any
prospect of Spiritual Good. The War of Persecution began under the wrangling
Names of Homo-ousians and Homoi-ousians: and no sooner was Great Constantine
dead, but the Arians influenced his Son Constantius to retaliate upon the
Homo-ousians, by returning Persecution for Persecution. If the Homo-ousians had
made a Creed at Nice, the Homoi-ousians in return fitted them with another at
Ariminum and Seleucia; adding to them the Christian Retaliations of Anathema's,
Banishments, Imprisonments, Deprivations, Consiscations, Executions, Burnings
of Books, and the rest. From this Creed-making came Persecutions, almost equal
to those of the Heathen Emperors; Zozom. l. 4. c. 25.
which were so much the more ugly, because it was still one Part of the
Christian Church that vexed the other: Zozomen reckons up nine of these Creeds,
made in a few Years. The Ecclesiastical War being begun, Creeds were as the
Arms and Ammunition with which to carry it on; they served also as
Declarations, and Causes of the War: and as Power and Opportunity gave leave,
they pursued one another with these both Means and Incentives to Revenge.
Hilary Bishop of Poictiors, describes this, saying, We decree every Year of the
Lord a New Creed concerning God, nay every Change of the Moon our Faith is
altered; we repent of those Decrees, and we defend those that repent of them:
He concludes with saying that the Christians were torn to pieces by themselves.
Gregory Nazianzen was so full of Detestation at these Quarrels of Christians,
that at last he resolved never more to come into an Assembly of Bishops;
because, says he, I have never seen a good and happy End of any Council; but
Mischiefs are rather increased than remedied by them, their obstinate
Contentions and Ambitions are infinite.

At last Heresy came to be the greatest Crime, and Heretics (so called) were
fore-doomed to Eternal Fire; and in the mean time to undergo the more temperate
ones here. It grew to be a Vie of Christianity, who should be most zealous in
Extirpation of Heretics, and to preserve the Honor of the Church, by cruel
and bloody Means: The famous St. Dominick was the most (wickedly) zealous in
this Tragical Task, and from his Order chiefly the Inquisitors have been chosen
ever since: one of his Successors issued Process for an hundred Thousand,
whereof six Thousand were burnt in a few Years. Pope Leo the Tenth, with the
Approbation of the Council of Lateran, decreed a severe Prosecution of the
Heretics; but at the same time a slight Punishment was ordered against such as
blasphemed God, or the Lord Christ: an Offense immediately against God was not
to them of so dangerous a Nature, as that which they call Heresy; because
Heresy is contrary to their Dictates and Power. And yet they would not seem to
be Men of Blood; but, with a miserable Evasion, make the Magistrate their
Stirrup-Dog, and loo him on to seize and execute the Prey, as they direct him.
But it is very lamentable, that not only in former Ages those that have suffered
under, and complained of Persecution, when by Alteration of Fortune the Power
has fallen into their own Hands, they have acted all that which before they
condemned: but even still in our days, every Party that has groaned under such
Sufferings, when they are arrived at Power, use the same Severities which
formerly they inveighed against.

Persecution is commonly taken to rise from the Impatience of Men to endure
Contradiction; but if Difference arose only from Disputes, where there is no
concern of Interest or Ambition, Men would not unite to make Laws to destroy or
punish, or endeavor by such Means to compel others to believe as themselves
believe. The love of worldly Power and Interest was the cause of Persecution:
the Sects of Philosophers that had great Differences, and taught various
Philosophies, never thought it worth the Combination of a prevailing Opinion or
Party, to persecute the others; because no Interest or Power could be the
Produce of such a Method. Plato's and Aristotle's Successors taught in Athens,
and had their Sects and Followers; but it never became worth Persecution on
either side: but when Aristotle's Philosophy became useful for Priestcraft,
where Power and Interest were designed, then it grew fit to be mingled with the
Causes of Persecution. Persecution therefore began from the insatiate Desire of
Secular Power and Interest, to preserve that Dominion over Souls and Estates,
which Mystery brought the Priesthood into: for when, by their subtle and dark
Impositions, they had subjected Men to an implicit Belief of, and Subjection
to, their Divine and infallible Inspiration and Authority, they then found it
necessary to fortify and preserve that Interest by Persecution; and thereby to
prevent the Examination of the unnecessary Follies and Cheats imposed, by
comparing them with the naked Truth and Plainness of the Gospel; to secure
their Subjects from deserting them, or declaring against them, they take care
that Ecclesiastical Dragoons be prepared (not to Convert, but) Destroy them.

There cannot be any who are for Persecution *so dull, as to believe it the
Means for what they (would seem to) intend it, the Conversion of the Erroneous.
For in Persecution; there is no rational Persuasion, in the Torments, or other
Punishments: that which can move an Alteration of Opinion, is Reason and
Argument, gently and friendly proposed; Error must be shown by Argument, not by
Power or Barbarities. If that were the true Way, which the Infallible follow,
then if a Man is known to differ in a particular Opinion, he should be
converted by breaking a Limb for that Opinion; and so another Limb for another
such (Dissenting) Opinion, and not by Arguments, till the Sum total of his
Heresies grew big enough for the Fire: but then it would appear also, that what
they pretend is for Conversion, in very deed is only for Destruction; and the
Service and Punishment is wholly for themselves, not the Persons punished. If a
Man sees Light, or any other Object, could Punishment make him not believe what
he sees? Torments perhaps may make him say, that he does not see what he does,
or any thing else, from the Force of his prevailing Misery: so perhaps
Persecution, in its various and skilful Inventions of several Punishments and
Torments, may force the wretched Sufferers verbally to renounce their
respective Faiths and Opinions, though they be not at all altered in their
Belief; which Victory is indeed a Service to the Priests Power, but none to
God, or the Suffering Person. If a Man should say Prayers for a show in this
World, and yet not believe in the God he prays to, but only designs to keep
himself from Trouble and Disturbance; would not such Prayers be (bantring)
Sins? Is there not the same Reason, that those who persecute, and by Torments
or Fears force suffering Wretches to declare against their own Consciences,
should be esteemed and judged guilty of the Sin which their Cruelty caused? or
is there perhaps any greater Sin, than to sin against a Man's own Conscience?
Should any one force a Man to murder himself; would not such a one be guilty of
the Murder? Does not the Law make the Accessory equally guilty with the
Principal? By the same reason, those that are guilty of the Violence or Terror,
are guilty of the (unconscionable, and therefore impious) Renunciations that
were caused by such Terror or Violence. Persecution can be no Argument to
Persuade, nor Destruction the Way to Conversion; and to force any to sin
against their Consciences, is no Rule of Christianity. The late unexampled
Persecution in France has, by strange invented Ways of several Torments and
Vexations, forced many to renounce (verbally) their Opinions and Consciences; a
Sin which God hates: it is true, Men should undergo all Sufferings for their
Consciences; but if Torments prevail over the Weakness of a distracted
Sufferer, those that inflict the Cruelty are certainly the cause of what God
hates, and their Rewards will be accordingly. Persecution therefore can be used
out of no respect to the Service of God; but is a Defiance of him, and only a
Service to Priestcraft and Priests, who like other Plunderers preserve ill-got
Goods by Force. The Prescriptions of the Gospel are of another nature; even to
be gentle in all things, and to have Charity for those that offend: St. John's
Epistles, whose Subject Matter is only Love, would be a Cheat rather than a
true Gospel-direction, if such a thing as Persecution could be approved in the
Gospel-state. If Love could spring from loss of Estates, Torments, and Death;
if the Advice and Gospel-command of Catholic Love were not made perfectly
ridiculous, by the contrary Command of Persecution and Hatred, we might allow
of the Priestly Expedient of Persecution: but 'twill be impossible to persuade
those that suffer, that their Persecutors do not hate them, and as impossible
to love such Persecutors any better than they love their Sufferings themselves.
But Woe be to them by whom the Offense comes: what Condemnation must it carry
with it, that those who pretend to be Teachers of the Gospel, instead of the
Ways of Love, search after those of Blood, and instead of Gentleness, pursue
with Fury; and that too for as little reason, as if they went about to punish
those that differ from them in Taste; for Opinion is no more to be helped than
a Man's Relish; 'twere as reasonable to punish any one for a vitiated Palate, as
for thinking what he must think.

It Is not reasonable to believe that God, who knows our Infirmities, will
punish Error; which is no Sin, because it comes not from the Will and
Intention: One Man may be weaker than another, and both may mistake more or
less, according to the Difference of their Capacities; but neither of them is
thereby guilty, because the Mistakes and Opinions proceed from their
Innoscence, which is to say, their Weakness and Ignorance. There have been very
warm and fierce Disputes upon Subject-matters that could have had no good
effect, if the Decision had been according to the Desires and Fancies of either
of the contending Parties; and yet neither of them is to be charged with
Heresy: in the Dispute concerning Freewill, one Party denies it, believing that
such Denial magnifies the Grace of God; the other affirms it, because he
believes it engages Men in pious Endeavors; therefore absolutely to determine
the Question, in direct favor of either Party, would not be useful.

St. Paul reckons Heresy among the Works of the Flesh; indeed it is in Holy
Scripture every where reckoned among practical Impieties: Matter of Fact, in
direct Sins, can only be ascertained to be Heresy; if a Man does not mix a Vice
with his Opinion, and that his Life accordingly is not led in unjust Practices,
his Error in Opinion cannot be a Crime, nor any Foundation of a Punishment. If
we seriously *consider the ill and unjustifiable Grounds of such a Persecution,
the Heresy will appear to be on the other side, the Persecutors will be the
Heretics: for those who practice Uncharitableness and Cruelty, commit that
Heresy of the Flesh; directly contrary to what our Savior taught, and founded
the Christian Religion upon, even Meekness, Charity and Mercy. But as St. Paul
says, He that was born after the Flesh, persecuted him that was born after the
Spirit: Even so it is now, and so it ever will be, while Self-interest and Love
of Dominion, are allowed to make the Want of Mercy, the Means to support and
propagate Religion: and such ill-gotten Power must increase the Cruelty and
Pride of Men, and consequently new and more large Inventions of Massacres and
other Persecutions; and yet (sure) themselves cannot but think it ridiculous,
that a Religion, whose Institution is so humane and merciful, should be
propagated by Cruelty and Inhumanity. St. Paul says, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.
the Servants of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle to all Men, in
Meekness instructing those that oppose themselves; if God peradventure will
give them Repentance, to the Acknowledgment of the Truth. Here Persecution is
forbid, though against those that oppose the known Truth, which needed
Repentance; they are directed to proceed by Meekness and Instructions: sure
then the Persecutors that strive to be ungentle, and use Cruelty instead of
Meekness, and Death and Tortures instead of Instruction, must be the true
Heretics.

It Is very observeable, that for real Heresies of the Flesh there are no
Inquisitions set up, nor any particular Persecutions; not for Drunkenness, or
Whoredom, or other Vices: they increase as much, by Temptation and Example, as
those sort of Vices can; and yet were never made Objects of the (pretended)
pious Zeal, or of any Persecution. Against such Heresies, they follow more the
Apostle's Rule, endeavoring to convert by Instruction and Persuasion; but
toward the Heresies that are prop^rly against themselves, they proceed by
another Method, by the Rule of their own Passions, not by the Directions of
Christianity. The Reason is, Heresy against true Morality does not shake their
Design of Power and Interest; but Heresy against their Rules of Faith, which
they would have superior to Scripture, is an Abnegation of their Authority.
The Endeavor to find out Truth should not be reckoned an Offense; it should
rather tend to unite than divide, and raise Tenderness sooner than Persecution.
God's Service is the pretended Cause of Persecution; but without suffering it
to be fairly examined, whether the Difference consists in Matters truly
necessary to Salvation. Which again evidences, that the Persecution is not for
the Cause of God, or the Good of the Persecuted, but of the Persecutors. It Is
sure a most Melancholy Prospect of Persecution, that all the Particulars in
which those differ who profess the Name of Christ, are in themselves of no
consequence, in respect to Salvation: for if it be temperately considered,
there is not one Particular that if it had never been controverted, or so much
as thought of, had been at all a Prejudice to our following the true and the
plain Rules of Christianity; nor can the Belief or Dis-belief of any of those
disputed Particulars, be reputed any Part of the Necessary Faith. Suppose, that
the Devotion paid to Saints, Angels, Images and Relics, Prayers for the Dead,
Consecration of Agnus Dei's, Blessing of Clouts, Indulgences and Pardons made
Mercenary, had never been thought of, where would the Want of them appear, if
we followed the acknowledged Rules and Precepts of the Gospel? Does any of
these concern the doing as we would be done to; or would they contribute to
Mutual Love and Forbearance of one another? In relation to Faith and good
Works, they could neither be Instrumental nor Exciting; and had they been
material, they would have found some place among the Precepts and Institutions
delivered by our Savior, in his Sermon on the Mount; where no Part necessary
to Christian Conduct can be believed to be omitted. So that these invented
Particulars by Priestcraft, are only to create a Faith in them, not in Christ
or his Gospel; where every thing that is necessary, is also plain and clear;
but these consist of Darkness, to involve Deceived Mankind in a Blind and
Implicit Obedience.

Another of their abstruse Inventions is Purgatory, wholly the Subject Matter
of Power and Profit; as if it were possible there could be a separate Confined
Place, where the Punishment or Purgation should be more or less, as the Price
is: as if Heaven were to be bribed, according to their lesser or greater Lucre.
If Men must believe in their Redeemer, and living according to his Example, may
thereby obtain Salvation, to what purpose could that Invention be, unless for
the Interest and Power of the Priests that invented it? For if it never had
been thought of, what Prejudice could it have been to the Christian Religion,
whose Rules are perfect and effectual without it, and which affords no
(tolerable) Intimation of such a Place? They may as rationally affirm, that all
the Rules of the Gospel followed in a good Life, shall yet not be available to
Salvation, without the Belief of Purgatory; so that one Point of Salvation is
wholly forgot by him that saved; as pretend that after a Life of Contempt or
Neglect of the Gospel Precepts; a Man, for all that, may be ransomed, by Money
given to the Priest, from the Place of Punishment; so near to Blasphemy, does
this extravagant Opinion reach. Be sure Purgatory is not of so ancient date,
but that there were Christians long before all mention made of it; who were
(questionless) in a State of Salvation without the Help of that Fancy, and
others are so now without the Belief of it: the Faith of it is useless, to any
Person or Thing, but only to the Priests, to complete their Catalogue of
Mysteries, and to increase their Profit and Authority.

The most famous of their dark Particulars, to which they pretend to be
directed by the Gospel, is the Real Presence: where the Priest can
Transubstantiate, without being himself Transubstatiated; which is ridiculous
enough. For all its seeming Importance, it is of the same nature with the
Particulars beforementioned; and if it had never been thought of, could in no
ways have been prejudicial to the Christian Religion. For suppose any one
should eat of the very Body and Flesh of our Savior, would that particular
Food have been the Food of Salvation, without Belief in him that died for us?
It Is impossible that any can affirm it would; for if it were so, and that
Priests can make Bread, or a Wafer, to be Christ's Flesh, the Eating of it must
of Consequence procure Salvation without the Help of Faith and good Works: but
if by Faith in his Death for us, Love and Charity, and following the Example of
his Life, we must be saved; of what use can it be to determine, whether the
Sacrament be the Real Body, yea or no? Since the Real Substance would not be
effectual by it self, of what concern can it be whether it be in the Sacrament
or no? And this Opinion too was not of so long standing, but that Christians,
who before this Invention believed in Christ, and followed his Example, were
certainly in a State of Salvation: and if that be granted, it shows that it can
be of no concern if the Question about it had never been raised; for if the
thing proposed to be believed, was in it self separately of no Force or
Efficacy, to what purpose is the Enquiry whether it be really in the Sacrament
or no? If it had effectual Power separately, and merely by virtue of the
Substance, then it must operate on an Infidel that eats it, as well as on a
Believer: but if Faith in him that died for us, be the Foundation of our
Salvation, and we build upon it in following his Example and Precepts, then
Salvation cannot depend upon this, Whether the Celebration of the Memorial of
our Savior's last Supper be this or that Substance. Should any believe truly
in Christ, and in our Redemption by his Death, and endeavor to follow his
blessed Rules and Example; and yet never consider further of the Celebration of
the Lord's Supper, but only as a Memorial, that as often as we come thither, we
do it in remembrance of his Suffering for us; would this be ineffectual,
without determining in Opinion at that time, what sort of Substance we receive?
If so, then if the Person that takes it guesses wrong, all his Faith in Christ,
and all his Endeavors of a good Life, are in vain and of none effect. So that
upon a controverted Point, which seems ridiculous to common Sense, Salvation
must depend; and the Mistake of a dark and controverted Point shall defeat all
the Effects of a strict following the plain and blessed Rules of the Gospel;
which most certainly contains all things necessary to Salvation. And if this
particular Question, What Substance it was that is administered in the
Sacrament, had been so very necessary to Salvation, our Savior would certainly
have delivered it in a plain Instruction and Precept, to guide our Faith in a
Particular on which Salvation depended, and with the same Plainness too, that
he uses through the whole Course of the Gospel: but the Gospel only directs
Faith in him, with Love, Justice, and Charity to one another; of which, it
directly says, that the Reward shall be Eternal Salvation.

St. Paul sets down very directly and plainly the necessary Parts of Faith, and
comprises all in a very short Creed; This is the Word of Faith, says he, Romans
10.8, 9.
which we preach, that if thou shall confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and
believe in thy Heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved.
This Doctrine of St. Paul must either deceive us, or else there is nothing of
real necessity besides this, and the apparent and immediate Consequences of it,
to be believed by us as Christians. But the Priests having endeavored to throw
every plain Way into a Wilderness, and to bring Darkness upon Light; it
follows, sutably to that Design, that they propose themselves as Guides, and no
Man to use his own Conduct and Reason. But if such Imposers, that design Power
and Wealth by their dark and unnecessary Doctrines, could secure us that we
should not answer to God for our selves, then to follow such Guides as could
and would be accountable for what their Followers have submitted to, on their
bare Authority, and to serve them, would be reasonable: but since a Blind and
Brutish Submission to any, will be no Excuse to them who had a plain Rule given
'em by God, it behooves every Man to take care that his Guide does not mislead
him; and then it is the same thing to follow his own Reason, and be his own
Guide; and sure every one may be better trusted to himself than to another. Yet
if by their undertaking to be Guides, they would exclude the Use of Reason in
Religion, why do they themselves propound Arguments, why is Scripture sometimes
cited, Councils and Fathers quoted, Tradition trumpt up? If we must not use our
Reason, and judge of those Arguments, 'twere fair Dealing to decree their
Propositions Magisterially.

But they say, the Unlearned are not fit to judge. This is true indeed; that is,
of the things which they have made too hard even for themselves to judge of, and
to agree about: but we are capable to judge of the Plainness of the Gospel,
which only is necessary to our Salvation. Their new dark Writings and Doctrines
are not decidable among themselves: and it is very impertinent to make it an
Argument, that because unlearned Men are not able to judge of the confused dark
Notions of these that call themselves the Learned, which Notions these Learned
Men seldom understand alike; therefore the Unlearned are to be debarred from
using their Reason in what is plain to be understood, such as the plain Gospel
of Jesus Christ is; which is and ought to be their only Concern. Do the Learned
by their own Agreement encourage others to depend upon them, as unerring
Guides? how can we be satisfied with their Differences, or find out Truth in
their abstruse Cavilings? for are not the Guides themselves grown into
different Sects, supported by Custom, Education, Interest and Prepossession,
more than by Reason? Do they not continue in a resolved Opinion, by only being
of the same Religious Club? This is the ridiculous Cause why all the Dominicans
are always of one Opinion, in the Points of Predestination and the Immaculate
Conception; and the Franciscans are as universally of the contrary. It were, in
my Opinion, as reasonable that all the John's should be of one Sect and Opinion,
and the Richards of another; pursuing still what is affirmed by those of their
Name, without examining the Nature or Reason of the Opinion: as that the
Institution of a Founder of the Order; suppose of Dominicans or Franciscans,
should as much influence all particular Persons of the Order, as much as an
Opinion which is taught by Reason. So also from the admired Thomas and Scotus,
came the Thomasts and Scotists; as if there might be an Imposition of Opinions,
from the mere Names of some particular Persons of the same either Order or
School. An unlearned Man would receive but small Satisfaction in such Guides;
and the Choice of them would be as little rational and intelligible to him, as
the Gibberish of their School Divinity is. Such a Possession in Men's Minds as
we are now speaking of, appeared some time in the Disciples of our Savior: for
though he spoke plainly of his going to Jerusalem, and being put to Death
there; Mark 1.32, 33.
yet (says the Text) they understood not these Sayings: Of which, the Reason
was, because they were beforehand possessed with the Traditions and Doctrines
of the Pharisees, and most other Learned Men of their Nation, that they were to
have a Glorious, a Conquering, and Triumphant Messiah; so that no clear
Expressions to the contrary, could have weight with them, or be regarded by
them: which shows how little Men use their own Reasons, or make use even of
common Sense, when once they are thoroughly prepossessed by a contrary
Institution or Impression from others, or the early Authority of their assuming
Guides.

The high Imposers the Priests, or others under the name of the Church, cannot
pretend to lay the Foundation of Faith; which is already laid in the Gospel:
they may (...) exci^e to the Practice (...) laid in the (...) but they may as
(...) the (...) in Generals, as in (...) especially in such as are dark, and
have the Appearance of New: to enlarge Faith is the same, as originally to lay
the Foundation of it. But they take care that the Particulars which they
impose, should be stamped with a Scripture-Mark, either true or false; that
they may not seem to arrogate to themselves to be Legislators.

From the two great Spring, Athanasius and Arius, the Church overflowed with
Divisions, and the insolent Value of Opinions began. Athanasius, in his Creed,
calls what he there sets down, the Catholic Faith; which yet received a
contrary Censure from two very great Councils; that of Milan consisting of 300
Bishops, and that of Ariminam consisting of 550: but the Practice, on both
sides, of imposing their Opinions with a Scripture-Mark or Character, was begot
and increased by the passionate Desire and Design of Power and Interest.

We have even at this present, an unlucky Instance of the strange Differences
among Learned Men. Dr. Sherlock writes a Book in answer to certain Brief Notes
on the Creed of Athanasius: He says, his Undertaking is to vindicate the
Athanasian Creed, and the Doctrine of a Trinity in Unity; which (he says) he
has now made as clear and easy, as the Notion of one God. But another, and a
very Learned Person too, in his Animadversions upon that Book of Dr. Sherlock,
calls the Explication of the Trinity advanced in Dr. Sherlock's Book, a silly,
a contradictory, and an heretical Notion; wholly of his own Invention, and a
Stab to the Heart of the Doctrine of the Church of England: he charges another
Book of Dr. Sherlock's, being a Discourse of the Knowledge of Christ, with vile
and scandalous Reflections upon God's Justice; and says moreover, that it may
deserve to pass for a Blasphemous Libel. I suppose it would hardly happen to
the Unlearned, or the Laity, if they should search after the Knowledge of God
and Christ in the Scriptures only, to be overseen in wider Differences either
from one another, or from the Truth, than these are. What Measures or Opinions
then, can the Unlearned take from their (disputing) Leaders? Guides that cannot
forbear to impose Faith in dark and unnecessary Points, and yet rate their
Imaginations at the Value of Holy Scripture, even while they disagree among
themselves in the very Points which they would injoin others to believe. But it
has long been the Custom of Learned Men to be saying something; to dispute and
talk, and from thence to impose: St. Austin ingenuously confesses this, in
these Words, Lib. de Trin. 5. c. 7. When Men ask, what is meant by the Three,
all Humane Speech wants Power to express it: yet we have ventured to say Three
Persons; not that it should be said, but that we may not be wholly silent. In
very deed, in all Ages the Learned have thought it incumbent upon them to say
something upon every thing; and upon dark and unnecessary Notions, to found a
Power over others: which would never have been built upon the plain, and
indisputable, Rules of the Gospel.

I say not this to lessen the Necessity and Use of Teachers and Guides in
Religion: the Knowledge of Religion is not born with us, nor infused into us;
and therefore is to be learned. And of consequence, Respect and Credit ought to
be given to our Teachers and Instructors. The Unlearned must of Necessity, in
some things place a Confidence in those, whose proper Employment and Learning
qualifies, and assists them to make a true Translation of the Holy Scriptures.
This just Credit and Respect ought to be given to such Teachers as apply
themselves strictly to pursue the Methods of the Gospel; yet without supposing
them to be infallible, or making an absolute Resignation of our Reason and
Judgment. Suppose a Man chooses one, that has the Reputation of an Able
Counselor and Learned in the Law, to settle an Estate or Purchase; and uses
such Counselor out of that just Opinion of the Knowledge he has in he Law,
which he (deservedly) reckons is much above his own Skill in the Laws; must he
therefore be debarred, or neglect, to use his own Care and Reason in examining
the Particulars of the Writings and Settlements? wherein, though there may be
many things, Points of Law beyond his Knowledge, yet there must be also many
Particulars of a plain and obvious Nature, wherein any Mistake or Contradiction
may be easily judged of by the concerned Party. And is it not as just and
reasonable to believe that Men should be allowed the same use of their Care and
Reason, in the Purchase of an Eternal Estate?

I shall conclude with this plain Assertion, That the Imposing Humor of those
who usurp more to themselves than belongs to Teachers, and their Quarrels and
Disputes upon dark and unnecessary Notions, is an assuming what belongs to God,
and a taking away what belongs to Men. By such Power assumed to themselves,
they rob God of his Glory, the World of Peace, and Men of Love and Charity:
whereas if they had only endeavored to instruct and persuade according to the
plain and genuine Methods of the Gospel, Teaching as they were taught by that;
the Glory had been to God on high, Peace had flourished in the World, and Men
had abounded in Good Will to one another.

FINIS.

