The Right use of that ARGUMENT IN PRAYER FROM The Name of GOD; On behalf of a
People that profess it.

By John HOW Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons, over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1682.

The PREFACE.
NO sort of men have ever pretended to Religion, who have not allowed unto
Prayer a very eminent place in it. And so much a deeper, and more Potent
Principle is Religion, in the nature of Man than Reason, (though both are
miserably perverted, and infeebled) that the former does secretly prompt men
(especially in great distresses) to Pray, and expect relief by Prayer, when the
way wherein it is efficacious, cannot so well be explicated, or apprehended by
the other.

And as Prayer has ever been reckoned a very principal part of Religion. So
has Intercession for others been wont to be accounted a very fit and proper
part of Prayer.

In the general, Prayer is most evidently, a duty of Natural Religion, a
Dictate of Nature, which every man's own mind suggests to him, or may be
appealed to about it: (should not a people seek unto their God?) Whence that
personated, eloquent Patron of the Christian cause, urging for the conviction
of his Heathen Adversary, the common practice of people in their extremities,
to lift up (even untaught) their hands and eyes to Heaven, fitly says of it,
Vulgi iste naturalis est Octav. apud Min. F.
sermo, that they do herein, as it were, but speak the language of nature.

Now hereupon, the impression of that Primitive Law of Nature, (not quite worn
out from the mind of man, even in this his very degenerate state) to love our
neighbors as our selves, does as a natural instinct, secretly prompt us to
pray for others, whom we cannot otherwise help, (especially such to whom we
have more peculiar Obligations, who are in a more especial sense our
neighbors) as (at least, in our last necessities) we do for our selves.

In which recourse to God, whether for our selves or others, we are led by a
sense of our own impotency, and dependent state, from a deeply inward
apprebension of a Deity, that is (as Epicurus himself seems constrained to
acknowledge concerning the Idea of God,) even proleptical, or such as prevents
reason. So that we do not, being urged by the pinching necessity of the case,
stay to deliberate, and debate the matter with our selves, how this course
should bring relief, but do even take it for granted, that it may; by an
apprehension that is earlier in us, than any formal reasoning about it, and
being Prior to it, is also not suppressed by it, but prevails against it, if
there be any thing in reason objected, which we cannot so clearly answer.

Yet, when we do bring the matter to a rational discussion, we find that in our
conception of God, we have the apprehension of so perfect, and excellent a
nature, that we cannot suppose he should be moved by any thing Foreign to
himself, or that we can inform him of any thing he knew not before, or incline
him to any thing, to which his own nature inclines him not. And therefore, that
though the wise and apt course of his Government over intelligent creatures
requires that they should be apprehensive of their own concernments, (whether
personal or that belong to them as they are in communities,) and pay a solemn
homage to his sovereign power and goodness, by supplicating him about them, yet
that if he hear their Prayers, it must not be for their sakes, but his own.
Therefore also, it cannot upon strictest reasoning, but seem most dutiful to
him, and hopeful for our selves, that our Prayers should be conceived after
such a tenor, as may be most agreeable unto that apprehension.

The Holy Scriptures, and the Divine Spirit do both aim at the recovery of
Apostate man, and the repairing the decays of his degenerate nature, and do
therefore (besides what was necessary to be added) renew the Dictates of the
Law of Nature, the One more expressly representing them, the other impressing
them afresh, and reimplanting them in the hearts of all that are born of God.
Therefore that External Revelation of the mind and will of God does direct, and
his Blessed Spirit (which is pleased to be in all his Children the Spirit of
Grace and Supplication,) does inwardly prompt them, not only to pray (in
reference to their single and common concernments) but to form their Prayers
after this Tenor; Which is to be seen in their so frequent use of this
Argument in Prayer, from the Name of God.

Whereupon, in a time when we are so much concerned, to be very instant in
Prayer, not only each of us for himself, but for the Body of a People, upon
whom that Holy Name is called. I reckoned it seasonable to show briefly the
import and right use of this Argument; and to that purpose have taken for the
ground, the following Text of Scripture.

JER. 14. 21. Do not abhor us for thy Names sake.
Where we have

A Petition and The Argument enforcing it.
1. A Very serious Petition, or a Deprecation of the most fearful evil
imaginable. Do not abhor us. The word does not merely signify abhorrence but
disdain. A displeasure (...) Sprevit contempsit
prevailing to that degree, and so fixed, as to infer rejection, even from a
just sense of honor. So some of the Versions read, reject us not, or cast us
not forth, as we would do what (or whom) we despise Vulg. Lat. and Chald. Par.
and scorn to own; As if it were feared the Holy God might count it
ignominious, and a reproach to him, to be further related to such a People, and
might even be ashamed to be called their God. (And consequently that the
following Argument is used not without some suspense of mind, and doubt lest it
should be turned against them, whereof more hereafter.) Here it is implied,

1. To be no impossible thing that God should reject with abhorrence a people
once his own, or that have been in peculiar, visible relation to him.

Prayer is conversant about matters of Divine Liberty, i. e. that are not known
to us to be already determined this way or that; but that may be, or may not
be, as he pleases, and sees fit; consistently with the settled course and order
of things, not about things that he had before made ordinarily necessary, nor
about things that are simply, or in ordinary course impossible. In the former
case Prayer would be needless, in the latter, to no purpose. We do not pray
that the Sun may rise to morrow at the usual hour, or that the Sea may ebb and
flow, nor that they may be prevented of doing so. (But we must distinguish such
necessity and impossibility from a mere certainty that things shall either be,
or not be.)

We are to pray in the present case, with a deep apprehension that this is
perfectly a matter of liberty with the great God, and that as he took such a
people to be his, of mere good pleasure, so it depends wholly Deuteronomy. 7. 7. C.
10. 15.
upon his mere pleasure, that he continues the relation, when he might abandon
and cast them off.

It is further implied,

2. That the more serious and apprehensive among such a people, do understand
it (at sometimes more especially) a thing very highly deserved, that God should
abhor and reject them.

The deprecation is a tacit acknowledgment, that the deprecated severity was
reasonably to be feared, not only from Sovereign Power, but offended Justice.
This is indeed expressed in the next foregoing words. We acknowledge, O Lord, our
wickedness, and the iniquity of our Fathers: for we have sinned against thee,
Do not abhor us. etc. So that this ought to be the sense of the Supplicants in
the present case, that they are herein perfectly at mercy, that if they be
heard it is undeserved compassion, if they be rejected it is from most deserved
displeasure.

And if it were not expressed, yet the Supplication must be understood to imply
it. For when the great God has vouchsafed to limit his Sovereign power, and
antecedent liberty by his Promise and Covenant, such a Prayer were it self
reflecting, and an affront, if it should proceed upon a supposition, or but
intimate, that he should ever be inclined to do such a thing, without an
excepted cause. Such as that his rejecting them upon it, might consist with his
being faithful to his word. When he values himself so much upon his
faithfulness, and seems even to lay his very Godhead upon it. As those
strangely Emphatical words import. Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Know therefore that the Lord thy
God, he is God, the faithful God, which keeps Covenant and Mercy with them,
that love him, and keep his Commandments, to a Thousand Generations; (implying
that he would even yield himself not to be God, if he did not in all points
vindicate and demonstrate his faithfulness.) Nor indeed do we properly crave
for any thing, but we therein disclaim a Legal right to it, and acknowledge it
to be rightfully in his power, to whom we apply our selves, to grant or deny,
We make demands from Justice, and are Supplicants for Mercy* and with this
sense the Spirits of Holy Men have abounded, when they have taken upon them to
intercede in the like case, as we see Dan. 9. 7. O Lord, Righteousness
belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of faces, as at this day. etc. And
to the same purpose, Ezra 9. Nehem. 9. at large, and in many other places. q.
d. Our only resort, O Lord, is to thy Mercy. Thou might most justly abhor
and abandon us, and say to us, Loammi, ye are none of my People, but in the
multitude of thy tender compassions and mercies, do it not.

It is again further to be Collected,

3. That this is a thing which holy and good men do most vehemently dread and
deprecate, viz. that God should thus abhor and reject a people so related to
him. It Is that which the very Genius, and Spirit of Holiness, in the sincere,
regrets beyond all things for themselves. They have taken the Lord to be their
God, for ever and ever; Their hearts have been attempered to the tenor and
constitution of an Everlasting Covenant, which they entered with no design, or
thought of ever parting; but that it should be the ground of an Eternal
Relation. And the Law of love written in their hearts, prompts them to desire
the same thing for others too; Especially such to whom they have more especial
endearing Obligations; and (if it were possible) that the whole body of a
people to whom they are themselves united, might all be united to God upon the
same terms, even by the same Vital and Everlasting Union; And therefore also,
that same Divine, and Soul-enlarging love, being a living Principle in them,
makes them have a most afflicting sense of any discerned tendencies to a
Rupture, and separation that might prevent, and cut off the hope of his drawing
still more and more of them into that inward living Union, and Inter-course
with himself.

These things it may suffice briefly to have noted from the Petition in the
Text. That which I principally designed, is what we have next coming under our
view, viz.

II. The Argument brought to enforce it; For thy Names sake. About which, what
I shall observe, shall be with special reference to the case which the Prophet
refers unto, in his present use of it.

viz. That in Praying for a people professing the name of God, that he would
not reject and cast them off, the fit and proper argument to be insisted on is
that from his own Name. (See Verse 1. 9.)

And here it will be requisite,

1. To have some very brief consideration of this argument in the general:
though

2. We principally intend to treat of it, as it respects this present case.

1. In the general, we are to consider both what the name of God in it self
imports, and what is signified by using it as an argument in Prayer. And,

(1.) As to what is imported by the name of God, in it self considered. We
shall not trouble this discourse with the fancies of the Rabbis; Of whom yet
one very noted, soberly, Maimon. Mor. Nevoch.
and plainly tells us the name of God is wont to signify his essence and
truth, though the instance he gives shows he means it of the Nomen
Tetragrammaton (the name Jehovah) which indeed more eminently does so. To our
purpose it is obvious, and sufficient, to note, that by his name, more
generally, is signified both the peculiar excellencies of his nature, and
being, which are himself, as the use of a man's name is to notify the man. So
when he is pleased himself to proclaim his own name, thus it runs; The Lord,
the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness
and truth, keeping Mercy for Thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression,
and sin. etc. Exodus 34. 6, 7.

And again, That by his name is meant his Glory, and most especially the
honor, and reputation of his Government. For so too, a man's name signifies his
fame and repute in the World (as they whom our translation calls men of Renown,
Genesis 6. 4. the Hebrew Text says only, (but plainly, meaning the same thing,)
they were Men of name.) And if he be a public Person, a Prince, and Ruler over
others, it must more peculiarly signify his Reputation and Fame as such. Thus
Moses designing to celebrate the unexceptionable equity, and awful Majesty of
the Divine Government, begins thus; Because I will publish the name of the
Lord: ascribe the greatness unto our God. He is the Rock, his work is perfect,
for all his ways are Judgment. Deuteronomy. 32. 3, 4.

2. As an Argument used in Prayer, it may accordingly either signify the
principle from which it is hoped and requested he should do what we desire, or
the end for which. For as his name signifies his nature, which himself has
taught us primarily to conceive under the notion of goodness, mercy, love, in
that forementioned Exodus 34. 7. and 1 John 4. 16. So when we pray he would do
this or that for his names sake, the meaning may be, that we request he would
do it for his mercies sake, even in compliance with himself, and as it were to
gratify his own nature, which (as nothing is more Godlike) is wont to be
delighted in acts of goodness toward all, of compassion and mercy to the
miserable, and of special favor to them that more peculiarly belong to him.

And again, as his name signifies his glory, and principally the honor and
reputation of his Government; So when we pray he would do this for his names
sake, we further must be understood to mean, we desire he would do it to
prevent his own dishonor, to augment his glory, and further to recommend
himself to the world. And I conceive it must be meant in both these senses
taken together, viz. that we pray he would do this, or that, both from himself,
and for himself, from his goodness, (or indeed the general perfection of his
nature,) and for his glory, and that he may represent himself such, as he truly
is:

But some circumstances in the coherent Verses (afterward to be particularly
noted) seem to intimate that the honor and dignity of his Government is here
more directly meant. His glory is indeed the end which he cannot but design in
all that he does. For inasmuch as he is said to do all things according to the
counsel of his will; Ephesians. 1. His will must be principally of the end, which is
ever the highest and most excellent good, and that can be no other than
himself, and that only as he is capable of greatning himself by his own action;
which cannot be in respect of intrinsic excellency, that being already perfect
and capable of no addition, therefore it must be in point of glory, and
reputation only. And so, as it is said, having no greater to swear by, he swear
by himself; Heb. 6. So having no greater to act for, it is most just, and most
worthy of him, and but a God-like owning of himself, to act only to and for
himself. And then whereas, having this constant, just and holy will, he does
all things according to Counsel in pursuance of it, it must signify that he
ever takes the aptest, and most proper methods for the advancing of his own
glory. The choosing the fittest and most suitable means to a foreresolved end,
being the proper business and design of consultation. Though that be spoken of
God but allusively, and after the manner of men, who by slow degrees, and by
much deliberation arrive to the (very imperfect) knowledge of things, which at
one view he perfectly beholds from all Eternity.

But also how the great God designs his own glory in all that he does, we must
take great care, be duly and decently understood. It were low and mean to think
that the design of his mighty works, and accurate dispensations is only that he
may fill men's minds with wonder, be highly thought of, admired, and celebrated
in the world, which even a wise, and virtuous man would think an end much
beneath him. But the glory of his name must be understood to be primarily an
objective glory, that shines with a constant, and equal luster in all his
dispensations, whether men observe, or observe it not. And shines primarily to
himself, so as that he has the perpetual self-satisfaction of doing as truly
becomes him, and what is in it self reputable, worthy of him, and apt to
approve it self to a right mind, (as his own ever is) let men think of his
ways as they please. Thus it was in his Creating the world, when he had not
yet made man, nor had him to look on, as a witness and admirer of his other
glorious works, it was enough to him to be self-pleased that he saw them to be
good, and that they had his own most just and complacential approbation. Nor is
he less pleased with himself, in his governing the world, than he was in the
making of it. As also good men, by how much the more they excel in goodness,
have herein the greatest resemblance and imitation of God, doing good for
goodness sake, and pleasing themselves with the luster and beauty of their own
actions, shining to their own mind, and conscience, and their discerned
conformity to the steady rules of righteousness; without being concerned,
whether perverse and incompetent Judges approve, or disapprove them. Though
also, because the blessed God delights in propagating blessedness, and
imparting it to his intelligent creatures, he is pleased in recommending
himself, so far, to their estimation and lo^ve, as is necessary to their own
felicity, wherein also he does as it were but enjoy his own goodness (as his
felicity can only be in himself) and is pleased with the self-satisfying
beauty, pleasantness, and glory of it.

Yet further also we are to consider that though it be most suitable to the
Majesty, and the independent, self-sufficient fullness of God, to take pleasure
only in the real goodness, excellency, decency, and glory of whatever he is,
and does. Yet it belongs to, and becomes the dutiful affection of his people
toward him, to be deeply concerned, how he is thought and spoken of in the
world. Dishonorable reflections upon him are therefore as a sword in their
bones. What cannot hurt him, ought to wound them. Which dutiful love also
cannot but make them highly covet that his name might be known, and renowned
all the world over, knowing that the reproach that is no real damage, is a
wrong to him; and that universal praise is his right, though it cannot be an
advantage.

And this love to his name they cannot more fitly express, than in praying to
him.

And here we are further to note that this argument, thus generally considered
has, when we use it in Prayer, a twofold aspect, i. e. we are to consider it
as an argument both to God, and to our selves. To God, as whereby we expect to
prevail with him to hear our Prayers. To our selves, as whereby we are to be
urged, and excited to pray with the more importunity, and confidence, so as not
to faint in Prayer.

Thus much as to what is more general. We are now

2. To consider it in reference to this present case. Where we are to show,

(1.) How the name of God may be understood to be concerned, in his abhorring,
so as to forsake a people more peculiarly related to him.

(2.) The fit and right use of this argument in deprecating his doing so.

1. How the name of God may be understood concerned in this matter. Taking his
name to signify not only his nature, and the attributes of his being
themselves, but also the glory and luster of those his attributes, especially,
which are to have a more principal exercise, and demonstration in the course of
his Government over Mankind, and more particularly, over such a select,
peculiar people. It may seem greatly to reflect upon those his governing
Attributes, and detract from the glory of them, and consequently to lessen the
honor and dignity of his Government, if having taken such a people into near,
and peculiar relation to him, he should grow into that dislike of them, as at
length, quite to reject and cast off them, as if he now disdained the Relation.

That such a contemptuous rejection of this people is the thing here deprecated
by the Prophet, is evident (besides what has been noted of the true import of
the word rendered abhor,) from other expressions in the Context, that plainly
speak this very sense, and show this to be the matter about which he was so
deeply concerned. Have thou utterly rejected Judah? has thy Soul loathed Zion?
Ver. 19. And then presently is added (to the same sense) Do not abhor us, etc.
As when a man's heart is full of a thing, and the sense of it abounds, he varies
expressions, and from the abundance of the heart, as from a fountain, the
matter streams from him several ways. His iterations, and varied forms of
Speech to the same purpose, show what urged him, and about what his mind was
engaged and taken up. It Is plain that, at this time, that which this holy man
was in this agony for, was not a lighter, temporary anger, but so settled a
displeasure, as upon which a final rejection was likely to ensue.

And he apprehends the name of God to be concerned in it. Which it appears also
lay with great weight upon his Spirit, Our iniquities testify against us, but
do thou it (i. e. Save us, as afterward) for thy names sake. verse 7. And
again, (verse 9.) Thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us, and we are called by
thy name; leave us not. Which also shows how he understood it to be concerned,
viz. as the great God was not only the common Ruler of the world, but a
Governor over them, in a way, and upon terms that were very peculiar, viz. by
Covenant and compact. Such whereof the nuptial contract, is the usual
resemblance; By which the related persons mutually pass into each others right,
and whereupon, the inferior person in the relation takes the name of the
superior, as Isa. 4. 1. We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel,
only let us be called by thy name. So the great God entering that Covenant with
a people; [I will be your God, and you shall be my people,] speaks of himself
as conjugally related to them. Thou shall be called by a new name, which the
mouth of the Lord shall name. Thou shall also be a crown of glory in the hand
of the Lord; and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God. Thou shall no more be
termed, forsaken; neither shall thy land any more be termed, Desolate: But thou
shall be called Hephzi-bah, and thy land Beulah: for the Lord delights in
thee, and thy land shall be married. Isa. 62. 4. Thy maker is [thine husband.]
Isaiah 54. 5. Who being the Governing relative, the phrase of being called by
his name imports the agreed, voluntary subjection of such a people to his
Government, and his vouchsafing to be their Governor, upon the special terms
of his own Covenant, whereupon another Prophet, pleading for his special
favor, and protection unto this people, against their Heathen adversaries,
uses this phrase. We are thine, thou never barest rule over them, they were not
called by thy name. Isa. 63. 19.

Therefore this Prophet understood his name to be concerned, if he should
reject them, as it signified his honor and reputation as their Governor by
Covenant, which further appears by the immediate connection of these words Do
not abhor us for thy names sake, with those that next follow, Do not disgrace
the throne of thy glory: remember break not thy Covenant with us, q. d. Thou
have Covenanted to be our Governor, and have erected, accordingly, thy
glorious throne among us. How can thou sustain, or endure to break thy
Covenant, and dishonor thy own throne! to draw a disreputation upon thy
Government; or cast a dark shadow upon those famed excellencies, which were
wont to recommend thee in the sight of all nations as the best Ruler that ever
people had; and might make the sons of men apprehend it the most desirable
thing in all the world to be, on the same terms, under thy Government!

Particularly of his Attributes that have more special relation to his
Government, such as these may seem (and have been apprehended) liable to be
reflected on in this case.

1. His power, as if he had designed to do some great thing for them, which he
could not bring about, and therefore he casts them off, and will seem no
further concerned for them. Or as if his power were confined within such
limits, that it would suffice him to destroy them once for all, but not
constantly to preserve and prosper them. So when God threatened to smite his
people Israel with the pestilence, and disinherit them. (Numb. 14. 12.) Moses
urges on their behalf, Then the Egyptians shall hear it, (for thou broughtest
up this people in thy might from among them) And they will tell it to the
inhabitants of this land: for they have heard that thou, Lord, art among this
people, that thou Lord art seen face to face, and that thy cloud stands over
them, and that thou go before them, by daytime in a pillar of a cloud, and
in a pillar of fire by night. Now if thou shall kill all this people, as one
man; then the nations which heard the fame of thee will speak, saying, Because
the Lord was not able to bring this people into the land which he swear unto
them, therefore he has slain them in the wilderness. (verse 13. 14, 15, 16.)
q. d. That thou have peculiarly owned them, and concerned thy self for them
cannot be hid. It has made a great noise in the World, and been the common
talk of all nations, and made a more special impression of awe and terror upon
the Egyptians (against whom thou first tookest part with them) that thou wast
usually seen face to face among them, that most extraordinary tokens of a
divine presence, the miraculous pillar of a cloud by day, and of fire by night,
were constantly afforded them. There is no coming off (so far and so openly
have thou been concerned for them) but this construction will be made of it,
that though very great difficulties have been overcome for them, there was a
prospect of yet greater, that could not be overcome, and therefore, that
whereas less power was required to make a present end of them, thou did
rather choose to do that. And this consideration seems sometimes to have
weighed much with God himself, as we find he is brought in speaking Deuteronomy. 32.
26, 27. I said I would scatter them into Corners, I would make the remembrance
of them to cease from among men; were it not that I feared the wrath of the
enemy, lest their adversaries should behave themselves strangely, and lest they
should say our hand is high, etc. Whence also

2. His wisdom must, by consequence, be exposed too; that this was not
foreseen, and considered, when he first undertook their conduct, and espoused
their Interest.

3. His Goodness and benignity, his propensity to do good, and bestow favors,
that it was not so unexhausted a fountain as might seem suitable to a God* and
to him, whom his wonderful noted acts of favor toward that people, had made
to be vogued among the nations as the only one.

4. His Clemency, and unaptness to be provoked. The great commendation of
Rulers. Who ought to be Legum similes, as little moved with passions, as the
Laws they govern by. A thing especially to be expected in a Divine Ruler, and
most agreeable to the serenity of the nature of God. According not only to what
men are commonly wont to apprehend of his nature, but what he had been pleased
to declare of himself, as is alleged Numbers 14. 17, 18. Let the power of my
Lord be great (intimating that to appear hurried with passions would seem an
un-Godlike impotency) And it is added, according as thou have spoken, saying the
Lord is long-suffering and of great mercy, etc. Whereupon therefore

5. His sincerity, another great excellency in a Governor, seems liable to be
suspected too. That he should not be what he seemed, had given out of himself,
or was taken, at least, to be the import and signification of his former
dispensations. Which is the scope of Moses's reasoning, Exodus 32. 12. Wherefore
should the Egyptians speak and say, For mischief did he bring them out, to slay
them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth? As if he
had said, why shall the Egyptian enemy have occasion to apprehend, that God did
only hide mischievous intentions toward this people, under an appearance and
show of kindness to them; That he only drew them hereby to trust in him, and
commit themselves to his care and protection that he might, when he saw his
time, the more please and as it were sport himself in having deceived them, and
in disappointing and destroying them. That therefore the God of Israel was not
such a one as he seemed willing to be thought, nor a relation to him so
covetable a thing. Or else

6. His constancy, and faithfulness to himself. He may be thought in this case
more mutable, and unsteady in his own designs than is worthy of a God. Even
Balaams notion of the Deity could not allow him to think either, first, that as
a man he could ly, or next, that as the son of man he could repent. Numb. 23.
The former he thought not agreeable to the sincerity, nor the latter to the
constancy which he reckoned must belong to the nature of God. That he should
appropriate a people to himself, remarkably own them by a long-continued series
of eminent favors; and at length seem to grow weary of them, and his own
design, and throw them off! How un-Godlike a levity does this seem to import?
and how contrary to the encouragement which we sometimes find given to such a
people, even from the regard he would have to his own name in this respect, The
Lord will not forsake his people, for his great names sake: because it has
pleased the Lord to make you his people. 1 Samuel 12. 22.

7. His righteousness in reference to his promise and Covenant with such a
people, or his faithfulness unto them. For, as considering only his purpose,
and his having begun a design, his pursuing of it is but faithfulness (or a
being true) to himself and his own design; So when his purpose has expressed it
self in a promise to a people; to make it good is to be faithful and true to
them. And is therefore a part of righteousness, his promise having created a
right in them to whom he made it. By his purpose he is only a debtor to
himself, By his promise he is a debtor to them too. Upon this account his name
seems liable to be reflected on, if he should reject such a people. As the
words following the Text intimate. Do not abhor us for thy names sake, do not
disgrace the throne of thy glory, break not thy Covenant with us. And such is
the import of Moses's plea, Numb. 14. 16. Because the Lord was not able to
bring this people into the land [which he sware] unto them, therefore he has
slain them in the wilderness. Which pleading of his he himself also recites
Deuteronomy. 9. 28. with little variation; And implies in it, that if God should
reject this people, it would turn greatly to the prejudice of his name and
repute in the world, in respect of his truth and fidelity which made so great a
part of his name and glory. That in his anger he neither regarded his word, nor
his Oath. No bond was sacred with him. Than which, what could make a Prince
more inglorious, and infamous? And how gladly would those more implacable
enemies out of whose hands he had rescued this people, catch at such an
occasion of traducing, and defaming him!

We see then how the name of God, may appear concerned in this matter. It seems
indeed in all these respects very deeply concerned, and much exposed to
obloquy, if he reject such a people. Though if he should, it can never be, but
upon such terms, as that all that can be objected, will appear to be but
groundless cavil, and calumny, and admit of easy answer as we shall see anon.
In the mean time, while the matter admits of any hope, We are

2. To show the fitness and right use of this Argument for the preventing of it.

We are indeed manifestly to distinguish these two things. The general fitness
of this argument to be used, and wherein stands the fit and due use of it. As
any thing else, though in it self very fit to be used for such and such
purposes (as meat and drink, for instance, or learning, or speech) may yet
notwithstanding be used very unfitly. Therefore we shall speak to both these
severally, and show.

1. How fit an argument this is to be insisted on in prayer, even to the
purpose we are now speaking of.

2. What is requisite to the due and right use of it to this purpose.

1. That it is in it self an argument very fit to be insisted on in Prayer, to
this purpose, or to any other in reference whereto it is fit for us to pray, is
most evident; For it is most likely to prevail with God, being an argument
taken from himself, and most fit to move and affect us; for it has most weight
in it. And we ought in Prayer as much as is possible, to conform our minds to
Gods. So as not only to pray for the things which we apprehend him most likely
to grant, but upon the same grounds, and with the same design, which he must be
supposed to have in granting them, And that there be but one end and aim common
to him and us. We are told that if we ask any thing according to his will he
hears us. John 5. 14. This is to ask according to his will, in the highest
and most certain sense. For the first and most fixed object of any will
whatsoever is the End: of any right will, the best and most excellent end,
which can be but one. The Divine will we are sure, is ever right, and must so
far as it is known be directive, and a rule to ours. Concerning the end it is
most certainly known, He does all things (as he made all things) for himself.
Concerning the means and way to his end, we are often ignorant, and in doubt;
and when we are, we then are to will nothing but upon condition, that it will
conduce to the great and common end of all things, and do interpretatively,
retract and unpray every petition in the very making it, which shall be really
repugnant thereto. Nothing can move God besides. He is eternally self-mov'd.
Our attempt will be both undutiful, and vain, if we suffer our spirits to be
engaged, and moved by any thing which will not be a motive unto him. Therefore
no argument can be fit besides this, for his own name, or that cannot be
reduced to it.

But the fitness of this argument may be more distinctly shown and discerned
from the following considerations viz. that it is most suitable

1. To the object of prayer; The glorious everblessed God. To whom it belongs
as the appropriate, most incommunicable Prerogative of the Godhead to be the
Last, as well as the First, the Alpha, and the Omega; The End, as he is the
Author of all things. Of whom, and through whom, and to whom all things are;
And unto whom must be all glory for ever. Romans 11. 36. So that to pray to him
that he would do this or that, finally and ultimately for any thing else than
his own name; is humbly to supplicate him that he would resign the Godhead; and
quit his throne to this, or that Creature.

2. To the right subject of Prayer, considered whether according to its
original, or renewed State. According to primitive nature, or renewing grace.
To primitive nature, which was no doubt pointed upon God as the last end.
Otherwise a Creature had been made with aversion to him, and in the highest
pitch of enmity and rebellion. Since there can be no higher Controversy than
about the last end. And to renewing grace, the design whereof, as it is such,
can be no other than to restore us to our Original State. To bring us back, and
state us where, and as we were, in that absolute subordination to God that was
original and natural to us. Which therefore stands in repentance toward God,
as our end, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, as our way, wherein alone we
can acceptably return and render our selves back unto him. We through the law
are dead to the law, being humbled, broken, macerated, mortified by it, we are
become dead to it, exempt from its execrating condemning power and dominion,
that we might live to God. Gal. 2. 19. that a new divine life and nature might
spring up in us, aiming at God, tending and working entirely, and only toward
him. Have been reduced to a Chaos, to utter confusion, or even brought to
nothing, that we might be ereated anew, with a reimplanted disposition to serve
the ends and purposes for which we were first made. And therefore are to yield
our selves to God as those that are alive from the dead. Romans 6. 13. i. e. (as
verse 11.) alive to God through Jesus Christ. In him we are created to good
works (that are principally to be estimated from the end) which God had before
ordained that we should walk in them. Ephesians. 2. 10. Thus we are reconciled to
God. The Controversy is taken up, which was about no lower thing than the
Deity. Who should be God, he or we. Whether we should live and be for our
selves, or him. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, old things are
past away, behold, all things are become new; And all things are of God, who
has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 5. 17, 18. Hereupon this
is, in Prayer, the only proper genuine connatural breath of the new Creature,
the most inward habitual sense of a devoted soul To thee, O Lord, be all
things, may thou ever be the all in all. Let the Creation and all things be
nothing, otherwise than in thee, and for thee!

3. To the Mediator in whose name we pray. Who never undertook that part of
mediating between God and us, with a design to alienate, and give away from God
the natural rights of the Godhead; but to assert them to the highest, to repair
unto God, and expiate by his blood the encroachments we had made upon them, and
provide we might do so no more. That we might be forgiven what was past, and be
dutiful and subject for the future. His principal design was to salve the
injured honor and dignity of the divine Government, and to reconcile therewith
our impunity, and felicity, to make them consist. He was therefore to redeem us
to God by his blood, Rev. 5. 9. How immodest, and absurd a confidence were it,
for any to make use of the Mediators name in prayer against his principal, and
most important design?

4. To the Spirit of Prayer who, we are told Romans 8. 27. makes intercession for
the Saints (...). We read, according to the will of God, but no more is in the
Text than according to God. i. e. in subserviency to him, and his Interest, so
as that in prayer, by the dictate of that Spirit, they supreamly mind the
things of God, and are most intent upon his concernments, and upon their own
only in subordination to his. As it may well be supposed his own Spirit will be
true to him, and not act the hearts which it governs, otherwise; And that the
prayers that are from himself, and of his own inspiring, will be most entirely
loyal, and import nothing but duty and devotedness to him.

5. To the most perfect model and platform of prayer, given us by our Lord
himself. In which the first place is given to the petition Hallowed be thy
name, and the two next are about Gods concernments, before any are mentioned of
our own. So that the things we are to desire, are digested into two tables, as
the decalogue is containing the things we are to do And those that respect God
(as was sit) set first.

6. To the constant (...) of the prayers of holy men in Scripture. We have
seen how earnestly Moses presses this argument in the (...) places, Exodus 32.
and Numb. 14. And so does Samuel express his confidence in it, when he
promises, upon their desire, to pray for the trembling people of Israel. 1 Samuel
12. 22, 23. The Lord will not forsake his people [for his great names sake]
because it has pleased the Lord to make you his people. Moreover as for me,
God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you. And
this was a pair whom God has himself dignified as persons of great excellency
in prayer, And whose prayers he would have a value for, if for any man's. Though
Moses and Samuel stood before me, etc. Jer. 15. 1. Thus also does Joshua
insist, upon occasion of that rebuke Israel met with before Ai Josh. 7. 8, 9. O
Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turns their backs before their enemies?
For the Canaanites, and all the inhabitants of the land shall hear of it, and
shall environ us round, and cut off our name from the earth: [and what will thou do unto thy great name?] And so does Daniel plead (one of a famous triad
too, of potent wrestlers in prayer. Ezekiel 14. 14.) O Lord hear, O Lord forgive,
O Lord hearken and do: defer not for thine own sake, O my God; for thy city and
thy people [are called by thy name] Dan. 9. 19.

7. To the highest example and pattern of prayer (fit to be mentioned apart) our
Lord himself. Who, in some of his last agonies, praying Father save me from
this hour, represses that innocent voice. But therefore came I to this hour,
and adds Father glorify thy name. Joh. 12. 27, 28. intimating that the sum
of his desires did resolve into that one thing, And contented to suffer what
was most grievous to himself that so that might be done which should be finally
most honorable to that great name.

8. To the design and end of prayer, which is partly and principally to be
considered as an act of worship, an homage to the great God, and so the design
of it is to honor him. And partly as a means, or way of obtaining for our
selves the good things we pray for, which therefore is another (but an
inferior) end of prayer. Whether we consider it under the one notion, or the
other, or propound to our selves the one or the other end in praying; It Is most
agreeable to pray after this tenor, and to insist most upon this argument in
prayer. For

First, Do we intend prayer as an homage to the great God, and to give him his
due glory in praying to him. How fitly does it fall in with our design, when
not only our praying it self but the matter we chiesly pray for have the same
scope and end. We pray that we may glorify God. And the thing we more
principally desire of him in prayer, is that he would glorify himself, or that
his name be glorified. And square all other desires by this measure, desiring
nothing else but what may be, (or as it is) subservient hereto. And

Secondly, If we intend and design any thing of advantage to our selves. We can
only expect to be heard, and to obtain it upon this ground. The great God
deals plainly with us in this, and has expressly declared that if he hear, and
graciously answer us, it will only be upon this consideration, as is often
inculcated, Ezekiel 36. 22. Therefore say unto the house of Israel, thus says
the Lord God, I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine
holy names sake, And I will sanctify my great name, which was profaned among
the heathen, and again, Not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord God, be it
known unto you; be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of
Israel. Verse 32.

This every way then appears a most fit argument to be insisted on in prayer;
And to this purpose as well as to any other. Many of the instances mentioned
from scripture, having an express and particular reference to this very case,
of praying for a people related to God, and upon whom his name was called. It
remains then to show

2. What is requisite to the right and due use of this argument unto this
purpose. Where we may sum up all in two words, sincerity and submission. The
former whereof belongs to this case in common with all others, wherein we can
use this argument, or (which is all one) wherein we can pray at all. The other
has somewhat a more peculiar reference to this case considered apart by it
self. And indeed that the one and the other of these are requisite in the use
of this argument, are both of them Corollaries from the Truth it self we have
been hitherto insisting on, and that have the very substance and spirit of it
in them. For if this be an argument fit to be used in prayer at all, it is
obvious to collect, that it ought to be used with great sincerity in any case,
and with much submission, especially, in such a case as this.

1. It is requisite we use this argument with sincerity. i. e. That we have a
sense in our hearts correspondent to the use of it, or that the impression be
deeply inwrought into our spirits of the glorious excellency of the name of
God. So as it be really the most desirable thing in our eyes, that it be
magnified and rendered most glorious whatsoever becomes of us, or of any people
or nation under Heaven. Many have learnt to use the words For thy names sake,
as a formula, a plausible phrase, a customary, fashionable form of speech, when
first, there is no inward sense in their hearts that does subesse, lies under
the expression, so as that with them it can be said to signify any thing, or
have any meaning at all. Or, secondly, They may have much another meaning from
what these words do import, a very low self-regarding one. As when in praying
for a people that bear this name, of whom themselves are a part, these words
are in their mouths, but their hearts are really solicitous for nothing but
their own little concernments, their wealth, and peace, and ease, and fleshly
accommodations. Apprehending a change of Religion cannot fall out among such a
people, but in conjunction with what may be dangerous to themselves in these
mean respects. Whereupon it may fall out that they will pray earnestly, cry
aloud, be full of concern, vehemently importunate, and all the noise, and cry
mean nothing but their own corn, wine, and oil. They mention the name of the
Lord, but not in truth. It appears the servants of God in the use of this
argument have been touched in their very souls with so deep and quick a sense
of the dignity and honor of the divine name, that nothing else has seemed
considerable with them, or worth the regarding besides. As in those pathetic.
expostulations, What will thou do to thy great name? What will the Egyptians
say? etc. This alone, apart from their own concernments, was the weighty
argument with them. For it weighed nothing with Moses on the contrary, to be
told, I will make of thee a great nation. To have himself never so glorious a
name, to be spread in the world and transmitted to all after ages as the root
and father of a mighty people, was a light thing in comparison of the injury
and disreputation that would be done to Gods own name, if he should desert or
destroy this people. Or, thirdly, They may have a very wicked meaning. The name
of God may be invok't, Religious solemnities used as a Pretense and color to
flagitious actions. In nomine Domini -- etc. Most execrable villainies have been
prefac't with that sacred adorable name. As when a fast was proclaimed, but a
rapine upon Naboths vineyard was the thing designed. And the awful name of God
was indifferently used in prayer and in perjury to serve the same vile purpose.

In which soever of those Degrees this venerable name is insincerely mentioned,
we ought to account a great requisite is wanting to a right use of it as an
argument in prayer. And should consider both the absurdity and the iniquity of
our so misusing it.

1. The absurdity, For who can reasonably think him capable of hearing our
prayers, whom at the same time he thinks incapable of knowing our hearts? Am I
consistent with my self when I invocate, worship, trust in him as a God, whom I
think I can impose upon by a false show? Is it likely, if I can deceive him,
that he can help and succor me?

2. The iniquity. For this can be no low (though it be not the peculiar) sense
of taking the name of the Lord our God in vain. And we know with what awful
words that great precept is enforced. The Lord will not hold him guiltless that
takes his name in vain.

Nor can any man devise to put a greater affront upon him than to approach him
with insincerity. For it is to use him as a senseless Idol, and signifies as if
I counted him as the vanities of the Gentiles, one of their inanimate or brutal
Gods; Denies his omniscience to discern, and his justice and power to revenge
the indignity, all at once.

And what now is to be expected from such a prayer wherein I both fight with my
self and him at the same time. With my self, for the same object that I
worship, I affront in the same act, and with him; for my worship is but seeming
and the affront real.

Such a disagreement with my self were enough to blast my prayer. The (...),
the man with two souls, Jam 1. the double-minded man is said to be (...),
unstable (inconsistent with himself the word signifies) and let not such a man
think says the Apostle, that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. Much more
when his prayer is not only not acceptable to God, but offensive. And by which
he is so far from pleasing, that he provokes.

It is then of unspeakable concernment to us in the use of this Argument, that
we well understand our selves. Let us search our hearts. And see that we mean
as we speak, that we do not pretend a concernedness, and zeal for the name of
God, when he that knows all things, knows that we lie; and that we do but
flatter him with our mouth, and lie unto him with our tongues when our heart is
not right with him. Psalm. 78. 36, 37. That we do not seem to be in great
perplexity about the name and glory of God, when we are quite unconcerned what
becomes of his name, are only solicitous lest we should suffer our selves,
afraid of being undone, of losing our estates, or of being driven from our
dwellings, or perhaps but of being abridg'd somewhat of our conveniences, and
more delectable enjoyments. As if (not the Fortunes of Caesar, and the Empire
but) the mighty and all comprehensive name of the great Lord of heaven and
earth did depend upon our being rich, or quiet, and at our ease, and having our
sense and fancy gratified. As if the heavens rested upon our shoulders, and the
frame of the universe were sustained by us, who our selves need such pitiful
supports, lean upon shadows, and if they fail us are ready to sink and drop
into nothing!

2. Submission is highly requisite especially in a case of this nature, i. e. We
are to submit to his judgment the disposal both of his concernments, which this
argument directly intends, and our own, which we are too apt, indirectly to
connect with his, so as to be more principally solicitous about them.

1. His concernment in this case must (as is fit) be submitted with all humble
deference to his own judgment, it being really a doubtful case, not whether it
be a desirable thing, that the name and honor of God should be preserved and
advanced, or whether we should desire it? But whether his continuing such a
people in visible relation to himself, or rejecting and casting them off, will
be more honorable and glorious to him? Where the doubt lies, there must be the
submission, i. e. This matter must be referred to himself, it being such as
whereof he only is the competent judge, and not we. The thing to be judged of
is not whether occasion may not be taken by men of short discourse, and of
profane minds, to think and speak reflectingly of such a piece of providence,
viz. if a people whom God had long visibly owned and favored should be, at
length, rejected with detestation, and exposed to ruin. It Is like the heathen
nations were very apt so to insult, when God did finally abandon and give up
that people of the Jews, and make them cease at once to be his people, and any
people at all. As we know they did before, when they gained any temporary
advantage upon them, upon their being able to spoil their country, to reduce
them to some distress, and straiten their chief City with a siege, as if they
had them totally in their power, they presently draw the God of Israel into an
ignominious comparison with the fictitious Deities of other vanquished
Countries. The Gods of Hamath, Arphad, Sepharvaim Isa. 36. 19. (who are also
styled their Kings as is thought 2 King. 19. 13. Seldom. de Diis Syris Synt. 2.
Cap. 16.
though the destruction of their Kings may also admit to be meant as an
argument of the impotency of their Gods. And they are mentioned distinctly, as
perhaps was not observed, in both those cited books of Scripture, where that
history is more largely recorded; 2 Kings 18. 34. chap. 19. 13. And Isa. 36.
19. chap. 37. 12, 13) As if he were able to do no more for the protection of
his people, than they for their worshippers. And so, for a few moments, he
remains under the censure of being an impotent God. But that momentary cloud
he knew how soon to dispel, and make his glory shine out so much the more
brightly unto, not only a convincing, but an amazing confutation of so profane
folly; yielded the short sighted adversary a temporary Victory, which he could
presently redeem out of their hands, that he might the more gloriously triumph
in their surprising, unfeared ruin; And so let them, and all the world see
that those advantages were not extorted, but permitted upon considerations that
lay out of their reach to comprehend; and that they proceeded not from want of
power, but the excellency of other perfections, which would in due time be
understood by such as were capable of making a right judgment. His wisdom,
holiness and justice which appeared in putting a people so related to him,
under seasonable rebukes and discountenance, when the state of the case, and
the methods of his Government required it. And so much the rather because they
were so related. According to that You only have I known of all the families of
the earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. Amos 3. 2. The
matter here to be disputed, was not whether it did not occasion a present
dishonor to the God of Israel, to let the enemy have such a seeming ground of
spiteful suggestions concerning him, as if he were impotent, or variable, or
false to them that had entrusted themselves to his protection and care; but
whether that dishonor were not recompenst with advantage, by the greater glory
that accrued to him afterward. And this also is the matter that must come
under judgment, if at length he should finally cast off such a people; whether
upon the whole, all things being considered and taken together, it be not more
for the honor of his name, and the reputation of his rectoral attributes, to
break off such a relation to them, than continue it. Wherein he is not
concerned to approve himself to the opinion of fools, or half-witted persons:
and whose shallow judgment too, is governed by their disaffection; but to such
as can consider. Perhaps, to such as shall hereafter rise up in succeeding
ages. For he is not in haste. His steady duration, commensurate with all the
successions of time, and which runs into Eternity, can well admit of his
staying till this or that frame, and contexture of providence be completed,
and capable of being more entirely viewed at once, and till calmer minds, and
men of less interested passions shall come to have the considering of it. And
in the mean time he has those numberless myriads of wise and holy sages in the
other world, the continual observers of all his dispensations, that behold them
with equal, unbyast minds, and from the evidence of the matter, give their
concurrent approbation, and applause, with all the true members of the Church
on earth, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just, and true
are thy ways, thou King of Saints. Rev. 15. 3. But it is enough, and much more
considerable to approve himself to himself; and that all his dispensations are
guided according to the steady, eternal Reason of things, which is an
inviolable law to him, from which he never departs, and from the perpetual
uniform agreement of all his providence whereto, an indubious glory will
result unto him, that will never admit the least Eclipse, or ever be capable of
being drawn into dispute. And according whereto it will appear, if ever he
forsake such a people, the concernment of his name and glory in the matter, was
the great inducement to it, that he did even owe it to himself, and had not,
otherwise, done right to his own name.

And whatsoever might be argued from it to the contrary will be found capable
of a clear and easy answer, so as that the weight of the argument will
entirely ly on this side. For

1. As to his Power, he has reason to be ever secure concerning the reputation
of that, having given, and knowing how further to give, when he pleases,
sufficient demonstrations of it, otherwise. Nor was it ever his design to
represent himself as a Being of mere Power, which of it self, has nothing of
moral excellency in it, nor do the appearances of it tend to beget that true
notion of God in the minds of men which he designed to propagate; otherwise
than as the glory of it should shine in conjunction with that of his other
Attributes that are more peculiarly worthy of God, more appropriate to him, and
more apt to represent him to the world as the most suitable object of a
Religious veneration. Whereas mere power is capable of having place in an
un-intelligent nature, and in an intelligent tainted with the most odious
impurities. He never desired to be known among men by such a name, as should
signify power only un-accompani'd with wisdom, holiness, etc. And

2. For his wisdom it is seen in pursuing valuable ends, by methods suitable to
them, and becoming himself. It became the absolute Sovereignty of a God, to
select a nation, that he would favor more than other nations; but would ill
have agreed with his wisdom to have bound himself absolutely to them, so to
favor them, howsoever they should demean themselves.

3. His bounty and goodness, though it found them no better than other people,
was to have made them better. Nor was it any disreputation to his goodness to
divert its current, when they, after long trial, do finally resist its design.

4. His Clemency must not be made liable to be mistaken for inadvertency, or
neglect. And to give the world cause to say, Tush God sees not, neither is
there knowledge in the most high. Nor for indifferency, and unconcernedness
what men do, as if good and bad were alike to him. And that such as do evil
were good in the sight of the Lord, and he delighted in them; words, wherewith
he sometime complained that men wearied him Mal. 2. 17. He is not to redeem the
reputation of one attribute by the real prejudice of another; i. e. the offense
and grievance to it, which acting directly against it (if that were possible)
would occasion.

5. His sincerity will be highly vindicated and glorified, when it shall be
seen that there is nothing more of severity in such a dispensation, when ever
it takes place, than was plainly expressed in his often repeated fore-warnings
and threatenings, even long before. And therefore

6. He is herein but constant to himself, and should be more liable to the
charge of mutability, and inconstancy, if finally, when the case should so
require, he should not take this course. And

7. As to his righteousness, and fidelity toward such a people, even those to
whom he more strictly obliged himself than ever he did to any particular nation
besides. Let but the tenor of his Covenant with them be consulted, and see
whether he did not reserve to himself a liberty of casting them off, if they
revolted from him. And whether these were not his express terms that he would
be with them while they were with him, but that if they forsook him, he would
forsake them also.

Therefore much more is he at liberty, as to any other people, to whom he never
made so peculiar promises of external favors as he did to this people. Nor
hereupon can any thing be pleaded from his name, or that is within the compass
of its signification, with any certainty, that it shall conclude, and be
determining on the behalf of such a people. There is a real, great doubt in the
case, whether the argument may not weigh more the other way. And whether the
wickedness of such a people may not be grown to such a prodigious excess, that
whereas none of these his mentioned attributes do make it necessary, he should
continue his relation, some other, that could not be alleged for it, may not
be alleged against it, and do not make it necessary he should break it off.
The glory of his holiness (which if we consider it in it self, and consider the
value, and stress he is wont to put upon it, we might even reckon the prime
glory of the Deity) is not, perhaps, to be sufficiently salv'd and vindicated
without, at length, quite abandoning and casting them off. There seems to be
somewhat very awful and monitory in those most pleasant, gracious words, and
that breathe so sweet a savor. But now they desire a better Country, that is,
an heavenly: wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God. Heb. 11. 16.
viz. that if a people that have long enjoyed brighter discoveries of heaven,
and the way to it, do yet generally bear a disaffected heart to the design of
that revelation, remain habitually terrene, like the rest of the world,
governed by the spirit of it, ingulft in the common pollutions, sensualities,
impieties of the wicked atheistical inhabitants of this earth. God will be even
ashamed to be called their God. He will reckon it ignominious, and a reproach
to him (though he will save such as are sincere among them) to stand visibly
related to such a people as their God. What to have them for a peculiar people,
that are not peculiar? To distinguish them that will not be distinguished? To
make a visible difference by external favors and privileges, where there is
no visible difference in practice and conversation, that might signify a more
excellent Spirit. This is not only to lose the intended design, but to have it
turn to a disadvantage. And whom he expected to be for a name and a praise to
him, a crown and a royal Diadem, to become to him a dishonor and a blot. And
we do find that such severities as have been used toward such a people, are
declared to have been so, even for the sake of his name, Jer. 34. 16, 17. But
ye turned and polluted my name, -- Therefore -- I will make you to be removed
into all the Kingdoms of the earth. And when therefore a remnant of this
people, rebelliously, against Gods express word, went down into Egypt,
preferring a precarious subsistence, under tyranny and idolatry, at the cruel
mercy of a long since baffled enemy before the true Religion, and liberty,
under the divine protection, see how God expresses his resentment of this
dishonor done to his name, and the affront offered to his Government. Jer. 44.
26. Therefore hear ye the word of the Lord, all Judah that dwell in the land of
Egypt, Behold, I have sworn by my great name, says the Lord, that my name,
shall no more be named in the mouth of any man of Judah, in all the land of
Egypt, saying; The Lord God lives.

And when the time drew nearer of Gods total rejection of that people, as in
the time of Malachi's prophecies; They are charged with despising and profaning
his name. chap. 1. verse 6. and 12. and are told God had now no pleasure in
them, nor would accept an offering at their hands, but that his name should be
great among the Gentiles (verse 10, 11.) even from the rising of the sun to the
going down of the same, Intimating that (excepting those few that thought on
his name, chap. 3. 16. and that feared his name, chap. 4. 2, who he says
should be his, when he made up his jewels, and the sun of righteousness should
rise upon them) he would have no more to do with them, but in the day that
should burn as an oven, (when the whole Hemisphere should be as one fiery
vault) they should be burnt up as stubble, and neither root nor branch be left
of them, And all this upon the concern he had for his name, which was reproacht
by such a peoples pretending to it. Whereupon, they had been threatened chap. 2.
verse 2. that except they did give glory to his name, he would curse them, and
their blessings, corrupt their seed, spread dung upon their faces, even that of
their solemn feasts, and they should be taken away therewith.

It is therefore possible the whole force of this argument may lie against us,
in praying for such a people, I say, it is possible it may, Whether actually it
do or no, we can never be competent judges. Our knowledge is not large enough,
nor our minds enough comprehensive. Our wisdom is folly it self to the
estimating such a case. We are capable of pronouncing hastily, it would in
this, or that particular respect, be dishonorable, and an obscurement of Gods
name, if he should cast off England. But he that pronounces hastily, considers
but a few things, and looks but a little way.

The question is whether all things compared and considered together, that
belong to such a case, it will be more honorable to God or dishonorable, and
more or less recommend him to intelligent minds, get him a greater and more
excellent name and renown in the world, when it shall be enlightened to consider
the case, to break off his relation or continue it? We know his own judgment is
according to truth, and hope he will judge the way, that will be more
favorable to us. But we cannot be certain of it. It Is a case that requires the
judgment of his all comprehending mind, whose prospect is large every way; and
takes in all the decencies and indecencies that escape our notice. As we know
in viewing things with the eye, a quick and clear sight (especially helped with
a fit instrument) will discern many things, so fine, and minute, as to be, to a
duller eye, altogether invisible. It is the work of wisdom, and judgment, to
discern exactly the critical seasons, and junctures of time, when to do this or
that. And the wise God in his dispensations, especially toward a great
Community, or the collective body of a people, takes usually a vast compass of
time, within which to select the apt and fit season, for this or that act,
whether of severity, or mercy toward them. And it is more fit, as by the
coincidence of things, it contributes more to the greater glory of his name. We
cannot discern the things, the concurrence whereof, make this a fitter season
than another, that such an event should be placed just there, within so large a
tract of time. What mortal man, or indeed what finite mind, was capable of
judging some hundreds of years before, what was just wanting to the fullness of
the Amorites sin, so as that it should be more honorable, and glorious to the
divine justice, not to animadvert thereon, till that very time when he did it.
Or why he chose that time which he pitched upon, wherein to come down, and
deliver his Israel from their Egyptian oppressors. Or when (without
inspiration) to be able to say the time to favor Zion, even the set time is
come. Nor are we to resolve the matter only into the absoluteness of his
Sovereignty, upon the account whereof he may take what time he pleases, but the
depth of his hidden wisdom, for he does all things according to the Counsel of
his will, having reasons to himself, which our shallow, dim, sight perceives
not, and whereof we are infinitely less able to make a sure judgment, than a
Country Idiot of reasons of state. He may (as to the present case) think it
most fit, most honorable, and glorious, so often to forgive, or so long to
forbear such a delinquent people; And may, at length, judge it most becoming
him, and most worthy of him, as he is the common Ruler of the world, and their
injured, despised Ruler, to strike the fatal stroke, and quite cut them off
from him.

Now here, it is therefore necessarily our duty, to use this argument with him
of his name, so, as wholly to submit the matter to his judgment, and but
conditionally, if it will indeed make most for the glory of his name, that then
he will not abhor and reject such a people even for his names sake. Nor can we
herein be too importunate, if we be not peremptory, not too intent upon the
end, the glory of his name; for about the goodness, excellency, and
desireableness of that we are certain; if we be not too determinate about the
means, or what will be most honorable to his name, concerning which we are
uncertain.

Neither is it disallowed us to use the best judgment we can, about the means,
and the interest of Gods name in this case. It is not our fault to be mistaken,
he expects us not to use the judgment of Gods. But it will be our fault to be
peremptory and confident in a matter, wherein we may be mistaken; and must
signify too much officiousness, as if we understood his affairs better than
himself, and a bold insolence, to take upon us to be the absolute judges of
what we understand not; and to cover our presumption with a pretense of duty.
Therefore though such a people be dear to us, yet because his name ought to be
infinitely more dear, that, in the settled bent of our hearts, we ought to
prefer. And be patient of his sentence, whatever it prove to be, with deep
resentment of our own desert but with high complacency that his name is
vindicated, and glorified, and with a sincere, undissembled applause of the
justice of his proceedings; how severe soever they may be toward us.
Especially if we have reason to hope, that severity will terminate, but in a
temporary discountenance, and frown; not in a final rejection.

2. Much more are we to submit our own secular concernments, which may be
involved. i. e. We ought only to pray, we may have the continued, free,
profession, and exercise of our Religion, in conjunction with the comfortable
enjoyment of the good things of this life, if that may consist with, and best
serve the honor of his great name. But if he do really make this judgment in
our case, that we have so misdemean'd our selves, and been so little really
better to common observation, in our practice and conversation, than men of a
worse Religion, that he cannot without injury to his name, and the reputation
of his Government, countenance us against them, by the visible favors of his
providence: That it will not be honorable for him to protect us in our
Religion, to so little purpose; and while we so little answer the true design
of it; That if we will retain our Religion (which we know we are upon no terms
to quit) we must suffer for it, and sanctify that name before men by our
suffering, which we dishonored by our sinning. We have nothing left us to do
but to submit to God, to humble our selves under his mighty hand, to accept the
punishment of our sin, to put off our ornaments, expecting what he will do with
us. And be content that our dwellings, our substance, our ease, and rest, our
liberties and lives, if he will have it so, be all sacrifices to the honor of
that excellent name.

Nor can our use of this argument want such submission without much
insincerity. Concerning this therefore look back to what was said on the former
head.

Nor is there any hardship in the matter, that we are thus limited in our
praying, for what even nature it self teaches us to desire; our safety, peace,
and outward comforts; unless we count it an hardship that we are Creatures, and
that God is God, and that ours is not the supreme interest. The desires of the
sensitive nature are not otherwise to be formed into petitions than by the
direction of the rational, that also, being governed by a superadded holy
divine nature; unto which it is a supreme, and a vital law, that God is to be
first-eyed in every thing. Reason teaches that so it should be, and grace makes
it be so.

And it ought to be far from us to think this an hardship; when, in reference
to our greater, and more considerable concernments, those of our souls, and
our eternal states, we are put upon no such (dubious suspenceful) submission.
He has not, in these, left the matter at all doubtful, or at any uncertainty,
whether he will reckon it more honorable to his name to save, or destroy
eternally, a sincerely penitent, believing, obedient soul. He has settled a
firm connection between the felicity of such, and his own glory. And never put
it upon us, as any part of our duty, to be contented to perish for ever, that
he may be glorified; or ever to ask our selves whether we are so content or no.
For he has made such things our present, immediate, indispensable duty, as
with which our perishing is not consistent, and upon supposition whereof, it is
impossible we should not be happy. If we believe in his son, and submit to his
Government, his name pleads irresistibly for our being saved by him. He can
have no higher glory from us, than that we be to the praise of the glory of his
grace, being once accepted in the beloved.

Neither is it disallowed us to do the part of concives, fellow members of a
community, civil, or spiritual, to pray, very earnestly, for our people, city,
country that are so justly dear to us. Only since prayer it self is an
acknowledgment of his superiority to whom we pray: and we have no argument,
that we ought to hope should prevail, but that of his own name; we can but
pray, and plead as the nature of prayer, and the import of that argument will
admit. i. e. with entire subjection to his holy and sovereign will, and
subordination to his supreme Interest, to whom we address our selves in prayer.

Use. And now the use this will be of to us, is partly to correct and reprehend
our prayers, wherein they shall be found disagreeable to the true import of
this Argument, and partly to persuade unto, and encourage, such praying, as
shall be agreeable to it.

1. It justly, and aptly serves to reprehend, and correct, such praying as
disagrees with it. Especially the carnality, and the selfishness of our
prayers. The use of this argument implies that the glory of God, and the
exaltation of his name, should be the principal design of our prayers. Is it
not in these respects much otherwise? We keep fast after fast, and make many
prayers. And what is the chief design of them? or the thing we are most intent,
and which our hearts are principally set upon? We see how God expostulates this
matter. Zech. 7. 5. When ye fasted and mourned, in the fifth, and seventh
month, even those seventy years, did you at all fast unto me, even unto me? Why
to whom can it be thought this people did keep fasts but unto God? Yes no doubt
they did eye him, as the object, but not as the end. They were kept to him, but
not for him, so as that his interest, and glory was the thing principally
designed in them. Nor can it be, if the things we chiefly insist upon, be such
as have no connection with his true interest, or subserviency to it. And let us
enquire upon these two heads; whether our prayers, in these respects, do not
run in such a strain, as that they cannot possibly be understood to mean him,
or have a true reference to him.

1. In respect of the carnality of them. When we pray for the people of our own
land, or for the Christian Church, more generally, what sort of evils is it
that we find our hearts most feelingly to deprecate, and pray against? what are
the good things we chiefly desire for them? We find our selves, it is likely, to
have somewhat a quick sense, and dread of the calamities of war, depredation,
oppression, persecution, and we feel, probably, somewhat of simpathy within our
selves, when we hear of any abroad, professing true, reformed Christianity,
that suffer the spoiling of their goods, are banished from their pleasant homes,
dragged to prisons, pressed with pinching necessities, for the sake of their
Religion; and it were well if our compassions were more enlarged in such cases.
And if we should hear of nations depopulated, Cities sacked, Towns and Countries
deluged with blood and slaughter, these things would certainly have an
astonishing sound in our ears. But have we any proportionable sense of the
Spiritual evils that wast, and deform the Christian Church, exhaust its
strength and vigor, and blemish its beauty and glory? Ignorance, terrene
inclination, glorying in the external forms of Religion, while the life and
power of it is unknown and denied, estrangement from God, real infidelity
toward the Redeemer, veiled over by pretended nominal Christianity,
uncharitableness, pride, wrath, strife, envy, hatred, hypocrisy, deceitfulness
toward God and man? We ought to lament and deprecate the former evils without
over-looking these, or counting them less, or being less affected with them. We
are apt to pray for peace unto the Christian community, for halcyon days,
prosperity, the abundance of all outward blessings, in conjunction with the
universal reception of such forms of Religion, as are most agreeable to our
minds, and inclinations. But do we as earnestly pray for the reviving of
primitive Christianity, and that the Christian Church may shine in the beauties
of holiness, in heavenliness, faith, love to God, and one another, in
simplicity, meekness, patience, humility, contempt of this present world, and
purity from all the corruptions of it. This we chiefly, ought to have done,
without leaving the other undone. Which while it is left out of our prayers, or
not more principally insisted on in them, how ill do they admit of enforcement
by this argument from the name of God? For do we think it is so very honorable
to his name, to be the God of an opulent, luxurious, voluptuous, proud,
wrathful, contentious people, under what religious form or denomination soever?

2. But also do not our prayers chiefly center in our selves? while we make a
customary (not understood) use in them of the name of God? And when we
principally design our selves in our prayers, what is it we covet most for our
selves? It Is not agreeable to the holy, new divine nature, to desire to ingross
spiritual good things to our selves; when for others, we desire only the good
things of this earth. But if our prayers do only design the averting from our
selves outward calamities, or inconveniences, and the obtaining only of ease,
indulgence, and all grateful accommodations to our flesh, how absurd an
hypocrisy is it to fashion up such a petition, by adding to it for thy names
sake? As if the name of God did oblige him to consult the ease and repose of
our flesh! when our souls, thereby, are made, and continued the nurseries of
all the evil, vicious inclinations, which show themselves in our practice, most
of all to the dishonor of that name! what subordination is there here?
Manifest is the opposition of our carnal interest, to the interest and honor
of the blessed name of God. If a Malefactor, convicted of the highest crimes
against the Government, should petition for himself to this purpose, that it
will bring a great disreputation upon authority, and detract from the famed
clemency and goodness of the Prince, if any punishment should be inflicted on
him for his offenses, or if he be not indulged and suffered to persist in them.
How would this petition sound with sober, intelligent men? It Is no wonder our
flesh regrets suffering, but it is strange our reason should be so lost, as to
think, at random, that right or wrong the name of God is not otherwise to be
indemnifi'd than by its being saved from suffering. As if the gratification of
our flesh, and the glory of Gods name were so very nearly related, and so much
akin to one another! And now this carnal self-interest, insinuating it self,
and thus distorting our prayers, is the radical evil in them, and the first and
original part of their faultiness. For it is not likely we should love others,
better than our selves; Therefore we cannot go higher in supplicating for
others. But yet we inconsiderately mention the name of God for fashion sake,
though it be no way concerned in the matter, unless to vindicate and greaten it
self, in rejecting us and our prayers together.

2. The further use of what has been said upon this subject, will be to
persuade and engage us to have more regard to the name of God in our prayers;
Especially in our praying about national, and public concernments; or such
external concernments of our own as are involved with them. That, in the
habitual temper of our spirits, we be so entirely and absolutely devoted to
God, and the interest of his great name, that our prayers may savor of it, and
be of an agreeable strain; that the inward sense of our souls, may fully
correspond to the true import of this argument, and our hearts may not reproach
us, when we use it, as only pretending God, but meaning our selves, and that
only our carnal self, the interest whereof alone, can be in competition with
that of Gods name; and which, while it prevails in us, will be the measure of
our prayers for others also; That the meaning of our words may not be One, and
the meaning of our hearts, another, that we may truly mean as we speak, when we
use the words for thy names sake. And that our hearts may bear us this true
testimony, that we desire nothing but in due subordination to the glory of his
name; external favors, with limitation; only so far as they may; and spiritual
blessings, absolutely, because they certainly will, admit of this
subordination. And to this purpose let it be considered.

1. How unsuitable it is to the condition of a creature, that it should be
otherwise. That were certainly, a most uncreaturely prayer, that should be of a
contrary tenor. Let us but digest and state the case aright in our own
thoughts. Admit we are praying, with great ardency, on the behalf of a people
to which we are related, and who are also related to God. It can scarce be
thought we are more concerned for them, than for our selves; or that we love
them more than we do our selves. Our love to our selves is the usual measure of
our love to others. And that is higher in the same kind, which is the measure
of all besides, that belongs to that kind. When therefore we are much concerned
for the external felicity of such a people, it is very natural to be more
deeply concerned for our own. Now if the sense of our hearts, in such a prayer,
will not agree with the true import of these words, for thy names sake; because
indeed, we are more concerned for our own carnal peace, ease, and accommodation
than we are for the name of God. Let us, that we may have the matter more
clearly in view, put our request into such words, as wherewith the sense of our
hearts will truly agree, and will it not be thus Lord, whatever becomes of thy
name, let nothing be done that shall be grievous, and disquieting to my flesh,
which is as much as to say, Quit thy throne to it, resign thy Government,
abandon all thy great interests for the service, and gratification of this
animated clod of clay; And do we not now begin to blush at our own prayer? We
easily slide over such a matter, as this, while our sense is more latent, and
not distinctly reflected on, but let us have it before us conceptis verbis; let
it appear with its own natural face, and look; and now see what horror and
detestableness it carries with it! And dare we now put up so treasonable a
prayer? It would puzzle all our Arithmetic, to assign the quota pars, or the
proportional part any of us is, of the universe, or the whole creation of God!
And do I then think it fit, that the heavens should roll for me? or all the
mighty wheels of providence move only with regard to my convenience? If a worm
in your garden were capable of thoughts, and because it is permitted to crawl
there, should think, this garden was made for me, and every thing in it ought
to be ordered for my accommodation, and pleasure, would you not wonder that
such insolence, and a disposition to think so extravagantly, should be in
conjunction with the thinking power, or an ability to think at all. If we allow
our selves in that far greater (infinitely more unbeseeming, and
disproportionable) petulancy, Do we think when the roller comes it will scruple
to crush us, or have regard to our immodest, pretenceless claim? Let us
consider what little minute things, how next to nothing we are, even compared
with all the rest of the world; what are we then compared with the Maker and
Lord of it, in comparison of whom the whole, is but as the drop of a bucket, or
the small dust of the balance, lighter than nothing and vanity! We should more
contemplate our selves in such a comparison, many comparing themselves with
themselves are not wise. While we confine and limit our eye only to our selves,
we seem great things, fancy our selves very considerable. But what am I? What
is my single personality? ipseity, selfhood (call it what you will) to him who
is the all in all; whose being (actually, or radically) comprehends all being,
all that I can conceive, and the infinitely greater all, that I cannot. If
therefore I take in, with my self, the whole body of a people besides, that I
am concerned for, and admit that a generous love to my Country, should make me
prefer their concernments to my own; or that upon an higher account, as they
are a people related to God, I could even lay down my life for them. What are
we all, and all our interests to that of his name? And if we should all agree
in a desire, that our interest should be served upon the dishonor of that
name, it were but a treasonable conspiracy against our common rightful Lord.
And a foolish one, being expressed in a prayer; as if we thought to engage him,
by our faint breath, against himself. We are to desire no more for them, than
they may for themselves. And if we have joined in open sinning against him, to
that height that he shall judge he is obliged for the vindication, and honor
of his name, (by which we have been called) of his wisdom, holiness, and
punitive justice, as openly to animadvert upon us, can we gainsay? If we knew
of such a judgment nothing could remain for us but shame, and silence,
conviction of ill desert, and patienent bearing the punishment of our sin. And
while we know it not, yet because it is possible; we ought no otherwise to
deprecate such a procedure against us, than as will consist with that
possibility. To pray otherwise, if we make no mention of his name, is absurd
presumption, that we should wish, or imagine, he will prefer any concernments
of ours, to the steady order and decorum of his own Government. But if we do
make mention of it, it is a more absurd hypocrisy, to seem concerned for his
name, when we intend only our own external advantages! as if we thought he that
could answer our prayers, could not understand them. It Is surely very
unbecoming creatures, to bear themselves so, toward the God that made them.

2. Consider, that to have a sense in our hearts truly agreeable to the proper
meaning of this argument for thy names sake, is very suitable to the state of
returning Creatures, who are gathering themselves back to God, out of the
common apostasy, wherein all were engaged, and combined against that great Lord
and Ruler of the world. In that defection every one did principally mind and
set up for himself. Each one would be a God to himself, but all were, by
consequence, against God. Whom to be for, they were divided, and of as many
minds as there were men. Whom to be against, they were agreed, as if their
common Lord, was the common Enemy. For his interest, and theirs, were opposite,
and irreconcilable. They were sunk and lost in sensuality, and had no other
interest, than that of their flesh. When man has made himself a brute, he
then thinks himself fittest to be a God. The interest of our souls must unite
us with him: that of our flesh engages us against him. Some are thorough the
power of his grace returning. What a pleasure would it be to us to behold our
selves among the reduces! those that are upon their return. That are, again,
taking the Lord only to be their God, and his interest for their only interest!

3. Consider that our very name, as we are Christians, obliges us to be of that
obedient, happy number. For what is Christianity but the tendency of souls
toward God, through the mediation, and under the conduct of Christ? Therefore
is the initial precept of it, and the condition of our entrance into that
blessed state, self-denial. We answer not our own name, further than as we are
revolving, and rolling back, out of our single, and separate state, into our
original, most natural state, of subordination to God; wherein only we are
capable of union with him, and final blessedness in him. This is Discipleship
to Christ, and the design of the Christian Religion to be subdued in our
Spirits, and wrought down into compliance with the divine will, to be meek,
lowly, humble, patient, ready to take up the cross, to bear any thing, lose any
thing, be any thing, or be nothing, that God may be all in all. This is our
conformity, not to the precepts only, but to the example too, of our great
Lord. Who when he was in the form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal
with God: made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of man; And being found in fashion, as a
man, humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross. Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. And hereupon, because he was so entirely devoted to
the honor, and service of Gods great name (father glorify thy name summed up
his desires) therefore God highly exalted him, and gave him a name above every
name, That in the name of Jesus every knee should bow, etc. verse 9. 10. And
when ever he shall have a Church in the world, that he will think it fit to own
with visible, unintermitted favors, it must consist of persons formed
according to that pattern. And then, by losing their own name and little
interests for Gods, they will find all recovered, when their glorious Redeemer
shall write upon them the name of his God, and the name of the City of his God,
and his own new name. Rev. 3. 12.

4. Let it be further (in the last place) considered, with what cheerfulness
and confidence, we may then pray; when our hearts are wrought to this pitch,
that we sincerely design the honor of the divine name, as the most desirable
thing; and which name above all things we covet to have glorified. For we are
sure of being heard, and to have the same answer, which was given our Lord by a
voice like that of thunder, from heaven, when he prayed Father glorify thy
name, Joh. 12. I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again. Our hearts
are not right in us, till we can count this a pleasant, grateful answer. And if
we can, we can never fail of it. For we are told 1 John 5. 14. That whatsoever
we ask according to his will he hears us. This will deliver our minds from
suspense. When we pray for nothing whereof we are uncertain, but with great
deference and submission, and for nothing absolutely, and with greatest
engagement of heart; but whereof we are certain. Upon such terms we may pray
with great assurance, as Daniel did, O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord
hearken and do defer not for thine own sake, O my God: for thy city, and thy
people are called by thy name. chapter 9. 19. And tho an angel be not thereupon
sent to tell us, as was to him, so many weeks are determined upon [thy] people
and [thy] holy City (so the matter is expressed; as it were kindly giving back
the interest in them to Daniel, with advantage, that he had before acknowledged
unto God) to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, etc. yet we are assured, of what reasonably ought
to be as satisfying, that whatsoever shall befall our City, or our people,
shall end in the eternal glory of God, and of the City of God.

FINIS.

