Mr. HOWE's SRERMON On the DEATH of Mr. RICH. ADAMS.

A SERMON On the much Lamented DEATH OF THAT Reverend and Worthy Servant of
CHRIST Mr. Richard Adams, M. A. SOMETIME Fellow of Brazen-Nose College in
Oxford. Afterward, Minister of St. Mildred Breadstreet, London. More lately,
Pastor of a Congregation in Southwark. Who Deceased Febr. 7 th. 1697/8.
Preached, February the 20 th. School. By JOHN HOW, Minister of the GOSPEL.

LONDON: Printed by S. Bridge, for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns
in Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel, School.

To Mrs. Anna Adams, Widow, and Coll. John Adams, Brother to the Deceased Mr.
Richard Adams.
My Honored Friends,
DEath is too common a Theme, and too obvious to our Sense to be thought
strange, any more than that we live. But that the Course of our Life, as to the
Rise, Progress, and Period of it, is at the dispose of one common Lord of all,
because it belongs to a Sphere above Sense, is little considered by the most.
To you, I doubt not, its far from being a new or unfamiliar Thought. And
thereupon, that the Precious Life you have lately seen Finished, was measured
by Him who could not therein be unkind to him who is gone; or to you who stay
behind.

We do, indeed, Tempt our selves, if we expect from his kindness, unreasonable
Things. As that he should, to Gratify us, alter the Course of Nature, or recall
the Universal Commission of Death, or only let it stand in force with an
Exception, as to our selves, our Relatives, and Friends, or that he should tear
his own most inviolable Constitutions; by which the present State is to be but
Transitory, and the future the only fixed State, which were to subvert the
whole frame of Religion, to nullify the design of Redemption, to take down his
Tribunal, to abolish and lay aside all thoughts of a Judgment to come, and
finally to make the Kingdom of His dear Son to terminate in a Dunghill. While no
such wish has place with you, your Reconciliation is easy to the Providence
that has for the present bereaved you of so delectable a Relation. And the
Love of God, which prevailing in you, will prompt you to compliance with his
will, must be the evidence of your title to the best Blessings of both Worlds.
For both the things in the other State the Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard,
etc. And the Concurrent Operation of all things for good in this present State,
do all belong to Persons of the same Character, The Lovers of God, 1 Cor. 2.9.
Romans 8.28. Which that you may constantly and fully experience to the end, and
in the end, is the serious Prayer, for you, of

Your very Respectful, and Affectionate Servant in Christ JOHN HOW

A Funeral Sermon ON THE DEATH OF Mr. Richard Adams.
PHILIPIANS I. latter part of v. 23. Having a desire to Depart, and to be with
Christ, which is far better. The foregoing Words are, I am in a straight
betwixt two. And then it follows, Having a desire to depart, etc.
IF you should have no other Subject for your present Consideration, than only;
That one in your Neighborhood is Lately Dead; Even that it self would deserve
your very serious Thoughts. The Translation of Humane Souls from World to
World, and out of this Present, into their Eternal State, is no light Matter;
and does claim and challenge more serious Thoughts, than it is commonly wont to
find and meet with. Nor does the commonness of such an occasion, at all excuse
the slightness of Men's Thoughts upon it; but rather aggravate it unspeakably
more. That which we find to be so common and universal a Case, we may be sure
will shortly be our own: And as it is now matter of Discourse with us, that
such a one is Dead, we shall ere it be long, according as we have been more or
less regarded in the World, be a like Subject of Discourse to others.

But it is a greater Thing, when it can be said, a Good Man is gone; there is a
more special Remark to be put upon the Decease of such a one, Mark the perfect
Man, and behold the Upright, the (...) of that Man is Peace, as Psalm 37.37.
There is that Agreement between his Way and his End, they are so much of a
Piece, and do so exactly Correspond; a course transacted in a constant Serenity
and Peace, meeting at length with Peace as the End of it; An even course,
still, uniform, self-agreeable, ever equal to, and like it self, ending at last
in Peace: Mark this! how he goes off, mark such a Life so ending!

But it yet Challenges more intense Consideration, when such a one is taken
away from amongst us, and the Progress and Period of his Course come to be
viewed together, whose Life was a continued Series of Labors in the Lords
Vineyard, from the earlier, to the later Hours of his Day; when such a one has
finished his Course, and fought out the good Fight of Faith, and is entered
into his Rest; by the vouchsafement of his indulgent Lord and Master, is made
to rest from his Labors, and receive the Reward of them, the Reward of Grace,
with a Well done good and faithful Servant, enter into the Joy of thy Lord!

And sure it cannot be ungrateful to you, to be desired here to stay a little,
to make a stand, and pause, and entertain your selves a while with the
Consideration of such a Theme and Subject as this. Especially it cannot be an
ungrateful Contemplation, to such as have known the Doctrine, and Purpose, and
Faith, and Charity, and manner of Life, of such a one, as the Apostle speaks;
so as to be told of nothing, but what you knew before: And so they are not
dubious and uncertain Thoughts, that you are to employ upon such a Theme; you
are well assured of the Truth of the Fact, and when you know it to be true, you
cannot but discern it to be very considerable and important Truth, and of very
great Concernment to you. What the Spirit of such a one has been through his
whole Course, you have a very high Example of in this Blessed Apostle; And a
Copy has been written out fair, after such a Pattern, by this lately Deceased
worthy Servant of Christ. Besides the many Straights and Difficulties, that
great Apostle met with in the Course and Current of his Time; he meets with
this toward the end of it, to be in a straight between two, and he does not
know what to choose, viz. between these two Things, The Consideration of what
would be the best and most valuable good to himself; and the Consideration of
what would be the more valuable Good, unto the Christian Church, and
particularly unto these Christian Philippians, to whom he now writes. He had no
doubt at all in the Case, but that to depart, and to be with Christ, would be
the best and most valuable Good to himself: And it was as little to be doubted
of, but that his continued abode and stay in this World, would be much more a
valuable Good unto the Christian Church; and unto this or that Church in
particular, that had enjoyed, and might further enjoy, his most fruitful
Labors. His difficuly and straight, was not either what was best for him, or
what was best for them; but which of these two he should, upon the whole,
prefer; whether he should prefer his own Private Interest, or prefer the common
Interest of Christ in the World. And upon weighing and pondering the Matter
with himself, he does prefer the latter, so as, without any kind of Hesitation,
to express a great complacency in it, that he should be continued yet longer,
some time longer, for common good, in this World. And it was a most noble piece
of Self-denial that was exercised herein, if you consider what the Apostles
Privileges had been. He had been caught up into the Third Heaven, he had there
seen unutterable Things; nor could he doubt his Interest in the Felicity and
Glory of the Heavenly State. On the other hand consider, his Life here on
Earth, was no voluptuous Life, it was not a Life of Ease and Pleasure, See the
Account that he gives of it in 1 Cor. 4. and in 2 Cor. 6. and in Chap. 11. of
the same Epistle. And to find, amongst how many Deaths he converst as it were
every Day of his Life, how familiar Labors, and Fastings, and Watchings were
to him; yea Stripes and Imprisonments; and that he was now at this Time a
Prisoner, as we see in some foregoing Verses of this very Chapter, viz. ver.
13, 14, 16. even in the very Lions Paw, in the continual Expectation of being
devoured, and not long after to be offered up, as he elsewhere speaks. Yet he
seems to take great Complacency in the Thoughts of, having some Addition made
to his Time in this World, on the common Christian Account; and that his own
Blessedness and Glory should be, for this Reason, a little while deferred; he
was Patient of this, he could endure it, out of his Love to Christ and the
Souls of Men. But as to himself, for what he esteemed, and desired accordingly,
as his best and most valuable Good, he was in no Hesitation or Doubt concerning
that, but Pronounces without any more ado, That he did desire to be dissolved,
or Depart, (the Words may be read either way) and to be with Christ, which is
far better; only he distinguishes what was his own most valuable good, and what
was the most valuable good of the Christian Church. And though he give this
latter the Preference, as in it self the more considerable Thing: Yet as to
himself, and his own concerns, to Depart, and be with Christ, he reckons far
better: And accordingly he did desire it as such, as better for him; as having
nothing to detain him, or nothing, which, on his own Private Account, he could
so much Mind or Covet, as that.

Now in this Comparison, it is this one side of it, which the Words that I have
read to you do call us to consider, and confine us to at this Time. As to that
other Part, it lies within the Compass of the Context, but not of the Text; and
so we shall not Treat of that at present: But consider, what is the genuine
Temper and Disposition of a Christian, and more principally of a Minister of
Christ, in reference to what he is to eye and look upon as his own best, and
most valuable Good; and that is, to Depart, and to be with Christ. This indeed
the Apostle speaks of himself, a great and eminent Minister of the Gospel of
Christ. But though this Temper and Disposition of Spirit was agreeable, it was
not appropriate to such a one. It is indeed very agreeable, it is very suitable
to the Spirit of a faithful Minister of Christ, in reference to himself, and
any Interest and Concern of his, to desire to depart, and to be with Christ:
But it is not so agreeable to such a one, as to be appropriate to him, or to
exclude the generality of serious and living Christians; because it is upon one
account; principally common to Ministers, and to other Christians, that this
Judgment is to be made, and this Desire is to have Place in Reference to that
Judgment. And therefore, that is what I will, for the little Time that remains,
chiefly insist upon.

That it ought to be, and in very great measure is, the Temper and Character of
gracious Persons, or sincere Christians, but principally of the faithful
Ministers of Christ, with Reference to any Interest or Concern of theirs, to
desire to leave this World, and to be with Christ. And in speaking to this, I
shall briefly, 1. Explain what requires to be explained in it; and then, 2.
Show you upon what grounds this Temper and Disposition of Mind is agreeable, in
the General to sincere Christians. 3. Upon what more peculiar grounds it is
more especially suitable to the faithful Ministers of Christ. And so make use
of the whole.

1. As to what requires Explication, Here we must show you what the Object of
this Desire is, in the first Place; and then secondly, Show you what this
Desire, with the Judgment unto which it is conformable, imports and carries in
it. Then we shall proceed to consider the grounds, both with Reference to
Christians in General, and the faithful Ministers of Christ in Special, of
their having this as an habitual Temper of Spirit belonging to them.

1. We are to consider the Object, which this Disposition of Spirit, here
described, has Reference to. And that is Twofold, Privative, and Positive.
There is

1. The Privative Object, that this Disposition has Reference to; and that is,
departing from hence. Their desire is to be gone, not to stay always here, i.
e. as to any Concern of their own. Indeed upon other Accounts, abstracted from
their own and more important, there may be Considerations that may induce their
willingness to stay; But as to their own Concerns, the Privative Object of
their Desire, is, to be dissolved, or to be gone, (...), they would fain be
dissolved; take that reading, and this is such a ones sense, I would fain have
my Bonds and Shackles taken off, I would be loose, not be always confined to a
Body of Sin and Death, and to a vain and wicked World: For these are the things
to which we are united: Or take the other reading that are to be left, in this
departure. To depart, What are we to depart from? Why the Gravamina, the most
grievous things are, a body of Sin and Death, and a vain and sinful World. When
God sees good, I would depart, says such a one, from these irksome grievous
Things, that, while they detain me, Torment me every hour. And then

2. There is the Positive Object, that this Disposition has reference to; and
that is, to be with Christ. This is a mighty thought, if we had time to stay
upon it. It is generally to be considered here, with reference to what State of
our Lord Christ, this was spoken, and then what it is to be with him in that
State.

1. With reference to what State of our Lord Jesus this was spoken, I desire to
be with Christ. Christ was not at this time in his State of Humiliation; he was
not now in the form of a Servant; he was not now going to Die, and Sacrifice
himself upon an ignominious Cross, as it was mentioned he had done, in the next
Chapter, Who being in the form of God, thought it not Robbery to be equal with
God; he made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant,
and was obedient to Death. It is not in reference to this State, but what
follows, that this is spoken; Wherefore God has highly exalted him, and given
him a Name above every name; that at his Name, or in his Name, every Knee
should bow, both of Things in Heaven, and Things on Earth, and Things under the
Earth. It is that State of Glory, in which he was Inthroned, and was receiving
the Homage of all ranks of Creatures, according to their capacities. It is this
State, that is here referred to.

And then, What it is to be with him in this State, That we are to consider:
And plain it is, it is not to be with him as Spectators only, but in some sort
as Partakers; not barely as Spectators. Indeed, to be so, is a most desirable
thing, to all the Lovers of Christ; To behold him upon the Throne, invested
with Glory, the highest Glory. But this is not all. Indeed, Participation with
him, is sometimes expressed by Beholding, as in John 17.24. Father, I will, that
they whom thou have given me, may be with me where I am, that they may behold
the Glory that thou have given me: For thou lovedst me before the Foundation of
the World was laid. But that Beholding, is Fruitive Vision; the Vision, not of
mere Spectation, but Fruition, by which we enjoy what we see. And so we are
taught to reckon concerning this being with Christ in the State of Glory. If we
be Dead with him, we believe we shall also live with him, by participation of
the same Glorious, Blissful Life, Romans 6.8. and chap. 8. ver. 17. If we are
Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joint-Heirs with Christ; that if we
suffer with him, we might be also glorified together. Glorified, is to be made
Glorious, to be Participants of the same Glory with him, and not Spectators
merely. We are not to be Glorified merely by a Glory that we are to behold, but
which we are to bear; not which we are to be the Witnesses of only, but the
Subjects, whereby we are to be made Glorious, in conformity to him, and in
communion with him. And here that we may more fully conceive the Sense of this
being with Christ, in the State of perfect Felicity and Glory, it is requisite
we consider these Two Things, 1. The Highest Perfection of the Object; and 2. A
suitable Perfection of the Subject, according to its capacity, by which it can
converse with, and enjoy, what continually rays, and is communicated from so
Glorious and Blessed an Object.

1. The Object in highest Perfection; When our Lord Jesus Christ, not
considered merely as God, but as God-Man, is exalted, and made as Glorious as
Glory could any way make him; when he is exalted, by way of remuneration for
what he had done, for what he had suffered, for what he had achieved and
accomplished by his doing and suffering, And he is now in all that most perfect
Dignity and Glory that belongs to him on that account; This consideration we
are to have of the Glorious Object. We are to consider the high and most
absolute Perfection of That PERSON, the most Wonderful One that ever was, and
of which neither created Nature, nor uncreated, affords the like; that is, such
a Person, in which all the Excellencies of created and uncreated Nature did
meet, or were united; and all that Felicity, and Glory, and Blessedness, that
This Person, according to either Nature, and both together, does enjoy; Here is
the Object wherewith we are to Communicate.

2. And then to be with him, as Participants, implys the connoted and
consequential Perfection of the Subject in it self, the highest that it is
capable of, the Perfection of all the Powers and Faculties belonging to a
Creature of such a Nature. A mind apt to employ it self about things of highest
Value and Excellency, able to comprehend whatsoever is needful, and fit to be
known of such things; contented not to know what is unfit. A Will, refined from
all Terrene Tinctures and Propensions, enlarged and attempered to the best and
highest Good. Whence must proceed the liveliest and purest desires, the noblest
and most grateful Perceptions, and Delights, the pleasantest and most
satisfying Relishes and Fruitions.

For (the high perfection of the Object being supposed) the Subject is the
Spirit of a Just Man made perfect, Heb. 12.23. Of one arrived, out of an
imperfect to a perfect State. No supposable Allusion in this Text, needs to
exclude the real subjective Perfection, which is so proper to such Spirits, and
to such a State as is then finally referred to. The satisfaction it self, which
results, cannot but be proportionable; according to the perfect excellency of
the Object, and the perfected capacity of the Subject, a most entire
Satisfaction. These two, meeting together, the most Glorious Object, and a
Glorified Spirit made capable of Conversing with it, and enjoying it to the
full. This makes that Fullness of Joy, those Pleasures for evermore, That are at
God's right hand, or in his power, to dispose of, in Eternal Communication,
Psalm 16. ult.

Thus you have some Account of the Object, Privative, and positive, What is to
be left, and Whom we are to come to; A sinful mortal Body to be left with a
vain and wicked World; And a Glorious Lord to be approached, so as to be with
him, in actual, and complacential, and eternal communion; to be with him, not
as Spectators only, but Partakers of that Glory wherein he is. Then

2. We are to consider the temper and disposition it self, of serious
Christians, and of the faithful Ministers of Christ especially, in reference to
this State of the Objects. And it is made up of Two Things, 1 st. Desire, and 2
d. Estimation, or Judgment, that is the measure of the former, and according
whereto that desire is directed.

1. This Desire is (...), intense desire, earnest desire, the fervor of
desire. That is, As to my self, and as to any concern of mine, I do most
earnestly desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, (...) signifies not
less than that, And then

2. The Judgment that is made of the case, unto which this desire is
conformable. That is, that to be with Christ is far better, far better! It is a
strange Emphasis, that is used in the Greek Text, to express this: For there
are Two Comparatives, (...); more better, with a mighty Surplusage besides in
the word conjoined (...). I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ;
which is better better, by much; or incomparably better; better above and
beyond all comparison. One Comparative would not serve the turn, but he adds
another, and then superadds a vast surplusage over and above. This is the
Judgment of the case, according to which this desire is directed and measured.

And now for the reasons of this temper and posture of Soul, in reference to
this State of the Case. There are diverse very obvious.

1. That this is most agreeable to the Law of our Creation, to desire and covet
the most perfect State whereof we are capable. It is an Unnatural Thing, not to
do so, not to covet the Perfection of that State, that we can finally attain
to. Nature, in all Creatures, tends to Perfection; it is a monstrous disorder
in Nature, for any Creature, if it be capable of choice, to choose a State
beneath the highest Perfection whereof it is capable. And

2. It is most suitable to the design of our Redemption, whether we consider
the Privative Object, unto which our Redemption refers, or the positive. The
Privative Object, this World, that we are to forsake and leave, with this
Flesh, that con-naturalizes us to this World. Christ gave himself for us, to
deliver us from this present Evil World, Gal. 1.4. As for his Redeemed Ones,
those for whom he gave himself, he is willing they should be here a while; but
he gave himself for them, that they might not be here always; That he might
fetch them out of this horrid Abyss of Darkness, Impurity, and Death.

And if you look to the Positive Object, our Lord died to bring us to God, 1
Pet. 2.18. He suffered once, the Just for the Unjust, for this purpose. He will
never desist, till he have brought us quite home to God. And it became him, by
whom are all Things, and for whom are all Things; in bringing many Sons to
Glory, to make the Captain of their Salvation perfect by Sufferings, Heb. 2.10.
He suffered, and those Sufferings he underwent, were the Price of our
Redemption; and for this, To bring the many Sons to Glory, that were to be
brought. And it becomes Him, that made all Things by himself, and for himself,
to bring about his Great and Glorious Design this way; to make the Captain of
our Salvation perfect, that is, perfectly Master of his Design. And Rev. ^.9.
We are told, That the Lamb, that was slain, was slain on purpose that he might
Redeem us to God by His Blood; that he might be capable of saying at last, I
have shed my Blood, and it has not been in vain; here I have brought back thy
wandering Strays to thee, that were separate, that had gone off: He has
Redeemed them to God by his Blood, they were gone off from God; and he, in this
way, fetches them back to God; never reckoning his Work finished, till he can
say, Here am I, and the Children thou have given me.

3. This most fully Answers the Gospel Call, under which we continually are, as
to both the parts of the Object, the Privative and Positive. By the Gospel we
are called out of the World; this is carried in the very Notion of the Church,
it consists of a People, called out of the World. And that call is not finished
till we are quite out; but we must be out in the inclination of our minds; to
be gone from this World, that we may be with the Lord. And as to the Positive
part of the Gospel-Call, the final term of it is the Eternal Glory. The God of
all Grace has called us to his own Eternal Glory by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 5.10.

4. This is most suitable unto the Aim and Tendency of the New Creature, which
is indeed the effect of the Gospel-Call; wheresoever it comes to be effectual
calling, the New Creature is the Product. This is the Genius of the New
Creature, to aspire upwards. They that have received the first Fruits of the
Spirit groan within themselves; Groan as under a Pressure, or Burden; to be
loosened from this World, from this Earth, and from these Bodies; and to
partake in the Glory of the Sons of God, manifested in the proper season, of
their Manifestation, Romans 8.19. compared with the 23. And as they, that in the
Work of the New Creation, are what they are, New Creatures, as being Born from
Heaven; so they are Born for it. Except a Man be Born (...), from above, he
cannot enter into nor see the Kingdom of God, John 3.3, 5. He is Born for this
Heavenly State, when he is Regenerate, when he is made a New Creature, that he
may be capable of entering into this Kingdom. And 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be God,
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has begotten us again to a lively
hope, to an Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in Heaven for us. There are Principles inlaid in the Work of the New
Creature, which dispose the soul Godward, and Heavenward. Hereby they are
made meet to be Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in light, as in that
Colos. 1.12. And to suppose that there should be a New Creature without such a
Disposition as this, is to suppose the New Creature to be the most Unnatural
Creature under Heaven. It must have Dispositions in it suitable to its Nature,
and to that State that it is designed ultimately for; as every other Creature
is suited to the Place and State it is to hold in the Creation of God.

But then as to what is more peculiar to Ministers, they have more reason than
others for this temper and disposition of Spirit, both as they know more,
generally, of the Difficulties of the World; and should be supposed to know
more of the State of the other World, than the generality of other Men do.

Their Toil, and Labor, and Travel, while they are here in this World, is like
to be more, read at leisure 1 Cor. 4.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. with 2 Cor. 6.4, 5.
They have many more uncomfortable Things to exercise them; especially, the
small Success of their Labors, that they often do but Sow the Wind, and
sometimes Reap the Whirlwind, and may be glad to depart on this account.

And it is to be supposed too, that they should know more of the other World:
For they are more obliged to be daily conversant there; Their constant Business
has a steady direct tendency thitherward: And therefore as this cannot but be
the temper of serious Christians, it is to be much more so of the Faithful
Ministers of Christ.

And therefore, to draw to a Conclusion, and shut up all with some Use, We may

1. Infer from it, The greatness of that capacity which belongs to an
intelligent immortal Spirit, that it is capable of such a State, as being
glorified with the Lord Jesus Christ in that high exaltation of his; it is a
State, whereof the Humane Spirit is capable. It is indeed very unapt, very
indisposed, till the regenerating Work take place, till the Divine Spirit have
molded it to that State; But then, in the mean time, there is a capacity, a
ground work, upon which the Divine Spirit does operate, by Inlightening the
Mind, and enlarging the Will, and refining and defecating the Affections, and
implanting Celestial Principles, that do all dispose it Heavenward. But in
the mean time, it is a useful reflection for every Intelligent Spirit, that
inhabits Mortal Flesh, to consider, What do I here? While it is my Lot to be
yet inhabiting this Flesh, am I only to mind the Things of the Flesh? I am
capable of an Abode above, with the Blessed Glorious Lord of all, with Him, my
greater Concernments do now lie. Col. 3, 1, 2. And

2. It further lets us see the Wonderful Love of God in Christ, that he should
design such mean abject creatures, as we, to such a State; that is, that when
we depart, and leave this World we are to be with Christ. O kind Design! What
admirable Love is this, that he will not have his own to be always at a
distance and far from him! When Christ, who is our life, shall appear with him
in Glory, in that 1 Colos. 3.4. And again further,

3. We may infer hence, that Holiness, wherever it comes to have place, does
comprehend and include in it Divine Wisdom, so as to make Persons capable of
judging right, or making a true estimate of things, which are more valuable,
and which are less. Till the sanctifying Work of God's Spirit take place in the
minds and hearts of Men, they Judge like Fools; they say a Portion here on
Earth is better, let us dwell always amid'st the Darkness and Death of this
lower World, and let them be with Christ that will. But says a gracious Spirit,
to be with Christ is far better, incomparably, beyond all comparison better,
and therefore let us depart, and be with him, as to any interest and concern of
ours.

And this being so, it is of the greatest Consequence to us imaginable, all of
us to endeavor to get this Temper of Spirit made habitual to our selves: For
it is a Thing of Dreadful Importance, to find the Temper of my Mind and Soul
differ from that of all good Christians that ever were, or ever shall be. It is
one thing indeed, to be willing to have the height of our Happiness deferred
for common Good; but it is quite another thing, to desire to stay here because
I love this World better, and when the Practical Judgment of our Souls is, I
had rather be here; When not any concern for the interest of Christ, or design
of doing him Service here, does Reconcile me to an Earthly State; but my own
Temper and Spirit is such, that I cannot endure the thoughts of a remove. And
let me insist here a little.

When the Best are continually going; and though the Worst do not go the same
way, they are going hence too, departing from hence, not to be willing to
follow! To have a desire running counter to the stream and course of Nature, in
All, and the current of Grace in the Best, is very unaccountable; and wherein
we should by no means Tolerate our selves. An irrational Desire of what we see
to be impossible: A Desire that Fights against Necessity, which will be too
hard for us, and will overcome at last, as to the term from which, an abode
here. And an Unholy Desire, in respect of the term To which, viz. Not to be
with Christ; such a Desire we should no more endure in our selves, than Fire in
our bosoms.

To have such an Excellent Person gone from amongst us, as is lately gone; but
to have no Disposition to follow! You loved him well, and you loved to hear him
Preach of Heaven, but you cannot endure the thoughts of going where he is gone!
Is this well? The World is Dying, and you would live! Miser. est qui cumque non
vult mundo secummoriente mori. Sen. Trag.
What a wretched Miscreant is he that would be an Exception from all Mankind!
And cannot be content to Die, when the whole World is Dying with him! And for
Christians united with Christ, they are such in whose hearts there is a rooted
Propension toward him, so as to covet his Presence above all Things, Rev. 22.
The Spirit and the Bride say, come, come Lord Jesus; either come and take us to
Thee, or come and manifest Thy self to us. Consider then, how absolutely
Necessary it is, if there be this Terrene Temper of Spirit, to get it changed.
For

1. While it remains, it countermines the Sum of Religion. All Christianity
runs counter, in the whole Design of it, to this Temper of Spiit, for it
terminates on the other World. But when all our Thoughts and Designs terminate
on this World, what a dismal Thing is it! To have a Temper and Disposition in
me, wholly repugnant to the Design of the Christian Religion, which is but to
draw People off from this World, and to fit them for another!

2. It will Infer, in the next Place, that whenever any Die, they must Die just
after the same manner that Wicked Men do, a Violent Death; be torn away from
their Earthly Station. He shall pluck him out of his Dwelling Place, and root
him out of the Land of the Living, as the Psalmist speaks, Psa. 52.5. This is
Dying a Violent Death; our Hearts do not consent, we cannot go but as we are
torn up by the roots, and plucked out of our dwelling places. This is quite
another thing from that, Now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace; and this
desiring to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. And it signifies

3. Our not yet having taken God for our God; for our taking him to be our God,
and to be our best Good, is the same thing. If God be not our best Good, he is
not our God: And can we choose to be willing to be at an Eternal distance from
our best Good? It must signify, that the Love of God has no place in us,
sincere Love, true Love to Christ: For it is never true, if it be not supreme.
But it is the greatest Absurdity imaginable, that I should supreamly love one,
that I desire never to be with, or enjoy.

I shall only add, with reference to the sad occasion that lies in view before
us, that what Instances we meet with of this kind, should leave their several
correspondent effects and impressions upon our Spirits, partly of Lamentation,
and partly of Imitation, and partly of Peaceful Submission and Satisfaction in
the issue, however Grievous it be to us.

1. Of Lamentation.
It is a much to be Lamented Thing, when such go, as that Reverend and Worthy
Person that is lately gone from amongst you: For this Temper of Spirit being
supposed, by how much the more there was of the conjunct Disposition to have
been content to have staid longer for Public Good; This speaks so much the
more of an Excellent Spirit. When Desires are so Fervent after the Purity and
Perfection of the Heavenly State, that nothing but sincere Devotedness to the
Interest of God in Christ, could make them patient of longer Abode on Earth.
It Is a Respect to God that either draws, or detains them, nothing but what is
Divine inclines them either way. Either the Enjoyment of God above, or his
farther service here below. That is an Excellent Spirit that lies under such
influences. And the higher was the Excellency of such a Man, the greater is the
Loss of him. The more he desired Heaven, within such Limits, the greater was
his Value, and with so much the brighter luster he shone on Earth.

There is much of God conspicuous in such a Man. And it was not a little of him
that was observable in this Worthy Person. Such a Course as his was, that Even
Course, that Peaceful Course, wherein was so eminent Devotedness to God, and
Benignity toward Man, showed his Spirit was touched by the one, for the other.
It could not be, but by influence from Heaven, that he so steadily tended
thitherward himself, and was only willing to stay so long out of it, that he
might invite and draw on as many as he could with him thither.

Hereby he appeared so much the more attempered to the Heavenly State, and that
World where Divine Love Governs, making a Man by how much the more strongly he
was attracted himself by it, so much the more desirous to attract others.

It is what such a one has about him of God on Earth, that makes him a
desirable Thing to us here; it is not what Men have of the earthly Spirit, but
what they have of the Divine Spirit, That makes them useful, both by their
Labors and Examples, to this World of ours; as was this eminent Servant of
Christ. It is a great Thing, to have one pass so long continued Course as his
was, with so equal a temper. It is like I may have known him longer than many
or most of you that were not related.

About Fifty Years I remember his Course, and our Conversation was not casual
or at a distance, as that of mere Colleagues, chosen by others, but as Friends
inward, and chosen by our selves, many a day we have Prayed together, conferred
and taken sweet Counsel together; when he was at once an Example, and Ornament
to his College, where he lived Respected and Beloved of all, but of them most,
who most knew him; That constant serenity, and equality of mind, that
seriousness, that humility, wherein he excelled, rendered him Amiable to
Observers; And therewith that industry and diligence that he used in his
younger days, by which he laid up that great Stock of Learning and Useful
Knowledge, that made him (when Providence called him to the City) a
well-instructed Scribe, capable and apt to bring out of his Treasury Things New
and Old, whereof there is, and will be a long extant Proof in his judicious and
dilucid Expositions of the Epistles to the Philippians and the Colossians,
which was the Part he bore in the Supplement to that most Useful Work, the
English Annotations on the Bible by the Reverend Mr. Matthew Pool.

In the great City he shone, a Bright and Burning Light, till many such Lights
were in one day put under a Bushel, I need not tell you what, or how black,
that day was. And then, though he was constrained to desert his Station, he did
not desert his Master's Work; but still he was with God, and God was with him;
and you know it I doubt not, many of you, what it was to live under so truly
Evangelical a Minister; to have Doctrine from time to time distilling as the
Dew and dropping upon you, such, as from which you might perceive how great was
his Acquaintance with the Mysteries of Christ: In reference to those, over whom
he had opportunity to Watch, it was undoubtedly, if it were not their great
Fault, their very great Advantage.

As to his Domestic Relations, knowing so much of him, I cannot, but so much
the more Lament their loss, God will I doubt not, be the bereaved Widovvs
Portion; but it ought, with tenderness to be considered, What it was for one
Person to lose successively Two such Helps, as This and her former Husband
were, (who was also in another University my former and most inward Friend that
Worthy Man Mr. Thomas Wadsworth) both Eminent Instruments in the Church of
Christ.

And this has been more eminently Remarkable concerning him that is lately
gone, that the Relations of the Family, to whom he was not Naturally Related,
the Branches from another Root, yet had that apprehension of his Love and Care
of them, and of their own Loss, as to desire this Public Testimony might from
them remain of him, that he was to them as tender a Father, as if he had been a
Natural One, such Fathers-in-Law are seldom known, and therefore it ought to be
mentioned, as that which may signify somewhat toward the Embalming of his
Memory among you.

Graces, when diffused, give their pleasant Relishes, to all that any way
partake of them.

What follows, was delivered in Writing into my hands to be inserted, by a Dear
Relation of his.

His Humility and Self-denial were eminently conspicuous in his taking upon him
the Care and Charge of so small and poor a People, and continuing with them to
the damage of his own Estate, though he had considerable Offers elsewhere.

His Meekness, as it was very visible in all his Conversation, it was
singularly showed in his bearing and passing by Slights and Affronts, even from
those he had very much obliged, taking off the Resentments, that his Friends
had of the Injuries of that kind put upon him, by Abasing himself, saying, I Am
an Unworthy Creature, I deserve no better.

His Candor every one was certainly made sensible of, who should offer to
speak any thing Reflectingly about any Person behind their backs, for he was
sure to vindicate or lenify in this Case, as far as he could.

When Labors, Weakness, and Age had worked out his Strength of Body, there was
never any thing appeared so manifestly to trouble him, as being necessitated to
desist from constant Preaching -- And, notwithstanding all Temporal
Discouragements he met with in the course of his Ministry, his Mind, to the
very last, was to have both his Sons brought up to it.

During the short time of his last Illness, when his Head appeared somewhat
disordered in other things by the Pains that were upon him, it was observable,
that he always showed himself sensible in Hearing or Discoursing about any
thing Religious, being among other things discoursed with by his Brother about
the discharge of his Ministry, he answered, he hoped, he had endeavored to
serve God faithfully, and sincerely, though he had been an unprofitable
Servant: About Five hours before his death, he said, God is my Portion, and
desired those about him to join with him in Prayer, wherein he expressed
himself very suitably to his Case as a dying Man, concluding thus: Grant that
when this Earthly Tabernacle is dissolved, I may be taken to those Mansions not
made with hands Eternal in the Heavens.

As his Life was calm and serene, so was his Dying, for though throughout his
Sickness, he was all along apprehensive of Approaching death: There was no
Ruffle upon his Spirit, Of which he himself then gave this Account, I know in
whom I have believed.

2. Of Imitation.
And as such Strokes, when they come, ought to be Lamented, They that by such
Strokes are taken away, ought to be Imitated. The Example remains; you have the
Idea left; you know how such a one Lived, how he Walked, how he Conversed with
his Family, how he Conversed with you as he had occasion: That Excellent Spirit
he discovered in all, how much of an Imitable Example has it given to all those
that are capable of Imitating, and Receiving Instruction that way.

3. Of Satisfaction.
But it ought also to have the effect of Satisfaction in the Divine Pleasure;
When such a Blow as this comes, do not repine, Peacefully submit, though it carry
smartness and severity with it. You ought to feel it, but yet notwithstanding
to receive it with Submissive Silence, to be dumb, and not open your Mouths,
remembering who has done it, and that it is the disposal of Wisdom that cannot
Err, as well as of Power that cannot be resisted, and of Kindness and Goodness
that has its Gratefulness to this departed Servant of His. For consider, that
notwithstanding his Willingness to have staid longer, if his Lord, whose he
was, and whom he served, had thought fit. Yet this could not but be his
Habitual Sense, To desire to depart, and to be with him, which was far better.

And if Christ be pleased, and he be pleased, why should we be displeased.

This was the Will of Christ, declared by his Word as to the thing, Joh. 17.24.
Father, I Will, that those that thou have given me, be with me where I am, to
behold my Glory. And declared by the Event as to the time. And his will, both
because it was Christ's, and because it was best. Who are we, that we should
oppose our Will to so kind a Will, on Christ's part, and so well-pleased a Will
on his part? Or that a Dissatisfaction should remain with us, as to what there
is with Christ, and him, so entire Satisfaction!

FINIS.
Here follows some SERMONS and DISCOURSES which was written by the late
Deceased Mr. Rich. Adams, viz.
THAT in the Morning-Exercise at St. Giles's, SERMON. XXVI. of Hell, from Matthew
25 th. Verse 41.

In the Supplement to the Morning-Exercise SERMON. XVII. What are Duties of
Parents and Children, from Colossians the 3 d. Verses 20, 21.

In the Continuatio^ of the Morning-Exercise, SERMON. XXII. How may Childbearing
Women be most encouraged and supported, from 1 Timothy 2. Verse 15.

(...)
