A Funeral Sermon ON THE DEATH Of that Pious Gentlewoman Mrs. JUDITH HAMOND.
Late WIFE of the Reverend Mr. George Hamond, Minister of the Gospel in LONDON.

By JOHN HOW, Minister of the same Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns at the Lower
End of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel, MDCXCVI.

To the Reverend Mr. Hammond.
MY offering this Discourse to the Eye of the World together with your own,
shows how great Power our Ancient Friendship has given you, over me; whereof I
have the less unpleasant Sense, believing you will understand it so; who, in
great part, know how difficult, my circumstances made it, to me, to comply with
your desire herein. Your Opinion of the fitness of publishing so uncompos'd a
thing, discovers how far you were subject also to the same Power; whose
Judgment I am little apt to distrust, where it meets not with this byas.

It will be a joy to me, if it help to mitigate your Sorrow which is, in great
part, justified, by the greatness of your Loss, in being separated, after so
long Conversation, from so Excellent a Consort, that lived in this World, so
much above it.

I reckon it an evidence of the real greatness of her Spirit that She thought
that, so little a thing, wherein others place Greatness. And that in almost
Forty Years Acquaintance with you both, I should never hear of her nearness to
a Noble Family, till, occasionally, since her Death. It seems the Blood that
filled her Veins, did not swell her Mind. And her Heavenly Birth and Relation
to the House and Family of God, made her forget her Earthly Kindred, and
Parents House.

SIR,

Though, whom God has joined together, no man might put asunder; yet when he
that made the Union, makes the Separation, there is no saying to him, What do
thou? We must a while, tug with the difficulties of our State and Work. Wherein
the hope of helping Some (as God shall graciously help us) to gain this Victory
over Death; and of being, at length, through his Grace, Victors our selves,
will be a constant Releif and Support to you, and

Your very respectful Brother and Fellow Servants in the Labors of the Gospel.
John How.

1 COR. 15. 54. the latter part. -- Death is swallowed up in Victory.
THE foregoing words signify this saying to have been, before, written
elsewhere. So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this
mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying
that is written, Death is swallowed up, etc. And we find it before-written,
Isa. 25. 8. in express words; and Hos. 13. 14. in such as are equivalent. What
their dependence or meaning is, in either of those places, cannot be discuss't,
within our present, narrow, limits. Only it is sufficiently manifest that
sundry passages in the Holy Scripture are said to be brought to pass, over, and
over; once and again; as that of Rachels weeping for her Children: and of Gods
bringing his Son out of Egypt: with diverse others.

This great saying may have had some partial and gradual accomplishment, within
the current of time, when in reference to a People more specially related to
God, and in some more notable delinquency, and defection from him, he may have
given a just, but limited, Commission to Death, to make great ravage and
destructions among them, so that it has even rode in Triumph, made an huge
Carnage, strow'd their Country with Carcasses, turned their rich Land, more
enrich't with humane blood, into an Akeldama; and thereupon, but into a place
of Sepulture, and of Graves; And yet, when it has gone as far as his designed
limits, and executed all his pleasure, he may have stopped it in its Career, and
said, hither thou shall come and no further: Now, cease, and give over: (as
Hos. 13. 14.) and so may have ransomed the residue from the Power of the Grave,
and been the destruction of their Destroyers, Plaguing them who were their
plagues. This in the next intention hereof may respect the People of the Jews,
who being returned from their (now foreseen) Captivity, might in the
Prophetique style, be spoken of as a People risen from the Dead, and newly
sprung up out of the Grave; but might have a further reference to the
yet-future state of the Christian Church, as Isa 25. 6, 7, 8. seems to carry
it; when so great a Death as has long been upon it, as well as the rest of the
World, it may be hoped shall be swallowed up in a very glorious victory!

But this saying is introduced here, as having its final and ultimate
Completion, in conjunction with what is mentioned besides, in this context,
viz. when in the close and shutting up of time, the Trumpet shall sound, as we
are told elsewhere it shall at the Coming of our Lord, and the dead (those that
died in him, first) be raised, the 1 Th. 4. 16.
living changed, so as to bear his (the heavenly Adam's) image. When this
corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal, immortality, then
shall be brought to pass this saying (whatever preludes thereto, as was
written, there may have been before) Death is swallowed up in victory.

And according to this its fullest sense, is this saying to be the subject of
our present Consideration. The Expression is highly Rhetorical, but there is a
most rational solid sense intended under it, for which no words can be too big,
or of too great a sound.

Our business must be to Explain, and Apply
this saying.

And,

I. For Explication of its rational Import, we shall show,

1. The Import. 2. The Reasonableness of it.
1. It imports, in general, Gods determination to put a perpetual end to death,
to make it cease in perpetuum, as a noted Expositor Grot. in loc. (...)
expresses it, showing, that the Parallel Hebrew Phrase is usually rendered for
ever, 2 Samuel 2. 26. Jer. 3. 5. and in diverse other places.

But that we may give a more distinct account of its meaning, several things
are to be noted;

1. That Death, as it is here spoken of, supposes a certain, limited Subject.
Its being mentioned in this Chapter, and elsewhere, as if it were, itself, a
suppositum, and an intelligent, designing One, is an elegant and an usual
Figure. The Holy Scriptures, and Common Speech, abound with this sort of
Prosopopoeia, And it has its special usefulness, when (as in the present Case)
what we are more to remark, and consider with greater intention of Mind, is so
represented, i. e. when to things of minute, or of no entity, but of great
concernment, (such mere privations as Death or Sin) a sort of Personality is
ascribed, attended with terrible aspects and appearances, it tends more
effectually to rouse our minds, and engage our attention, whether we are to
consider, and magnify our danger by them, or our deliverance, and to behold
them as attempting upon us, or as overcome. But speaking strictly, we must take
things as in themselves they are. Death therefore must be considered, in
reference to some subject or other. Abstractly considered, it is but a notion.
As it actually has taken place, it must be the death of this or that Person.
And as it is finally to be overcome, and have an end, it must have a limited
subject, and not be understood of all, absolutely and universally; for then
there would be no such thing as Eternal Death, which has no end. And how the
subject here supposed, is to be limited; the series of discourse thorough the
Chapter shows, they are such as are Christ's, ver. 23. and to whom he is
peculiarly the first fruits, ibid. Such as shall bear his heavenly Image, ver.
49. and, as elsewhere, whose vile bodies shall be made like his glorious One,
Phil. 3. 21. Such as shall have spiritual, incorruptible, immortal bodies like
his, and with him inherit the Kingdom of God, and through him obtain this
victory, ver. 50 -- 57.

2. This limitation of death to be overcome, to such a subject only, connotes
the extent of it to the whole of that subject, as that is composed of an inner
and an Outer man, 2 Cor. 4. 16. It were frigid, and comfortless to suppose, if
it were supposeable, that this glorious Conquest of death should extend no
further than the giving us a fair specious outside; and that our Mind and
Spirit should not partake, or be nothing the better for it. It Is plain the
Apostles scope through this Chapter is more to assert the future subsistence of
the Soul, than the recomposure of the Body, as his Arguments show; though what
was necessary to be said concerning the future state of that also, is not
neglected. But what he is now saying in this part of the Chapter concerns not
what is common to men, but what is peculiar to Good and Holy Men. And
therefore, as it respects their nobler part, must intend More than its mere
subsistence in another state, which is common to good and bad, and signify the
perfection of the Holy Divine life, which shall be at last entirely victorious,
and Swallow up Death, in its utmost extent, and specially as it was opposite to
that life. Death I mean, as it was so heavily incumbent upon the Minds and
Spirits of Good Men themselves, and was their most intolerable burden;
extorting from them such groans as that Romans 7. 24. O wretched man that I am
who shall deliver me from this body of death. Nor indeed is this death sensible
or grievous, or ever felt, but where the opposite life has some place. Total
death knows no grievances, makes no complaints. They that lie buried in the
Earth, are in their own Element, where no such thing weighs upon them; a
terrene, carnal Mind is no burden to such Souls, as are quite dead in
Trespasses and Sins. I hope I need not tell you that though the Souls of men are
Universally immortal in the natural sense, they are not so in the moral.
Morality comprehends the means and end, Virtue and Felicity; or in terms more
agreeable to our Christian Ethics, or that are oftener heard by them that live
under the Gospel, Holiness, and Blessedness. These are signified by Spiritual
Life, or life in the spiritually-moral sense. And so are Sin, and Misery, by
the opposite death. And no man has reason to think it strange that Life and
Death, are estimated by such measures; or that a temper of Spirit habitually
and fixedly good or evil, should be signified by being alive, or dead, if we
consider how perfect an equivalency there is between them in the moral sense,
and being naturally alive or dead. For wherein do we usually state the notion
of Natural Life, but in a self-moving power? Now let any ordinary Understanding
be appealed to in the Case, and who would not say it were as good, not to be
able to move at all, as to move in so perpetual disorder, as never to attain
any end, such motion should serve for. The Ends of a reasonable Creatures
motions, must be duty to its Maker, and felicity to it self. If all its motions
be such as import constant hostility toward God, infelicity and torment to it
self; this is to be dead not simply and naturally, it is true, but respectively,
and not in some by-, and lessconsiderable respect, but in respect of the
principal and most important purposes of Life. So that, in full equivalency,
such a one is, as dead, to all valuable intents and purposes whatsoever.
Therefore such are only said to be alive in a true, and the most proper sense,
that are alive [to God] through Jesus Christ, Romans 6. 11. Or that do yield
themselves [to God] as those that are alive from the dead, ver. 13. it being
the proper business of their life to serve God, and enjoy him. Others that only
live in sinful pleasure, are dead while they live, 1 Timothy 5. 6. Nor has such a
Notion of life and death been altogether strange even among Heathens, when we
find it said by One of no mean note, That a wicked man is dead, as a soul may
be said to die (...)
; and to it it is a death, when it is (too deeply) (...) Plotin. Enn. 1.
plunged, immerst into the body so as to be sunk down into matter, and replete
with it. (Besides much more that might be produced from others of like import)
and how agreeable is this passage to that Romans 8. 6 To be carnally minded is
death.

Upon the whole, I cannot, indeed, conceive, that since Death is often taken,
and that most reasonably, in so great a latitude, as to admit of comprehending
this sense; and since, in these latter verses, the Apostle is speaking of a
final deliverance from it, as the special privilege of such as are in union
with Christ, not of what is common to all men, but that victory over death in
this respect, as it imports aversion from God, or indisposition toward him,
must be within his meaning, and that he was far from confining it to bodily
death only, or from intending, in reference to the Soul, the mere natural
immortality of that alone. But that Death in its utmost latitude was, now, in
reference to this sort of men, whom his present discourse intends, to be
entirely swallowed up in victory. Or in a perfect plenitude of victorious life,
as 2 Cor. 5. 4.

So much, which was more requisite to be insisted on, being clear, we shall
less need to enlarge upon what follows. As, that,

3. This Victory supposes a War. Or, That Life and Death were before in a
continual struggle. So we find the Case is. Even this Lower World is full of
vitality. Yet Death has spread it self thorough it and cast over it a dark and
dismal shadow every where, according as Sin, which introduced it, is diffused
and spread. Death is therefore mentioned as an Enemy, ver. 26. And so we
understand it, Natural Death, as an Enemy to Nature; Spiritual, to Grace. In
the Body numerous maladies, and round about it, multitudes of adverse
rancounters, are striving to infer Death; In, and about the Mind and Spirit,
worse diseases, and Temptations have the like tendency. Temptations I say, the
mention whereof was not to be omitted, as pointing at, the Tempter, the wicked
one, who first brought Sin and Death into this World of ours. And who is
(though the concealed) the first and most proper seat of the Enmity which gives
Death the Denomination of an Enemy; which is so called indefinitely, The last
Enemy; that we might not understand it to be our Enemy only, but more an Enemy
against God than us, from whom the spiteful Apostate aimed and gloried to pluck
away, and bury in Death and Ruin, the whole Race of humane Creatures. In the
mean time Nature in all, and Grace in the Regenerate are Counter-striving. In
the former the self-preserving Principle is more sensibly vigorous, but less
successful; but they who are born of God, are better assisted by their
Divine-keeper, in sub-ordination to whom, they are enabled effectually to keep
themselves, that the wicked one (mortally) touches them not, 1 John 5. 18. but,
as must be supposed, not without continual watching and striving, as in War is
usual.

4. Where such a War and striving ends not in victory, on the one side, they
end in victory on the other. This is consequent upon what has been said of the
limited Subject here spoken of. Death is not universally overcome; with some it
is left to be conceived, therefore, as a Conqueror. We see how it is with the
two Hemispheres of our Globe. When in the One, the Light is chasing the
Darkness of the foregoing Night, and we behold the morning gradually spreading
it self upon the mountains, and it shines brighter, and brighter unto perfect
day: So in the other a feebler light does more and more retire and yield, till
at length it be quite swallowed up in the victorious darkness of a black and
horrid midnight. It Is much after the same rate here, with this difference: that
vicissitudes, and alternations cease, and whether darkness and the shadow of
death, or the light of life, be finally Victorious, they are so (as has been
said) for ever. With the One sort, i. e. with the righteous, a vital light
arises in the midst of darkness. A Type of their Spiritual, and a Prelude to
their Eternal State. They have a quickening light within, under all Clouds of
present ignominy, and trouble, and an Eternal day awaits them. Now Death
works in them, and surrounds them on every side, for a while, and gains a
temporary victory, over their bodily Life; which while it is doing, and their
outward man is perishing, their inward man is renewed day by day. But at length
even that vanquished life revives; and that more noble life which is hid with
Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. and of which he says, that whosoever lives and
believes in him shall never die, Joh. 11. 26. becomes perfect, for it is pure
Life; as that is said to be pure, which is plenum sui, and minimum habet
alieni; full of it self, without mixture of any thing alien from it; having
quite swallowed up whatsoever was opposite or disagreeable. So does Life in the
several kinds and degrees of it flourish with them, in a permanent, perpetual,
and most consistent State. And, as Regal Power is often founded in just
Conquest, they do even reign in life, by Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 17 -- 21.

But for the other sort, that sorry, pitiful, dying life they have, wherein
they are even dead while they live, will be swallowed up in a victorious,
eternal, Death; in which there remains to them a perpetual Night, and the
blackness of darkness for ever. We are next to consider.

2. The Reasonableness of the Divine Determination, which this saying imports.
And that is to be collected, by reminding who it is that has so determined. He
that can effect all his determinations, and do all his pleasure. The reason of
his intendments, and performances, must be fetched from himself, and the
perfection of his own Nature, unto which nothing can be more agreeable.

When Death, let in by Sin, has been reigning, doing the part of a King, as
Romans 5. 17. over so great a part of Gods Creation, it can be little suitable to
him, who does all things after the Counsel of his will, Ephesians. 1. 11. to let it
reign for ever. Sometime it must be swallowed up in victory. Otherwise,

1. His own Glory would suffer a perpetual Eclipse. 2. The Felicity of his
Redeemed should never be complete.
Neither of which, as we are taught to apprehend the state of things, can
consist with the absolute perfection of his Being.

1. Can we think it agreeable to him, to suffer such a perpetual soloecisme or
incongruity within his Dominion, that when Death, by means of a most Criminal
Apostasy, had made so great an inrode into the Nobler part of his Creation, i.
e. had broken in amongst Creatures capable of Immortality (who indeed otherwise
had not been capable of Sin) and thereby darkened the Glory which shone more
brightly in such an Order of Creatures, it should be so always! i. e. that
such a sort of Creatures should be perpetually continued, to be born, and sin,
and die. Sometime, we must think, this course of things should have an end, and
not by yielding an everlasting conquest to an Enemy. We can well conceive it
most worthy of God, when he had made such Creatures, unto whom liberty was as
agreeable, as holiness and felicity to leave them to themselves awhile, as
Probationers and Candidates for that state of immortal Life, whereof they were
not incapable. It well became a self-sufficient Being, and an absolute
Sovereign, to let them understand dependence, and subjection; and that their
state was precarious, not his. To let them feel the cost of ungovernableness,
and self-will, and the disagreeableness thereof to their condition who were not
self-subsistent, and had not their good in their own hands. If, being put upon
this trial, they would transgress, and open a way for Death to come in upon
them, the real loss could only be their own, and none of his. He had no reason
therefore to prevent it, by so unseasonable an interposition, as should prevent
the orderly connection between duty, and felicity; i. e. the precedence of the
former to the other. All this was a most unexceptionable procedure. But then,
when being left to themselves, they as Men, or as Adam, had transgrest, Hos. 6.
7. and done like themselves, i. e. like frail mutable Creatures, in their lapse
into Sin and Death, How opportune was it for him, now, to do more illustriously
like himself, i. e. by so surprising, unthought of, methods as the Gospel
reveal, to recover to himself this Glory out of the Cloud, and make it shine
more brightly than ever, in this final Victory over Death, and him that had the
Power of it! So that it shall at last retain no Dominion over any but such as
by their own choice, during a new state of trial, remained in an inviolable
union with that Prince of Darkness and Death. How glorious will the Triumphs of
this Victory be over the Grand Apostate. And how unsupposeable is it, that he
should have occasion left him to glory in an Eternal Conquest! And

2. It is not a light thing to him whose nature is Love, That without this
final victory the felicity of the Redeemed should never be fully accomplished.
Ante-cedently to the Gospel-Revelation, it would seem more agreeable to the
Nature of God that some should be rescued from the Power of Death, than, that
all should lie under it for ever. But we to whom that Revelation is vouchsaf't,
cannot now but think it the most unlikely thing in the World that the design of
Almighty Love should finally be defeated, and that such as are in Vital Union
with the Redeemer, should either be overcome at last by Death, or remain in an
eternal struggle with it. Whence nothing can be conceived in this case, but
that as to them, death must be swallowed up in this glorious Everlasting
Victory.

Whereupon how admirable a display will there herein be of sundry the most
known Attributes and Excellencies of the Divine Nature, as his Wisdom, Power,
Goodness, Holiness, Justice, and Truth, in the whole Conduct, and in this final
issue of things! (as might be distinctly shown of each, if we were not within
limits.) He at first dealt with them very sutably to their natures, At length
he deals with them according to his own. That it may be the Theme of Eternal
Contemplation to themselves, and the whole intelligent World. How far his ways
are above their ways, and his thoughts above their thoughts, Isa. 55. And that
as at first he thought it not fit to hinder them from doing as too little
became such Creatures, nothing should at last hinder him from doing as became a
God.

But come we now to the Use. And,

1. Do we find this saying in the Sacred Word of God, that Death is to be
swallowed up in victory. Then we are not to doubt, but so it shall be. A
plenary assent is to be given to it. But what sort of assent? not that which
arises from the sight of our Eye. If that were to be our only Informer, we see
no such thing; but quite the contrary. That represents Death to us as the only
Conqueror. It visibly swallows up all in Victory, wheresoever it makes a
seizure. Nothing stands before it! We behold it turning every where living Men
and Women like our selves into breathless lumps of Earth! It irresistibly
introduces it self, and Life is fled, and gone! Such as convers't with us,
walked to and fro amongst us, reasoned, discourst with us, managed business,
pursued designs, delighted themselves with us, and gave us delight, become
Deaths Captives before our Eyes, are bound in its bands, and we cannot redeem
them, nor save our selves. Where then is this swallowing up of Death in
Victory? which is it self so constantly Victorious!

Our Reason may tell us it shall not be always and universally so, but it
flutters, and hallucinates. It Is the Divine Word that must at last put the
matter out of doubt; and our Faith therein, which is the substance of what we
hope for, and the evidence of what we do not see. If Faith is to assure our
hearts in this matter, it must be as it relies upon his Word who can do this,
and has said he will. If we believe his Power, that renders it possible to us.
If his Word, that makes it certain. Has he said it, who then shall gainsay it?
It Is one of the true and faithful sayings of God.

2. If this be a Credible saying, it is certainly a very comfortable One.

If we can but make that first step, and perceive this not to be a hard or
incredible saying; it is very obvious to make a second, and acknowledge it to
be a very Consolatory saying; and that both in reference to,

The past Death of our Friends and Relatives, even such as were nearest, and
most dear to us.

And in reference to our own, most certainly future and expected Death.

In the one Case, and the other, we are to look upon it as a comfortable
saying, That this Mighty raging Enemy shall have all his power lost, and
swallowed up, in so glorious a Victory, one day.

1. It is surely a very comfortable saying in the former of these Cases, the
Case of our losing Friends and Relations very dear unto us: And there only
needs this to make it most deliciously pleasant, that is, to have a comfortable
persuasion concerning such, That they are part of Christ's Seed, they are some
of them, in reference to whom Christ is, in the most peculiar Sense, the
first fruits, so as that they have a pre-assurance of Victory in his Conquest,
and Victory over Death and the Grave. And we have great reason to be so
persuaded concerning that Worthy Gentlewoman, whose late Decease is the more
special occasion, of this solemn Assembly at this time. She was one who, (as
such as had most opportunity to observe, and best ability to judge, did reckon)
had given abundant evidence of the work of Gods Saving Grace upon her own
Spirit, and who thereupon did long walk with God in a very continued Course; so
indeed, as that though her Comforts were observed not to be Rapturous, yet they
were steady and even; so as that she was rarely troubled with doubts, to give
obstruction or hinderance to her in her Christian Course: If any such doubt did
arise, it soon vanished, and she quickly, through the Mercy of God, received
Satisfaction, and so went cheerfully on in her way.

She was abundant in reading, especially of the Holy Book, that was her
business and delight. She very little cared to concern her self in reading
Writings that were merely Notional, or Polemical and disputative: But the most
practical ones she was most of all taken with, such as treated of the other
state, and of the duties of Christians in the mean time in reference thereto;
future felicity, and present spiritual-mindedness, that has so certain
connection therewith, and so direct a tendency thereto, were, with her, the
delightful Subjects, which she chose to read of, and meditate upon.

Her Temper was observed to be even, betwixt a freeness and reservedness. She
was not Melancholy, though much inclined to solitariness, and would frequently
lament, that so much of her precious time was past away, either in necessary
business, or Civil Conversation, that was not to be avoided.

It was observed, that her disposition was most highly charitable, very apt to
give, even to her uttermost, as occasions did occur.

In reference to her Children her care was most tender. Much of her time was
spent in instructing them, while under her Instruction, and within her reach;
teaching them their Catechism, with the Proofs at large, and how to apply the
Proofs to the Answer, so as to bring them to a distinct understanding thereof.
And in this way and course she past through the World.

Her last Sickness did very little alter the temper of her Spirit, it was calm
and sedate all along. Only so much does deserve a remark, That she was
prepossest with an Apprehension that she should dye suddenly; so much of Gods
secret he was pleased to impart to her, as he sometimes does to more inward
Friends; That discovery he vouchsaf't to her, as to a Favorite, to let her
have some kind of pre-signification, that her passage out of this World should
be very quick, whenever it came; and so it was, that sitting in her Chair,
amidst familiar Discourse, in a dimidiated Sentence, she made a full stop, and
life was ended, before that could have an end.

Now certainly the Decease of such a one ought not to be lamented with that
bitter Sorrow, as if there were no such thing as this, that Death were
certainly to be swallowed up in Victory, in an entire and complete Victory,
with reference to such a one. It seems indeed in such Cases, as was said to you
before, unto the judgment of our sense, that Death only overcomes, we see not
beyond that; It turns a living Creature into a dead Clod, and so it is laid
among such, it is buried in the Grave, our Sight goes no further. But when we
are persuaded by the Word of the Lord, that this mortal shall put on
immortality, and this corruptible incorruption, and death be swallowed up in
such a Victory, as you have heard; certainly this takes away the cause of all
bitter and reliefless sorrow.

I am not unapprehensive that Reverend Brother whom this stroke touches more
nearly, is much fitter to administer this consolation, than receive it from
such a one as I.

But as we may any of us put in for our share, as our case may require and can
admit, in what is so generally spoken with reference to Christians dying in the
Lord, and their surviving Fellow Christians, that as yet live in him, 1 These.
4. from verse 13 onward to the end. So, we are directed to comfort one another
therewith. (Be patient I pray you, while I present to you this Most suitable
Portion of Scripture). I would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren,
concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have
no hope. For if we believe that Jesus dyed, and rose again, even them also
which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. For this we say unto you by the
word of the Lord, that we which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the
Lord, shall not prevent them which are asleep. For the Lord himself shall
descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with
the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we which are
alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet
the Lord in the air: and so shall we be ever with the Lord. Wherefore, comfort
one another with these words. We shall be in a great promptitude and
disposition of Spirit to do so, if these words be looked upon as Divine sayings,
as the words of the Living and Immortal God. My Friends, do you not find there
is Spirit in these words? Is there not strong Consolation in them? How can we
but think so, unless our whole Religion be with us but a Fable? This concerns
us all upon the common Christian account who are but a residue, a remnant,
escaped, and exempted, awhile, from being part of the Spoils and Triumphs of
Death; which has slaughtered, and thrown into the dust, probably a much
greater number of our Friends and Relatives, than we our selves do make who are
left behind. And it is likely we have been most of us diverse times Mourners,
upon such occasions. This shows upon what account, and in what case, we may
intermingle very reviving Consolations with our Sorrows, and that we ought
freely, as the occasion recurres, to apply it to our selves and one another.

But I withal think there may be somewhat of more special import tending to
repress intemperate Sorrow, on such an occasion, in that of Ezekiel 24. 16. I
think there may be somewhat, I say, collected, besides what was more peculiar,
and appropriate by way of signal to the Prophet himself, that may reach the
last mentioned Case. It was a thing injoined upon him, that he should not mourn
nor weep, nor should his tears run down, when, God should take away from him
the desire of his eyes with a stroke. I reckon that as we have seen Christians
should not mourn like other men, so the Lords Prophets are not to mourn
altogether, like others of his People, but somewhat more of restraint they are
to put upon themselves, that they may discover an higher excellency, or
somewhat a greater measure of that spirit of faith ruling in them, that gives a
great allay to present things, whether good or evil, as it begets clearer and
more vivid apprehensions of things yet-future and out of sight. And that as all
believers, should endeavor in things of common concernment to all, to be
exemplary to one another and to other men; so they who are so much nearer to
God, in Office and Relation should be examples to Believers in Conversation,
Spirit, Faith, 1 Timothy 4. 12.

2. This should be very comfortable too, unto them that are in union with
Christ, in reference to their own future death, which they are continually to
expect. Death is often saying to us repeatedly, and very sensibly, to our very
Bone and our Flesh, You shall be my Prey shortly; at least, sooner or later. It
is ready to make its seizure upon us, when, we do not know, but we are sure
some time, it will.

But, my Friends, it does not become Christians, to look upon this thing called
Death, as so formidable a thing, as it is commonly reckoned; it is ignominious
to our profession, not to be endured amongst them that have Life and
Immortality brought to light, and set in view before their Eyes in the Gospel,
such as profess to be united with Christ, who has Life in himself, and imparts
it to all that are so united; such a Life, hid with Christ in God; And hope
that when he who is their Life shall appear, shall appear with him in Glory. It
becomes not such to dye continually, by the fear of dying, or that the very
thoughts of Death should be deadly to them.

This is remote from what was much observed to be the Temper and Character of
Primitive Christians. An Heathen Prince, Marc. Antonin. de vit. sua lib. 11.
who thoroughly understood them not, Censures them too hardly, as being in the
other extreme (though he at length became kinder to them) as if they rashly
threw themselves upon Death. Whereas he says, the Soul (...).
should, rationally, and becomingly, be in readiness to be loosed from the
body. But how come we to lose our Character! and our Glory! How degenerated a
thing is the Christianity of our age! To dye without regret is counted an
attainment; it should be with gladness: As Psalm. 16. 9, 10, 11. and upon the
Considerations there mentioned; as being now upon the Confines of that World of
perfect Purity, Bliss, and Joy; and having so great an assurance that the
intermediate Death we are to go through, is no sooner suffered, than overcome!

We should deal closely with our selves in this. Do we think this saying a
Fable; or a Trifle? Have these Words no meaning? We should labor to come to a
point, and say, If we have no reason to dis-believe them, we will believe them
absolutely; and live as having gained our point, and overcome already, i. e.
who are as sure of Victory, as of Death. Some overcome by dying, as others are
overcome by it. There are, who are not hurt by the second Death. If Death
strike once, it thereby puts it out of its own power ever to strike a second
time, or hurt them more. Let us once bring our case to that state as to live in
continual defiance of Death, let it strike when it will. Dependence only on the
Grace and Spirit of Christ; must give us this confidence, not an opinion that
we are our selves strong enough to act separately, but that knowing our
relation to him, we are thorough him that loved us, more than Conquerours, or
as that (...), Romans 8. 27. may be understood to signify; We are a glorious
Triumphant sort of Conquerours. We not only Conquer, but Triumph too, through
him that loved us, being persuaded that neither Death nor Life -- shall
separate us from his Love --. So a noted Expositor understands that word,
observing how great a delight this Apostle takes, when he would heighten a
matter, in the use of that particle (...).

It is elsewhere said, Colos. 3. 3. Ye are dead, but your life, etc. We are
dead, i. e. in our selves, we are a sort of dead or dying Creatures, Death has
almost got the possession of us already, has partly seized, and partly
sentenced us to die, and irreversibly. This the Apostle intimates where he
adds, what you have heard, Ye have a Life bid with Christ in God, that Life is
safe, and out of the reach of Death, no Death can ouch that Life. They that are
born of God, have in reference to this Life (though the other must be given up)
a self-preserving principle and power in them; 1 John 5. 18. They keep
themselves, that the Evil One touches them not; that is, not mortally, or with
any deadly touch. In having a new, holy, divine Life; they have an assuring
pledge also of the permanency, perpetuity, and everlastingness of it. If a man
have once drank of that water which Christ gives, it shall be in him a
perpetual fountain, a well of water springing up into everlasting life. Joh. 4.
14.

Are we Christians, and with the springings of this life, do we not feel a
lively joy springing, and exulting in our Hearts! Add vital Christianity to the
rational Nature, and loathness to dye is a repugnancy, and a reproach to both.
Christianity so plainly stating our Case, Reason should judge upon it. And
suitable affections arise in us thereupon, as they would if our Christianity
were vital, and the product of the Divine Spirit. Then, how should we bless God
that we are Mortal! and that it is not in the Power of all this World to keep
us from dying out of it, when we know in how glorious a Victory, that Death
will be swallowed up!

But it may be said by some, We should very little fear death, if we did know
our interest in Christ, if we were not in great uncertainty, and had not our
hearts hanging in doubt within us about this thing. And therefore,

3dly. This saying should be Monitory to us. (As it is a Credible, as it is a
Comfortable, so it is a Monitory saying also). Death shall be swallowed up in
victory. This said in reference to some, (which cannot be meant as to all), So
great a thing, spoken with restriction, ought to make them of whom it is not
meant, look about them! With what solicitude should we concern our selves, to
be at a certainty! Am I one of them, in reference to whom Death shall be
swallowed up in such a Victory?

It should awaken us to consider, Have we made our Interest sure in our Lord
Jesus Christ, that great Prince and Lord of Life. He that has the Son has
life. It Is Eternal Life that is spoken of in that Context, 1 John 5. 11, 12.
This is the record that God has given us, eternal life; and this life is in
his Son; That is, this Eternal Life. He that has the Son, has [this] Life, he
that has not the Son, has not [this] Life. Spiritual Life, and Eternal Life,
are all one, all of a piece; the same in nature and kind. The One will grow up
into the other.

That Life only is here meant, that will be Eternal Life. To the same sense is
that, He that believes in me, shall never dye, Joh. 11. 26. These are plain
words. He has a life in him that is Immortal, Sacred, and not liable to be
touched. It was before said, They that believe in him, if dead, shall live,
ver. 25* But not only that, but it is further added, they that believe in him
shall never dye; If dead, they shall live; If they Vid. Ham. in loc.
live, they shall never dye; What means this? that they have a life, besides
this bodily one; which is continued thorough Death. Of this line or thread,
Death makes no intercision. But we can never justify it to God, or our own
understandings, to rest in a dubious uncertainty about a matter of so vast
Consequence as this. Unconcernedness here, is the most unaccountable thing in
the whole World; i e. whether we have only that life in us which will end in
the darkness and rottenness of a Grave, and an horrid Hell; or that which runs
into Eternal Life? Things will come to this issue very shortly with us, that
either death must, as to us, be swallowed up in victory, or we be swallowed up
of victorious death; Nor have we any ways to ascertain our own state, but (as
was said) by uniting with the Prince of life; i. e. by receiving him in all the
Capacities wherein we are to be concerned with him; and by resigning our selves
entirely to him. For if we must have him, that we may have life: How can we,
otherwise, have him but by receiving him. The Gospel, under which we live, can
only be a savor of life to us, as it disposes us hereunto. Recollect your
selves then; How do your Lords Days, and other Seasons, of attending this
Gospel, pass over with you? Have you long expected Life, and (which is less
likely) do you meet with continual and total disappointments? And does it cause
with you no qualmish thoughts? But it is infinitely a sadder Case if you never
feel your selves begin to live, and yet are never disappointed; because you
never attend upon the Gospel Dispensation with any such design or hope. Is the
matter thus, that If you speak the Truth of your Case, you must say, I have a
soul dead to all the Actions, Motions, Sensations, Enjoyments, of a Divine and
Spiritual life. And shall it be always thus, by our own Consent, with any of
us? We have however the rational, intellectual Life, and can think: Do we think
it is fit for us to rest satisfied, and secure, in such a state? What? satisfied
in the midst of Death? such a Death? while we are capable of apprehending at
once, the horror, the danger, and the remedibleness of our Case? What will this
come to? It can only be Holy, Divine Life that must be Victorious over Death,
as the warring, opposite principle: If there be nothing to oppose it, what
shall Conquer? Death is in that Case Total, and upon such terms, till Life
begin to spring in thy Soul, thou must reckon it likely to be Eternal. Yet let
none so mistake as to imagine this Life an Enthusiastical thing, that must
discover it self in rapturous, extatical motions, or go for nothing. It
perfects our Faculties, therefore destroys them not. And chiefly consists in a
rational Judgment, Choice and Love of what is most worthy of us; what is
fittest to be done by us, and what is with fullest satisfaction to be enjoyed;
with a steadfast, most resolved adherence thereunto.

4thly, This saying ought to be Instructive to us, in reference especially to
this one thing, i. e. That we abstain from rash Censures of Providence, That
God lets death be regnant in so great a part of his creation, so long a time.
It shall be swallowed up in victory, let that solve with us the Phenomenon. It
seems indeed, an untoward one; and might at first be an amazing spectacle, even
to the Blessed Angels themselves, to behold so great a revolt in Heaven: and
afterward, to take notice of an intelligent world, of Creatures beneath them,
successively, thorough one first, delinquent, drawn in, as Accomplices, into a
like defection; and Death hereby spreading its horrid shadow, and extending its
power, over so great and so noble a part of the Universe! Committing such
Wastes, making such desolations, from Age to Age, in so great a part of the
Creation of God! But there are many alleviating Considerations, that should
compose our Spirits to a rational quietude, and be satisfying and pacifying to
our minds with reference to this thing. Let me but name some few to you, which
I shall leave with you, for this purpose.

1. Do but consider how minute a part of the Creation of God, this Globe, this
point, this punctilio, rather, of our earth is, where death has reigned, and so
long had place.

2. Consider how much of life there is in and about this little World of ours.
When, upon one single Molehill, you see the brisk motions and efforts of so
many hundred Lives, you have reason to apprehend there is a great deal of
Vitality about this little spot of Earth.

3. Consider and Collect how probable it is, that as we go higher and higher,
the nobler and finer parts of Gods Creation, must be much more replenished with
a nobler and more excellent sort of life. It is very unreasonable to think,
that this Clod of Earth should be so full of Life and that in higher and purer
Regions, there should not be a richer plenitude of life, or of such Inhabitants
as live nobler and more excellent Lives than we And

4. For ought we know, death never reaches higher than this earth of ours, and
what is in a nearer vicinity to it; And that, therefore, there be vast and
ample Regions, incomparably beyond the range of our Eye, or Thought, where now,
no Death ever comes; after the detrusion of the first revolters, from those
bright Regions. When we are told, Ephesians. 4. 10. our Lord Jesus Christ is ascended
far above all heavens, as it were a fond attempt to pretend to count them so it
were rash Philosophizing, to go about to describe them. But can we suppose them
spacious, wild Wastes? Or not suppose them replenished with numberless numbers
of excellent Creatures that in their confirmed state, fear no Death. And
continually pay a willing, joyful Homage to their Great Preserver. For every
knee must bow to him, of things in heaven, Phil. 2. 10. And when we are told,
Ephesians. 1. 20, 21. God has set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places,
far above all Principality, and Power, and Might, and Dominion, and every Name
--, etc. And 1 Pet. 3. 22. That he is on the Right hand of God. Angels, and
Authorities, and Powers being made subject to him. Though we cannot form distinct
thoughts what those Dynastics, Principalities, and Dominions are, yet we cannot
but suppose those unconceivably vast, and ample Regions, fully Peopled, with
immortal Inhabitants, that reign in life, in a more excellent sense. For it
being said our Lord ascended far above all Heavens, that he might fill all
things, Ephesians. 4. 10. This must suppose suitable Recipients. And if his influences
reach down in such plenty to our minute Earth (as ver. 11, 12, 13.) how copious
are they here!

5thly. Consider, That here, where Death has made its inrode, though the Apostate
Spirits surround us, and incompass this Earth of ours, and go to and fro
throwing Death among us every where, yet even here is a glorious offspring
continually arising, the Redeemers Seed in whom a Divine Life is gradually
springing up from Age to Age. So that, at length, they make a great multitude
which no man can number standing before the Throne, clothed with white Robes,
and (as Ensigns of Victory) having palms in their hands, Rev. 7. 9. Here is
life then disseminated through all this death that inwraps our World. Which for
ought we know, is the Center of Death; it may be here, for ought we can tell,
and no where else; (here, or hereabouts.) And yet even here, an Holy Divine
Life is insinuating and spreading it self, even among us, over whom death has
reigned; and there are great numbers, that having received abundance of Grace,
and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ,
Romans 5. 17. Here Is supposed a Kingdom, with a Counter-Kingdom, and one Head
against another; One, that brought in Death and Condemnation upon the World;
but another, that brings in righteousness and life. And that here, even in this
lower Region, The Redeemer should have so large a Portion (we know not how
large!) This very much narrows the confines of Death. And let it be further
considered.

6thly, That where Death shall be perpetual, it is there but self-procured.
They only lie under Death, that loved it. All they that hate me love death,
Prove. 8. 36. They inwrap themselves in death, they make a covenant with it.
That Sin, which is Death, which carries Death and Hell in it self, that they
loved; 'Twas so it is true, with the rest, that finally perish not; but it was
not always so. The Grace of God made a difference, not to be quarreled at,
when striving with many, it is victorious with some. But of those with whom it
is not so, it must be said, as their final, never-altered sense, even to the
last, They would not be plucked out of the Gulf, that deadly Gulf, where they
therefore lie, as in their most agreeable Element. And let it further be
considered.

7. That for the death that shall be perpetual, it is to be confined, and go no
further. Before it was diffused and continually more and more diffusing it
self. But in the future state of things, when time has run to its period, and
the Affairs of it are shut up by the final Judgment, Death and Hell are now to
be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, which is the second Death, Rev.
20. 14. All death is now to be gathered into Death, Hell, into Heil. It shall
be contracted, gathered into it self. It Is true, it will be therefore
consummate, finished, perfect in its kind, or full of it self, as that which is
without mixture cannot but be, (as was noted before). Here will be pure death,
without mixture; and which therefore will have no allay. But then, whereas
formerly it ranged to and fro uncontrolled, now it is confined to its own
narrower Circle, and can have no new subject, And shall therefore give no
further trouble or disturbance, to the rest of Gods Creation. Moreover,
Consider,

Lastly, That this victory will not be gradual only, but total and entire.
Every thing of Mortality, that was Hanging about these glorious Victors, shall
be swallowed up in perfect, and in endless Life. Death is unstung first,
disarmed, and then easily overcome. Its sting is said to be Sin, the deadliest
thing in Death. A plain further proof (by the way) the Apostle intended Death
also, in the moral Sense. And the insulting Enquiry, Where is it? implies it is
not any where to be found, and signifies a total abolition of it; and, by
consequence, must infer that every thing of Death besides, must (as to them)
for ever cease, and be no more. Which also the Phrase of swallowing up, does
with great Emphasis express. And this compleats the vindication of Providence,
i. e. in this whole Affair; and not only vindicates, but magnifies the conduct
of the Supreme Disposer of all things. For by this means, as his Wisdom, Power
and Goodness, are most highly illustrated, so the trial of his Peoples Faith
(the great Instrument of this their Victory, as well as of that over the world,
1 John 5. 4) is found unto praise, honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 4. 7. And they find, what, by patient continuance in well-doing,
they were enjoined to seek, (which shows they were not vainly put upon so noble
a pursuit) Honor, Glory, Immortality, to their actual attainment of Eternal
Life, Romans 2. 7.

Now, therefore shall this saying be made good in its fullest sense: And if
there shall be such a Victory, so glorious a one won at last; surely we should
be tuning our Instruments, and laboring to get our Hearts into a frame to sing
the (...) the triumphant song, ver. 55, 56. and conclude it, as ver. 57. Thanks
be to God, that gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
These Books Written by the Reverend Mr. John How, are Sold by Tho. Parkhurst
at the Bible and Three Crowns, Cheapside.
OF Thoughtfulness for the Morrow; with an Appendix concerning the immoderate
desire of fore-knowing things to come.

The Redeemers Tears wept over Lost Souls; in a Treatise on Luke 19. 41, 42.
With an Appendix, wherein somewhat is occasionally discoursed concerning the
sin against the Holy Ghost, and how God is said to will the Salvation of them
that Perish.

Of Charity in reference to other Men's Sins.

Two Sermons preached on these words, Yield your selves to God.

A Funeral Sermon for Mrs. Esther Sampson, the late Wife of Henry Sampson, Dr.
of Physic, who died Nov. 24. 1689.

The Carnality of Religious Contention, in Two Sermons Preached at the
Merchants Lecture in Broadstreet.

A Calm and Sober Enquiry concerning the Possibility of a Trinity in the
Godhead: In a Letter to a Person of Worth, occasioned by the lately Published
Considerations on the Explications of the Doctrine of the Trinity: By Dr.
Wallis, Dr. Sherlock, Dr. S -- th, Dr. Cudworth, etc. Together with certain
Letters, (hitherto unpublish'd) formerly written to the Reverend Dr. Wallis on
the same Subject.

A Letter to a Friend concerning a Postscript to the Defense of Dr. Sherlock's
Notion of the Trinity in Unity, relating to the Calm Enquiry upon the same
Subject.

A View of that part of the late Considerations addressed to H. H. about the
Trinity, which concerns the Sober Enquiry on that Subject.


