HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS Upon the REIGNS OF EDWARD I. II. III. And RICHARD II.
With REMARKS upon their Faithful Counselors and False Favorites. Written by a
Person of Honor.

Liscensed, Jan. 17th. 1688/9. Rob. Midgley.

LONDON, Printed for J. Partridge and M. Gillyflower, at the Post Office at
Charing Cross, and at the Spread-Eagle in Westminster Hall. MDCLXXXIX.

Advertisement.
THE LADIES NEWYEARS-GIFT, or ADVICE to a DAUGHTER, under these following
Heads, viz. Religion, Husband, House and Family, Servants, Behavior and
Conversation, Friendships, Censure, Vanity and Affectation, Pride, Diversions,
Dancing. Printed for Matt. Gillyflower and James Partridge. 1688.

HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS Upon the REIGNS. Of EDWARD the First, Second and
Third, and RICHARD the Second.
Introduction.
SINCE Living in an Age in which the Minds of Men are so passionately divided,
that they are apt, of all sides, not only to Condemn whatever is not suitable
to the Noise they make, but wrest out forced Constructions far, perhaps, from
the meaning of him that either writ or said the words, and where it is possible
to turn Censure into Accusation. I thought it not improper therefore, at least,
of State-Criticks, by giving a short Account, by way of Introduction, why I
chose History as the most useful Study, and something of our own most proper
for our selves, where the Prospect of things past under the same Laws and
Government that we now enjoy, must also probably be the most useful part of
History to us. For if the Revolution and Event of things are the best
Instructions, the Impressions may probably be the most effectual, where our
Actions are Precedents to our selves.

I have also often considered, since riper years have admitted a full
consideration, what Hazard any man undergoes, that exposes publicly the
Endeavors of an improved Knowledge, though with a design to present to others
those advantages that he believes he has acquired to himself by the most
industrious and impartial searches. And indeed it is not only the Intention of
doing well, that will procure an Excuse for Errors committed, but joined to a
fair performance, will hardly find a just acceptance; and every man by reason
of Self-inclination, is as much unfit to be a Judge of his own Productions, as
generally men, by the averseness to the Reputation of others, are improper to
bring in their Verdicts.

The same Inclination and Reason, that guide what any man writes, will probably
make him approve what he has written; so that indeed a man has past his
Judgment at first, and can hardly have a separate Opinion left at last: For
when he has endeavored to apply his best Correction, he must be disentangled
from his own Nature, to have another Judgment. Fathers that beget Children, may
fancy that to be Wit and Diversion in them, which perhaps disinterested persons
would judge troublesome impertinencies.

On the other side, those that are not biased by any particular Concerns, and
should be most capable to judge, are yet as much bent with the apprehension of
the Reputation of others, as they are by the fondness of gaining it: as if any
were robbed of what was due to their own merits, by others receiving the reward
of theirs. One Candle may illuminate a Thousand, without the loss of Light; and
in esteem no man loses by what another shares. But Jealousy that disturbs the
Peace of Life, raises the Disquiet in Men's Minds, and Disturbance is the
Product of ill Nature; so that men are prepared rather to censure than judge.
Besides, in giving Judgment for the Party, there seems a tacit submission to
his; but Censure seems a preference to their own: So that by searching out
faults in others, they give Evidence (as they think) of their own Correctness.
Whereas, if those that endeavor to be Censorious, were to attempt the same
thing, they might perhaps show as many failings; and the others that should
enter upon their envious Province, might perhaps successfully exceed them in
searching for Defects.

This is the Cause why the best Performances have not that Kindness or Justice
bestowed upon them while the Author lives, which after his Death they receive.
Many excellent Painters, who during Life, did not gain any extraordinary Wealth
or Fame, after Death their Works increased alike into an extreme of Price and
Reputation: for they could then be no Rivals, and those that were jealous, they
might darken their Reputations while living, now believed it might be a safe
Testimony of their own Skill, to admire the Art of those that were dead.

'Twere too long and needless to name the Writings of many that were little
regarded at the time they were written; nay, some censured, some absolutely
condemned, which in future times grew into Credit, and by laborious
Commentaries, great Excellencies, and heights of Imagination, have been
endeavored to be discovered, which perhaps were never designed or thought of
by the Authors. But when they were not capable to receive any Benefit of a
Reputation, 'twas then searched out for them, to make their Writings useful to
the Fame and Interest of others. For when by Distance of time there seems a
Traditional Authority descending with the Writings, many have curiously
labored how to bring this to the use of their Arguments and Designs, and, to
gain the more reverence, fixed the Name of Antiquity to that which was
performed rather in the Infancy os Learning.

From this general, and no very pleasant Consideration, I entered into the
particular Parts of Learning; and in the first place seriously weighed those
searches I had made in Divinity, and I perceived nothing so easy, nor so
useful, as the Gospel Part of it, which should have been the whole: For I
thought all things necessary were so fully and clearly laid down there, that it
did not need Disputes, nor could reasonably cause men to differ, but only
required a general Consent of persuading for the other pretended part of it,
which is drawn out in Disputes. I found little encouragement to hope any
advantage or improvement by laboring in such an interessed Labyrinth. For when
with as much power of Impartial Reason as I was furnished with, I had steddily
weighed the particulars that were so warmly disputed among Christians, I could
not convince my self (though I had a charitable Inclination to the contrary)
but that all the particulars from whence such passionate Differences had
sprung, were caused more by the Zeal for this World than for the other.

For in the first place, there was never any Point, now in Controversy, that
had a name pretended when Tradition began: If they had a Birth it was unknown,
they lay asleep in their Cradles, till the future noise of the Church roused
them, but had no growth at all; and after many years continuing Infants, giving
a Testimony at least of an unlawful Birth, being then disowned by many of the
Fathers they were then laid to. So that the Disputes seemed of what Men
invented, not what they found; and in Civil Matters 'twould be thought a
ridiculous Contention about a Title of an invented Thing, that never was heard
of in Five or six hundred years, and then not to be found.

Whoever will take Pains to sum up the Differences Disputed among Christians,
may easily find the Dates and Commencements of every one, long after the time
from whence they would derive the Causes of them. And since the particulars
disputed are (for the most part) affirmed to be of such Consequence, it seems
strange that none of them should have such a plain Name, as not capable to be
called otherwise, and after a Deluge of so many hundred years, when admired
Tradition, nor the least Ecclesiastical Gazett had given notice of any such
thing, to see strange Births, and new Names contended for.

But that it may justly be thought too prolix and improper for my intended
Subject, I could set down most of the Particulars, their times of Birth, and
the Confident Fathers that first owned them, who, while they were thus
Passionate for their own unquiet Offsprings, did for ought they knew endeavor
to illegitimate the Truth. For large Disputes, and Divisions of Men's Minds,
show there is a Doubt, which is the right Determination; but one side finds a
Protection for themselves against all Error, and Mistakes: For those who call
themselves an Infallible Church, must consequently make their Determination so;
and not only secure what is past, but what is to be, by Declaring from the same
assumed Power, a right of making new Articles of Faith. So that none need
Examine why they believe at present, nor be sollicitous for what they believe
hereafter.

To add to this, I confess, I could not upon my best Examination find that any
of the Particulars controverted among Christians, purely and abstractedly
considered in themselves, and the Validity of their own Natures could have any
effectual Virtue or use, by the Opinion of them, in Point of Salvation, no more
than if they had never received their injurious Beings by the Designs of
Disputing Parties; for some of them are so unnecessary, that the most earnest
Contenders for them want Modesty, so much as to desire; that since we must
endeavor to Live as well as we ought, that the certain knowledge of those
things must needs be useless to that end; for nothing that is not in it self
material, can be useful to the Means; and if Faith, Charity, and Justice must
be the effectual means, I cannot see how it is necessary to consider of
believing, or not believing any Thing that is not in it self purely necessary
to be believed for its own intrinsic Virtue.

This being my Thoughts of the Polemic part of Divinity, I could not perceive
any use for my self or others, to be extracted out of these interessed
quarrels, and therefore resolved not to wander farther in a Wilderness, where
all disputed the way, and most pretended to be unerring Guides. But were the
Apostles now Living, they would see a greater improvement by these Disputes,
than would have been purchased by their plainer Methods and Doctrines; of which
they would be sufficiently evinced by the (then unthought of) Titles and large
Possessions of their Successors. But things of extraordinary Natures are most
apt to get respect, visible impossibilities are made the most worthy Objects of
Faith: And the Church the less visible, the more Veneration to be given it; and
submitting imagination must make that greatest, that is not to be made less by
being possible to be found out where it is.

The next thing I Considered was Philosophy, wherein I found also Disputes
warmly maintained, Men being apt to engage for the pride of Victory, or lust of
Interest. And it appears plainly, that not the desire of Truth only has engaged
many in the search of Philosophy, since the uncertain fate of it shows that the
Opinions received Credit, as the Interests of Men were guided by Design or
Opposition. For in Things that admit no Demonstration, there is more room for
Disputes than common Benefit.

The beginning of it is reckoned from Thales and Pythagoras, who made first the
public profession of it. But the Account is given faintly by Laertius; and
what we read of them and others down to the time of Socrates, are but dark
Accounts either to raise, use, or dispute from. Under him Plato began his
Studies, and Aristotle in his time appeared in Athens. The Differences between
the Stoics and Epicureans were famous, and by their Disputes made way for the
Doctrine of Plato to flourish, which Cicero in his time followed close, finding
it perhaps useful to Eloquence which he so much Labored in.

The Doctrine of Aristotle lay silent, while Plato's spread in Italy and
Greece, which were then the only Countries of Learning. It Is said that the
Writings of Aristotle lay hid about One hundred and sixty years, and almost
spoiled by the moisture of the Cave where they were buried; after sold for a
great price to a wealthy Citizen of Athens, who had a fancy for making a great
Collection of Books hard to be gotten. Afterward when Sylla took the City, he
took these Writings with a design to bring them to Rome: But he dying they fell
into the Hands of one Tyrannion. After him Andronicus got them into his
Possession, who seemed the first restorer of them, and made them known in Rome,
about the time of Cicero's growing Reputation.

But Plato was yet famous in all Places, and the Romans that found Advantage
and Preferments depended more upon Eloquence than Natural Philosophy, applied
themselves most to the Moral Part of it, and from thence formed Religion.

This Established the Reputation of Plato's Doctrine in Rome, till the same
Cause gave Reputation to Aristotle's. In Domitians time, the Disputes of the
Philosophers began to be so troublesome to the Government, that they were
banished Rome. Marcus Aurelius brought it again in high Reputation, and in his
time the Doctrine of Plato was in such Esteem, that it grew in Fashion among
the Ladies, and so continued to the time of Severus.

In this first Age the Church seemed to have a Birth; the beginning of the
Christian Religion was thought to have the most obstruction from Philosophers,
whose Disputes among themselves, and the Division of their Sects, gave Lucian
one of the best occasions to turn it into ridicule.

Some of the Sages among the Christians finding the Pagans so averse to any
that disowned Philosophy, they closed with them in becoming Platonists, whose
Philosophy was then so highly preferred; and then this Philosophy was by them
judged most agreeable to the Christian Religion; and contributed to turn
Justin, who was afterward Martyred; who avowed, that the Philosophy of Plato
disposed him to Christianity. Many Bishops were also admirers of that
Philosophy; Origin and St. Austin were great Asserters of Plato's Doctrine, and
the usefulness of it for Christianity; and the two first Ages were absolute
Opposers of that of Aristotle.

Tertullian was one of the first that appeared against the Doctrine of Plato;
calling him the first Author of all Heresies; and both he, and Arnobius
followed by St. Chrysostom, who most sharply of any handled that Doctrine. And
then the Stream quite turned; and as in the First and Second Age it was
believed Christianity was asserted by it; so now in the Third and Fourth Ages
'twas found out that Heresy sprung from it.

The Latin Fathers were not so clear sighted to find out that the Subtilties of
Aristotle were not full of a Spirit of Contradiction against the Christian
Religion; but the Greeks that flourished in the Eleventh Age, found it
otherwise by studying it; and the Commentaries of Avicen and Averrhoes on the
Philosophy of Aristotle, assisted his Reputation, and helped it to spread.

In the 13th. Age, as the French write, the Works of Aristotle were brought
into France, and for some time taught in the University; but after a little
time his Writings were burnt, and Excommunication threatened against any that
taught out of them: His Metaphysics were Condemned by an Assembly of Bishops
at Paris; and six years after the Cardinal of Estieune, sent by Pope Innocent,
forbid the Professors of the University of Paris to teach his Physics; which
afterward was also Condemned by a Bull of Gregory the Ninth, and one Simon a
Professor, and Diuant a Master of Arts, were after accused of Heresy, for
being Esteemers of Aristotle's Opinions and Writings. Mezeray says, that in the
Year 1209. one Almeric a Priest, beginning to preach some Novelties, had been
forced to recant; for which he died of Grief. Several after his Death followed
his Opinion, and were Condemned to be burnt; and he being Excommunicated by the
Council of Paris, his Body was taken up, and his Ashes thrown upon a Dunghill.
And because they believed the Books of Aristotle, lately brought from
Constantinople, had filled their Heads with these Heretical Subtilties, the
same Council forbids the reading or keeping them, under the pain of
Excommunication.

But during this Disgrace, there arose in his defense three famous Divines, to
whom Damascen had opened the way, having abridg'd many of his Works; which had
assisted him to put in order his great work of Divinity: And afterward others
improved this, and took as it were a Plan of Divinity from Aristotle's
Philosophy.

In the year 1366. Two Cardinals, Commissioners from Urban the Fifth, came to
Establish the Doctrine of Aristotle in France; where it was ordered, that none
should proceed Master of Arts, that were not Examined upon his Logic,
Physics, Metaphysics, and his Books of the Soul; and afterward were enjoined
to study Aristotle carefully, to restore the Reputation of the University.

Pope Nicholas the Fifth, a great advancer of Learning, commanded a new
Translation of Aristotle into Latin, for the use of the Divines of the Romish
Church.

Pope John, that Canonized St. Thomas and his Doctrine, increased the
Reputation of Aristotle, from whom that great Doctor had drawn his Principles;
but now his Writings became the Fundamental Laws of Philosophy.

In the Fourteenth Age grew the hot Contention between the Thomists and the
Scotists: The Disciples of St. Thomas and Scotus, about Subtle things, or (as
Mezeray calls them) brangling Cobweb-Controversies, which yet was pursued with
Passion, according to Interest or Inclination, or by engagement of Parties. And
so multiplied were Disputes, that a Venetian Writer pretended to reckon up
Twelve thousand Volumes published in that Age about the Philosophy of Aristotle.

This pursuit of Differences, and Niceties, never to be made decidable, grew to
raise a new Philosophy, that the other became scarcely intelligible: Interest,
and the Excessive love of Dispute, caused so many vain subtilties, that
Philosophy began to lose its former Credit and Reputation. And if it were not
from my purpose, the naming only of those useless and unintelligible Subtilties
would easily convince any, that by the sharp Disputes it appeared, it was for
Truth, or the hopes evidently to discover it, that engaged the quarrelling
Parties.

Yet after this the Reputation of Aristotle so far increased, and was so
established in the University of Paris, that Ramus, who had found out some new
Subtilties in Logic, and Published some Observations upon Aristotle to
diminish his Credit, was by the other Professors in the University condemned in
the year 1543. for Rash, Ignorant, and Impudent, to dare write any thing
against Aristotle; and an Order made, that none should teach any other
Philosophy. Such a Religious Veneration they had for Aristotle, that dissenting
from it grew a Heresy; and in the Massacre at Paris, Ramus was murdered with
as much fury, as the Calvinists themselves.

The Credit of Aristotle was also not a little increased in the Church of Rome,
from the Opposition of Bucer, Calvin, Melancthon, and others; and it was then
more and more found out, that it was a support to the dark Opinions of that
Church. This was the Cause that it was so supported by the Doctors of Paris in
the year 1611. by making a new Rule, that all Professors should teach the
Philosophy of Aristotle. And in the year 1624. a Request was denied for some
particular Theses to be proposed against the Doctrine of Aristotle And the same
Parliament in the Year 1629. made an Arrest against some Chemists, upon the
Information of the Sorbonists, that the Principles of Aristotle could not be
written against, or lessened, without prejudicing the School Divinity received.
And this perhaps raised and confirmed his Reputation in all Universities, which
were first encouraged by the Popes, as proper Soils to sow the Seeds for
Disputers to grow up, to defend and support all new and dark Opinions. Thus his
Name grew almost Sacred in Universities; and Queens College in Oxford yet
shows a kind of Testimony of Veneration, by reading Aristotle upon their Knees;
and those that take Degrees, sworn to defend his Philosophy.

Whosoever will impartially consider the dark Subtilties contained in
Aristotle's Philosophy, will find reason enough for the use of it in as dark,
but more dull Writings of School Divinity, whose end seems only to confound all
things with obscure and dark distinctions. For when an impartial Obedience is
to be persuaded, the most sublime and unintelligible means are most proper to
be used.

And it is no wonder if the Fathers, and Sages of the Three first Ages, were not
quick enough to understand a sort of Dullness, of which then they had no use,
the thing not being then found out that they were to be applied to. But when
the occasion was ready for it, the puzling parts of Aristotle's Philosophy were
found useful; and among all his dark Subtilties, none more convenient than that
of separated Essences which were Beings where no Being was, and the only proper
Notion to find out a place for Purgatory; and seemed also very useful to
support the hard Point of Transubstantiation; where there appears a Substance,
that must not be believed to be there, and another to be believed there that is
not at all to be perceived. Yet though the Church engaged in the Quarrel, the
Credit of the New Philosophy has increased chiefly by the Writings of
Mirandula, Lod. Vives, Galilaeus, Gassendus, and Des Carles, and by many
excellent Philosophers of our own Nation.

I have not given this Account with the least Design or Endeavor to lessen the
Esteem of Knowledge in this particular of Philosophy. For certainly the Natural
Reason of things is worthy of such a search as may inform. But to labor in the
endless and useless searches of Subtilties and nice Distinctions, can be for no
other use but Disputes, caused by the Vanity of supposed Victory, or the
Application to Interest. At least, I could not find a clear advantage to my
self, or could have hoped to have offered any others, by endeavoring to obtain
the Perfections of an imperfect Study, wherein nothing appeared to me promising
any thing of public use or private demonstration.

For the Mathematics, setting aside that vain part of it, Astrology, I only
know enough of it to deplore I had not made my entire Study there, where a
Demonstration made it more proper for the true use of men, than for their
Designs. For in things that admit the least Dispute, men must be least divided;
and yet Evident Truth begets the least Interest, and the fewest Admirers. But
where things not only above Reason, but contrary to Sense, are imposed upon
men's Belief, that implicit Faith, and consequently Obedience, must be the sure
Foundation of Interest; and those who have parted with their Wits, may probably
part with their Fortunes. For certainly had not such extraordinary Designs
prosper'd on easy men, the Ecclesiastics had not crept into such great Titles
and large Possessions, that the Apostles could hardly find any Image of
themselves in their Successors, and as little in some of their Opinions, who
never were taught, or did teach, to deny Sense, and to make visible Truth, or
sensible Demonstration, a Sin.

The Mathematics have therefore caused less Disputes, and engaged fewer in the
Study of it, where Truth can only be the Search and the Reward, and Disputes
must be confounded by Demonstration. But the other Studies are most suitable to
the bent Nature of Mankind, where things not to be clearly decided, nourish
Contention and Design: For easy People being ready for extraordinary Notions,
excuse the folly of not examining, by the prudence of believing it safer to
submit implicitly to others, than to use their own Sense. And at last, by such
entire submissions, Impossibilities become as easy to them as Truths, and
Falseness as Demonstration; like those that use themselves perpetually to hot
Waters, Spirit of Wine it self at last is swallowed up, without being perceived
to have any violent strength.

Observations on HISTORY.
THE next Study to this, that seemed nearest Truth, and of most use, was
History, in which the best measures of men are to be found; and the Comparisons
of Calms and Storms in Empires, the Quiet and Revolutions under several Princes
and Governors, will best teach by what Methods Kingdoms have been preserved
and shaken; which is not only useful for those that govern, but those that
obey, teaching the first how to preserve, and the last how to afford the Means.

Nor did any thing appear more agreeable to me, than the use that Machiavel
makes of History in his Decads on Livy, where his Discourses, grounded upon
Reason, have yet matter of Fact to support them, and brings it the nearest to a
Demonstration. For Notions in Politics, unsupported with Fact, seem only bare
Opinions; but from those Accidents and Events that we have seen follow closely
the Wisdom and Virtue of Princes, or the Folly and Vices of them and their
Favorites and Ministers, (sharing so much their Power) may be reasonably
deduced that Judgment of things which must be useful to practice, or avoid, by
the ruling and obeying part.

There are no Prescriptions (in my Opinion at least) so useful against this
Sickness, as the Precedents in History; to see what Glory and Safety wise and
virtuous Princes have obtained, and what Ruin the Cruelty and Folly of others
have brought upon themselves and Subjects. In every Country their own
Precedents are most proper for themselves, since living under the same
Constitutions, they may justly expect the same Effects from those happy or
unfortunate Causes.

In all our Stories, I looked upon none so instructing as this part I have
chosen, where the power of firm Virtue and unsteady Errors so evidently
appeared in their close Operations.

I do not look upon a calm and quiet Reign so much the Proof of steady Virtue,
where Peace has descended with the Empire, nor the Troubles of an unquiet time
so clear an Evidence of unsteady Errors, where the Storms and Troubles
descended with the Crown. But when in an immediate and repeated Succession, the
Extremes alternately have preserved and destroyed. I look upon these as the
clear Testimonies of the different Powers of Vice and Virtue, Steddiness and
Indirectness, Justice, and Tyranny.

The Examples are no where to be found more close than in the Reigns of Edward
the Second and Richard the Second. The first succeeded his Father Edward, who
came to the Crown after many Troubles that his Father Henry the Third had long
labored under; but his steady Virtue overcame all Troubles at home, and
conquered his Enemies abroad; and was the first that made England look like a
Powerful and Established Monarchy. His unfortunate Son Edward unravelled what
he had wound up, and by unsteddy Errors shook that Power that descended so
unshaken to him from his mighty Father. His Son Edward the Third, by Virtues
and Methods of his Grandfather, restored what his Father had lost. Richard the
Second, the Son of the Black Prince, succeeded his Grandfather in his Throne;
but his Great Grandfather, Edward the Second, in the same fatal and unsteddy
measures, lost more than the other had gained. For though he lost his Life,
like Edward the Second, yet he lost more than he; for with him the Succession
ended, and fell into another Line.

No Subject appeared to me so worthy of Remarks as this; which evidently shows,
that there is a general Temper in Mankind, fatal to their own Peace, which even
and firm Minds would perceive. Fortune and occasion add to, or diminish the
Temper of most, who sink either too low, or swell too high: Success makes them
salse to themselves and others. All modest and professed Principles are lost in
such a Temptation, and both Kings and Subjects have harassed one another by
such alterations, and shook the Government they both seemed tender of.

Sometimes when Kings have been in such a Condition that is capable to ground
sufficient Flattery upon, there never want those either indigent in Fortune or
Virtue, to persuade Kings, That Limited Power (for so they call Laws observed)
is but the Fetters of a Prince, and they need be worn no longer than he submits
to public Notions, which are nothing but unsolid Fancies: For if a King does
not assume all Power, the Subjects will grow into the greatest share, and will
necessitate him to try for all, or have as good as none.

On the other side, a Prince attempting this, and failing, he sinks perhaps to
grant as much as he designed to get, and believes to find a stop in their
Desires, who knew none in his own. Subjects are at first modest, and their
Desires are grounded upon Common Interest; but usually when they believe their
Credit and Condition large enough for a Foundation, they increase as fast in
Desires as Fortune gives them occasion; and when they gain more than they
expected, they will ask more to secure what they had obtained, and at last make
themselves incapable to trust or be trusted. It is the Nature of Extremities to
allow no retreat; and the mischiefs of either side are equal to the Common
Peace; and wherever a ravished Power rests, the Tyranny is alike.

Nothing more illustrates this than the unfortunate Reigns of those Two unhappy
Princes Edward the Second, and Richard the Second, both Princes of resembling
Tempers, not affected with extraordinary Cruelty in their own Natures, of
competent Sense and Courage, but ill Users of both: In Prosperity they seemed
to show more Courage than they had, and in Adversity less; by which it
naturally appeared they were more influenced by others than themselves, who
flattered them in a good Condition, and forsook them in a bad. They were both
apt to be fond of Favorites, and the Nobility as apt to hate them: Yet some of
those that condemned those Kings for fixing too much their Favors upon
particular persons, would perhaps have been as pleased to enjoy the same good
Fortune. But the public was made complain for their private Displeasures, and
the usual immoderate use of Power in those Favorites, caused such a Distance
in the Hearts of King and People, that the attempting the Cure of the Diseases
that sprung from the infection of ambitious Ministers, procured Calamities in
their Redress; as Physicians, sometimes one Disease as a Remedy for another,
and to cure a Lethargy, the Patient must be driven to a Fever.

King Edward gave this Offense by his unlimited Favors to Gaveston, and after
him to the Spencers: King Richard to the Duke of Ireland, and Earl of Suffolk.
Gaveston's Person was very charming, and his Mind and Frame equally fitted for
Luxuries, which was discerned by that great Prince Edward the First, who
banished him, and on his Deathbed enjoined his Son never to bring him back. He
was a man of Courage, but when raised to Power, he grew from all Evenness of
Temper, and was as insolent as his Fortune was great.

The Spencers succeeded him in Favor, in whom no particular marks of good
Qualities could be traced; never satisfied with wealth, nor ever satisfied with
revenge. The Riches of the Nation seemed but enough to satisfy their
Ambitions, and the Destruction of it to secure their Safeties. They first
justly made many their Enemies, and then destroyed them for being so. By this
it may seem strange, that Princes should have that Excess of Value for such
worthless Objects, which more ordinary persons would hardly bestow upon them.
But those of the loosest and most debauched Principles are aptest to feed the
Humor of men, who love to be nourished by soft Flatteries; and Common People
are not Objects for such Endeavors. Princes tempt the Tempters, who creep into
their Power by perpetual whispers, how to enlarge theirs, and twisting
themselves into their Princes Favor and Opinion, involve his Interest with
theirs, and render any Displeasure against them, the want of Duty to him.

Richard the Second was as unhappy as his Choice of Favorites. The first was
the Duke of Ireland, better than the rest, but hardly better than any others.
He was not a great studier of mischief, but a ready Adviser to pursue any
advantage to enlarge Power. He seemed to want Courage to attempt; and few want
Courage to embrace. So that it was possible he might have rested in a limited
share of Fortune, and been contented with a moderate quietness, had he not been
joined with the turbulent Earl of Suffolk, who, in all Conditions, merited the
worst Character; in War, fearful; in Peace, insupportable; all Virtue unthought
of by him, and Mischief his study, and his Diseased Mind the common place of
Corruption.

Tresilian, the Chief Justice, was an useful Minister to assist such a
Favorite, who was ready to subject Law to Occasion, and make the Occasion
suitable to Law; and it is probable he got his Place by such measures; for his
Reason was Violence, and his Justice Cruelty.

There was nothing right or wrong, but what he was directed to determine so,
and gave a full Testimony of himself in the deciding the Ten Queries proposed
by the Earl of Suffolk, all which were resolved into Treason, or to merit
Death. By which Resolves the Nation was made the Traitor, and the Treason
fitted certainly to find out Traitors.

Thus commonly Men attain to Princes Favors, by being more Counselors to
their Humors than their Interest, and with unconfined Flattery betray them to
the Temptation of unlimited Power. And this violent driving all things into
Extremes, was the fall of those too unhappy Princes, who, when they had Power
showed no Moderation, and when they wanted it, betrayed as much Dejection.

This shook that Trust, which is the Foundation of peace, and that once shaken,
either side (as occasion offered) acted the same immoderation, which they
before Condemned. Both these Princes in the change of Fortune, denied and
granted too much, and most commonly denied what they had granted, and granted
what they had denied before, by which they disobliged in denying, and their
Favors seemed no Obligation when bestowed. The first was looked upon, as
designed to injure their Subjects, and the last as a fear of them.

These things will be best illustrated by giving an impartial Account of some
resembling Particulars in the Actions of these unfortunate Princes.

Edward the Second began first with his receiving the banished Gaveston into
Favor before his Fathers Funerals were performed, makes him Earl of Cornwall,
and gives him the Lordship of Man; and in his first Actions, seems to forget
his Fathers Commands, and neglect the Advice of any Council.

This so enraged the Nobility, that they press for Gaveston's Banishment; or
threatened (if denied) to hinder his Coronation. The King (pursued always with
a Fatal unsteadiness) yields to their Demands, and Promises in the next
Parliament all they had desired: Yet after he had promised the Banishment of
Gaveston, permits him, notwithstanding, to carry St. Edward's Crown. This
aggravates so much, that the next Parliament proceeded much higher. Thus the
Balances began to be tossed up and down, as any weight on either side, helped to
hoist up the other.

In the Parliament they pursued their advantage; and the King not only grants
them power to draw Articles, but takes his Oath to confirm whatever they
concluded; and he that before seemed jealous of trusting his Subjects, now gave
them an opportunity of revenging that Mistrust.

The want of Confidence before seemed to betray an ill Intention, and this
unlimited Confidence confirmed the Opinion of it; both betrayed what he
designed both should conceal; and by the Extremes, taught the fatal Lesson of
Jealousy; and those perhaps that advised the ill Designs, wanting power to
bring them forth from their own Fears, gave Councils contrary to their former
Advices in a better Condition: For men without Principles are guided by those
Opinions that unequal Fears, or unsteddy Ambition gives them, and receive no
Council from even Principles, or unshaken Virtue.

These Mistakes provoked the Banishment of Gaveston, and the King became liable
to Perjury whenever they pleased. But after he had committed this Error, he
pursues it with a greater; and though he banished Gaveston to keep his Oath, he
violates again by re-calling him, and gives him his Niece in Marriage, and so
much Rules, that it justly merited the Censure of wasting the public^ Treasure.

The Barrons enraged at this Breach of Faith in the King, and to see the
Fortune of the Nation thrown into a Stranger's Hands, threaten Force against
their Perjured Prince, and by this means obtain again the Banishment of
Gaveston, with a Clause of Death, if ever he returned.

Gaveston having not been long in Banishment, and finding, or at least
believing he was not safe abroad, thought it less hazardous to trust to the
former extravagant Affection of the King, than Enemies and Strangers in another
Country; and upon this consideration comes back into England, and immediately
repairs to him. The King (according to his expectation) received him with such
an Excess of inconsiderate Joy and Kindness, that it seemed as if Gaveston
brought always Charms more powerful than any Divine or Hamane Obligation.

Upon this the Lords again took Arms, and petition in the Name of the whole
Commonalty, That Gaveston may be banished. The King more fond of Gaveston, than
sensible of what he had done, or of their Force or Petition, takes, as it were,
a Flight with him, and puts him with Forces into Scarborough-Castle; and as
Gaveston seemed to aim at security, by weaving the King's Fortunes with his, so
the King seemed to make his Fortunes as desperate as Gaveston's, by sharing his
Condition.

The Lords eagerly pursued him to Scarborough, which they besieged and took,
together with Gaveston, whom they immediately beheaded. Thus this unhappy
Prince neglecting his own Faith, gave others the Opinion, that theirs was
discharged; and the fondness of a Favorite above the People, lessened their
Duty, as he lessened his Consideration of them: and it is too visible a truth,
that a Prince who so much resigns himself to Favorites, must also resign his
Fortune to theirs.

The Lords, swelled with this Success (the usual Effects of Ravished Power),
march with an Army toward London, where the King then was, where Necessity,
and not Choice, seemed to be the means that a Parliament was called, where the
King complained of the Barons, who justified their unlawful Actions, by the
Errors of their Prince, and plead Merit for having purchased the Banishment of
Strangers to quiet the People. Thus unsteddy Actions beget wild Arguments, and
false Pretensions are too much supported by Power.

However, a Composure for the present was made by the Queen, the Bishops, and
the Earl of Gloucester, who calmed the Barons into a Temper of asking the King's
Pardon; and several Articles were agreed on for present satisfaction, which
seemed as if the Lords had more Inclinations to Obedience than Rebellion, and
wanted but the prudent Justice of a Prince to be applied, to cure these Wounds
that Jealous Discontents had made.

But the Mischief of former ill Humors and Councils remained, and began to
show themselves by the dealy of performing what was agreed on, which was the
Cause that the Earls of Arundel, Warwick* and Warren, refused to go with the
King against the Scots.

It seems strange, that Vnsteddiness and Injustice, Two of the weakest Errors
of Mankind, should become Rules for Princes to act by, which could hardly be
possible, were they not resigned to the Councils of others, and consequently to
their Interests, such who cannot by National Methods pursue their Ambitious
Designs, and protect what they obtain; the pursuit of Honor and Riches are
seldom limited, and putting a Distance between King and People is the only
means to keep them remote from Examination and Justice, and at least involve
their Interest so with his, that to question them is to attack his Dignity.

To foment Differences between the King and others, was now acted by little
Artifices; one Instance of which was the taking away the Earl of Lancaster's
Wife by one Richard St. Martin, claiming her as his, and that he had formerly
lain with her; and claimed by her the Two Earldoms of Lincoln and Salisbury.
This was an Action that seemed to show the Encouragement and Assistance of
great Power; nor did they that contrived it, omit their chief aim of having the
King thought a Party, at once to engage him in their Designs and Animosities,
and to revenge himself and them by particular Injuries: For it is not to be
presumed, that such a man as the Duke of Lancaster could have such a violence
committed in his House by an inconsiderable Fellow, without great assistance of
Force and Power: and the Two Earldoms (that seems rested in her) were Arguments
that the Design was to affront the Duke of Lancaster in the Diminution of his
Honor, and to make an irreconcilable Difference between the King and him, who
being related to the King, and a man of great Quality and Interest; might
perhaps be an Obstacle to those Designs which were contriving by the new
Favorites; and it was an improper consideration for such to consider whether
the King's Interest and Honor were best served by this, but only whether their
own Designs were not best pursued.

And now the same Fatal Humor began to show it self; and Hugh Spencer the
Younger (who Mezeray says had been bred up with him in an unbecoming
Familiarity, and had absolute Empire over him), succeeded Caveston in an almost
unlimited Favor and Power. The first Difference that this caused appeared at
the Siege of Berwick, which being near taken by the Scots, the King declared to
make his Design to make the Younger Spencer Governor of it; upon which the
Earl of Lancaster withdrew his Forces, with whom the Lords presently took Arms,
and declared the Cause to be for the removing the Spencers; the Father being
now got into joint Commission of Favor with his Son, who governed with as much
Insolence and Absoluteness as ever Gaveston had done.

With these Forces they advance toward the King, and boldly demand the
Banishment of the Spencers: The King not being strong enough at present to
oppose them, gives a Temperate Answer, only seeming averse to punish any but by
Form of Law; and therefore would not banish them unheard, but promises them
they should answer to any Charge, and swore he would never pardon Offenses
proved. This Answer did not yet satisfy the Lords, who continued their March
to London, where the King grants all things denied before.

The King, that had yielded to what was demanded by Force, out of the
apprehension of that Power, retained yet his former Inclinations, and was so
used to act by indirectness, that he rather proceeded by a familiar Method,
than any new Necessity, and praetis'd as much from Nature as Occasion.

The Spencers, by an Edict published in Westminster Hall, by the Earl of
Hereford, were banished the Realm; but in a very little time, when the Lords
were returned home, the Edict was revoked in a Council held in London, where
the Archbishop of Canterbury declared the Banishment of the Spencers to have
been Erroneous.

As soon as the Lords were retired to their promised Quiet, having obtained
what they desired, the King began to design to revenge on them the Displeasure
for what he himself had granted, as if all his Favors were his Errors, and
his Severity his prudent Justice. Thus while they thought themselves restored
to Peace, the King prepares for War, and suddenly raising Forces, pursues the
Barons, many of whom revolt to him; the rest make such preparations as was
possible in so short a time, and stayed with their Forces at Burton upon Tnent:
When the King's Army advanced to them, they perceived they were much exceeded
in Numbers; so that the Earl of Lancaster thought it wiser to retreat,
especially considering, that he had sent Sir Robert Holland to raise more
Forces among his Tenants, which Supplies he thought it prudent to wait for: But
the Endeavor to retreat, gave the King's Forces an Addition of Courage from
that Testimony of their Fear, which was made use of by Valence Earl of
Pembrook, who then Commanded the King's Army, who, after some resistance, put
them to flight; after which the Earl of Lancaster, and many Noblemen and
Gentlemen, were taken Prisoners. The News of this Defeat, or his own Falseness,
brought Sir Robert Holland, with his new raised Forces, to join with the King.

As soon as these mighty Enemies were in the King's Power, the Spencers (full
of Revenge) urged on for the Execution of all. It Is said, That Valence the Earl
of Pembrook, who obtained the Victory, interceded for Mercy; but this rather
hastens their Fate; for Spencer was so apprehensive, that the King's Mercy to
any would be a Cruelty to him, that he successfully urged a quick Execution:
The King, with other Lords, among whom was Hugh Spencer, now Earl of
Winchester, sat and gave Judgment upon the Earl of Lancaster, who was presently
beheaded, and many other Lords in their several Countries, to disperse Terror
in every place. Above Twenty Men of Quality were put to death at this time; the
first Blood of this nature that was ever shed since the Conquest.

Besides, the Earl of Lancaster, there died Fourteen Lords and Barons, their
Estates and Inheritances were likewise seized, and were used to advance a new
sort of men, who must needs applaud and flatter such Councils and Successes
that had been so favorable to them; and questionless the Streams of Flatteries
flowed to the King, for his Choice of such a Favorite as Spencer, who had now
enthroned him once again, and by so much Blood procured him the surest
Coronation: Nor was Spencer less blind in the Judgment of his own Condition,
who was now Master of his King, and of all those Spoils that this bloody
Success had thrown into his ambitious Arms: But his Condition was too
prosperous temperately to consider the Uncertainty of a Violent Prosperity,
watched by the unwearied searches of Envy and Revenge.

Councils and Actions now appeared, as commonly after such Success; Law lay
contemned under Power, and the Interest of the Nation under Conquest; all
Temperate and Composing Actions formerly used, were now reflected on as a
Prince's Shame, and any thing less than Arbitrary Power, his Dishonor; an ill
chosen Ground of Safety in its own Nature, but most improper to engage a Prince
in, who by the weakness of unsteddy Judgment, and the ill use of Power, had
sufficiently, by mistrust, prepared men's minds not to be cozened into Flattery.

It must be the Concurrence of many strange Accidents, and the close Reserve of
a Prince's Nature, that must steal him into Absolute Power; otherwise we had
heard of many more successful Tyrants in the World: For I doubt not but
generally the Natures of Men have been more ready to embrace more Power than
their Abilities or Accidents have complied to assist them in: And we seldom
read of such as become Slaves, but of such as have been well cozened Subjects.

The King's Power now seemingly grown to a great height, by the Numbers that
his Success increased, flattered him as well as their Tongues, that nothing was
able to resist him, and perhaps to find uses for those Forces, that now must be
kept together, resolves to march from York into Scotland, rather with a mighty
Number than a powerful Army, never considering, that such Numbers, without
suitable Discipline and Provisions, were a weakness to themselves: The Scots,
it seemed, considered this, and kept close, and hindered them of all Provisions,
leaving them to overcome themselves; for Want increasing, they were beaten
without Blows, and returned pursued by Want and Dishonor, as well as by the
Scots, who entered far into England, and returned with great Spoils into
Scotland.

This unhappy King, not made for Councils, was as well not born for Triumph,
and was now perhaps at a calmer leisure to consider what he had done. It seemed
something like regretting Thoughts, when being earnestly solicited to pardon
one of the Duke of Lancaster's Followers, a Man of a mean Condition, he
exclaimed with Passion against such Counselors that pressed him to spare the
Life of such a Fellow, and spoke not one word to spare the Life of the Duke,
though his near Kinsman, whose Blood had so near Relation to his own, making
this true Reflection, that his Life might have been useful to him, the other's
could not.

Misfortune seemed at this Instant to give the King a more temperate
Consideration, which in the streams of Success he would hardly have leisure to
entertain, but this was rather an unsteddy than a firm return to better and
more prudent Thoughts and Councils, his Nature was still the same, which made
his Favors or Displeasure equally dangerous.

Sir Andrew Hackley, who took the Earl of Lancaster, showed the Truth of this;
for growing enough to give apprehension to the Spencers, he lost his new
enjoyed Honors, together with his Life, being first degraded of them, and then
executed: So that the King seemed at one time ready to destroy, and to revenge
Destruction, just as the Displeasure and Spleen of his Ambitious Favorites
guided him.

It was no wonder if so easy a Conquest over a King should swell the
Conqueror enough to burst him; nor that so much Wealth and Glory should so
much dazzle the Eyes of Spencer, as to make him loose his way; but all seemed
calm, nor any little speck so like a Cloud that seemed to threaten any storm;
and the instability of this World in general is seldom the Contemplation of the
Fortunate and Ambitious.

This made him attempt that which was the highest Testimony of his believed
Security, in lessening the Queens Attandance and Maintenance: The Spencers were
not satiated with all the late Spoils of the King's Enemies, nor with the Sale
of his Favors to his Friends; Places and Honors were purchased as in a common
Market, and every thing enclosed or exposed as they pleased: Yet it seemed all
this was not enough, or certainly they would not have endeavored to supply the
want by the Queens Prejudice, and raise the most probable storm to disturb
their prosperous Course: For the Queen had been always the great support of the
King, and the Composer of his difficult Affairs: She repaired those Breaches
the Errors of others had made; one that still labored for Peace, and was
successful in it.

It might seem strange, that Favorites could find ways to waste as much as
would support and supply the Public, and then seek ways as extravagant to get
it: and yet more strange, that a King should be a Party in the dangerous ways
that led to his own Ruin, and careful to preserve them by the Hazard of
himself. When Gaveston and the Spencers seemed forsaken by God and Man, they
were never by their unfortunate Prince, but by him the whole was judged more
guilty, and less wise than his Favorites.

In the fatal stream of Fortune, the Prosperous and Ambitious think of nothing
but Enjoyments, detest a sober, much more a melancholy Consideration of those
strange and sudden Alterations and Changes that this World is subject to; but
think their Greatness and Prosperity has chained up Accidents; and that
Fortune, who had flattered them as much as they had done their Prince, would
always be as obedient as she had been seemingly fond of them: Affliction gives
Thoughts admittance, but the swelled Minds of the successfully Ambitious seldom
endure to think.

The First Accident that showed this Truth, was the Troubles that rose in
France, which grew so high that all the Kings Territories were adjudged
forfeited, and many places of importance seized: The storm was so violent that
there was no hopes of becalming this Roughness, but by the King's going in
Person to pay his Homage, or at least the Queen to mediate with her Brother.
But the Spencers thought it unsafe to be separated from the King, who yet was
the only Fence against that Sea of Discontent, whose Tide every day appeared to
swell; and they that had destroyed all Trust, had reason enough to be jealous.

Such men so constantly guided by pleasing Weaknesses, might not perhaps
descern the Queen might be a dangerous Instrument to employ, that had been so
disobliged; but commonly those that do injuries, are the least apprehensive
that they will be remembered, or commonly having no fear of those they oppress,
they never consider the future possibility of Revenge. But if they had
apprehended danger to themselves in the Queens going, yet they chose the less
Evil, nothing appearing so terrible as parting with the King.

Thus the Queen was sent away with an indifferent Train, and acted seemingly so
well, that she brought things to a fair accommodation, but upon such Terms as
did necessitate the Prince her Son to be sent over to her. With him she had
what she desired, a Foundation to build her Revenge upon, which had been long
raked up in warm Embers, which now she began to discover. And the beginning of
this Fire breaking out, was made known to the King by the Bishop of Exeter, who
secretly withdrew into England; but she was stayed by the most powerful Causes,
Love and Revenge. For she that now seemed free from all Ties to her King and
Husband, placed her loose Affections upon Roger Mortimer, who had lately
escaped out of the Tower, and from the Oppression of the Spencers: She knew
England con'd neither be safe to her, nor Mortimer, whom she valued as her
self; and therefore resolved to trust any thing rather than her Husband or the
Spencers.

The Queen thus delaying her Obedience to the King, in returning to England,
She and the Prince were declared Enemies to the Kingdom, and they and their
Adherents banished; and at the same time the Queen received Intelligence, that
there were great Sums offered to have the Prince murdered; upon which she
withdrew to the Earl of Haynault, where she contracted her Son to Philippa,
Daughter to the Earl, and there procures some Forces and Moneys: Though her
Forces were inconsiderable, yet she reasonably depended upon what she should
find in England, not what she brought; For she knew that any thing would be
welcome that brought a show of redeeming them from the Oppressions they
suffered under. With these therefore she ventured to Sea, and after some
Variety of Accidents, she landed with her Forces near Harwich, where
immediately she found all her Conjectures true: For many Lords and Bishops
repaired to her; among them, the Two Bishops of Hereford and Lincoln; the first
not forgetting the particular Wrong, and both zealously remembering the Injury
the Clergy had received.

The Queen wanted not a just Complaint to support her unjust Cause; and so
great were the Discontents, that they hurried on almost the whole Nation to
support a Double Rebellion in a Woman against her King and Husband; and the
Pulpit was ready to speak as execrably as others to act. The Bishop of Hereford
taking for his Text, My head aketh, raising his revengeful and impious Doctrine
upon it; That a sick Head was to be taken off; and in the Revolutions that
attended this unhappy King, and Richard the Second, the Clergy were always
ready to Sanctify, and the Lawyers to make Rebellion Legal.

The King had now the Clamorous effects of ill Councels calling too loud upon
him, yet saw no way left to recover or repair the Misfortune those Errors had
brought him into. Wherever he went he found no Subjects, those with their
Hearts were lost before, but led by as uncertain Councels as his Life was
Governed. He knew not whether to fly, but only fled: He saw London was unsafe,
who were all turned from Duty to him, in Affection to the Queen: Nor could he
propose any place to himself, where he had not reason to expect certain
Enemies, or worse, uncertain Friends. After many Motions, as various as his
former Humors, he designed for the Isle of Lundy, and takes with him the Earl
of Gloucester, the Spencers and Robert Baldock, that was Chancellor, and with
some few others takes shipping; showing how Man's Nature waits upon Fortune,
and changes with it. They that before could not be content with so much Plenty
and Dominion, showed now no more Ambition, than what a small naked Island could
satisfy, where Safety was their only Hope, and a chosen Prison their Liberty.

The King had left the Government of the City of London to Walter Stapleton
Bishop of Exeter, and Lord Treasurer; but the City to show their good will to
the Queen, among the many Testimonies she received, gave a bloody one of their
Devotion to her increasing Success, and struck off the Bishop's Head, and
seized the Tower of London, killing many in their Fury, and acting those
Lawless Cruelties that they before Condemned.

These strange Revolutions evidently showed the various Powers of Adversity and
Prosperity, how it depresses some below themselves, and lifts up others beyond
their Reason and Consciences: The Queen, that had been before the repairer of
her Husband's Errors, now makes use of them to her Husband's ruin: She that
used to bring Peace to heal those Wounds Ill Councels had made, brought War now
to make them wider; and whilst she Condemned those Diseases that made the
Nation sick, she made Rebellion the Cure. But success (as it was used to do)
made her not only act worse than her self, but worse than those she had so
Condemned. At first she only declared against the Favorites, and perhaps then
only designed their ruins: but she ought not with the loss of her own Virtue,
to try to Cure what the want of it in others had caused. But had not the
rapidness of her Good Fortune hurried her so fast from her self, she might have
discerned she was exposed upon so violent a Stream, as would carry her by its
own Force, and not by her Direction; and others at last would use that Power,
which, in such Cases as these are, is seldom retained long by the Raisers of
it. Mighty Causes, that bring Disorders, like Temples, raise up things first,
and toss up unthought of Ruins upon them; and a Succession of mischief lasts
till the Storm ceases. No Age but this afforded these Examples, and yet we see
it not powerful enough to teach those, who would be safe in Virtue, not to
hazard being Corrupted by Power violently obtained.

The Queen now, with still increasing Forces, pursues her flying King and
Husband, and from Oxford marches to Gloucester, and from thence to Bristol,
where the King had put the Earl of Arundel, and Spencer the Father to defend
the Place, which was fortified as well as the time would give them leave: But
this Place quickly yielded to that success, which seemed to deny all hopes to
the King's declining Condition. Spencer, was there taken, and executed with all
the Rigor that Revenge and Conquest could invent, and with as much Contempt of
Law, as he and his Son had formerly showed. They Condemned him without any
Trial, and prevented his natural Determination, which could not have been long,
being then Fourscore years old.

Proclamation was about this time made, That if the King would come in, and
conform himself to the Laws and Government, he should be restored by the
General Consent of the People. But the King either durst not, or his Favorite
Spencer durst not let him trust this Declaration. Such Ministers made
desperate, hold their King the safer, the more sinking their Condition is; and
rather chose that the Hazard of their Prince may save them, than their Ruin
save their Prince: Though perhaps in his Prosperous Condition they flattered
him, that their Lives and Fortunes should be always Sacrifices for him. But
it is equally strange, that Princes in great Power and Prosperity, should with
pleasure believe Flatterers, and that those Interested Flatterers should hope
to be believed; it shows a fatal Weakness in the one, and loose Designs in the
other.

Those also that put forth this Proclamation to call the King to his own
Government, did perhaps as little desire he should embrace it. For this was but
once done, and seemed a thing rather used to cov^^ what was intended, than a
clear intention in it self. For the eager pursuit of the King was still
continued, who (as some say) seeking to Land in Lundy, was driven by Tempest
into Wales, and in the Abbey of Nethe in Glamorganshire lay some time concealed.
From Hereford the Queen divided part of her Army, under the Command of Henry
Earl of Lancaster, into Wales, in pursuit of the King, who by the means of one
Ryce ap Powel (who was well acquainted in the Country) took the King in a
Monastery: This Earl of Lancaster was Brother to him that was beheaded at
Pomfret, and seemed to show a Powerful pursuit of Blood, to bring the King into
the Mercy of a Family where he had showed so little.

Others say, that the King and and the younger Spencer were in the Castle of
Bristol when it was besieged, from whence (fearing the Event) he with the
younger Spencer stole away by night, and endeavoring to escape by Sea, his
Boat was beaten back; and trying to put out again, it was discovered by the
Lord Beaumont, who chased them with a small Vessel, and took the King and
Spencer in it. However they all agree, that Spencer was taken with him, as if
the King must always appear inseparably from the Cause of his Misfortunes.

The Earl of Arundel that was taken at Bristol with others were beheaded, at
the Instance of Mortimer, who now Governed the Queen's Affections and Affairs.
This Earl of Arundell was generally allowed a brave Character, and seemed to be
Guilty of no Fault but Loyalty to an unfortunate King, unless his Relation to
the younger Spencer, who married his Daughter. The same thing that creates a
prosperous Interest in one Condition, brings Ruin in another; or else it
seemed improbable, that so brave a Gentleman should dye like a Traitor only for
being Loyal.

The younger Spencer was carried along only to Grace the Queen's marching
Triumph: and as the chief Cause of her taking Arms, he was rendered as
Contemptible a Spectacle as was possible, and exposed in a fitting Posture to
increase the Storms and Reproaches, that use to attend such miserable Objects:
And perhaps some were mingled in the Crowd, that had formerly in his prosperous
Greatness saluted him with fawning Acclamations. At last he was eased of all
his Sufferings, though by a Death as full of Torments, as could be imagined,
which yet he endured with much seeming calmness; perhaps wearied with so much
shame and misery, he might be willing any way to find an undisturbed Quietness.

A Parliament was presently called, where it was agreed the King should be
Deposed, and his Son placed in his Throne; who hearing of it, refused such an
untimely Succession, without the Consent and Resignation of his Father.
Commissioners were immediately Deputed, consisting of Lords and Bishops, to go
to the King: But before they came, the ready Bishops of Hereford and Lincoln
had pressed the King to yield to the powerful Decrees of the Nation; and added,
^no question, specious Petences how well he should be provided for, and live
more happily, than the various Cares of a Crown would ever permit him: Yet
mingled Threatenings, That if he refused quietly to resign to his Son, the Fury
of the Incensed Nation would not only Destroy Him, but perhaps his Posterity.

The King seemed quietly to submit, and a little after the Commons come to
receive his Resignation, and were seated in a Form ready for the Ceremony. The
King came out in Mourning, and at the sight of a formed Power ready to take
away His, sunk down; but being recovered to a miserable Life, the Bishop of
Hereford delivered the Cause of their coming. After which Trussell a Lawyer,
and Speaker of the House of Commons, pronounces a Form of renouncing all
Allegiance to Edward of Caernarvon; to which (as most Writers say) the King
made not the least Answer, but turned about, and went out. There were Articles
also exhibited against him; and his Son with much Ceremony chosen King in
Westminster Hall with the full consent of the People; which gave the occasion
to the Archbishop of Canterbury to choose for the Subject of his Sermon, Vox
populi, Vox Dei; exhorting the People to pray for the King they had chosen:
Thus the Lawyer found out a Legal Method for the People to deprive their King
of Sovereignty; and the Divines Consecrated their mighty Power, in calling
their Voice, a Divine Election.

Philip de Comines in his Third Book takes notice, That the Great Earl of
Warwick subdued England in Eleven days; and King Edward the Fourth recovered it
in One and twenty. Though these were sudden Revolutions, yet the Fortune of
them was disposed by many Battles: but this was as sudden, yet without a Blow,
which shows no Force to be greater than the Power of Injuries and Oppressions.
For though in Prosperity and the full gust of Power, this mighty Force lying
(as it were) in an Ambush in the Vexed Minds of injured Subjects, is
undiscerned and slighted: And the fatal Precedents made by the Errors of
others, are seldom made use of to our selves; yet when it begins to show it
self, it seems no wonder, that the united Minds of all conclude for themselves.
But Men are so much their own Flatterers, that they believe every thing
Permanent they wish to be so; and Favorites that cannot submit to share a
Common Benefit, venture at uncertain Advantages, and make it a Principle to
depend more upon Men's Fears than Love. By the Mighty and Ambitious Mischiefs
and Disturbances are wrought, but the Weak and Moderate desire Peace and
Quietness.

The unhappy King was now kept in Confinement with a small allowance, that he
might be deprived of all things, that resembled a Princes Condition; and
suffered now for his unsteady Errors, as much perhaps by the wounding
reflection of their Memory, as by what he endured for them. But too late he was
taught Truth by Misery; and saw the Difference to lose those Friends that could
preserve him, and keep none but only such as could help to destroy him. Princes
sometimes believe that the right of Power should preserve them, notwithstanding
the want of Conscience in the using of it. But when their Errors have
contracted Enemies, and the same Errors raised Accidents enough to give power
and opportunity to those Enemies, misguided Princes (like this unhappy King)
will find that such with as much want of Conscience will revenge their Wrongs,
as they showed by the Oppression.

It now appeared that the Graves of Princes are ever near their Prisons. This
unhappy one above all things deplored, That his Wife, whom he had ever loved,
would not be got to see him. But she was now possessed by her passion for
Mortimer, that all her Duty and Virtue was Sacrificed, and her Husband was now
as much her apprehension as aversion. Mortimer was as jealous as he could be,
and never thought himself safe in his Enjoyments, while the King lived. They
could be informed of the murmuring whispers of their Course of Life, and that
hard usage of the King proceeded from thence, and therefore looked upon the
King's Death as their only security. His Keepers were therefore changed by the
advice of that ready Counselor of mischief, the Bishop of Hereford; for Sir
Maurice Berkley, in whose Custody he was, had been tampered with, and not found
ready for the intended Villainy, he was therefore taken from Henchworth Castle,
and committed to Sir Thomas Gourney and Sir John Matravers, who carried him to
Corf-Castle, a place (some write) that he always declared an apprehensive
aversion to; from thence to Bristol, from whence upon some suspicion of a Plot
for his escape, he was conveyed to Berkley Castle; where by those barbarous
Villains he was wretchedly murdered with a hot Iron, thrust through a Pipe up
behind into his Bowels; which way they thought would perhaps make the least
discovery by what Death he died; though his Groans and Cries sufficiently
proclaimed the Violence of it.

Some write, That the Bishop of Hereford by a dark Sentence instigated the
Murderers to hasten the Execution by this Line; Edwardum occidere nolite
Timere bonum est: At once giving them encouragement, and concealing an excuse
for himself: But Ecclesiastical Riddles are dangerous, and sometimes their
Expositions of Texts have been no other.

After this horrid Execution, the Murderers Gourney and Matravers expected
Rewards; but found the Queen and Bishop readier rather to threaten and accuse
them, than to own the Service; and were forced to fly beyond Sea to seek safety
for their loathed Lives. But Gourney after three years was taken, and sent to
England, and by the way had his Head struck off. Matravers fled into Germany,
where in Repentance he had time to wast a miserable Life.

This King Reigned something above Eighteen years, and was murdered in the
43d. year of his Life: His Body was carried to Gloucester, and there buried
without any Ceremony. His Character I will reserve till I join it with Richard
the Second; since the same Methods and Errors in Government workt the same
Effects, and both Princes equally unfortunate.

The Reigns of Edward the Second, and Richard the Second (to which I am now
proceeding) may be justly said to be as Mezeray calls the Reign of Henry the
Third of France [ The Reign of Favourites] who did enervate all his Virtues,
and disposed him to looseness and carelessness; deafen'd and confounded him with
Flatteries, prompting to observe no Law but his Will, while they were the
Disposers of all things. At which many great Men and others retired
discontented, and left the Favourite-Ministers at large to pursue their
Ambition, and with new Inventions to waste, and pillage the King's Revenue.

This Description suits with the beginning of this unfortunate King Richard the
Second, who after the death of his Grandfather, that great Prince Edward the
Third, succeeded him in the Throne: His Father the Famous Black Prince, dying
in his Father's time; who by contrary Methods to what they used, met as
contrary Fortunes. The Comeliness and Beauty of his Person (exceeding all his
Predecessors) only seemed to Entitle him to a Generous Father, and as beautiful
a Mother. But that promising Person, which might have become great Actions, was
turned to Looseness and Pleasures; and Flatterers broke in to encourage that
dissolute Carelessness, which they found would be suitable to his Nature, and
their Ambitious Designs.

The three chief Favorites and Ministers were Robert Vere Earl of Oxford,
afterward Marquess of Dublin, and Duke of Ireland: Michael Delapool Earl of
Suffolk; and Robert Tresilian Lord Chief Justice. The Duke of Ireland seemed
the best, as hardly he could do otherwise, being set with two such Foils; but
he wanted Virtue and Courage, without the excess of Vices of the other two.
Michael Delapoole was a model of complicated Vices; in Peace the most odiously
Insolent, in War the most dejectedly Contemptible; He despised all methods of
Quietness, and yet was frighted with the least Disturbance. Tresilian the Chief
Justice was one that never showed his Place or Title by any practice, but ready
to prostrate all Law to Occasion, and Justice to Designs: His Knowledge was
Lewdness, and his Virtue Violence; what others designed he was ready to
execute, and being kept up in this Darkness, he grew fierce on all things that
were cast to him.

This King was called Richard of Bordeaux, because born there, the only Son of
the Black Prince. By his Grandfather Edward the Third he was in his Life time
declared his Successor: And after his Death was Crowned at Westminster (in the
year 1377) by Simon Sudbury Archbishop of Canterbury, with great Solemnity. The
King being then eleven years old. The Duke of Lancaster, and Edmund Earl of
Cambridge, the King's Uncles, with other Lords and Bishops, were joined in
Commission to manage the State.

The Minority of the King gave foreign Princes an Opinion, that it was a proper
time to attempt upon England; the French first laid hold on the Occasion, and
landed Forces, and did some mischief, and burnt some places near the Sea: As
about Rye, Portsmouth, Dartmouth, and Plymouth; as also, Hastings and
Winchelsea: The Scots also assaulted the Castle of Berwick, and won it, but it
was taken again by the Earls of Northumberland and Nottingham, and all put to
the Sword, but Ramsey, who took it by a bold and desperate attempt with a few
Men.

These troubles occasioned a Parliament to be called at Westminster, where
Alice Pearce the Concubine to the late King Edward the Third was banished, and
all her Goods confiscated: A Tax was then given of two Tenths of the Clergy,
and two Fifteenths of the Temporalty: Others write the Tax was a Poll of four
Pence upon every Head; but which way soever it was, either the Levying it, or
the Tax it self, caused a sudden and strange Insurrection, begun by the
infusion of one Wiat, a Factious Priest, using these Common Notions against
great Men, who had power to oppress others, and ruin the meaner sort to
support their Greatness and Luxuries. This spread to the City, who gave
intelligence, that they were ready to join with the Rabble, that appeared
gathered from many adjacent Countries. This confused Body chose one Wat Tyler
for their Captain, whose Assistants, or Privy-Councellers, were John Ball, Jack
Straw, and Jack Shepherd.

Blackheath (as they marched to London) was their Rendezvous, where they
appeared to be above Threescore Thousand; From thence they marched to London,
declaring themselves for the King and People.

When they came to London, they were received either for Fear or Love, with all
freedom, and treated as if they strove who should express themselves best to
the flattered Rebels, who (like such a Mass of Giddiness got together)
committed nothing but Murder and Violence; They burnt the Savoy, the Duke of
Lancaster's House; they rifled the Temple, and destroyed the Law Books,
expressing a Spleen against any thing of that Nature; Nor were Churches or
Religious Houses spared; the good they punished, the ill they cherished,
setting all Prisoners at Liberty; their Chief Leader, Tyler, remembering some
Punishment that his old Master, Richard Lion, had inflicted on him, for some
Crime he had committed, without any more Trial or Judgment than what his
Revenge allowed, caused his Head to be stricken off, and carried before him on
a Spear. Their Numbers were now so great, that the King durst not resist their
Entrance into the Tower, where they abused his Mother, and took the Archbishop
of Canterbury, the Chancellor, and Lord Treasurer, and dragging them to
Tower Hill, there beheaded them.

In the midst of all these Outrages, the King proclaimed a Pardon to all that
wou^d go quietly home; which the Essex men, and some others accepted; but the
Kentish and others stayed with their Captain Tyler: So that it seemed as if
part of this Rabble were not in the secret intention to subvert the Government,
and throw down all above themselves from Oppression: About 20000. continued
with their Captain: The King looking upon this as a good beginning, presented
himself in Person before the Rebels, and spoke to them with all sweetness,
promising them Pardon and Favor; but had so rude a return from Tyler, that
instead of Submission, he demanded the King's Sword; at which the Mayor of
London drew his, and struck him to the ground, where he was presently killed.
The Rabble seemed to threaten Revenge; But the City hearing this, and thinking
it high time to free their King and themselves from Ruin and Destruction, came
to his Relief with a body of men; at which sight the affrighted Rebels yielded,
and some fled, and delivered up their Ringleader; a Sacrifice that seldom fails
to be made by such Tumults. Jack Straw, at his Execution, confessed their
Design of destroying all that were above them in Name or Fortune.

The King's chief Favorites now appeared to be Michael Delapoole, made
Chancellor of England, and after Earl and Duke of Suffolk; Robert de Vere,
Marquess of Dublin, and after Earl of Ireland; Alexander Archbishop of York,
and Tresilian the Chief Justice. The first Testimony that these showed of their
Animosities against the Methods of a just Minister, was the displacing Sir
Richard Scroope, Lord Chancellor, who in all things used an impartial
uprightness, which was an Offense to their loose and partial Designs.

But they did not only sharpen the King's Nature against men in point of
Offices and Employments, but against their Lives. The first appearance of this
was by the Duke of Lancaster, whose Offenses were likewise from his Virtues,
and his Ruin therefore contrived by them, and resolved by Tresilian to be done
by Form of Law; the worst sort of destroying when violated; but when truly
observed, the best defense against destruction.

There are seldom any extreme Proceedings in a Government, but there are
depraved persons enough in all Conditions ready to swim with the stream, and
take the benefit of any Tide of Fortune: For when Mischief is to be practiced,
Corruption is the Consequence; and there are always those ready, whom no
Consideration balances in their Natures with Honor and Benefit. Tresilian was
one of those thus prepared, and could hardly want as well-condition'd Informers
and Juries: Occasions preserved from men is the surest Cause of their Virtue;
but offered from those that should depress it, is the Cause and Temptation of
Villainy. Crimes were prepared for the Duke, he never committed; a Jury of Lords
were fixed, and it was not only designed he should be arrested, but his
Condemnation was as confidently resolved and concluded.

These things were not so secretly contrived, but the Duke of Lancaster had
notice of them, and privately retired, or rather fled to Pomfret-Castle, where
he prepared to defend himself; and already Discontents grew so high, that he
wanted not assistance for it, and grew so considerable, that the Queen Mother
thought it worthy her pains in all respects to endeavor a Composure, which she
effected, assisted by the apprehension of her Son, and the Duty which the Duke
of Lancaster seemed yet to retain; so that for this time every thing was
composed, unless their Minds, which once shaken by indirectness and mistrust,
are seldom so purely cleared, but that some Seeds of Jealousy lie ready to
spring upon the heat of any Difference. Without Trust, the Traffic amongst
Dealers in petty things can never be carried on, and much less the Commerce
between Prince and Subjects, without Credit.

The King now entered upon the assuming the Government into his own Hands, and
from this time grew liable to his own Errors, appearing wholly regardless of
all his great Relations and Nobility, and only seemed kind to a fondness of his
Chancellor, the Duke of Suffolk, and the Duke of Ireland, and their two
subservient Friends, the Archbishop of York and Tresilian the Chief Justice,
they that had now gained the possession of the King's Power and Inclination,
showed a great Testimony of their ill use of it, by disposing the King against
his brave Uncle the Duke of Gloucester, and the Earls of Warwick and Arundel.

The King was now wholly possessed by these Favorites, and in a particular
manner by the Chancellor Delapoole, whose mean Birth was suitable to his
Qualities: His Vices so many, that he was himself a Grievance; and it seemed a
fatal unhappiness, that the King's Conscience should be entrusted unto so bad a
Keeper; but the King was as violent in his Affections as others could be in
their Displeasures; He seldom regarded what others thought, till necessity
forced the Consideration.

These men that both feared and hated any men of Honor and Quality, that might
have Interest to cross their Designs, laid hold of an Occassion to be rid of
one of the greatest, the Duke of Lancaster, by assisting him with Forces to
conquer Spain, which he claimed in right of his Wife Constance, Daughter and
Coheir of Peter (who was surnamed the Cruel), King of Castile and Leon: With
very considerable Forces he sailed for Spain; He landed at the Troyne, and at
Compostella met with the King of Portugal, where a Marriage was concluded with
his Daughter; and after some Incursions made into the Country of Castile, a
Peace and Marriage was also effected between the King of Spain's Eldest Son,
and Katharine of Lancaster; and so resigned the Title to Spain for a
Composition, by a sum of Money and a Pension.

This looked like the feeble Policy of violent and self-interested Counselors,
which was applied to Men and not to Things, as if the removal of Two or Three
that opposed their Designs, took all the Danger away that attended them: As
long as there were injured men, they must have Enemies; and their safety was no
way probable but by better Principles and Practices: Besides, there were other
Lords left behind, made Popular by the same Errors: But they designed to ruin,
if they could, all that were in their way; and after grew very busy in
designing to murder the Duke of Gloucester, every day contriving some ill, and
by their heavy wickedness loading their King.

A little after the Rebellion, the King married with Anne, the Daughter of the
Emperor Charles the Fourth, whom he loved passionately; for whose sake he
refused the Daughter of the Duke of Milan, who was offered him, and with her a
Dowry much more considerable: She lived with him Twelve Years, but without
Issue, and died at Sheen by Richmond; which great loss made the place ever
hated after by the King, who in all things showed he was a Man of great
Affections; which are unfortunate Virtues when wrong placed.

About this time the King declared Roger Mortimer his Heir and Successor, who
was the Son of Lionel Duke of Clarence, Third Son of King Edward the Third, who
was afterward killed in Ireland: He also created his Uncles, Edmund of
Langley, Duke of York, and Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, and his
Cousin Henry of Bullingbrooke (Son and Heir to his Fourth Uncle, John of Gaunt,
Duke of Lancaster), Earl of Derby: His Cousin Edward Plantagenet (Son and Heir
to his Uncle Edmund of Langley), he created Earl of Rutland; Sir John Holland
Earl of Huntington, and Thomas Mowbray Earl of Nottingham.

In the Parliament, in which these Creations were made, was exhibited a Charge
of many Particulars, and of very great Natures, against Chancellor Delapoole;
in which one particular was the abusing and cozening the King. But this had
only an Audience, and no Examination, which gave so much offense, that an Aid
demanded was denied; and Reasons given, that it was to no purpose to give
money, when the ill use of it was countenanced. This seemed a wrong Method to
ask and be denied, and at the same time neither to have Power enough to
enforce, nor Obligations to obtain; but 'twas not proper for his Favorites to
tell him they doubted success with his Parliament, since that were to own such
apprehensions sprung from their ambitious Errors. But Princes are rightly said
to be used like froward Children, flattered, and condemned never to hear the
Truth.

But the Parliament still pressed the Examination of the Charge; and the
Necessity of the King's Affairs, concurring with their importunity, procured
what they so warmly desired: The Cause was put to selected Noblemen to examine;
and a Subsidy seemed the purchase of it, which was afterward granted.

The Cause then being heard by his Peers, the Duke of Gloucester, and Earl of
Arundel being Two of the Judges, he was convicted, deprived of his Office and
Chattels, and condemned to be executed: But all this seemed rather Arguments of
Merit, than Causes of Punishment; For the King presently after restored him
into the former Favor, as if he had suffered for his sake. Thus as Edward the
Second received Gaveston from Banishment, and his Subjects hate, to his Arms
and Love; so this unfortunate and resembling King received this Earl of Suffolk
from Execution, and the Prosecution of his Parliament, to increased Affection
and Trust; as if Crimes found out, and prosecuted by a Parliament, had been the
Testimonies of Merit, and Arguments for a Prince's Fnvour: These unsteddy
Councils increased mistrust in the Subjects, who now began to see they were too
light to make a Poisure with his Favorites: And to confirm their worst
apprehensions, the Duke of Ireland, who had been driven away by the Displeasure
that was contracted against him, now returned with equal Credit and Principles
with the Earl of Suffolk; to whom also joined the Archbishop of York, to
strengthen their Power, and weaken their King's; for they who had influence
enough to make a Prince believe their Cause to be his, might easily carry him
on to revenge these Affronts, he now assumed to be his own: To this belongs the
same Fate that attends indirect unsteddy Counsels; they must be maintained by
the Ruin or Oppression of those that suffered by them, and no method taken for
the Preservation of any, but they that merited the Punishment.

The Argument that was, and must be used to deceive Princes, was then enforced
by these Favourite-Ministers, That the Arrows shot at them, were intended
against the Prince; and 'twas but a method of Rebellion to confine a King, on
whom to confer his Favor; and therefore to avoid the Dishonor of a Limited
Monarchy, he must now use Power, and declare his Trust in that only. With this
flattery, they raise their King to a fatal Confidence in that, which must in
time deceive misguided Princes: For perhaps, for some time, Apprehension and
Conscience may preserve a show of Peace, yet at last Error and Oppression will
disturb such a weak-setled Calm.

The King thus raised by Flattery above his Power, and sharpened by false
Arguments beyond his Nature, they proceed seemingly to act his Cause, but
really to revenge themselves; and (like the other Favorites in King Edward's
Time) wrap their Prince's Fall and Hazard, and their own together, while they
are only the King's Loyal Subjects, and the Kingdom his and their own guilty
Enemies.

The Memory of Suffolk's Trial and Condemnation, was the first Cause that
incited them against those that were his Judges, the Duke of Gloucester and
others, on whose Destruction they first resolved, as being the most
considerable; nor feared his near Relation to the King, for they knew their
Power was gotten above his Nature or Consideration. The first Design was to
invite Gloucester and others to a Supper in London, and there murder them;
which (some write) was discovered by the Duke to Exton, the then Mayor of
London; and so the Mischief was prevented for that time.

About this time the Earls of Arundel and Nottingham (who were engaged with the
Duke of Gloucester, in the Trial and Censure of the Chancellor Suffolk)
Commanded the Navy; and did so many brave Actions, that all mouths were filled
with just Praises; the King's only excepted, to whom Satisfaction did most
belong: For at their Return, they found such a cold Reception from the King,
that it seemed they were rather forgiven for Misdemeanors, than received for
Merits: The strangeness of his Words told too plainly, That public Merit lost
its Nature, when the Desert was in the Enemies of his Favorites.

How much more limited is a King, by such as inflame him against the Dishonor
of it? He must neither reward Virtue, nor punish Vice; his best and bravest
Subjects must not be esteemed, nor his worst questioned nor punished.

The Duke of Ireland, with as much Arbitrary Power as he persuaded the King to
assume, put away his Wife, the Duke of Glocester's Daughter; and married a
Vintners, some say a Joyners Daughter: The injured Lady often petitioned the
King, but without success, her Injury was done by a Favorite, where his Nature
was more tied than to his own Blood: Upon no less nourishment can growing
Favorites prosper, than by their Princes loss of Interest and Honor.

The Duke of Gloucester, bore it not so calmy; but told the Duke of Ireland
plainly, he would revenge it, who from that time grew more assiduous to
contrive the Destruction of the Duke of Glcester, but at the present his
pretended Journey to Ireland kept all silent, which after many delays he
seemingly began; and was accompanied in great State by the King himself, the
Earl of Suffolk, and the ready Chief Justice Tresilian.

But this proved only a Journey through Wales, and so about to Nottingham,
where they entered in private and black Consultations. The first was to destroy
the Lords; and for that end summoned the Sheriffs of every County; and plainly
asked them what they could promise against the Lords, if the King should
require it: Their Answers were for the most part, That the People were very
much satisfied in their Opinions, That the Lords were lovers of their King and
Country, and therefore durst promise nothing in that matter.

The Trial was then made to pack a Parliament, by contriving Elections as the
King should appoint: But this received as cold a return.

To what a lose Hazard they had now reduced their King, to attempt
unsuccessfully to break by force, or in a Legal way to make the Nation destroy
it self: The last was without question, the most dangerous design, force may
enslave for little time, but slavery by Law is like to endure longer, but the
People were not then cozened enough; and indeed it must be the Concurrence of
strange Accidents, the fairness of an undiscovered Dissimulation, and the
Opportunity embraced in the same Moment, that must so infatuate the People, as
to make their Ruin their Choice.

The last attempt was designed by surer means, the Judges, who kept and seemed
to deserve their Places for the Compliance; of these were summoned the two
Chief Justices Tresilian and Belknap with others, and to them were put Queries,
which might comprehend the safety of the Ministers, and the danger of all they
pleased beside.

The Questions were to comprehend so large a Treason, that it could not miss to
find Traitors; for, by them resolved, the very Constitution of the Nation was
Treason.

The first four Queries concerned the Duke of Suffolk most particularly, and
with him all Favorites: For the Case was put, Whether the Law it self, and the
Commission for his Trial, did not derogate from the Kings Authority? and then
how they were to be proceeded with, that procured such a Law? and how they were
to be dealt with, that provoked the King to assent to it?

The Fifth Question: What they merited that opposed the Kings remitting or
releasing Penalties, or Debts due to him?

The sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth, consisted of Questions, Whether
Parliaments could proceed upon any business, but such as the King should
propose and limit by Articles? And whether the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament might accuse any of the King's Officers without his Leave?

The Tenth was singly for the Duke of Suffolk, Whether the Judgment given in
the last Parliament against him, were Erroneous and Revocable.

It Is improbable, that such questions as these should be proposed to any
Persons, that had the Names of Justices, unless there had been before a
received assurance of the Answers they would give. Accordingly it appeared, for
they returned not any answer doubtingly or modestly, but determined all to be
Treason, and the Offenders worthy the death of Traitors.

The last Article they resolved with as much clearness ( viz.) That the
Proceedings and Judgment against the Duke of Suffolk were Erroneous and
Revocable; and accordingly delivered these bald Opinions under their Hands and
Seals.

It seemed as if they durst judge no Crime less than Treason, that offended the
Ministers; though by their bold Opinions, the Parliament it self became the
Traitors, and a Statute Law the Treason.

This I suppose was highly applauded by the Ministers, and the King flattered
to believe what excellent Servants he had of such Judges, by whose briskness
not only the Law, but the troublesome Constitution it self of the Nation might
be rendered as useless as Arbitrary Power could desire: For if such Laws that
seemed to limit a King, should in themselves become void for that very Cause,
there could no Law be valid, but such as pleased the Sovereign, who was the
Judge of his own Infringment; and then all past Laws, and Laws to be made,
would become but prostituted Writings to the Will of Princes.

Perhaps at that time these Judges had the Character of being the most Loyal,
for appearing most desperate, giving that great Testimony of their Devotion,
that their Zeal for the Favorites was far warmer than for their Country, and
involved themselves in their Fortunes by Principles as lewd as their Designs.

The King looked upon the Opinion of these Judges as Authentic, and of
validity enough to throw legally into his power the Estates and Fortunes of
those Lords that appeared most Eminent against his Ministers; and accordingly
he began to dispose of their Estates among those that he favored, presuming
them (without farther Trial) Convicted Persons; and to maintain this absurdity
by a worse, raised Soldiers privately, and sent to surprise the Earl of Arundel.

The Duke of Gloucester having Intelligence of all these proceedings, got the
Bishop of London to persuade the King from such Violences; and to assure him
that he had never had an undutiful thought against him; and intimated how much
more safe and Honorable it would be for the King not to be led by false
suggestions to such a fatal difference and severity with his best and greatest
Subjects.

The Bishop performed this, with his best Skill and Zeal; and wrought so upon
the King, that he seemed inclined to a more happy Temper; but the Duke of
Suffolk, that had all Peace and Justice (by which he knew he was to have little
Benfit, nor could be probably safe longer than while he kept his King in
danger) quickly nipt the King's budding Gentleness, and, like an untimely
Frost, blasted the springing Hopes of Peace, falling upon the Bishop with harsh
and insolent Reproofs: But the Bishop not daunted with his Power and Greatness,
boldly told him, That it was not the Service of his Prince that guided him, but
his own violent Ambition; and that rather than the Lords should not be
destroyed, he would involve the Nations in Ruin: Adding, That it was easy for
such abject Spirits as his, to raise Tumults, which must be ended by the Ruin
of the Bravest; nor was he fit to give Advice, that was the chief Incendiary,
and made a Party by his Condemnation. The King was so angry to see his
Favorite so roughly and boldly attacked, that he commanded the Bishop out of
his sight.

In this particular, as in most of the King's unhappy Actions, he appeared
against Himself and his own Reason, being guided by the Duke of Suffolk, who
was of a contrary Interest, turned from his own Nature and Reason, by one that
wanted Sense and Bowels; and by this Unsteddiness, kindled new Mistrusts, the
fruitful Nourishers of Civil Mischiefs.

At this, the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundel, Warwick, and Derby, take
Arms; the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of Ely (then Lord Chancellor)
were sent to the Lords; who composed Matters so well, that the Lords agreed to
appear before the King at Westminster, under the Promise of Protection: But
retaining their usual Jealousies, they received the Bishop of Ely's Assurance,
That if there were any Danger designed them, he would give them notice.
Accordingly he kept his Word; and a little before the Lords were to come, he
gave them Intelligence of an Ambush laid for them at the Mews, to seize them as
they came in: Upon this, the Lords failed of their coming; which the King
wondering at, asked the Bishop of Ely, What might be the Reason? who boldly told
him, That the Lords durst not trust him, and had discovered the Trap laid for
them: Of which the King seemed to be wholly ignorant, and commanded the
Sheriffs to search the Mews, and to kill and carry to Prison all they found
concealed: But the Thing was true, though the Place mistaken; for the armed Men
were secretly assembled at Westminster by Sir Richard Bramber, and Sir Thomas
Trivett; who perceiving or being informed of the Discovery, secretly conveyed
away their Men.

It seemed as if the King were really ignorant of this that was acted by the
desperate Ministers, who showed a full Confidence in the Power they had with
the King: And though perhaps they apprehended the Action too vile to trust the
King with it, yet they did not doubt to bring him to approve it, though never so
base, if successful enough: Nor has this been an unusual Method of Powerful
Ministers and Favorites, to contrive Mischiefs for their Prince to approve;
knowing that it is easier from the necessity of a Thing done, to gain an
Approbation, than a Consent to the Attempt of it: For a Prince that is wholly
led by them, and wrapped up in their desperate Counsels and Interests, may
scruple at a thing to be done, that he cannot when it is effected: One is but a
difference in Opinion, the other is a deser^ion of his Party; he may be free in
the first, but too much involved to be at liberty in the latter.

A Prince in this Condition, has not only his own Errors, but the weight of
theirs to struggle under; and it is impossible he should make any Calculation of
his own Fortune, unless he were free to examine the mischievous Effects of
those ill Planets, that he Himself had raised to such powerful Influences.

At last, upon new Faith and Security, the Lords came to the King at
Westminster; but so strongly guarded, that they did not appear like Men that
came to Submit or Petition: Accordingly they challenged for Traitors the Duke
of Ireland, the Duke of Suffolk, the Archbishop of York, the Chief Justice
Tresilian, and others. The King at that time, when Favorites could not speak,
spoke like himself (a King) and with equal Temper and Reason, showed the Lords,
That if all were true they alleged, they had not taken the proper way too seek
for Justice, by a show of Rebellion; and give that opportunity to the
licentious Multitude, which perhaps might be difficult to take again from them:
And, after having gently laid before them the more proper way for what they
desired, he raised them from their knees, and retired with them.

All this while, the adverse Party kept out of the way, apprehending, as justly
they might, the danger of such powerful and enraged Enemies.

This Action of the King is questioned by some Historians, whether done out of
Apprehension, or a better Temper: But yet all this while that things bore this
calm face, the Duke of Ireland gathered Forces, and was met and overthrown by
the Earl of Derby near Burford: But he that was so bold in Counsel, showed
little of Courage (when 'twas needful) in Action, and fled himself before the
Fight scarce began.

Among many things that were taken of the Duke's, in one of his Trunks were
found Letters from the King to hasten his coming to London, with what Power he
could make, where the King would be ready to share Fortunes with him.

Upon the news of the Duke of Ireland's Defeat, the Duke of Suffolk fled in a
Disguise to Calice, and never more returned.

It is a wonder that ever such a Man should get the ascendant over a Prince; a
Man that was profuse of what he could get; and got it as willingly by the
Spoils of others, as by justifiable Ways. He was unfit for Peace, by his
turbulent Nature, and wanted Courage to be troublesome in War. In Peace, he was
furious; in War, calm; never quiet, but when afraid; at all other times
intemperate: When he was not designing Mischief, his Courage or Occasion failed
him. He never seemed good, but when necessity hindered him from appearing bad:
He had no Fits of a Disease, but lived in a continual Leprosy.

But we have read of other Presidents, how worthless Men have fcru'd themselves
into Princes Favors by such Flatteries, that generous Tempers could not creep
to: For ill Men study the Nature of Princes, good Men their Interest; and that
which is most pleasant, sooner prevails than that which is most useful.

The Chief Justice Tresilian, with others of that Faction, fled from this
Storm, and the King retired to the Tower, while the Lords with a great Army
marched toward London, and showed themselves in a form of Battle to the King,
who lay with his Forces in the Suburbs. The King at first seemed to slight
them, but at last yielded a Treaty. The Tower was the place appointed; but the
Lords first made what search they pleased, and came with such Guards as they
thought fit; at once showing the severe effects of Mistrust and Power; the
first seldom to be cured; the last, as seldom used with Modesty: For when they
came to the King, they plainly charged him by way of Accusation of the
Contrivances at Nottingham against them; his Letters to the Duke of Ireland
(contrary to his Word) to raise Forces; the Agreement with the French to
deliver up Calice; and other Grievances which the ill Conduct of the King's
Ministers had plentifully furnished them with.

At these Truths, told by those that had Power enough to Revenge, the King
instead of a Defense, sunk into a Confession of his Errors; which seemed at
that time to make a great Impression on the Lords, and produced the Agreement
of a meeting at Westminster the next day.

But they were no sooner gone, but the King's Mind was turned by Arguments of
the common frame, That by the Meeting, he would expose his Person to danger,
and his Authority to diminution. Which presently changed the King, and showed
as if a fatal Mutability was to pursue him to his end. To such dangerous
Methods he must probably be led by the Counsels of those, whose desperate
Ambitions could permit no directness to be used toward their Enemies the
Public. Such Ministers are the Consulters of Moments, shifting only for a
present Preservation, and dare not look toward the future; but refer Things to
come, to the same Chance that raised them: They live to no Rules, but with an
unlimited readiness wait upon Occasion.

This Alteration in the King, raised the Lords to such a rage, that they sent
him word, That if he used such Indirectness, they would choose a New King. At
this being again shaken, he not only went, but submitted to those he had so
enraged before; and delivers up that Power, which he was before counseled not
to diminish: So that his ill-timed Counsels made that Misfortune sure, which
they seemed careful to prevent.

A Parliament was presently called, where Tresilian the famous Chief Justice
was condemned, and presently executed; as also the other Chief Justice,
Belknap, and other Judges, and some banished. The Lords grew now so high by
their Success, that they exacted an Oath from their King, to become a Subject
to them, and submit to their Government. Thus when Errors provoke Force, it is
hard for those Jealousies that urged the Attempt of Power, to suffer it to be
used modestly, much less to be laid down when obtained: And when once a State
begins to be tossed by such Commotions, Parties in that Tempest, like Waves in
Storms, pursue and dash out one another.

Within little more than a Year after this, the King grew to be One and Twenty;
and upon that took an Occasion, when all things seemed a little composed, to
assume full Power. I cannot but here remember the Character the Impartial and
Judicious Mezeray gives Lewis the Eleventh upon his Entrance upon the Throne,
That he was the greatest Enemy to his own and his Kingdoms Quiet; one that
loved his own Irregular Fancies more than the wise Laws, and thought the
greatest Grandeur consisted in the greatest Oppression, pulling down great ones
to raise up the meanest from nothing. This, he says, another calls putting
their Kings Horse de Pay; that is, out of their Minority; he should have said,
putting them out of their Sense and Reason.

No question the Ministers were ready to welcome him to that which they called
the Exercise of his Power, when it was rather to the Execution of theirs.

The first practice of it was taking the Great Seal from the Bishop of Ely (as
if remembering his former Carriages), and gave it to Wickham, Bishop of
Winchester; and displaced many others; as if by that he seemed to take Seizin
of his new Power; suspending also Gloucester and Warwick from the Privy Council.

The Tide now turned to the King, who began to return to follow those Advices
that had brought him to so much hazard before; And that Interest and Opinion
which the French had worked themselves into, appeared in all things to
increase. The Duke of Gloucester, and the Archbishop of Canterbury had formerly
tempered the King with their calm and sure Reasons; when being enraged against
the Lords, he swore he would more willingly submit and rely on the Protection
of France, than thus to be made servile to those he ought to command.

It Is not unworthy of an Observation, how frequently the French have been
prevalent in England; and always in such Princes Times as have given so much
Power to Ministers and Favorites, as made them considerable enough to be
corrupted.

Philip de Comines says, That in his Time all the Kings of England's Ministers,
and great Persons, had Pensions from France, and gave their Acquittances upon
every Receipt, which were to be seen in the Chamber of Paris.

Hastings, the Lord great Chamberlain, was the only great Person that was
hardly persuaded to become a Pensioner of France, and that refused to give any
Acquittance for what he received. The same Historian says, That he was the only
man that persuaded him to it, and had first persuaded him to be so to Charles
Duke of Burgundy; and when Cleret was sent by King Lewis, with a Present of
2000 Crowns, and desired his Acquittance for his Discharge, as he had received
it from the Chancellor and the Admiral: He answered, the Gift proceeded from
his Master's Liberality, not his Request: If he desired he should receive it,
he might put it in his Sleeve; other Testimonial he should get none of him; for
he would not that any should say, That the Lord Chamberlain was Pensioner to
the French King, nor that his Acquittance should be found in the Chamber of
Accounts. The King of France was angry with Cleret for bringing no Acquittance;
but ever after preferred the Lord Chamberlain in his Esteem before all the King
of England's other Servants.

I cannot discern much Reason for it; There seems little Difference to me
between one that is carelessly, and another that is cautiously dishonest: And
those Ministers equally forgot the Interest of England for their own, to let
them share in our Affairs and Councils. The People judg^^ right in this, and
Parliaments (as Cemines observes) were never corrupted in themselves and
Judgments, and alway^ perceived the Dissimulation of the French; and in another
place says, they were always willing to grant Aids against France; for they
could not be deceived by Demonstration: which showed the Difference in our
Methods and Constitution from theirs: Our Laws are suitable to our Interest,
and our Interest secured by our Laws: Our Fashions and manner of Expenses,
should be applicable to the Consumption of our own Productions. The French
differ from the first; and their Fancies are the only Measures of the last:
They are not capable to live after the Methods of our Interest, but we may quit
ours to assist theirs: France can be but of little use to us, but we may be of
too much to them: They may receive, but can bring no advantage. They have
reason then to be always active, to keep an Interest here by private means,
since 'twere vain to hope it by public ones; and Gardinal Richelieu well
understood these Truths, when he called England their Indies.

About this time Guido Earl of St. Paul was sent by Charles the French King, to
visit and complement King Richard and his Queen. The Earl, according to the
ready Confidence of the French, became Counselor: For one day the King
discoursing with him, he complained of the Duke of Gloucester, and in
particular, that he did passionately endeavor to disturb the Peace between
England and France. The Earl presently gave Seutence against the Duke, and told
the King plainly, he was not fit to live: For when a Subject was grown so
great, a Prince was no longer safe; and if he meant to secure himself against
Danger, the surest way was to destroy those from whence it might so easily come.

This Advice blew the King's Anger into a Flame; and he began to express to
some of his great men, his Displeasure against the Duke of Gloucester; but he
found in them all an high Opinion of the Duke's Honor and Virtue: So that the
King began to calm again, and showed as if Cruelty had not its full spring from
his own Nature, but swelled as it was nourished by the Streams of other
Councils.

For after this he was again raised by the Advices of the Earls of Holland and
Nottingham, to contrive the Destruction of the Duke of Gloucester: And commonly
as the Advice of ill men tends to the worst things, so generally they suggest
the worst way of doing them.

The Duke of Gloucester was then at his House in Plashy in Essex, whither the
King was invited, or rather invited himself, and with all Testimonies of
Respect and Kindness most splendidly feasted. This was judged a proper time for
the Design; and as the Duke waited upon the King, to bring him going, he was
seized by a Company of armed men laid secretly for him, and so hurried
blindfold to the Thames, and in a Vessel ready prepared, carried to Calice, and
there shortly after strangled: Either thought too Guilty and Popular, or not
Guilty enough to be brought to a public Trial. And as the wicked Advisers
persuaded his taking by the breach of Hospitality (the basest way of
Treachery), so they continued in the peculiar Methods of Mischief, to contrive
his Death by the most hated way of private Murder.

Within a Day or two after, the King invited the Earl of Warwick to Dinner, and
in the midst of all shows of Kindness, sent him to Prison, and also the Earl of
Arundel and his Son. The Dukes of Lancaster and York being thus alarmed,
gathered Forces together; but upon the Promise of a Parliament, and Legal
Proceedings, with many Excuses for what had been done, they dismissed their
Forces, and came up to attend at Parliament; where Sir John Bushy, Sir William
Bagott, and Sir Henry Green, appeared busy Ministers for the King: Sir --
Bushy was made Speaker, and by his and their assiduous Endeavors, corrupting
some by Fears, and others by Benefits, the Charters of Pardon, formerly granted
by the King, were annulled and made void. The Prelates perceiving what way was
made for taking away of Lives, constituted Sir Henry Percy their Procurator,
and absented themselves, that they might not be present at any Sentence of
Blood; a President ever to be remembered for the Honor of their Calling.

Then followed, as was expected, the Death of the Earl of Arundel, the
perpetual Imprisonment of the Earl of Warwick in the Isle of Man, the Death of
the Duke of Gloucester (abovementioned), the Archbishop of Canterbury arraigned
for Executing the Commission against Michael Delapoole, the Lord Cobham
banished into the Isle of Wight, Sir Reginald Cobham condemned to Death for
being formerly appointed by the Lords in the King's Minority, to be one of his
Governors.

These Cruel Successes furnished Arguments to those new Upstart Ministers,
Bushy, Bagott, and Green, to infuse into the King how much more safe he was by
Cruelty than gentle means, and how much more secure by Fear than Love. Nor are
other Counsels to be expected from such Men, equally low and mean in their
Minds, as in their Extractions, made greedy from their Poverty, and ambitious
from their Meanness; neither endued with their Minds and Fortunes to think of
Principles: Power was their Justice, Violence their Prudence, and Opportunity
the Providence.

The King was now possessed with the Opinion, That he was in a Condition to
dispose, as he pleased, of those that durst dislike his Actions, and that his
Will might now become the Law. But the present Prospect of Things commonly
deceives those that are willing only to believe the Whisperers of their own
Inclinations; and because they see nothing at the present spring up, they
forget that the Roots grow undiscerned. And no Questio^^, the King in that
Conjuncture of Time, thought every Cloud dispersed, and pursued all those fatal
ways that mistaken Flattery could guide him in.

But a particular Accident made way for a general and fatal Revolution. The
Duke of Hereford one day discoursing with the Duke of Norfolk, complained how
much the King was misguided by mean and base Counselors, such as fought their
own private Interest, and not the public Good; and feared that the King,
following such Councels, would so lose the Hearts of his People, that it might
prove dangerous to him: Assuring him, that no private displeasure urged him to
say this, but merely his love to his King and Country; and therefore desired
the Duke, being one of the King's Cabinet-Council, to lay these things before
him, which might prove of ill Consequence if continued. The Duke of Norfolk
seemed not to dislike what had been said, but so represented it to the King,
that he turned it rather to an Accusation, than a Counsel: The King, that could
not endure to hear unpleasant Truths, and at that Instant looking upon himself
as above the mean Consideration of public Notions, so resented the boldness of
the Duke of Hereford, that he summoned him to answer this (that now became his
Charge) before the Council, where the Duke confirmed his Information, which was
denied by the Duke of Hereford, owning all that he had said; but the Duke of
Norfolk maintaining the Accusation, the Combat was demanded, and assented to,
and the day appointed by the King: At which time both the Dukes appeared armed,
and being just ready to be engaged, they were stopped by the King, and Banishment
pronounced against both the Dukes: The Duke of Norfolk dyed suddenly after at
Venice, having enjoyed no great Benefit by those Violences he so precipitately
engaged in.

A little after dyed John of of Gaunt, Father to the Duke of Hereford, and
fourth Son of Edward the Third; after whose death the Duchy of Lancaster fell
to this Dukes being his eldest Son. But the King in his deceived opinion of
Power and Security, acted the most probale means to shake both; seizing all the
Duke's New-descended Estate into his own hands, and endeavored to make his
Banishment perpetual: Revoking all his Letters Patents, to prevent the suing
out the Livery for those Lands during his Banishment.

If this be well considered, it is impossible a King should do it purely from
his own advice: First, he enraged a Person that could only be a considerable
Enemy; his Popularity gave him an Interest in Power, and his Descent from a
King, the Pretense to use it. This could be no Motive from right Reason to urge
the King to do such an imprudent Injustice; he was above the Temptation of a
private Estate, but his Ministers were tempted by it, following the usual
Methods of their Counsels, by no Considerations but Revenge and Interest; as if
their Safeties were grounded upon nothing so much as their Princes Hazard, and
their Advantages upon his Prejudice.

As the Testimony of the prevalency of these Counselors, the King left all the
Business to them, and gave himself up wholly to Sloth and Pleasure; The
imitation spread into Luxury and Effeminacy, and the King thought it was the
Testimony of Arbitrary Power to live uncontrolled to such a loose Condition;
all Power, but this shadow of it, was exercised by his Ministers, who now
depressed all Persons of either Courage or Honor. A Valiant Man was counted
dangerous, and a Wise Man Mutinous; and every one was made perceive, that 'twas
easier to prosper by following their Princes Humor, than to pursue his
Interest and Honor.

The Ministers being grown into Absolute power, thought of nothing but how to
satisfy their greedy Ambitions: They pretended to get all for the King, the
sure way to convey it to themselves. And indeed his Gifts were so large to
them, that they brought him into more wants, than ever the Wars of his brave
Ancestors could reduce them to; and used more unjust Inventions to supply his
private use, than they needed public Assistances to support the Interest and
Honor of it. But Edward the First and Edward the Third had a less Burden, and
Charge to support: They had a Kingdom and no Favorites; the first was not
capable to satisfy the latter. For at this time, without any public occasion,
strange ways were used to levy Money; sometimes Pole Money was exacted of every
Religious Person, and Secular Priest: sometimes sums were drawn from the People
under the name of Benevolence; sometimes Money borrowed by Privy Seals. Then
Commissioners sent to all Sheriffs and Corporations, declaring the King's High
Displeasure for the kindness they testified to the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls
of Arundel and Warwick; and for this affection showed to the King's Enemies,
his Pardon was to be obtained by heavy Fines, or rather Taxes laid upon them.
The Commons were bound by new-invented Oaths, to perform what they engaged to,
and black Charters Sealed and Delivered to the King's use, whereby their
Liberty might be as well taken away, as their Properties had been.

By such Counsels as these the Subjects were turned to Slaves, and made waiters
upon any Opportunities to shake off their Fetters: The King made believe he
governed most, when he had none to Govern: For Slaves are not in the Business
of Mankind; their Thoughts are fixed upon Revenge and Freedom, and like
distempered Men, seldom return to their former Composures.

The first occasion that proved this true, was a Rebellion that broke out in
Ireland; the opportunity of which Diversion favored the Earl of Northumberland
to gather Forces in the North. And others of the Nobility and People, weary of
their Oppressions, resolved in the King's absence to attempt some relief; and
fixed upon the Duke of Hereford, as the proper Instrument to act by: His
Banishment, that the King designed to make perpetual, was the Cause of that
mischief, which he believed he should prevent by it. He now became the Center,
to which all other Discontents tended; to whom now resorted many of his former
Friends, and others whom Oppression now made so.

Among these the Archbishop of Canterbury was the Chief; who in Speech to the
Duke of Hereford laid open their Grievances, and Desires, summing up all the
Mischiefs and Misfortunes of an unsteady Government, the Contempt it spread
abroad, and Oppression at home; not Slaves to their Prince, but to his
Favorites; and that Peace under their Extortions was more chargeable than War:
The Expense of their Riots and Ambitions needed more Projects and Taxes to
maintain them, than the Defense and Support of the Government it self required:
By their Cruelties most of the Nobility were destroyed, and the Commonalty
wasted; concluding with imploring the Duke to pity the Oppression of his
Country, and to animate those that were ready to redeem themselves from
Slavery, by his Valor and Conduct.

The Duke of Lancaster needed not the force of Eloquence to persuade him; the
loss of his Uncles, his Banishment, the Imprisonment of his Children, and the
loss of his Estate, were powerful Exciters enough to lay hold on any
Opportunity to revenge all his Wrongs: To all which was added the persuasive
Temptation of a Crown; and sure there could be no more powerful Motives, than
by one way at once to satisfy both his Ambition and Revenge.

These Considerations, and the depending on the Peoples Affections to a Change
(being wearied with Oppression) made him venture to land with a very small
Force in Yorkshire. At first he gave out, That he came only to recover his
Inheritance, and quickly found his utmost Expectation answered; for his small
Troop presently increased to an Army. Many of the Nobility that came in to him,
took an Oath of him, That no bodily harm should be done to King Richard; as if
a Conquest and a Crown would preserve that Sincerity that was inconsistent with
it; or that the Modesty professed, when something was to be obtained, should
continue after the Acquisition.

The Duke finding every thing more successful than almost he could hope,
pursued that Fortune which so prosperously invited him, and hasted with his
still-encreasing Forces to London, where he found a Reception suitable to usual
Joy, that discontented People show in Alterations. He was received in Triumph
without Victory, and with all the Testimonies of Zeal and Duty which flattering
Crowds could pay their lawful Prince and Sovereign; Pageants and rich Presents
entertained him; and all the fulsome Praises that could be invented, and as
many contumelious Reproaches on their King: All Testimonies of Allegiance
seemed lost; the modest Mask was now taken off, and War proclaimed against King
Richard and his Adherents.

The Duke of York in the mean time tried to raise Forces; but found a general
Resolution in all People, not to be Enemies to the Duke of Lancaster. The
Favorites, that were active and bold in Prosperity, showed that neither their
Skill nor their Duty, was to struggle with Difficulties; nor had they either
Interest or Reputation, if they had attempted it: They were always dead Weights
upon their Prince, and, like the nature of it, hung heaviest upon weak
Conditions. Bushy and Green were pursued to Bristol, and there taken; fatal
place to hasty Favorites They were eagerly pursued by the flattering Fury of
the People; and perhaps there were some among them, that before, in the
Prosperity of these Favorites, made as passionate Professions of a contrary
Devotion. Bagott escaped into Ireland, and saved himself from the present
Execution. The Lord Scroop, Lord Treasurer, with Bushy and Green that were
taken, lost their Heads.

These sudden Executions were but the usual Consequences of violent Changes:
All new-gotten Power is commonly endeavored to be preserved by Destruction;
and the Execution of the Unfortunate, is called a Justice.

King Richard was at this time in Ireland, where the news came to him of the
Duke's landing in England, and his successful Proceedings. The news increased
by coming, and every Circumstance grew enlarged; so that it appeared the
blackest and most portentous Storm that ever gathered in the full Sunshine of
a Prince, which his Favorites assured him could be subject to no Eclipse.

The contrary appeared to this unfortunate King, who was then engaged in
Troubles in Ireland: After some time, he prepared for England, having first
imprisoned the Sons of the Dukes of Lancaster and Gloucester, in Trim-Castle,
and took with him the Dukes of Surrey, Aumarl, and Exeter, and the Bishops of
London, Lincoln, and Carlisle.

The Earl of Salisbury was sent before to raise an Army, which he did in
Cornwall; but the King failing to come within the time he promised, they all
discouraged, went home. This delay was attributed to the Counsel of the Duke of
Aumarl, who perhaps had more mind to see things determined by the Fortune of
others, than by hazarding his own.

After this, the King Lands in Wales, where he found the stream turning from
him, and every Place of strength submitting to the Duke of Lancaster. He knew
not what Course to steer, but wandered to Conway-Castle, where the Earl of
Worcester, Steward to the King's Household, (as if finding a fitting time to
remember the proclaiming his Brother, the Duke of Northumberland, Traitor)
broke his Staff of Office openly in the Hall, before the King's Servants; and
with Advice to them to be as base as himself, went avowedly to the Duke: The
rest followed his Example and those that seemed the most eagerly Loyal, became
now the most violently Rebellious. And it is improbable that those, who with
unlimited Flattery for their Interest and Ambition, had persuaded their Prince
into the dangerous Attempt of Absolute Power, should in any turn of Fortune, or
shock of Danger, retain any limited Principles. The true Interest of a Prince,
retains the Interest of others; but the Interest of private Men, excludes the
Prince's. We have heard, it is true, of some that have been successful in such
unjust and dangerous Attempts; but the Examples have been very few, that have
not been fatal at last; and there are so many of the contrary, that the
Comparison would convince any, That the just Limits within a Nation's
Constitution, are much more safe, as well as glorious.

King Richard had now cause to make such sad Reflections, and by the want of
Power instructed to lament the attempting of too much: He saw himself forsaken
by those whom he should have forsook before; He now felt severely the want of
that Trust and Confidence that he had destroyed; and seemed not forsaken of his
People, but to have forsook them before; He had forced them all to be in the
nature of Traitors, and compelled them to purchase, as it were, the name of
Subjects, while there were none that seemed so to him, but those that needed
Pardon the most, such as had counseled him to the Ruin that now fell upon him.

He had been so long accustomed to follow the Counsel of others, that he knew
not now the way to use his own: He had too long followed the mean and easy
ways of Indirectness. Virtuous and steady Actions in the undisturbed part of
Life, give power in Extremity; and the memory of what was Great and Good, gives
boldness to such a Mind to claim Success in the worst condition: But the memory
of Injuries and Injustice done to others, shakes Hopes and Expectations in a
dangerous Estate. This he showed, by discharging his Army, rather than bravely
using them; as if he believed it impossible to recover Power now, since he had
used it so ill before.

The next thing that seemed best, was to have retired till a better occasion
was offered; for nothing is more various or violent, than the stream of Men's
minds, with greediness affecting Change, and hurried by Expectations (that are
seldom answered) to be eased from all former Grievances and Oppressions; and
every one that assisted in the Alteration, looks upon himself as a particular
Object of Reward; never considering, that new-gotten Power needs more to secure
it, than the Ease of People will allow; and when deceived in that, they begin
to stagger, and at last grow to repent the Blood and Money the expenceful
Change had cost, and ready upon any occasion to revenge their mistaken Errors.
And perhaps King Richard might have hoped as much in some time, as the Duke of
Lancaster then found.

But there were some who probably had before appeared most violently Loyal, who
now advised their still-abused King to the last and worst way, and sacrificed
Him for their own Peace; telling, perhaps, That unfortunate Princes seldom
found Protection abroad, but were kept only as a Composition with their
successful Enemies. And tho he had so near Relation to the King of France, yet
Ties by Marriage were no Obstacle to their Use of Interest, but rather a
Shelter for the more unsuspected Designs. And he would accordingly find, that
he would be the Sacrifice of new Alliances, and then 'twould be too late to
expect such Conditions from the Duke of Lancaster, which probably he might not
hope for.

These false Reasons were perhaps used to him by such as could not at a less
rate reconcile themselves to the Duke of Lancaster, than by betraying their
Master into his hands; for nothing could be more improbable, than that he who
had the Power, should by Conditions preserve him who had a Right to it, while
neither was capable to trust the others Mercy: Yet this vain Counsel was
followed; and, as if to improve it by Intelligence with the Duke of Lancaster,
the Duke of Northumberland was sent to the King, to assure him, that the Duke
would pay him all humble Obedience, and only desired a Parliament should be
called at Westminster, to settle the shaken Affairs of the Nation.

The King must then perceive how he was forsaken by those who before had so
much flattered him with their excessive Love and Loyalty: and it seemed a just
instruction to suspect the violent Professions of any that have no restraint by
Principles in a fortunate Condition: They that want Virtue, and profess Love,
should rather cause suspicion than belief; especially when it is addressed where
Power and Interest may invite it: But the Love of absolute Greatness in
Opinion, more than real and true Greatness in it self, has hindered Princes from
seeing the Defects and Designs of mean and interrupted Flatterers; such as
believe their Prince has never Power enough, unless it appears by the
Oppression of others, and (like these in this unhappy King's time) fall from
their Professions, as he declined in Power: But I have read of some (tho but a
few) who governed themselves by Principles in their Prince's Prosperity, and
guided by the same Virtue, have not forsaken him in Adversity.

The King in some measure yet made a right Reflection on his Condition; for he
thought 'twas in vain to hope that the Conqueror would restore him the Power he
had gotten, and therefore only to the Duke of Northumberland proposed for
himself a retired and quiet Condition: But he was as much mistaken to hope
that, as he guessed right to expect the other. But when the Duke met the King
at Flint-Castle, he seemed to pay him all Reverence due to a King; and told
him, He only acted what he had done for the recovery of his Estate and
Possessions. But this was only that false Formality, that ill men use in
obtaining, and seldom perform when they have obtained; for such Modesty is laid
aside by Success, and Justice grown useless, when Power is fully possessed; for
presently after the King was secured, and in the condition of a Prisoner
carried to London; yet in His Name a Parliament was presently called.

The King now found the unhappy Truth, That usually men's Professions are but
the product of their present Conditions, not of their Intentions; and perhaps
in a low estate they may wish and desire within modest limits: but the violence
of overwhelming Power breaking over the former bounds, overthrow all mean and
level thoughts. Perhaps the King might now make such severe Reflections on his
past Actions, seldom regarding his Professions when he had Power or Opportunity
to violate them; he could not but be pressed with the memory of his unhospitable
Treachery to the Duke of Gloucester, and the Earl of Warwick; and must with
detestation remember those Counselors of Falseness and Indirectness, which
once destroyed his Happiness, and now aggravated his Misery. He now saw their
violent and loyal flatteries were meant for their own Interest, not for His;
and that such mean things, like other Insects, live with a little Warmth, but
shrink at any Change of Weather.

The Duke of York, that was entrusted with the Government, during King
Richard's absence in Ireland, was become the Duke of Lancaster's chief Adviser
of the Methods he was now to take, which was as violent as his fogotten Duty
required to make his new Loyalty acceptable. In the first place, he advised,
That King Richard should be pressed to a voluntary Resignation, and also to be
solemnly Deposed. This Advice was pursued, and the King seemed as ready to
yield to it, as the Duke ambitiously desired it: The form of the Resignation
was then contrived to be performed the day before the Parliament was to meet,
and yet that Parliament was to sit, tho the King was to be no longer a King, in
whose name it was called; and certainly, if there could be no Virtue in the
Resignation, the Dissolution of the Parliament must have been the Consequence;
for that which was called by a Power, could not continue when there was a
Demise of that Power; but no Plot was to be seen or hit. The hasty and
flattering Zeal, that was to be shown to the Duke of Lancaster, pursued it is
violent Course through all the Obstacles of Law and Justice.

Among those that were Commissioned to receive his Resignation, there were
Lords, Clergymen, and Lawyers; the two Chief Justices, Thormins and Markham,
were in the number: And in the Reigns of these two unfortunate Princes, there
wanted not Temporal and Spiritual Gown-men, that contributed to all their
Errors in their unfortunate Conditions; and on their Adversities, transplanted
their Zeals into Sunshine.

These Commissioners being formerly Assembled in the Tower; King Richard was
brought out in all the Kingly Ornaments, that he might have some Ensigns of
Glory to resign formally; in this Condition he was placed in a Chair of State,
and in this moment of his Royalty appeared a King; all that was now done, was
certainly from himself, and showed in this Extremity, virtue enough to make it
evident, He might have been an excellent Prince, had his Ministers not Reigned
more than he; for he showed no Disorder to this great and unpresidented Action
of his Life; he neither seemed to force a Resolution to endure, nor affect a
Temper to submit. But as both had naturally sprung from the choice of a retired
Condition, with this Calmness in all this Storm of Fortune, he spoke to the
Commissioners, beginning with their acknowledging those Errors, that his Youth
made ill Counselors capable to imprint in him; and seemed only troubled, that
he had not time allowed to repair those Injuries he had done the Nation;
knowing now from a clear sight, that he was both willing and capable to have
performed so happyan Action. He now perceived his own Virtues, when the Vices
of others could no longer hide them. And he that could have once been so easily
persuaded, that he was shot at through his wounded Ministers; now saw that
'twas from them he received his Wounds; he neither accused any, nor complained
of any, nor valuing a Narrative and Empty Satisfaction; but concluded with the
choice of losing a Kingdom, rather than engage it in Blood and Confusion for
his Sake; desiring only to enjoy that Peace which he merited for Reserving it
for others; and was as willing to resign his Title to the Duke of Lancaster, as
he perceived they were willing to receive it from him.

After this, he read the Instrument that was prepared; and made two Bishops his
Attorneys, to declare that his Resignation in Parliament, which was done the
Monday after, and accepted of by the Lords and Commons, was Legal* but yet this
was not thought enough, but a heavy Charge in many Articles was exhibited
against him.

The Articles were too far from my purpose, and too long to set down; but
whoever reads them in the Rolls, will find them of much weight, and as shrewdly
composed, as the Nature of the thing could either bear or require; there was
not an Injustice or Error omitted; the chiefest things contained were those
Actions by which his Favorites thought to secure themselves, by subjecting all
Judges and Sheriffs to his Will, thereby to bring within his Power, Parliaments
and Law, and make way to Levy Taxes as he pleased; and it was a particular
Article, That he should say and declare, That all Law lay in his Head and
Breast.

These are the Extremities that proceed from the Counsels of such Men, who have
made themselves incapable to Share or Trust in the Common Good; who knowing how
little they could expect from the uninterrupted Methods of Law and Justice,
seek to preserve themselves by the Destruction of that which threatened them.
And 'twere impossible that Princes should involve their own in the desperate
Interest of others, were they not first blinded from discerning the Ambition of
those that hide it under the fierce Zeal for their Absolute Power.

The Articles (which were 29.) were owned by the Lords and Commons to be so
notorious, that they needed no further Examination or Proof. And joined with
the Consent of the King, on whom they were charged; It was judged sufficient
for Deposing King Richard, and Establishing the Duke of Lancaster, by the Name
of Henry the fourth; adding also a far-fetched Title from Henry III. to patch
up the seeming Justice of such an Action.

This Title was drawn from Edmund, surnamed Crookback, eldest Son of Henry III.
and that for his Deformity he was put by the Succession, and given to Edward I.
and the Duke of Lancaster was next of Blood by the Mothers side to this Edmund.
But this Edmund was third Son of Henry, and not deformed at all, but a brave
Man in Person and Mind; but the next Heir then to the Crown was Edmund Earl of
March, Son to Roger, who was a little before slain in Ireland; who seeing the
Stream so violent against King Richard, wisely retired, and lived with all
imaginable Care and Pruduce.

Thus was a Title invented, to support that Power, which the Sword had
obtained: And the King, who by the Law is said to do no wrong, is charged with
Articles for doing all. Thus when Balances are once hoisted, like Childrens
play at Weighing, the same Weight tosses one another, that would of themselves
hang equally; nor is there any Judicature to compose such violent Disorders in
a State; for Success will be the Judge, and always gives worst Judgment. And the
Professors of the divine and human Laws, have been commonly zealously ready to
find wrested Law, and Divine Necessity to ratify the Success of the Ambitious.
On the other side, when Princes by false Professions, abuse the Good, and
increase in Power enough to encourage the Bad, the eager Hounds they press to
run at Head, and lead the Cry that is made by slower paced, and more temperate
Hunters, till at last, Fear and Necessity brings most to make up the Noise; or
by Silence, not to interrupt it; so that a general Consent seems to contribute
to the designed Oppression: And the naming a Right to Liberty and Property,
becomes an Intention of Rebellion. The Prince's Will must then be the Law, and
his Religion the Devotion of all Loyal Subjects; then those that have least
Principles, declare for the greatest Loyalty; and by their Zeal and Duty pursue
their Interest and Ambition. And the search for Absolute Power, is made by
secret Reserves, public and false Professions, Corrupting some, and Terrifying
others, Deceiving many; and upon specious Pretenses displacing such as appear
either suspecting the Designs, or not as passionate as the rest in promoting
them. Yet, when the Power is promoted and secured, as the King was told his
was, when all Subjects lost their Names, and like guilty Slaves, signed Blanks,
as the Testimony of it. Then appears what Machiavel describes in those times
among the Romans; When absolute Power was exercised; Riches and Honor,
especially, Virtue, grew to be Capital Offenses; Informers and Calumniators
rewarded, Servants instigated against their Masters, Children against their
Parents, guilty Men the Accusers; and those few that were so unhappy to have no
Enemies, destroyed by their Friends. And all dissembled Cruelties and
Oppressions, break forth into public and barefaced Practice. That which
before was declared to be the Government, must then be called the support of
it. Ill Designs grow by Degrees, but when their cherished Roots have took a
deep and firm hold, they are then declared by the mischievous Fruit they put
forth.

Modesty seldom stays with full grown Power; and the former Reputation of Men,
is useless to them. In such a Change they must purchase new Characters, from
new Violences, to merit Trust or Safety.

King Richard having now (as far as he could) resigned his Sovereign Power,
began to find how much he was mistaken with the hopes of enjoying that retired
Peace, which he seemed willing to change his Crown for; Fortune commonly makes
haste in the Prosperity or Adversity of Princes; and there is a reasonable
Cause why neither should be slow; for the base Minds of Men hurry them to
assist the Successful, and help to destroy the Unfortunate; led always more by
Fear and Interest, than Resolution and Virtue.

This Truth appeared in the Condition of this unhappy King; whose Title that
was left him, was first shared by his Enemies, and he then conveyed from the
Tower of London, to Leeds Castle in Kent, and from thence to Pomfret Castle in
Yorkshire; for some little time there seemed to be paid him some small Respects
in the manner of his Attendance, but that was but the Counterfeit Treatinf of
the Shadow of a King, which yet probably made him uneasy who enjoyed the
Substantial Power: For it is reported by some, That King Henry should one day
with a deep Sigh Deplore and Lament, That neither he nor the Nation, had a
Friend that would pull up that Root from which Disquiets and Rebellion could
only Spring.

It Is probable that the Bishop of Carlisle's Oration, arguing at that time
against the Right of King Richard's being deposed, and the Right of Henry to
succeed to the Crown, and some Plots and Risings that afterward happened,
might perhaps hasten the taking away the unfortunate Prince from all his
Miseries; but whether the King gave particular Orders or Encouragement by such
words, is uncertain; but there never wanted Men barbarous enough to offer cruel
Sacrifices to bloody Power; and for the hopes of Favor and Reward, rather
guess what Mischief would be acceptable, than stay to be instructed, that their
Merits might seem to be enlarged by their readiness in Villainy.

Some of these Causes made Sir Pierce Exton, with eight other Villains hasten
to Pomfret, as if he feared he should be deprived of the Honor of the Action;
when he arrived, the Preface to the intended Cruelty, was the forbearance of
that Ceremony of Tasting, that was usually paid King Richard, as he sat at
Dinner; who demanded the Reason of it. He that used to perform it, answered,
That Sir Pierce Exton had brought such Orders from King Henry; at which the
King seemed so much transported, that he Struck at him, and called him Huzzy of
Lancaster; at which time Sir Pierce Exton with his bloody Followers entered, and
shut the Door after him, which being perceived by the King, he verily guessed
their fatal Intentions; and seeming less surprised in this great and threatening
Danger, than in all the former, tho lesser Hazards; he readily and boldly
snatched a Halbert, and with a Resolution differing from his former Actions,
Slew four of the Assassinates, and with continued Bravery fought with the rest,
till the chief Villain Exton got upon a Chair behind him, and with a Pole-Ax
struck him down, where the unfortunate King ended all his Calamities, and left
the Murderer to endure future Torments. For when he returned again, expecting
great Preferments and Rewards, he found himself deceived, not only in the hopes
of an Addition of Favor, but in the Loss of what he had; not considering that,
tho a Man might be Ill enough to wish a Mischief, he hardly could be so
confidently Bad, as publicly to Reward the Doer of it; that counterfeit Piece
of Justice was probably showed by the King, to seem (at least) to hate what he
wished, by Discountenancing the Actor of the Ill, who now began by Discontent
to make way for a punishing Conscience, which continued him in Torments during
his short and miserable Life, and left an Infamy to outlive him.

It is observable, that in the two greatest Exigencies of this Prince's Life,
he appeared differing from himself; one in Resignation of his Crown; the other
in the Loss of his Life; the first he did with a steady Calmness, almost above
the Temper of a Man; the last with a Courage equal to the Bravest; in smaller
Concerns he seemed unsteady and amazed; in these great ones firm and
unconcerned; but in these Extremities he was not cloyed with those Favorites
and Ministers that influenced him with their Weakness, and shook his Mind with
their Indirectness, making not only their Cause to be his, but his Nature
theirs.

This seemed justified by his Behavior in these last and greatest Extremities;
when acting wholly from himself, he entitled himself at last to his Father's
and Grandfather's (the Black Prince's) Courage and Virtue; and showed himself
Dying, what they never gave him leave to appear Living.

THE COMPARISON.
HAving now finished, with some Reflections on the chief Accidents in the
Reigns of Edward and Richard II. and believing it to be too tedious to take the
same Methods with Edward I. and Edward III. I thought it was not improper to
Extract their Characters; that by the Comparison of them all, the reasonable
Causes may further appear of the unhappy Condition of the two first, and the
prosperous Fortunes of the two others, which will show the fatal and mighty
Difference in a Prince's using himself, and being used by others; between the
steddiness of a strong Mind, and the indirectness of a weak one* Edward I. and
Edward III. resembled one another. Edward and Richard II. were also alike: So
that their Comparisons may be made as if between Two Persons, which will show
the Causes of the mighty Differences that succeeded with them.

Edward I. and Edward III. came both to the Crown after it had been shaken by
the Errors of both their Fathers, Henry III. and Henry II.

Edward and Richard II. came both to the Crown after it had been settled by the
Virtues and Valor of the Father and Grandfather, Edward I. and Edward III.

Edward I. and Edward III. were both Men Earlier than others, and Victorious
before others used to attempt Victory: So that before they were Kings, they
showed how fit they were to be so.

Edward and Richard II. never appeared Men, till they were to be so no more;
They never attempted true Glory; and before they were Kings, gave little
Testimony of their fitness to be so.

Edward I. and Edward III. were able to Judge, yet never unwilling to hear the
Judgment of others: They were deliberate in resolving, but firm in their
Resolutions; unshaken in Dangers, steady and equal in Safety; Their Promises
were Mankind's Security, and Truth their Wisdom; Their great Virtues and
Courage made the Nation expect Success from all their Actions.

Edward and Richard II. never appeared able to Judge, but wholly submitted to
the interested Opinion of others; They were inconstant in all Conditions; in
Prosperity bold and violent, in Danger fearful and temperate; Their Promises
were no Security, and Dissimulation was their Policy: So that from such Methods
of Government the Nation could expect no Success or Happiness.

Edward I. and Edward III. grew fierce by Opposition, and gentle by Submission;
They seldom denied Pardon to those that implored it, nor suffered any abused
Mercy unrevenged; They were Mighty enough to conquer Enemies, and Powerful
enough to forgive those they conquered; They were equally Victorious both to
Themselves and Others; and those that submitted proved always more fortunate
than those that resisted

Edward and Richard II. were submissive when opposed, and fierce when submitted
to; They always abused the Tenderness of others, and seldom showed any of their
own; never forgiving, where they had opportunity to punish; They neither had
Power nor Design to conquer Enemies, but used both to overcome their Friends;
Others were Masters of Them, not They of Themselves, and they that resisted
were always more fortunate than they that submitted.

Edward I. and Edward III. in their greatest Hazards required none to attempt
more than they did in their own Persons; and in the greatest Prosperity and
Safety they prescribed no more Virtue and Temperance than they gave Examples
for.

Edward and Richard II. in Danger depended on others to attempt for them, and
in Prosperity they gave no Rules of Virtue, but suffered the Vices of others to
be their Examples

Edward I. and Edward III. knew how to gain Power, and how to use it; They made
the best Laws, that might have attempted the easiest to break them.

Edward and Richard II. knew little how to get Power, and less how to use it.
Chance sometimes brought it, and their giddy Favorites lost it. They never
seemed inclined to make good Laws, and were always contriving to violate those
that were made.

Edw I. and Edw. III. knew how to gain, and how to preserve, by the Love and
Confidence they raised in their Subjects hearts; the first they requited, and
never abused the last.

Edward and Richard II. showed little skill how to gain, and as little how to
preserve; They were advised to the mistaken Policy of neglecting Love, and to
the Folly of abusing Trust.

Edward I. and Edward III. had great Taxes and Supplies, which in themselves
might appear very large, but would not seem so vast, when compared with their
Victories. The Conquest of Wales, Scotland, and France, will not seem such
light Victories to be obtained with small Assistance; but what the Nation gave
was justly bestowed for what it was given, and faithfully laid out for their
Honor and Interest.

Edward and Richard II. had great Supplies, but made no Purchase with them of
Honor or Interest: What others bestowed for the public Glory, they gave away
to their private Favorites, and wanted more to supply their Avarice and
Ambitions, than the others did to enlarge the Nations Glory: The private
Conquests the Favorites made over these Princes, were more chargeable than the
Victories the others obtained over Nations.

Edward I. and Edward III. not only returned Security and Benefit for their
Subjects Gifts, by Conquests Abroad, but by excellent Laws at Home: What Edward
I. began well, Edward III. gave perfection to; nor were these brave Princes
more just in making good Laws, than severe in the due execution of them; and
never showed so much severity, as against those that abused the Trust of
Justice; as if they were more offended at the Enemies of Mankind, than at their
own.

Edward and Richard II. returned nothing to their Subjects for what they gave,
neither by the Bravery of Arms to crush the Greatness of their Enemies, nor by
the Virtue of good Laws, to increase the Prosperity of the People; They seemed
not fitted in Themselves to attempt the first, and too much influenced by
Favorites to incline to the last; They feared the Greatness of their Subjects,
more than their Enemies; and showed they would rather have Conquered at Home
than Abroad; as if they would choose to make their own People Slaves, rather
than Others. They apprehended the Effect of good Laws, and were most pleased
with those that debauched the Trust of Justice; and the Judges esteemed most
Loyal, that were readily wicked; those were the greatest Favorites, that the
People most hated, and the greatest Enemies to Men were reputed the best
Friends to them.

Edward I. and Edward III. mingled their Interests with their Subjects, and
never refused to hear the Wrongs of those that assisted them to revenge their
Injuries on others. They were equally Valiant, and equally Successful, and both
died uncheck'd by Fortune; only Edward I. died himself and Edward III. outlived
himself: But the Death of his glorious Son the Black Prince, joined with the
weight of Old Age, might justly make that Sun set clouded.

Edward and Richard II. divided their Interests from their Subjects; and their
complaint of Grievances rather procured Punishment than Redress. They thought
their Peoples Good was inconsistent with their Power; and to be sensible of
Oppression, was Rebellious. They were alike in their Tempers, and equally
Successful; and in the midst of the greatest smiles of Fortune, both alike
forsaken by Her But Richard II. in the last wretched Scene of his Life had the
opportunity of showing some Testimonies that he sprung from the Black Prince,
and had not lived more unhappily than he died bravely: The First he owed to his
Favorites, the Last to Himself.

FINIS.

