OF CHARITY In reference to Other men's SINS. By JOHN HOW, Minister of Gods
Word.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. 1681.

THE Preface.
A Proposal was made to me, by some friends, for publishing of these Papers;
which I cannot doubt, proceeded from Charity, both to the Reader, whose good
they intended in it; and to the Author, that they could think so slender a
performance was capable of serving it.

I cannot, indeed, think it unseasonable, to take any occasion of recommending
Charity, though this subject led me only to consider one single instance of it.
But if the practice of it, in this one, would redress so great an evil, what
might we not expect from its universal exercise, in all cases upon which it
might have influence?

Even the tongues of men and angels, as (with our Apostle) they are
insufficient to supply its absence; so nor are they more than sufficient, fully
to represent its worth.

We vainly expect, from either eloquence, or disputation, the good effects,
which Charity alone (could it take place) would easily bring about without them.

How laboriously do we beat our way in the dark! We grope for the wall, like
the blind, and we grope, as if we had no eyes: we stumble at noon day, as in
the night; but the way of peace we have not known:

Humane wit is stretched to the uttermost; wherein that comes short, the rest
is endeavored to be supplied by anger: And all to bring us under one form,
which either will not be; or, if it were, could be to little purpose; while, in
the mean time, this more excellent way is forgotten of our foot, and we are far
from it. Which shows, it is God that must cure us (the God of love and peace),
and not man.

How soon, and easily would a mutual universal Charity redress all? For being
on one side only, it could never cement both. And limited only to a party, it
is not it self, and acts against it self, divides what it should unite.

But a genuine, equally diffused Charity, how would it melt down men's minds,
mollify their rigors, make high things low, crooked straight, and rough places
plain?

It would certainly, either disposemen to agree upon one way of common order,
or make them feel very little inconvenience, or cause of offense in some
variety.

But without it, how little would the most exquisite unexceptionable form
(universally complied with, in every punctilio) contribute to the Churches
welfare? No more to its quiet, and repose, than an elegant, well shaped
garment, to the ease, and rest of a disjoynted, ulcerous body. Nor longer
preserve it, than the fair skin of a dead man's body would do that, from
putrefaction, and dissolution.

What Piety is to our union with God, that is Charity to our union with one
another. But we are too apt, as to both, to expect from the outward form, what
only the internal living principle can give; to covet the one with a sort of
fondness, and deny the other.

One common external form in the Church of God, wherein all good men could
agree, were a most amiable thing, very useful to its comely, better being, and
the want of it has inferred, and does threaten evils, much to be deplored, and
deprecated. But this divine principle is most simply necessary to its very
being.

Whatsoever violates it, is the most destructive mortal schism, as much worse
than an unwilling breach of outward order, as the malicious tearing in pieces a
man's living body, is worse than accidental renting his clothes

And indeed, were our Ecclesiastical contests, about matters that I could think
indifferent, as long as there is such a thing, as distinction of Parties, I
should readily choose that, where were most of sincere Charity (if I knew where
that were). For since our Savior himself gives it us, as the cognizance of
Christians (by this shall all men know ye are my disciples, if ye love one
another), I know not how better to judge of Christianity, than by Charity.

Nor know I where, among them that profess, there is less of either, than with
them that would confine, and engross both to their own several Parties; that
say, here is Christ, and there he is; and will have the notions of Christian,
of Saint, of Church, to extend no further than their own arbitrarily assigned
limits, or than, as they are pleased to describe their circle.

We know to whom the doing so, has been long im puted; and it were well, if
they had fewer sorts of imitators.

Nor does it savor more of uncharitableness in any, to think of enclosing the
truth, and purity of Religion, only, within their own Precincts, than it does
of pride and vanity, to fancy they can exclude thence, every thing of offensive
impurity.

We are never like to want occasions, even in in this respect, of exercising
Charity. Not to palliate the sins of any, but recover sinners.

God grant we may use it more, to this purpose (when the case so requires) and
need it less.

John How.

Advertisement by the Bookseller.
The Books underwritten are Published by John How, the Author of this
Discourse.

1. The Blessedness of the Righteous.

2. The Vanity of Mortal Life, in Two Treat. Psalm. 17. 15. Psalm. 89. 47.

3. Treatise of delighting in God.

4. The Living Temple.

5. A Discourse of the Divine Prescience, with an Appendix.

6. A Sermon at Mrs. Baxters Funeral, on 2 Cor. 5. 8.

7. Treatise of thoughtfulness for the Morrow: with an Appendix, concerning the
immoderate desire of fore-knowing things to come. This last lately Printed by
Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 2. for is read in. p. 30. l. 1. r. practice. p. 43. l. 3. insert
after must, cut it off, and. p. 45. l. 19. after Christians, add a Parenthesis.
p. 49. l. 3. r. Sacred.

Of Charity in respect of other men's sins.
1 Cor. XIII. 6. -- Rejoiceth not in iniquity.
THE Subject spoken of, must be supplied from the foregoing Verses; where we
find the Matter all along, in discourse, is Charity: which it is the principal
business of the whole Chapter to describe, and praise. And this is one of the
Characters that serve (as they all do) to do both these at once. For being in
it self a thing of so great excellency, To show its true nature, is to praise
it. What soever is its real property, is, also, its commendation.

Our business here must be,

1. Briefly to explain and give some general account of both these, viz.
Charity, and this its negative Character, That it rejoices not in iniquity.

2. To demonstrate the One of the Other; Or (which is all one) to show the
inconsistency between that divine principle, and this horrid practice.

Upon which the Use of this piece of Christian Doctrine will ensue.

1. We are to give some account both of this Principle, the Charity which the
Apostle here treats of, and of the practice which the Text denies of it,
Rejoicing in iniquity.

1. For the former. The Charity or Love here spoken of, is the root of all that
duty which belongs to the second Table. The whole of the duty contained in
both, is summed up by our Savior in Love. That of the former in that first and
great commandment, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc.
Matt. 22. That of the latter is this other which is like unto it, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self. Upon which two we are told hang all the Law and
the Prophets. See also Romans 13. 10.

The instances which are given in this Chapter, refer to man as the object, and
show that it is the love of our neighbor which is meant.

But though it be so far humane, it is however upon other accounts a real part of
divine love; which we see 1 John 3. 17. that Apostle speaking even of love to
our brother: Whosoever has this worlds goods, and sees his brother has need, and
shuts up the bowels of compassion from him, demands, How dwells the love
of God in that man? And David called the kindness he intended the Relicts of
Saul's Family, the kindness of God, 2 Samuel 9. 3.

This part of love is divine both in respect of its original, and of somewhat
considerable in its object.

1. In respect of its original. It Is a part of the (communicated) divine
nature, from whence they that partake of it, are said to be born of God. It is
most conjunct with faith in the Messiah, and love to God himself, which are
both comprehended in that birth.

For as it is said in the Gospel of John, chap. 1. 12, 13. That as many as
received him, (viz. Christ) to them he gave power to be called the sons of God,
even to them that believe in his name, who were born not of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. And in his 1 Epist.
chap. 5. 1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God. So it
is, in this latter place, immediately added as the double property of this
divine production (not more separable from one another than from it), and every
one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him.

And hereupon also from the in-being and exercise of this love, (though toward
an object that seems very heterogeneous and of much another kind) we come to
bear the name of Gods children. Love your enemies -- that you may be the
children of your father which is in heaven, Mat. 5. 44, 45. The Law indeed of
love to other men, though it oblige to love some above others upon a special
reason, yet in its utmost latitude, comprehends all mankind under the name of
neighbor or brother, as the particular precepts contained in it do
sufficiently show. Which surely leave us not at liberty to kill, defile, rob,
slander, or covet from others, than the regenerate (as we count) or our own
friends and relatives.

Now that Principle from which we are called Gods children, must be of divine
original; for it is not spoken of them casually, but as their distinguishing
Character. So that, in this respect, they are said to be of God. It is their
very difference from the children of another, and the worst of fathers, 1 John
3. 10. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil;
Whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God, neither he that loves not his
brother.

Which also shows it is not universilly all love, unto which this dignity
belongs. Some more noble-minded Pagans that were wont to ascribe divinity unto
love, have also carefully distinguished, and told us of a love that was
genuine, and another that was spurious; the one akin to virtue, the other to
vice; and have noted it as an abusive error of the Vulgar to give the same name
to God and a Disease. The corruption and degeneracy Max. Tyr. Dissert.
of love, is indeed less than humane; but the first being, and restored
rectitude of it, is of an original no less than divine.

2. And even this love, though placed upon man, is divine too in respect of its
object, i. e. of somewhat we have to consider in it, which is most properly and
strictly the object, or the inducement and formal reason why we love. God is
the Primum amabile, the first Goodness as well as the first Being. As therefore
there is no being, so nor is there any goodness, amability, or loveliness,
which is not derived from him. We love any thing more truly and purely, the
more explicitly we acknowledge and love God in it. Upon the view of those
strokes and lineaments of the divine pulchritude, and the characters of his
Glory, which are discernable in all his creatures, our love should be someway
commensurate with the Creation, and comprehend the Universe in its large and
complacential embraces.

Though as any thing is of higher excellency, and has more lively touches and
resemblances of God upon it; or, by the disposition of his Providence, and Law,
more nearly approaches us, and is more immediately presented to our notice,
converse, use, or enjoyment, so our love is to be exercised toward it more
explicitly, in an higher degree, or with more frequency. As man therefore has
more in him of divine resemblance, of Gods natural likeness and image; good m^n
of his moral, holy image, we ought to love men more than the inferior
creatures; and those that are good and holy, more than other men; and those
with whom we are more concerned, with a more definite love, and which is
required to be more frequent in its exercise. But all from the attractive of
somewhat divine appearing in the object. So that all rational love, or that is
capable of being regulated and measured by a Law, is only so far right in its
own kind, as we love God in every thing, and every thing upon his account, and
for his sake.

The nature and spirit of man is, by the apostasy, become disaffected and
strange to God, alienated from the divine life, addicted to a particular
limited good, to the creature for it self, apart from God; whereupon the things
men love, are their idols, and their love idolatry. But where, by regeneration,
a due propension toward God is restored, The universal good draws their minds,
they become inclined and enlarged toward it; and as that is diffused, their
love follows it, and flows toward it every where. They love all things
principally in and for God; and therefore such men most, as excel in goodness,
and in whom the divine image more brightly shines.

Therefore it is, most especially, Christian Charity that is here meant, i. e.
which works toward Christians as such. For compare this with the foregoing
Chapter, and it will appear that Charity is treated of in this, which is the
vital bond of holy living union in the Christian Church, supposed in the other.
Whereby as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of that
body being many, are one body; so also is Christ, v. 12.

This principle refined, rectified, recovered out of its state of degeneracy,
and now obtaining in the soul as a part of the new creature, or the new man
which is after God, as it has man for its object more especially, and more or
less according to what there appears of divine in him, is the charity here
spoken of.

Now of this Divine Charity it is said (which we are to consider

2. In the second place) it rejoices not in iniquity. Hereof it cannot be
needful to say much by way of Explication. The thing carries a prodigious
appearance with it; and it might even amaze one to think, that on this side
Hell, or short of that state, wherein the malignity of wickedness attains its
highest pitch, any appearance should be found of it.

Yet we cannot think, but these Elogies of Charity, do imply reprehensions, and
tacitly insinuate too great a proneness to this worst sort of (...), or
rejoicing in evil. The Gnostics (or the Sect afterward, known by that Name)
gave already too great occasion for many more express, and sharp reproofs of
this temper; which were not thrown into the Air, or meant to no body. The
Scripture says not in vain, the spirit which is in us lusts to envy. With
which, what affinity this disposition has, we shall have occasion to note anon.

Rejoicing in iniquity, may be taken (if we abstract from limiting
circumstances) two ways.

Either in reference to our own sins: Or to other men's.
Our own, when we take pleasure in the design, or in the commission, or in the
review, and after-contemplation of them: Converse in that impure Region, as in
our Native Element, drink it in like water, find it sweet in the mouth, and
hide it under the tongue, etc.

Other men's; when it is counted a grateful sight, becomes matter of mirth and
sport, to see another stab at once the Christian name, and his own soul.

The scope and series of the Apostles discourse, does here plainly determine it
this latter way: For as Charity (the Subject of his whole discourse) respects
other men; so must this contrary Disposition also. De iniquitate procul dubio
aliena, etc. says Cajetan upon this place. It Is without doubt, unapt to
rejoice in the sins of other men; for neither can it endure ones own.

And this aptness to rejoice in the iniquity of others, may be upon several
accounts.

It may either proceed From an affection to their sins. From an undue self
love: Or, From an excessive dis-affection to the persons offending.


1. From a great affection, and inclination unto the same kind of sins, which
they observe in others. Whereupon they are glad of their Patronage; and do
therefore not only do such things, but take pleasure in them that do them, Romans
1. Men are too prone to justify themselves by the example of others, against
their common rule. Others take their liberty, and why may not I? And so they go
(as Seneca says sheep do), non qua eundum est, sed qua itur, the way which is
trodden, not which ought to be.

2. From an undue, and over-indulgent love of themselves. Whence it is, that
(as the case may be) they take pleasure to think there are some men, that
perhaps outdo them in wickedness, and offend in some grosser kind than they
have done: And so they have, they count, a grateful occasion, not only to
justify themselves, that they are not worse than other men, but to magnify
themselves, that they are not so bad; as the Pharisee in his pompous
hypocritical devotion, God, I thank thee (that attribution to God, being only
made a color of arrogating more plausibly to himself) that I am not as other
men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, etc. Luke 18. 11. whereby the hypocrite,
while he would extol, does but the more notoriously stigmatize himself.

3. From a dis-affection they bare to the offenders; whence they are glad of an
advantage against them: That they have occasion to glory in their flesh, and
insult over their weakness.

It must be that rejoicing in other men's sins, which is most contrary to
Charity, that is here more especially meant: And that is manifestly the last of
these; such as proceeds from ill will to the person that offends: Whereupon we
are glad of his halting (which perhaps we watched for before), and when his
foot s^ippeth, magnify our selves against him.

Now rejoicing at the sins of other men, upon this account, may be either,

1. Secret, when only the heart feels an inward complacency, and is sensibly
gratified thereby: Or,

2. Open, when that inward pleasure breaks forth into external expressions of
triumph, and insultation, into derision, scoffs, and sarcasms.

II. And how inconsistent this is with the Charity which our Apostle so highly
magnifies, it is now our next business to show. And it will appear, by
comparing this rejoicing in other men's sins.

1. With Charity it self. 2. With what it is, ever, in most certain connection
with.
1. With Charity it self; and so we shall consider it,

1. In its own nature, abstractly and absolutely.

2. In relation to its Original, and exemplary Cause. And shall compare this
rejoicing in the sins of other men, with it both ways.

1. Consider Charity in its own nature: And so it is the loving one another as
my self, so as to desire his welfare and felicity as my own: Where we must
note, that love to our selves, is the measure of the love we owe to others. But
yet are also to consider, that this measure it self, is to be measured: For we
are not to measure our love to others, by the love we bear to our selves,
otherwise, than as that also agrees with our superior rule; which obliges us so
to love our selves, as to design, and seek our own true felicity, and best
good: To lay hold on eternal life, to work out our own salvation.

If in other Instances, we were not so to understand the matter (since the
particular precepts extend no farther than the general one), any man might,
without transgression, destroy another man's goods, when he has learned to be
prodigal of what he is Master of himself: and might make himself Master of
another man's life, whenever he cares not for his own. And so by how much more
profligately wicked any man is, he should be so much the less a transgressor.

We are not so absolutely (...), or so much our own, that we may do what we
will with our selves. We are accountable to him that made us, for our usage of
our selves: And in making our selves miserable, make our selves deeply guilty
also. We were made with a possibility of being happy. He that made us with
souls capable of a blessed state, will exact an account of us, what we have
done with his creature. He that commits a felony upon his own life, injures his
Prince and the Community to which he belongs. The one is robbed of a subject,
the other of a member that might be useful: wherein both had a right. No man is
made for himself. And therefore the fact is animadverted on, and punished as far
as is possible in what remains of the offender, in his posterity, from whom his
goods are confiscate; in his name, which bears a mark of infamy, and is made a
public reproach. How unspeakably greater is the wrong done to the common Ruler
of the whole world, when a soul destroys it self! loses its possibility of
praising and glorifying him eternally in the participation and communion of his
eternal glory! How great to the glorious society of Saints and Angels! From
whom he factiously withdraws himself, and who (though that loss be recompenc't to
them by their satisfaction in the just vengeance which the offended God takes
upon the disloyal apostate Wretch) were to have pleased and solac't themselves
in his joint felicity with their own. So that he has done what in him lay, to
make them miserable, and even to turn Heaven into a place of mourning and
lamentation.

The Supreme primary Law under which we all are, obliges us to be happy. For it
binds us to take the Lord only for our God. To love him with all our hearts,
and minds, and souls, and strength. And so to love him, is to enjoy him, to
delight, and acquiesce finally, and ultimately in him; and satisfy our selves
for ever in his fullness: So that every man is rebellious in being miserable,
and that even against the first, and most deeply fundamental Law of his
Creation. Nor can he love God in obedience to that Law, without loving himself
aright. Which love to himself, is then to be the measure of the love he is to
bear to other men: And so most truly it is said, that Charity begins at home.
Every man ought to seek his own true felicity, and then to desire another as
his own.

But now consider, what we are to compare herewith. Rejoicing in the sins of
other men, how contrary is it to the most inward nature! to the pure Essence!
how directly does it strike at the very heart and soul, the life and spirit of
Charity!

For sin is the greatest, and highest infelicity of the Creature; Depraves the
soul within it self, vitiates its powers, deforms its beauty, extinguisheth its
light, corrupts its purity, darkens its glory, disturbs its tranquillity, and
peace, violates its harmonious joyful state, and order, and destroys its very
life.

It disaffects it to God, severs it from him, engages his Justice, and inflames
his wrath against it.

What is it now to rejoice in another man's sin? Think what it is, and how
impossible it is to be where the love of God has any place. What? to be glad
that such a one is turning a man into a Devil! A reasonable immortal soul,
capable of Heaven, into a Fiend of Hell! To be glad that such a soul is tearing
it self off from God, is blasting its own eternal hopes, and destroying all its
possibilities of a future well-being! Blessed God! How repugnant is this to
Charity?

For let us consider what it is that we can set in directest opposition to it.
Let Charity be the loving of another as I ought to do my self; its opposite
must be, the hating of another, as I should not, and cannot sustain to do my
self. As loving another therefore includes my desire of his felicity, and
whatsoever is requisite to it, till it be attained, and my joy for it when it
is; loathness of his future, and grief for his present infelicity, as if the
case were my own: So hating another must equally and most essentially include
aversion to his future good, and grief for his present (which is the precise
notion of Envy) the desire of his infelicity, and whatsoever will infer it,
till it be brought about, and joy when it is; or when I behold what is
certainly conjunct with it. Which is the very wickedness the Text animadverts
on, as most contrary to Charity. The (...), which not only the Spirit of God in
the holy Scriptures, but the very Philosophy of Pagans does most highly decry
and declaim against. Which is of the same family you see with Envy. And no
other way differs from it than as the objects are variously pos^^ed. Let the
harm and evil of my Brother be remote from him, and his good be present, I envy
it. Let his good be remote, and any harm or mischief be present and urgent upon
him, I rejoice in it.

Both are rooted in hatred, the directest violation of the Royal law of loving
my neighbor as my self, Jam. 2. 8.

And it is that sort of (...) which has most of horror, and the very malignity
of Hell in it: As the sin of another, wherein this joy is taken, is an evil
against the great God (which there will be occasion more directly to consider
hereafter), as well as to him that commits it; a wrong to the former, and an
hurt to the latter: Whereas other infelicities are evils to him only whom they
befall.

2. Consider Charity in relation to its Original, and Exemplar. And so it is
immediately from God, and his very image. God is love, and he that dwells in
love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4. 16.

And what sort of love is this, which is made so identical, and the same thing
with the very Being, and Nature of God? Not a turbid, and tumultuous, not a
mean, and ignoble, not an imprudent, rash, and violent, least of all, an impure
polluted passion: But a most calm, wise, majestic, holy will to do good to his
creatures, upon terms truly worthy of God. Good Will, most conjunct with the
other inseparable perfections of the Godhead: Whence, with expressions of the
most benign propensions toward his Creatures, he still conjoyns declarations
of his hatred of sin, upon all occasions. That he is not a God that takes
pleasure in wickedness, nor can evil dwell with him. That sin is the abominable
thing which his soul loathes. That he is of purer eyes, than to look on
iniquity. What can now be more contrary to the pure, and holy love, which shall
resemble, and be the image of his, than to rejoice in iniquity? For as God,
while he loves the person, hates the sin, men do in this case, love the sin,
and hate the person.

And while this horrid impure malignity is not from God, or like him (far be
the thought from us), from whom does it derive? Whom does it resemble? We read
but of Two general fathers, whose children are specified, and distinguished,
even by this very thing, or its contrary, in a forementioned Text, 1 John 3.
10. where when both the fathers, and their children, are set in opposition to
one another, this, of not loving ones brother, is given at once, both as the
separating note of them who are not of Gods family, and offspring, not of him
(as the expression is), having nothing of his holy blessed image, and nature in
them (and who consequently must fetch their Pedigree from Hell, and acknowledge
themselves spawned of the Devil), and as a Summary of all unrighteousness, as
it is, being taken (as often) for the duty of the second Table, or as a very
noted part of it, taken in its utmost latitude. Agreeably to that of our
Savior, Joh. 8. 44. Ye are of your father the Devil -- he was a murderer from
the beginning -- as every one is said to be that hates his brother, 1 John 2.
15. If therefore we can reconcile God and the Devil together, Heaven and Hell,
we may also Charity, and rejoicing at other men's sins.

2. The inconsistency of these Two will further appear, by comparing this
monstrous dis-affection of mind, with the Inseparable concomitants of Charity,
or such things as are in connection with it. And the argument thence will be
also strong and enforcing, if that concomitancy shall be found to be certain,
and the connection firm, between those things and Charity.

I shall only give instance in four things, which every one that examines will
acknowledge to be so connected.

Viz. Wisdom, and Prudence. Piety, and sincere devotedness to God, and the
Redeemer. Purity. Humility.


Moralists generally acknowledge a concatenation of the Virtues: Those that are
truly Christian are not the less connected, but the more strongly and surely.

Which connection of these now mentioned, with Charity, we shall see as to each
of them severally; and, at the same time, their inconsistency with this vile
temper and practice.

1. For Wisdom or Prudence, it is so nearly allied to Charity, that it is
mentioned by the same name, Jam. 3. 17. The wisdom that is from above, is first
pure, then peaccable, gentle, etc. The foregoing words, (v. 16.) show Love is
meant. These words represent the heavenly descent, and the true nature of it,
both together. That it is called Wisdom, shows its affinity with it, and that
it partakes of its nature; dwells in a calm sedate mind, void of disquieting
passions and perturbations, which it is the work of Wisdom to repress and
expel. Indeed the name is manifestly intended to express, generally, the
temper, the genius, the spirit of one that is born from above, and is tending
thither. The contrary temper, a disposition to strise, envy, or grief for the
good of another (which naturally turns into joy, for his evil, when his case
alters) is called Wisdom too, but with sufficiently distinguishing and
disgracing additions. It is said, verse. 15. not to be from above, but earthly,
sensual, devilish; And to have the contrary effects; where envying and strise
is, there is confusion (Tumult the word signifies, or (...).
disorder, unquietness, disagreement of a man with himself, as if his soul were
plucked asunder, torn from it self) and every evil work, verse. 16.

There can be no charity toward another (as has been noted) where there is
not first a true love to a man's own soul, which is the immediate measure of it.
Nor that, where there is not prudence to discern his own best good, and what
means are to be used to attain it. His true good he is not to expect apart by
himself, but as a member of the Christian community. Not of this or that party,
but the whole animated body of Christ. In which capacity he shares in the
common felicity of the whole, and affects to draw as many as he can, into the
communion and participation of it. So he enjoys, as a member of that body, a
tranquillity and repose within himself. But is undone in himself, while he
bears a disaffected mind to the true interest and welfare of the body.

Wherefore to rejoice in what is prejudicial to it, is contrary to prudence and
charity both at once. Put on, says the Apostle (as the elect of God, holy and
beloved) bowels of mercies, kindness, bumbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man
have a quarrel against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. And
above all these things, put on Charity, which is the bond of perfectness. And
let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are called in
one body. Implying no true peace or satisfaction can be had, but in vital union
with the body.

Is he a wise, or is he not a mad man, that rejoices he has an unsound hand or
foot, or an ulcerated finger, or toe rotting off from him? or that is glad a
Fire or the Plague is broken out in the Neighborhood, that equally endangers
his own house and family, yea and his own life?

2. Piety and devotedness to God, and the Redeemer, is most conjunct with true
charity. By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God,
etc. 1 John 5. 2. For the true reason of our love to the one, is fetched from
the other, as has been shown. And how absurd were it to pretend love to a
Christian upon Christ's account, and for his sake, while there is no love to
Christ himself? But can it consist with such love and devotedness to God, to be
glad at his being affronted by the sin of any man? Or to Christ, whose design
it was to redeem us from all iniquity, and to bless us, in turning us away from
our iniquities; to rejoice in the iniquity that obstructs, and tends to
frustrate his design? Do we not know he was for this end manifested, to destroy
the works of the Devil? And that the works of wickedness are his works? Do we
not know, the great God is, in, and by our Redeemer, maintaining a War against
the Devil, and the subjects of his Kingdom; in which Warfare, what are the
Weapons, on the Devils part, but sins? Who but sinners his Soldiers? And who
is there of us, but professes to be on Gods part in this War? Can it stand with
our duty, and fidelity to him, to be glad that any are foiled, who profess to
fight under the same Banner? What would be thought of him, who, in battle,
rejoices to see those of his own side fall, here one, and there one? He would
surely be counted either treacherous, or mad.

3. Charity of the right kind, is most certainly connected with Purity. The end
(or perfection) of the commandment (or of all our commanded obedience), is
Charity, out of a pure heart, 1 Timothy 1. 5. Sincere Christians, are such as have
purified their souls, in obeying the truth through the spirit, unto unfeigned
love of the brethren; and must see, that they love one another with a pure
heart, fervently, 1 Pet. 1.

Pagans have ^aught, there is no such thing, as true friendly love, but among
good men. But how consists it with such purity, to take pleasure in other men's
impurities, or make their sin the matter of jest, and raillery?

4. A further inseparable concomitant of Charity, is deep humility. We find
them joined, and are required to put them on together, in the already mentioned
Context. Put on kindness, humbleness of mind; above all put on Charity, Col. 3.
And do find it among these celebrations of Charity, that it vaunteth not it
self, and is not puffed up, v. 4.

Nor can we ever, with due Charity, compassionate the wants, and infirmities of
others, if we feel not our own. Which if we do, though we are not, ourselves,
guilty of heinous wickednesses, we shall so entirely ascribe it to Divine
preserving mercy, as to be in little disposition to rejoice that others are.

USE. We may then, upon the whole, learn hence, how we are to demean our selves
in reference to the sins of other men.

So, no doubt, as Charity does command, and require.

At least, so as it does allow, or not forbid.

We are manifestly concerned, not to offer violence to so sacred a thing; and
shall be secure from doing it both these ways. We may therefore under these two
Heads, take direction for our behavior upon such occasions: viz. the actual
sins of others, or their more observable inclinations thereto.

1. We should faithfully practice, as to this case, such things as Charity, and
the very law of love does expressly require, and oblige us to. As we are,

1. To take heed of tempting their inclinations, and of inducing others to sin,
whether by word or example. We are, otherwise, obliged to avoid doing so, and
this greatly increases the Obligation. What we are not to rejoice in, upon the
account of Charity; we are, upon the same account, much less to procure.
Especially take heed of contributing to other men's sins, by the example of your
own. The power whereof, though it be silent and insensible, is most efficacious
in all men's Experiencc. A man would perhaps hear the verbal proposal of that
Wickedness, with horror and detestation, which he is gradually and with little
reluctance drawn into, by observing it in other men's practice. A downright
Exhortation to it, would startle him. But the conversation of such as
familiarly practice it, gently insinuates, and by flower degrees alters the
Habit of his Mind; secretly conveys and Infection like a Pestilential Disease;
so that the man is mortally seized before he feels, and when he suspects no
danger.

Most of all, let them take heed of mischieving others by their Sins, who are
men of more knowledge, and pretend to more strictness than others. Perhaps some
such may think of taking their Liberty more safely: They understand how to take
up the business more easily, and compound the matter with God. An horrid
Imagination! and direct Blasphemy against the holy Gospel of our Lord! If it
were true, and God should (do, what is so little to be hoped) mercifully give
them the Repentance, whereof they most wickedly presume, who knows but others
may, by that example, be hardened in wickedness, and never repent?

Yea, If thy greater knowledge should prompt thee to do, unnecessarily, that
which (really, and abstracting from circumstances) is not a sin; but which
another took to be so, and thence takes a liberty to do other things that are
certainly sinful; yet walk thou not charitably. Through thy Knowledge shall a
weak Brother perish and be destroyed, for whom Christ died? Romans 14. 15. with 1
Cor. 8. 10, 11. Suppose the process be, as from sitting in an Idols Temple, to
Idolatry; so from needless sitting in a Tavern, to Drunkenness, or other
consequent debaucheries.

But if the thing be, in its first instance, unquestionably sinful, of how
horrid consequences are the enormities of such as have been taken to be men of
sanctity, beyond the common rate? What a stumbling block to multitudes! How
much better might it have been for many that are of the Christian profession,
if such had never been Christians! And most probably for themselves also! No
doubt it had been more for the honor of the Christian name. How many may be
tempted to infidelity and atheism by one such instance! And whereas those
scandalized persons do often afterward, incur this fearful guilt of rejoicing
in the iniquity of such, even that also, they have to answer for, with all the
rest.

2. Charity requires, not only that we do not procure, but that we labor, as
much as is possible, to prevent the sin of others. What in this kind, we are
not to rejoice at, we should hinder. And indeed what we do not hinder, if it be
in our power, we cause.

3. We should not be over-forward to believe ill of others. Charity will, while
things are doubtful, at least, suspend. See how immediately conjunct these two
things are. It thinks no evil, rejoices not iniquity, v. 5, 6. It is not
imaginative, or surmising. And in the following verse (on the better part, it
must be understood), it believes all things, hops all things: i. e. briefly,
it is unapt to believe ill, without ground, and hopes, well, as long as there
is any. But it is not so blindly partial, as to shut its eyes against apparent
truth (of which more in its place).

4. Much less should we report things at random, to the prejudice of others.
That character of an inhabitant in the holy hill, must not be forgotten, that
takes not up a reproach against his neighbor.

5. If the matter particularly concern our selves, and circumstances comply, we
must have recourse first to the supposed offender himself, and (as our Savior
directs) tell him his fault between him and thee alone, Mat. 18. 15.

6. We ought to compassionate his case. Not rejoicing in iniquity, may have in
it a (...). More may be meant; we are sure more is elsewhere enjoined, solemn
mourning, and the omission severely blamed. Ye are pussed up, 1 Cor. 5. 2. (not
perhaps so much with pride, as vanity, and lightness of spirit, as a bladder
swollen with air, which is the significancy of that word) and have not rather
mourned. Perhaps he is burdened with grief and shame. A Christian heart cannot
be hard toward such a one in that case. We are to bear one another burdens,
and so fulfill the law of Christ. Gal. 6. 2.

7. We should, as our capacity and circumstances invite or allow (at least by
our prayers) endeavor his recovery. And therein use all the gentleness which
the case admits, and which is suitable to a due sense of common humane frailty.
Take the instruction in the Apostles own words, Gal. 6. 1. Brethren, if a man
be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such a one in the
spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted.

8. We must take heed, upon one man's account, of censuring others; for such as
we know to be faulty, those, that for ought we know (and therefore ought to
hope) are innocent. A practice most absurd and unrighteous, contrary to common
reason and justice, as well as charity. Yet that whereto some are apt to assume
a license, upon so slender and senseless a pretense, i. e. Because some, that
have, under a show of piety, hidden the impurities of a secretly vicious life;
Others that are openly profane, and lead notoriously lewd and flagitious lives
(who though bad enough, are so far the honester men) do add to all their other
wickedness, that folly and madness, as to count all men hypocrites that are not
as bad as themselves. And reckon there is no such thing as real Religion in the
World. A like case as if, because sometimes specter have appeared in humane
shape, one should conclude there is, therefore, no such creature on earth, as a
very man.

2. But there are also other things that ought to come into practice, in the
case of other men's sinning, very suitable to the case, and not unsuitable to
charity. Which, though they proceed more directly, rather, from some other
principle, yet are not inconsistent with this (As the graces of Gods Spirit,
and the duties of Christians never interfere, so as to obstruct or hinder one
another). Things which, though Charity do not expressly command, yet are otherwise
commanded, and which Charity does not forbid. As,

1. That we labor to avoid the contagion of their example. That we take not
encouragement to sin from their sinning. They are not our rule. We have not so
learned Christ.

2. That we take warning by it. And endeavor that their example may not only
not be tempting to us, but that it may be monitory. We should reckon such
things are our examples, for this purpose, 1 Cor. 10. and were not only,
heretofore, recorded and written, but they are also, in our own days, permitted
to fall out for our admonition. We that think we stand, should therefore take
heed lest we fall. And must remember we are to stand by faith, and are not to
be high minded, but fear. It Is a costly instruction that is given us in such
instances. Consider the dolor and pangs that they may perhaps endure, who are
our Monitors. If they do not cry to us to beware, their case does. Reckon (as
the Psalmist, Ps. 73.) It is good for you to draw near to God; they that are
far from him shall perish. Labor to be sincere, living Christians. Let me tell
you what I have often inculcated. A mere form of godliness will one time or
other betray you. And that it is not being of this or that party, conjoined
with a formal, lifeless Religion, that will secure you from being public
scandals on earth, and accursed wretches in hell. Let every one prove his own
work, and make through work of it, so shall he have rejoicing in himself, and
not in another, Gal. 6. (yea, though he may have much cause of mourning for
another): For every one must, at last, bear his own burden, and give an account
of himself to God.

3. Seriously bless God for being kept from gross and scandalous enormities:
Such words savor well, spoken with deep humility, and unfeigned sense of
divine favor, not with Pharisaical ostentation and scorn, God I thank thee I
am not as other men. If the poor man was so transported, and poured out his
soul in tears of gratitude to God, upon the sight of a Toad, that he was not
such a creature; how much more cause is there for it, upon the sight of a gross
sinner! For, I should think, Who made me differ? Why was not I the example? And
reduced to such a condition, before which I would prefer the greatest sinless
misery in all the world?

There is a threesold degree of mercy, in our preservation from more heinous
and reproachful wickedness. We may owe it to nature that less inclines us to
some sins, as gluttony, drunkenness, etc. to external succedaneous providence
that keeps us out of the way of temptation. Or to victorious Grace, able to
prevail, both against corrupt inclinations of nature, and what soever
temptations also. God is to be acknowledged in all. He is the Author of Nature,
the Ruler in Providence, the Fountain of Grace. Under the first of these
notions, he ought more to be eyed, and praised, than the most are aware of. I
could tell you, if it were seasonable, of some (and no despicable) Heathen
Philosophy, which speaks of such an (...), or goodness of natural temper
(though the word has also another signification), that is said to carry in it,
a sort of seminal probity and virtue: Which, when it shall be observed, how
some others, have the seeds of grosser vitiosity, and of all imaginable
calamities, more plentifully sown in their natures, there is no little (...) be
thankful for. Though all are (...) nough by nature, to be children of (...) and
for ever miserable, without (...) mercy; And though again, none (...) so bad
natures, as to be thereby excusabl^ in wickedness (they should endeavor, and
seek relief the more ^^^nestly), yet some are less bad, and their case more
remedible, by ordinary means; and therefore the difference should be
acknowledged with gratitude.

And surely there is no small mercy, in being kept out of the way of
temptation, by the dispensation of a more favorable Providence, that orders,
more advantageously, the circumstances of their conditions in the world, so as
they are less exposed to occasions of sin, than others are. Which Providence I
called, succedaneous, for distinctions sake; because even the difference of
natural tempers, is owing to a former Providence. But now who can tell, what
they should be, or do, in such circumstances as might have befal'n them? It Is a
singular favor, not to be exposed to a dangerous trial, whereof we know not
the issue.

Nor yet should any satisfy themselves without that grace, which can stem the
tide. Which they that possess, how should they adore the God of all grace?

4. Charity does not forbid, and the case it self requires, that when others do
grossly, and scandalously sin, we should, at length, upon plain evidence, admit
a conviction of the matter of fact. For, otherwise, we cannot perform the other
duty toward them, unto which, Charity does most expressly oblige: Nor discharge
an higher duty, which another love requires, that ought to be superior to all
other. No Charity can oblige me to be blind, partial, unjust, untrue to the
interest of God and Religion. When we are told in the Text, it rejoices not in
iniquity, it is added in the next breath, it rejoices in the truth: i. e. in
equity, and righteous dealing. We are not to carry alike to good men, and bad:
And are therefore sometime to distinguish them, if there be a visible ground
for it, or to take notice, when they manifestly distinguish themselves: For it
is necessary to what is next to ensue: viz. That

5. We are to decline their Society: i. e. when their heinous guilt appears,
and while their repentance appears not. Scripture is so plain, and copious to
this purpose, that it would suppose them very ignorant of the Bible, for whom
it should be needful to quote Texts. We must avoid them for our own sake, that
we be not infected, nor be partakers in their sin, and guilt. For theirs (and
so Charity requires it), that they may be ashamed, which may be the means of
their reduction and salvation: And (which is most considerable) for the honor
of the Christian Religion, that it may be vindicated, and reseued from
reproach, as much as in us lies. It ought to be very grievous to us, when the
reproach of our Religion cannot be rolled away, without being rolled upon this,
or that man; if, especially, otherwise valuable. But what Reputation ought to
be of that value with us, as his that bought us with his Blood? The great God
is our Example, who refuses the fellowship of Apostate Persons, yea and
Churches: Departs, and withdraws his affronted Glory. It is pure, and declines
all taint. When high Indignities are offered, it takes just offense, and with a
Majestic Shyness retires. None have been so openly owned by the Lord of Glory,
as that he will countenance them in wickedness. Though Coniah (he tells us,
expressing a contempt by curtling his name) were the Signet on his right hand,
yet would he pluck him thence. Yea and our Savior directs, If our right hand
it self prove offensive, we must cast it from us, Mat. 5. 30. And to the same
purpose (Chap. 18) in the next words after he had said, Woe to the world because
of offenses; it must be that offenses will come., but woe to him by whom the
offense c^meth. Wherefore if thy hand offend, etc. ver. 7, 8. It must be done
as to an hand, a limb of our body, with great tenderness, Sympathy and sense of
smart and pain; but it must be done. Dilectionem audio, non Communicacationem;
Tertul.
I hear of Love, not Communion, says an Ancient upon this occasion.

6. We must take heed of Despondency, by reason of the sins of others, or of
being discouraged in the way of Godliness; much more of being diverted from it.
Indeed the greatest Temptation which this case gives hereunto, is (to this
purpose) very inconsiderable and contemptible, i. e. that by reason of the
(...), 2 Pet. 2. 2.
lascivious ways of some, (as that word signifies, and is fittest to be read;
referred to the Impurities of the Gnostics, as they came to be called) the way
of truth (i. e. Christianity it self) is evil spoken of. But this ought to be
heard (in respect of the scoffers themselves with great pity, but) in respect
of their design to put serious Christians out of their way, with disdain. And
with as little regard, or commotion of mind, as would be occasioned (so one
well expresses it) to a Traveller, intent upon his journey, by the mowes and
grimasses of Monkeys or Baboons.

Shall I be disquieted, grow weary, and forsake my way, because an unwary
person stumbles, and falls in it, and one ten times worse, and more a fool than
he, laughs at him for it? We must in such cases mourn indeed for both, but not
faint. And if we mourn, upon a true account, we shall easily apprehend it, in
its cause, very separable from fainting and despondency. It is a discouraging
thing for any party to be stigmatized, and have an ill mark put upon them, from
the defection of this or that person among them, that was, perhaps, what he
seemed not, or was little thought to be. But if we be more concerned for the
honor of the Christian name, than of any one party in the world, our mourning
will not be principally, upon so private an account. All wise and good men,
that understand the matter, will heartily concur with us, and count themselves
obliged to do so. None that are such, or any man that has the least pretense
to reason, justice, or common sense, will ever allow themselves to turn the
faults of this or that particular person (that are discountenanc't as soon as
they are known) to the reproach of a Party.

For others, that are aptest to do so, men of debauched minds, and manners;
With whom, not being of this, or that party, but Religion it self, is a
reproach. I would advise all serious, and sober-minded Christians of whatsoever
way, or persuasion) if they be twitted with the wickedness of any that seemed
to be such, and were not, to tell the revilers, They are more akin to you than
to us, and were more of your party (howsoever they disguised themselves) than
of any other we know of.

And if yet, after all this, any will give themselves the liberty to rejoice at
the sins of other men, and make them the matter of their sport and
divertisement, or take any the least pleasure in observing them, I have but
these two things, in the general, to say to them;

You have no reason to rejoice. You have great reason for the contrary.
You have first no reason to rejoice: For produce your cause, let us hear your
strong Reasons.

1. Is it that such are like you, and as bad men as your selves? But

1. What if they be not like you? Every one, perhaps, is not; at whose sins
(real or supposed) you, at a venture, take liberty to rejoice; What if your
guilt be real, theirs but imagined? Sometimes through your too much haste, it
may prove so; and then your Jest is spoiled, and you are found to laugh only at
your own shadow. At least, you cannot, many times, so certainly know another
guilt, as you may your own; and so run the hazard (which a wise man would not)
of making your selves the ridicule.

And supposing your guess, in any part, hit right; What if those others sin by
Surprise, you by Design? They in an act, you in a course? They in one kind of
lowdness, you in every kind? They sin and are penitent, you sin and are
obdurate? They return, you persevere? They are ashamed, you glory? These are
great differences, (if they are really to be found) in any such case. But

2. If they be not found, and those others be like you throughout, every whit
as bad as your selves, This is sure no great matter of glorying, That I am not
the very worst thing in all the world! the vilest creature that ever God made!
Should it be a solace to me also that there are Devils, who may perhaps be
somewhat worse than they or I?

Nor, though they fall in never so entirely with you in all points of wickedness,
will that much mend your matter? Can their wit added to yours, prove there will
be no Judgment-day? Or that there is no God? Or, if that performance fail, can
their power and yours, defend you against the Almighty? Though hand join in hand,
the wicked will not go unpunished. Or again,

2. Suppose you are not of the debauched Crew; Is this your reason why you at
least think you may indulge your self some inward pleasure, that wickedness
(you observe) breaks out among them who are of a distinct party from you, which
you count may signify somewhat to the better reputation of your own?

But are you then of a Party of which you are sure there are no ill men? There
are too many faults among all Parties; but God knows it is fitter for us all to
mend, than to recriminate.

Yea, but the Party we are of, professes not so much strictness. No? What Party
should you be of, that professes less strictness? What more lax rule of Morals
have you than other Christians? Do you not profess subjection to the known
rules of the Bible concerning Christian and civil conversation? You do not sure
profess Rebellion, and hostility against the Lord that bought you! Does not
your Baptismal Covenant (which you are supposed to avow) bind you to as much
strictness as any other Christian? And can there be any other more sacred bond?

But if in other things, than matters of civil conversation, such delinquent
persons were of a stricter profession (suppose it be in matters of Religion,
and Worship), does that delinquency prove, that in those other things, you are
in the right, and they are in the wrong? Does the wickedness of any person,
against the Rules of the common, as well as his own stricter profession, prove
the profession he is of, to be false? Then, wherein the profession of
Protestants, is stricter than of other Christians, the notorious sins of wicked
Protestants, will conclude against the whole profession. And the wickedness of
a Christian, because Christianity is a stricter profession than Paganism, will
prove the Christian Religion to be false. Who doubts, but there may be found,
of the Roman Communion, better men than some Protestants? And of Pagans, better
men than some Christians? But then, they are better, only in respect of some
things, wherein all Christians, or all men, do agree in their sentiments; not
in respect of the things wherein they differ. And the others are worse, in
things that have no connection with the matter of difference. Enough is to be
found to this purpose, in some of the Ancients, writing on the behalf of
Christians, which we need not, in so plain a case.

Nor can it be thought, that men of any understanding, and sobriety, will make
this any argument, one way, or other; Or think them at all justifiable, that
glory in other men's wickedness, upon this, or any other account.

For such therefore, as are of so ill a mind, and think, being of a different
party, gives them license, they ought to know, they make themselves of the same
party; and that upon a worse account, than any difference in the Rituals of
Religion can amount to.

Upon the whole, your Reason then (alledg what you will) is no Reason, and
argues nothing but shortness of discourse, and want of reason; or that you
would fain say something to excuse an ill practice, when you have nothing to
say. But I must add,

2. That you have much reason to the contrary, both upon the common account,
and your own.

1. Upon the common account. That the Christian world should, while it is so
barren of serious Christians, be so fertile, and productive of such Monsters!
made up of the sacred Christian profession, conjoined with (even worse than)
Paganish lives! And the more of sanctity any pretend to, the more deplorable is
the case, when the wickedness breaks forth, that was concealed before, under
the vizor of that pretense? Is this no matter of lamentation to you? Or will
you, here, again say, your unrelatedness to their party, makes you unconcerned?
If it do not justify your rejoicing, it will sure (you think) excuse your not
mourning. Will it so indeed? Who made you of a distinct party? Are you not a
Christian? Or are you not a Protestant? And what do you account that but
Reformed primitive Christianity? And so, the more it is reformed, the more
perfectly it is it self. Who put it into your power to make distinguishing
additions to the Christian Religion, by which to sever your selves from the
body of other Christians in the world, so as not to be concerned in the affairs
of the body? If this or that member say, I am not of the body, is it therefore
not of the body? Is it not the Christian Name that is dishonored by the
scandalous lives of them that bear that name? Whose Laws are they that are
broken? the Laws of this or that party? or are they not the laws of Christ?
Will you say you are unrelated to him too? or have no concern with Him? Can any
Party be united within it self, by so sacred ties, as all true Christians are
with the whole body of Christ? I know no way you have to be unconcerned in such
cases, as the matter of your humiltation (when they occur within your notice)
but by renouncing your Christianity.

Nor, indeed, would that serve the turn. For what ^ill you do with your
humanity? Are you not still a man, if you would be no longer a Christian? And
even that, methinks, should oblige us to bewail the depravedness, and
dishonor, of the nature and order of humane creatures! That they who were made
for the society of Angels, vea, and of the blessed God himself, should be found
delighting, and wallowing in worse impurities, than those of the Dog or Swine.

The more strictness in morals they have (falsely) pretended to, the greater is
your obligation, to lament their violating those sacred rules (which you also
profess to be subject to) and not the less. Do I need to tell you, that even
among Pagans, where a profession of greater strictness had once been entered
into, an apostasy to gross immoralities has been the matter of very solemn
lamentation. As in the School (or Church should I call it?) of Pythagoras,
where, when any that had obliged themselves to the observation of his virtuous
precepts, did afterward lapse into a vicious course, a Funeral, and solemn
mourning Jambl. de vit. Pyth.
was held for them, as if they were dead.

2. On your own. For when our Savior says, Woe to that man, by whom offense
comes, does he not also say, Woe to the world because of offenses? And who
would not fear, and lament his share in that Woe? Are you proof against all hurt
by another's sin? What if it encourage you to sin too? What if harden you in
it? How many do some men's sin dispose to Atheism? and to think there is nothing
in Religion? And if you felt in your selves an inclination to rejoice in them,
that, it self, argues the infection has caught upon you; seized your spirits,
and corrupted your vitals. So that you have cause to lament even your having
rejoiced. To be afficted, and mourn, and weep; to turn your laughter to
mourning, and your joy to heaviness, Jam. 4.

One would think them indeed but half men, and scarce any Christians, that can
allow themselves so inhumane, and unhallowed a pleasure, as rejoicing in
another's sin! It Is very unworthy of a man to take pleasure in seeing his
fellowman turning beast. There is little in it of the ingenuity that belongs to
humane nature, to delight in the harms of others; much less of the prudence, to
make sport of a common mischief. And would a Christian rejoice in the
disadvantages of his own cause? and in the dishonor and reproach of the very
name which he himself bears?

To conclude, One would think no more should be needful to repress in any this
ill inclination, than to consider, What sin is, wherein they rejoice. And what
Charity is, which is violated by their doing so.

What to rejoice in sin! that despites the Creator, and has wrought such
Tragedies in the Creation! that turned Angels out of Heaven! Man out of
paradise! that has made the blessed God so much a stranger to our world,
broken off the intercourse, in so great part, between Heaven and Earth;
obstructed the pleasant commerce, which had, otherwise, probably been between
Angels and Men! So vilely debas't the nature of man, and provoked the
displeasure of his Maker against him! that once overwhelmed the world in a
deluge of water, and will again ruin it by as destructive fire! To rejoice in
so hateful a thing, is to do that mad part, to cast about firebrands, arrows,
and death, and say, Am not I in sport?

And to do that which so highly offends against Charity! so divine a thing! the
offspring of God! the birth of Heaven, as it is here below, among us mortals;
the beauty, and glory of it, as it is there above, in its natural seat. The
eternal bond of living union, among the blessed spirits, that inhabit there,
and which would make our world, did it universally obtain in it, another Heaven.

Consider from whom, and from what Region that must proceed, which is so
contrary to God and Heaven.

If any will yet, in despite of divine love it self, laugh on, at so foul, and
frightful a thing as sin is, it is too likely to prove the Sardonian laughter*
i. e. (as some explain that Proverb) of them that dye laughing; Conclude their
lives, and their laughter both together; and only cease to laugh, and to live
in the same last breath.

FINIS

