A LETTER TO A Member of Parliament: SHOWING How probably the Credit of the
Nation may be speedily Raised; And not only the Public Debts made good without
present Money, but rendered serviceable to the Public, and a means to free
others as well as the Creditors from the Difficulties that the Deficiencies of
Funds, and Scarcity of Coin have occasioned.
THE way I proposed to encourage and hasten Subscriptions of Tallies, etc. To
enlarge the Bank of England, and make it serviceable to the Public in Trade
and otherwise, and more advantageous to the Proprietors, as I told you, was,

By the New Establishment of the Bank so enlarged, to let every one have Bank
Stock-bills for his whole Stock; entitling him, his Heirs, Executors and
Assigns thereunto, with the Dividends of the Principal, the Interest, and other
Profits that may become due and payable thereupon.

The said Bills to be assignable before two Witnesses, whereby they will be as
Useful in Trade as Bank-Notes, or as Money, according to the Value of Bank
Stock, which will be as easily known, as the Rates of Foreign Exchanges, by
which so much is Negotiated Weekly.

And on such Bills, with the Security of the Proprietor, may Money be taken up,
as upon Bills of Exchange, by Endorsments, for a Month, Two, or Three; and for
longer time, with more Privacy, and less Charge and Trouble, than upon a Real
Estate, upon any Occasion, or Prospect of Advantage: So that though they have a
growing Interest on them, they will be almost as so much Money always at
Command; the Conveniences whereof I need not further insist on.

And these Bills being so easily and safely negotiated, without Charge or
Attendance, either at Buying or Selling Bank-Stock, or exposing the Transaction
to the Notice or Censure of others, will be so commodious and agreeable to the
Humor of Trade, and Traders, that doubtless many will be induced thereby to
come into this Enlarging Bank, that otherwise would not; for that they can
immediately, or unobserved, sell out again, all, or what they please; or borrow
upon the Bills, or pay Debts with them.

And though, I cannot say, the so much fallen Stock, will by this Method,
become presently, of like value with so much Milled Money, yet doubt I not but
such Bank-Stock Bills will immediately be more worth than the Stock, Tallies,
and Notes, by which they were purchased, and that it will be daily rising till
they come to an equal value with Legal Coin: And mean while serving so many
ways, as suggested, I conceive it will be obvious to those that understand the
Methods of Trade, and prefer the Public before Private Interest, that the
liquidating the Bank-Stock by this proposed Method will be of great use and
service to the Kingdom at this Juncture.

But two sorts of Men will be against this, or any thing that tends to
extricate us out of the present Difficulties through the want of Credit, and
seeming want of Coin in the Kingdom; the notion whereof is improved to make it
so really to the Public, and many particular Persons: viz. by the Enemies of
the Government, and the Enemies of Mankind; those Canibals I mean, that by
their Extravagant Extortions devour men alive; of which kind never before were
such Instances in England, as I have lately heard from Persons of their own
knowledge. One of which was of 12 l. asked, and 8 l. insisted upon, for
discompt of a Foreign Bill, which afterward was done for 20 s. by another; nay
was offered for 14 s. the bare Interest; and tho I know others that lately have
refused to take more than Legal Interest for Milled Money, yet I am credibly
informed, that above five times the Interest is commonly given for Money on
like occasions; which Exorbitances, if not prevented by one way or other, such
Extortioners will prove worse Enemies to the King, and the Kingdom, than the
Jacobites are like to be: And therefore I hope the Richest and Greatest monied
Men will not be thought the fittest to consult of ways to increase the Stock of
Coin and Credit of the Kingdom; nothing being more certain, than that the
greater the Stock of Coin and Credit, the greater will be the Profit of the
Nation; and the less the Stock, the more, in proportion, will be the Profit to
the Persons, that have it.

The danger of forging these Bills, will by Numerical Distinctions, and a
Methodical Course of paying the Interest and Dividends, appear so much less
than the Bank is subject to by their present Notes and Bills, that it will not
be considerable, nor more than that of Tallies.

Nor will the Choice of Directors, or the Qualification of the Electors, be
Difficulties in this way of Establishment.

And each Bank-Stock-Bill will be subjected to the Charges and Losses that may
happen, all Debts being to be paid before the last of the Stock be paid off.

But I have yet a further Proposal, which I conceive will most effectually and
speedily accomplish this Conjuction and Coallescene of Funds, and Enlargement
of the Bank, and render the whole Stock more useful to the Public, and private
Persons. And humbly presume it will be consonant to Reason, Prudence, and
Justice, and to the Honor, and for the Interest of the Kingdom, and tend as an
Act of Righteousness virtually to exalt them, and actually do it, by raising
the Public Credit; and more effectually tending, to lessen (if not wholly to
extricate us out of) the mentioned Difficulties; and without which, I doubt it
will be very hard for the Government by Loans to supply the early occasions of
it, whilst such Extortions are practiced upon private Persons.

That the Honor and Credit of the Public is sunk with the value of the
Public Debts, cannot be denied; and that the Cause has been the Deficiency of
the Funds, on which, and the Honor and Justice of the Government (as their
Security), the Money was lent, or the Goods sold. That it is incumbent
therefore on the Government, in Reason and Justice so effectually to supply
those Deficiencies, that the Lenders may be no Losers, and the Debts be as good
to them, as if the designed Funds had been sufficient to have paid them in due
time. And that by so doing, the Public Credit would soon have recovered, so as
to have raised Money again on like occasions, is little to be doubted.

And since it is thought impracticable at this Juncture so suddenly to raise
what is requisite for those and other Occasions, I propose this way, which with
little Charge to the Government, more than designed upon the Enlargement of the
Bank, will I presume do Justice to those Creditors of the Public, and make all
their Debts presently as good as Legal Money, and (with the Plate-Bill, of so
much necessity at this time) soon rectify the Disorders for want of Coin and
Credit.

And is, By the Establishment of the enlarged Bank in the manner proposed, and
by making such Bank-Stock-Bills legal Payment in all Cases in England, except
Foreign Bills; or with a fourth, or a third in Money, as upon thorough
consideration shall be thought expedient.

Which though at first may be thought hard, and looked upon as a force upon
Mankind; yet, I believe, e're six Months come about, such Bills (supposing the
Funds indubitable) will be desired rather than Money.

And this will not only be of present Service to the Government: But the
dispersing and dividing these Bills, will unite the hearts of so many the more
to support it from time to time.

And though it be without President, yet if it be considered that the occasion,
and need thereof, is so too, and that these are already Public Debts, which
ought to be made good, and in the ordinary way cannot now be done, some
extraordinary way of doing it may be allowed as necessary.

And if it appear so to you, and that you think this a proper way, I hope you
will please to promote it for the Public Good, which is all that I aim at in
recommending it. And I am almost as much of the Opinion of the Necessity of
some such Course now, with respect to the Credit of the Nation, as I was at the
beginning of the last Sessions, of a Supply of Coin from the Wrought Plate,
when the Clipped Money was called in. Which if we had then had, our Difficulties
had not been as they have been, and are, and will, I fear, till that Bill pass.
What I have more to say, I shall refer till I see you, mean while I presume all
Objections to this may be answered: And am yours,

T. H.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultry. 1697.

ADVERTISEMENT.
AN Essay upon PROJECTS. Printed for Thomas Cockerill.


