SCOTLAND Pulling down the Gates of Rome: OR, CHRIST against ANTICHRIST.

THE Lambs Friends against the Dragons Followers.

CONTAINING First, Christ's Herald proclaiming his second coming, in Allarum to
most Kingdoms of Europe, from the late presaging Comet which appeared,
December, 1680. and January 1681. and now in August. 82.

With the Judgment of the Learned in the like preceding cases; as the Pious and
Literate Beza upon that Star 1572. and 73. Widekind and Synop. Bohem. yea,
Reverend Knox.

SECONDLY, The Popish Confessions and Catechisms, lately dispersed, and their
Damnable Principles examined, promoting a League with Popery, to the ruin of
Protestancy and Protestants, teaching implicitly to Kill, Murder, and destroy,
cut the Throats of Thousands.

LONDON: Printed for Joseph Roberts, at the Sign of the Bible in Fleet-lane.
1683.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas the Authors former Labor have found such favorable acceptances, but
much more singular success, by the signal presence of God in the Hearts, of the
Serious and Judicious: These are to give Notice, that (the Lord permitting)
they may also have the Expository in the same Method, with Digressions, all
suitable and seasonable for the time, upon the Thirty nine Chapters of Ezekiel.

To the Right Honorable ARTHUR, Lord Baron Mount Norris, Newport Panel, Earl
of Anglesey, etc.
My Very Noble Lord,
THough Truth exposes it self (with its naked Breast, and thereby make its
owners Victors) over Truculent Papists! -- Yet

May it please your Lordship, With Famous Constantine, to cast your Purple
Robe, in your Noble Patrociny over these Scriptural Apologies, in order to the
more happy preventing of a dreadful Sacrifice, first of Protestanism, next of
Protestants, by a bloody Papists and his Associates, a God-daring and Heaven
provoking generation, turning the whole fabric of the Word of God into a Nose
of Wax, and render the most serious pretenses of a specific Love-union, to
offer their damnable Problems in to the world, whom David describes, speak with
a heart and a heart. What is mine here, I must acknowlegde, my Lord, is not
worthy of such Illustrious Patronage, but the Truth it self begs your
Patrociny, which ever I have heard, and in part do know, does lodge in your
Noble Family, who always have been for Peace, Champions, for Religion,
Ornaments, for the Truth, Patriots. Whatever may be the various Sentiments of
men's minds amongst the very judicious, in reference to the Integrals and
Circumstantials of Godliness: yet as it is reported of that heroic Spirit of
Boleslaus, the most materials of his Ancestors, he caused to be kept in record,
and affixt them as obvious to his eye within his room. Yea, the remarkable
passages and Virtues of that Famous Emperor, Marcus Aurelius, are combined in
your Lordships Breast. Nothing I desire to know, but what Vice and Virtue is,
and that I may serve the Immortal God aright; since so much trouble in Life,
and pain in Death. I wonder how Rational men, can hound a Phenomenon to catch
a Fly; for my part, I have not only built a Throne to my Son, but a Temple to
my God. Thus he writes to his Son Commodus and Panutius his Secretary.

My Noble Lord, The transcendent Properties in your Lordships serenity of Mind,
dexterity of Judgment, does far surpass my Minerva, which that ancient
Philosopher Bius speaks of a Noble person, is here verified, comparing him to
a Torch shining upon a Mountain. The luster and radiations of the Sun beam
undervalueth the light of a Candle; yea, Aquila non captat muscus. Yet those of
a lower Orb, My Lord, through the help of such a Lanthorn may travail on their
journey, and pass through the Thieves of Jericho. Those bloody Jesuits
trampling upon Gods Heritage, penning their Panegerick Theams with the blood of
Gods Innocents; beating their paradoxical brains, in dipping their quils in the
Blood of Monarchs. Now that the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ may land your
Lordship with top and top gallant, a full assurance, and plerochie of Faith in
Emmanuel's Land, where the Anchor is laid upon the blood of Jesus within the
vail, shall be the Prayer of,

Your Lordships Ever obliged and Humble Servant in precious Christ, WILLIAM
HOVSCHONE.

To the Church Universal throughout the World, that comely Bride, entirely
beloved Spouse of Jesus Christ. From your Head and Husband, King of Kings, Lord
of Lords, Jesus Christ.
BAbylons Fire never burnt out; the Dragons flood never cooled true love to
Jesus; he has been courting and contracting those near seventeen hundred years,
read the Pose of his Ring, Baldazar to Beza so writes.
I love none but thee alone. O for Faith, and love to love again. We wear his
Contract Ribbons, the sweet Cross of Christ, fresh and green, you are
flourishing in all seasons, return to your Bridegroom fraighted with the
influences of Heaven, Aurel. to Panut.
what trouble in life, what pain in death, says a Moralist, painting out
Immortality as a transparent firmament, yet death to you noble Daughters is
sugared from top to bottom, with most pleasant and sweet Ingredients; so that
all Hells Engines can pierce no farther than my skin, says one (Marlorat.) Here
are not Cains, Stone-walls, over which death did scale, to wrap up the wicked
in a Cabinet and Covert of their own sins. Their Grave stinks, Hell, Death, and
Judgment, are engraven upon the Tomb; pounds of Judgment, ounces of Wrath, the
hot scalding of Eternal Vengeance dropping down their Throat, lumps of hell
shut and thrust into them, measured out from Gods own hand, but O noble Queen,
Psalm. 75. be not dismayed, your Husband has wrath in his hands, but love in his
heart. Lets sit in the Chair of Humility and dunghill of self-denial; Doves of
the valley mourning for their own sin. Your Marriage in the Clouds shall
shortly be solemnized, Regner Praeden of Groningaine.
says one, your Corn shall not shake, your Breard shall not wither; thy due
shall be as the due of herbs, Isai. 34.19. Your Husbands Harbinger proclaims a
harvest, a joyful harvest though sorrowful Seed-time. Take a right look of the
wheel of Providence, Ezekiel. 1.15. Zions whelfare he has on the wheels. A Pagan
by the eye of sense could read, Pharaoh Hophras downfall, why! as Gods peoples
Cup was then full of tears, so the enemies cup lackt nothing, the wheelings and
turnings of time, Sesostris and another King, drawing the King of Egypts
Chariot.
was a Looking glass to a Pagan, from the very motion of a Chariot; one part
mounts, to the sky, another presently in the dirt. The Mountains of iniquity
are great, yet Free Grace is greater; though we have broken our side of the
Contract, yet God has not broken his. The great Commissioner of Heaven and
earth, is going to hold his Parliament, 1 Pet. last Chapter. To be his
Livery-men, says one Melanchton; for since the Devil's Badge is a common
Apparel, hang out your flag of defiance; Devil do your worst? This is the
second Summons Christ is to hold, a Court of blood-weds against Antichrist; he
will plead with all the Lambs of the beast, Arise ye dead and come to judgment,
did sound dreadfully in Hieronimies ears before his death, what dreadful
Lethargy? what dead sleep has arrested the Senses? Kutherfords Trial of Faith.
Brown in Life of Faith.
seized upon the Soul of Men and Women; as if God had Commissionated the Devil
to prevail, either by a providential Commission, to the spirit of Error, or by
a Judicial hardening; the spring and poise of hearts, is broke into nine pieces:
No wonder men do not fear to hurt Conscience; which shortly upon themselves
shall hold a seize, and pass sentences. When ye have a eye to the Cross, look
to the Crown; feart Passengers known not whether they go, till within half an
hour, failing to Emmanuels Land, a hour of his presence counterballances a
thousand Crosses, says a Nobleman to the Papists, Marquis Galeasius de vito;
their Gold perish with themselves, who bring Gold in such competition: O narrow
necked Heart, that drinks by drops the Wine of Heaven, out of such an Ocean: O
for a thousand hearts to Christ: Keycold heart, match with the heart burning
love of Christ; pledge him with the cup of thanks, he has a magnetic virtue,
touches as an Adamant, and draws the heart with a blink of his face. No wonder
when men as a Gold-ring fell off the singer of God; so high in count was Man,
Angels could not, nor would not lend a hand to help Christ stopped, and set him
on the middle finger of God. This is everlasting love, comely Bride, thanks is
all the Rent he seeks for, all your enjoyments, and ye shall have a Leace of
his love! O follow the pursuit of Christ, though the Scent be cold, yet he is
to be found my Soul, says King David, follow after God; fading vanities does
now allure our senses, the prime of our youth is sacrificed to the Devil! and a
heap of Bones ne offer to God: in Youth we are altogether for pleasure, in
Manhood for Credit, in Age for Riches, where will the Heart center? will
another world like unto this please Alexander, yet shall it be but a empty
nothing, hell and earth in one belly shall not do, who have taken Mammon to be
their God, those who have breathed out their life, spent their strength in
catching of flies, hownding of vanities. God has snatched them away before they
got half a mouthful of their pleasure! will the height of Morality, unparalleld
Virtues, center Heroic Spirits: nay, Marcus Aurel. to Caecil Prince.
a Heathen shall resolve the doubt, Their Virtues shall be turned to Vices, who
are ignorant of the Gods. Nay further, and that elegantly, as if the Gospel
were peeping out of a Pagans bosom; those who to build a new Palace, pulls
down an old Temple, the whole fabric of that foundation shall ruin the
Master Builder. Here men work their own ruin with their own hands; when in
men's thoughts they have carved and cutted all most curiously, looking
undoubtedly to answer their expectation, Providence fetches them in by the
shoulder, to oil the wheel of Providence, and this they shall not know. Hamans
Cruelty, and Judas Covetuousness, shall answer Gods purpose, but never their
intentions. But herein is peace, making the Believer sing the Swans Song: the
Canopy of Gods presence, that bright cloud that hung over his Disciples, as a
screen shall be drawn over them. Yea, Christ upon the Mount treating them.
Bless him for the Scarlet, since ye look for the white Robes: what! though
Christ's Church waan, look for a waxing. Your Lord is shaking the Tree of life
above you, let Antichrist shake his Sword. Fear nothing but deadly sin, the
sins of the Saints are often so deep a die, makes their faces red with shame,
yet come and welcome with the Lamb of God in our arms. Though the Devils sparks
light upon me, yet shall they never burn me. Let me be ground with the teeth of
wild beasts, says one, so be it, I be pure bread for God; and after the
celebration of the Sacrament, I eat Christ yesterday, he is eating to me,
delightful in me. Influences of Heaven are not under Lock and Key; be open
hearted, for Christ is open handed. O Daughter, make your Charter rights sure,
get a Pass for Heaven. The hand writing of Christ upon the Soul. Cyprian Epist.
97. Ignatius.
To whom shall I resemble your Lord, a Tree in the Canory Island, Emblem of
your Tree of life; the Inhabitants receive no Rain, but from the branches and
leaves of the Tree, as the Rose-sol is, the more it drops the more it flows.
The spirit as the Mother grace, working with the habit, in the renewed faculty,
it brings not forth a Bastard but a full begotten Child of Grace, concuring
into every gracious act, though not to the substance of it, (...) yet to the
mode of it; though often the difference is not Patent, as the finger playing
upon the harp; the spirit bends all the strings of the Soul; the habit is the
art tuning the faculty, this is pleasant. Music to Christ, not by lending
their natural powers, those men wrapped up themselves in blankets of ignorance,
Thom. P. 9. 9. 3. c.
foolishly dreaming to spin righteousness out of their own bosom. O Believers,
interpose your credit at the Throne, that Christ, that blessed Bridegroom, may
be reconciled to his Bride again. O the prevalency of Prayer with God; the
Primitive Christians had the Heavens at their command, in the time of a great
drought seizing upon the Emperors Army: he proclaims a Fast, every man to his
God; they prayed so hard, Marcus Aurel.
that a shower ran down upon their own Camp, and Hailstones upon their
Enemies. Noble Queen, your Saints shall sing when the world shall mourn. Our
morning and afrernoon is gone, our evening cannot be long: our life is but a
day; the Saints says come, the Bride says come, Minister says come, the last of
Rev. the world says be gone, too good for the wicked, therefore made God, Hell
too bad for the righteous, therefore Christ took, comprizement upon Heaven. O
wicked men give your ear one quarter of an hour to the windows of Hell, to hear
the Bells of Hell ring, and Trumpets of Heaven sound: yea, the the Hellish
Spirits would exclaim, blessed is the ground the righteous goes on; when
Mountains will be clad with Bones, and Rivers run with Blood, the garment of
Christ shall be spread over the Believer, Ezekiel. 39.

Christ against Antichrist: Or, a Reply to the League-Makers betwixt
Protestancy and Popery, lately come abroad into the world, attempted of old by
Cassander, Bartholomeus, Nervus, Seravius, Modestus, renewed by Johnstons
Rejoinder, and now clad with threadbare Arguments. Theophil. says of Rome,
Behold here how cheap the Devil buys Souls. No Peace with Rome.
WE grant Maximilian and Ferdinand, set the forementioned at work, in order to
peace; that the one, viz. Papist, might remit his pride, the other his
peevishness; but the Chief Landlord of Souls and Consciences, teaches us to set
asunder Worships of diverse natures, as mingled seed, as not only dangerous, but
damnable; and however some have beaten their brains to hammer out peace, yet
could not, yea in Conscience, but make the breach more wider; such Labyrinths
having no end, such sinks of Error having no foundation. No pen can reach, nor
brain expiate throughout those Cells of wickedness, from which Arminianism,
Free-willers, Socinians, and what not, have had their birth. Yea, there have
been cridled; into which they return as into the vast Ocean. However our
League-makers are dipping their pens in the gall of bitterness, yet shall it
avail nothing, but verify that Distichion, and accomplish the pouring out of
the last Vial, upon all the Limbs of the Beast,

Aut men's vulcanum aut forceps indoila fefellit,
Eir ennen voluit, cudere cudit erin.
Proposition, A foundation of Religion is over-turned two ways, either flat
terms, or by consequence. Popery and Arminianism comes in the last way,
proclaims, believes all the Articles of Faith, yet denies the meaning of each
Article; razing not only the Integral, and accidentals, but the true meaning of
the word as the Basis. As 1. The various senses of the word, says our
Pamphleteer, does not unhinge material Articles, nor on them do we build any
Fundamental Truth; why then do the Papists, as the Scripture, could or would
empower them, bend their wit to draw the Popes Temporal Sword out of Peter's
Scabbard, and to fish for his Vicaredge with Peter's nets, taking the help of
the Limbeck of the Jesuits, making the right of Church and State lie under the
Popes girdle, unhinging the very Fundamental Article of Justification, scorning
to cloth themselves with a coat of Christ's Righteousness; yea, scarce
Aristotle's Morality, but kill, murder, and destroy such truculent practices are
mercenary duties, no Truce, no League, no Covenant, keep either to God or Man.
In reference to Protestants, witness their own Patriots, Vasquez Alvarez, but
read farther, Sphanhemins Contract of Chamier, Lombard Senten. If we shall view
the Monuments of Cruelty, the Heads, Hands, and Bloody Spirits, wherever they
get power, does call alowd.

Proposition, We allow thee will no strength to any Spiritual good, till
revived by preventing Grace, the Leaguemakers mitigates thus. The Papists and
Protestants both compare a Man, after the fall to a Prisoner; the Papist says
he is only bound, the Protestants say, he is not only bound but dead also; both
attribute the power of coming out to God; what danger in either Opinion.
Answer, If the Physician give me a Plaster, and leaves me to apply it to my
wound, if I will, I impute the cause of my deliverance to my self, and yet
there is much betwixt a dead man and a sick man; her errors are wrought like
Serpents eggs,; for if she taught not Concupiscence, the inmost garment of the
Soul; the first it puts on, the last it puts off, were no sin, she could not
affirm any man could perform the Law; and if she laid not with another hand,
the sandy foundation of Free Will she could not deceive us, they filthy rags of
thy unrighteousness. 3. She plunges her self again in the pit seeing a cure,
not following the star of the Scripture; the Papists say, Inherent
Righteousness, the Protestant Imputed Righteousness; the Papists mean Grace,
Charity, etc. at most Evangelical works, or duties, habitual Righteousness or
good works, actual Righteousness, not so formally but our deservings; the L. M.
reconciles thus: both grant its the Blood of Christ that delivers what are we
concerned whether another pay the debt, as the Protestant, or we our selves as
the Papists say? But the debt of Justice is not paid, till it come out of the
hand of Christ; the Cautioner the principal must not compare; yea, we differ
upon the matter, for its nothing but their bits of duties, at the most, which
they would soader with Christ's Righteousness, which avail nothing out of their
own place. I know they make a tergiversation, and tells us, Opera tinct a
sanguine Christi. What is this to half the Righteousness of Christ, as
Bradwardane says. Half to man, the other half to God, or flatly deny Imputed
Righteousness, as some black-mouthed fellows lately do even among Protestants,
scorning at acquaintance with God. 5. We come to the instrument applying the
wound. The Papists grant to Faith a share, but include works in the same
Category. The League-makers speak very plausibly, both agree its by the blood
of Christ we are saved; the odds is only in the branches whereby we hold: the
Protestants lays hold of a sure one, Faith in Christ, the Papist of both Faith
and Works; now this cuts the sinews of Faith, altogether looking upon it as a
meritorious work; or at the best, an Evangelical Duty, altogether mercenary,
but we have a eye to it, as a condition, or hand touching the Alms, not binding
God to our Merits; its nothing but free love, far surpassing the Fathers love
to a Child: Gods Free grace so abounding, that the Justice of God cannot be
known; so Salvian, a famous Presbiter in Messalania. Justificat fides sola sed
non solitaria.
Our Antagonist takes advantage most bitterly to determine most sad conclusions
generally upon all Protestants, by reason of their promiscuous conceptions of
the applicatory nature of Faith. If there be any offense taken, there is none
given; we call it our selves, say they, Instrumental cause, which always has
one Physical influx upon the effect, for to term it a passive instrument,
there is no such thing can have being in nature; and if you will grant the name
of a condition, formally so taken, making Faith and Repentance concomitaneous
and coaetaneous, those radical Graces being all sown at once, though some of
them peep above the ground before another. All Orthodox Writers agree, whom God
justifies, them he sanctifies; so runs the Golden Chain of Election, Romans 8.13.
So that Spiritual Sanctification, as the Antinomiah dream, only believer, live
loose if thou will, only be in Christ, sin if thou can, are the fiery balls
of Antichrist; what if we shall grant all demanded, this does not infer any
coefficiency in or with works. If in the least we shall put them in the
balance of the Sanctuary, and give them that fair but false name, works of
Supererrogation, what relation there may be betwixt our works and our
Salvation, (what influence they have thereunto be determined, shall after and
through grace be determined.) Some grant the same relation to illustrate it,
betwixt the mean and the end; the Scripture points forth, as ye sow ye shall
reap; because one of these Doctors does in express words so much confess,
(though maintaining Faith directly, and formally resolves it self in the
Church) That the works of a Regenerate man, upon which the main state of the
controversy depends, are of themselves worthy, and God will retalliate and pay
all such; but postpones such a common action of Eternal Life to the Divine
promise; and therefore, say they, God is not bound to recompense such, if we
look upon his Attributes distinct from his Covenant: yea, also abstract from
it, Puteanus Summa Theologiae. Quest. 115. Artic. 1. Drob. 5.

In vain therefore do the Papists raise dust, proclaiming to the world
notorious lies, which are there refuge, as if it were our Principle, not to
approve and encourage the works of the faithful; we grant and approve of a
blessed harmony, betwixt Faith and Works; yea Works and Eternal Life. Yet no
casual relation, but a relation of orders, such respect as Mean has to an End.
This in a sober sense, not in a captious; nay, as instance, I have fought a
good fight of Faith, henceforth is laid for me a Crown of life; the fight is
needful to obtain the victory, the victory, in order to obtain the Crown. Nor
can we say, the conflict of it self produces the Victory, the Crown according
to promise is freely given.

What madness would it be in any Rational man to impute the cause of a lights
entrance to a chamber, to reckon (I say) to the demission, letting down, or
pulling up of the broads, and yet the world knows, letting down of the broads
is, Conditio sine qua non. That the light of Life, the light of Grace, and last
the life of Glory may enter in; those broads of darkness, Atheism, Ignorance,
Formality, must all be pulled up: and this is the sound Doctrine amongst all
Orthodox Divines. Yea, Ludovicus le Blanc de Justitia.
amongst rational men and Christians, where the name Protestant has not been
used, without holiness we shall never see Gods face in mercy.

Concessions we grant farther, though God does highly approve of the works of
the Regenerate, yet we are not to understand them, as if God of themselves did
so empower them properly to effectuate Eternal Salvation; yet herein can we,
nor shall we not, robe those noble actions in the sight of God, of their just
value, and proper operation, proportionable to their sphere, being as means
natively tending to their end, which is Eternal life and Salvation,
consequently following upon Gods appointment, and his gracious promise. So very
solidly do the Doctors of the Reformed Churches speak the truth in calm terms,
denying denominatively good works to be the proper cause, in a strict sense, of
our Salvation; why, because they of themselves do not immediately reach the
effect, Gods gracious promise mediating betwixt; yet in a more larger, though
improper sense, with all our Soul and heart do frame this concession if it
would make a reformed Catholic; honor them with the name of causes efficient
of our Salvation; but thus, nay as an efficient cause, in general is described,
by all the Philosophers; and so morally has a name thus, that in general to be
an efficient cause, whatsoever, in what ever way, has an operation and
concourse into one effect. Davenant 39. all we deny, and from that the word of
God, a meritorious efficiency, or properly so taken, against us is excepted;
what can be more clear from the Word of God, that Eternal life is the reward of
good works. But Reader know, to such a reward for which we now dispute, there
must be those two ingredients absolutely. 1. That there be a proportion of
equality betwixt the labor and the reward, and that by the exact law of Equity
it be so distributed, so all our works shall be thrown over the bench-bar of
Heaven.

And further, we add this one concession, if it can avail, though there may
not be a proportion of Equality, or poize or valor, yet as one terms it, a
proportion of convenience, such as is betwixt the seed and the fruit, the sower
and the reaper, etc. Amongst things of the same order, flowing from the same
principle, having some connection among themselves; Grace is glory begun, Heaven
upon earth. A famous man explains it further thus, that word (according) holds
out all and every relation amongst two things, betwixt the good works of just
men and eternal life; good works being a certain moral good, life eternal, a
physical good, and so both agree, though they be not of the same kind; and so
worth and dignity admits of a twofold sense, one consisting in a relation of
justice, as the workman is worthy of his wages; another consisting in a certain
convenience of nature, facite fructus penitentos dignos.

Proposition, It Is not only our, but the worlds wonder, what has infatuated
the great persons of the earth with this man of this sin, whose life and
fortune he still projects, considering what singular advantages does accrue to
their own interest, in trampling upon the man of sin; how does he clip the
feathers of honor, yea dethrones the greatest of Princes, Platina, Sabellicus,
Krantz, l. 5. cap. 7.
the Senate of Cardinals did not scruple to invest themselves with the power to
choose and refuse Emperors at their pleasure, as plainly appears by Hildebrand
Electing of Ralfe, displacing of Henry, under which that horrible Idolatry of
worshipping and carrying about of Bread came into the Church, kneeling to the
Bread god. Henry stoutly, as became a Magistrate, resisted, and ramcountred
them with the point of the Sword of Justice. Though for a long time he
submitted too much, but perceiving how the pulse of the Senate, like to the
Treachery of that Prelate Thurstan, betraying Gospel, King, and Country, to
the Popes hands, he must needs now declaim himself an open enemy to all such
pestiferous persons, for which there is nothing but fire and faggot, grievous
Wars against him, Excommunicating, Deposing, displacing, choosed a new
Emperor, to whom he sent a Crown of Gold, with this Motto,

Petra dedit Petrus, Diadema Rodulpho. What Tumults, Combustions, Devastations
of Churches and States, have they been actors of? what dreadful villainy, under
the color of honesty, have they learned of the Devil, as one reports; how
Satan prescribed some rules to the Papists for the better defense, when
questioned upon the meaning of (...), Anselme. Hermolaus. Barbarin.

Proposition, Our Pamphleteer leads us now to salute this Brother a miscreant
creature, an Arminian Heresy, to over-turn Gods Eternal Blessedness, Will,
Wisdom, Providence, and consequently his whole Essence; it shall not suffice
them to write their Panegyric Theams in beating of their paradoxical brains,
dipping their quills in the blood of Gods Innocents, as their old Mother Babel
attempted to pull God out of Heaven: we must render all the habits of Grace,
and the Spirit of God superfluous; Advance the Throne of Free Will, into the
Throne of Free grace; cut the Throat of Souls and Life. If God was avenged for
the blood of Jezabel, much more for the blood of Abel; and this is all their
color of honesty, and picture of lawfulness; they are, say they, only useful
dispositively, and by no co-efficience, the efficient being helped by the
habit, in taking away the impediment; yea increasing the virtue of the agent,
though not as a natural quality, yet does the habit influence into the very act
which the natural power do choose; but best of all, with good ground we deny
all active concurrence in natural abilities to the generating grace in the
heart, at the first infusion of grace into the Soul, Durand. and this Pamph.
only a passive capacity, for in this neither the holy Ghost, works like a
natural Agent, nor man as a moral Agent, in the production of material forms,
brought out of the power of the matter, resulting from the inherent qualities
of the Subject diversely compounded, and ripened by one external Agent, as those
Agents working in the generation of second qualities, arising out of the
different mixture of the first, both which, the qualities, the qualities of the
subject, concurs with the outward Agent, in producing the effect. But this is
all the infusion of the Soul into the body, into whose conception and creation
it confers nothing; so that the whole pack of Moral Virtues, so Christionized,
cannot kindle a spark of this heavenly fire; though they would make us believe,
that a saving interest were nothing, but a dogmatical assent of the will: for
say they, we place Faith in two distinct faculties, to flow from two diverse
principles; but these are not distinct faculties who have dictinct actions: the
Understanding essentially including the Will: And if the Memory be not a
distinct faculty, because the mind suffices, no more are the Will and
Understanding. Their object being on the truth and goodness of the same thing:
Christ and his Bible being as essentially good as true! in order to the
practical use of those former debates spirits, being hot and toiled, traveling
throughout floods of error. Let Us solace our Souls in the contemplation, yea
application of those fundamental Truths, called in question by Spirits, who
know not whither to rest; posting throughout Hell and Earth; and this we shall
do, in denying of some inferences, and then consider the Controversy,
absolutely and resolutely, before ever a Papist had a being.

Inference first, what sad distemper attend, yea, possess, the spirits of those
men, fluctuating betwixt wind and wave, airt about as the weather cock goes;
travail hell over to purchase a Proselite, and make him seven times a child of
the Devil, than one of themselves. How does Satan suit the tentation to their
necessity; yea, every way qualified to their inclination, what ever may be his
search, scrutiny, yea knowledge experimental and revealed. Yea, further
(revealed) from God, as a Judge to some; yet still does God challenge the first
room in the Soul, he having that only Prerogative to know the Heart by external
Symptoms. The Devil strangely reads the mind of Man, and knows best whether,
when, and how to sow his seed: one a stranger to the work of Mortification,
another grapling after this ship wrack of the world, looses the life in
purchasing the means of life; another of one unestablished spirit, when natural
parts and gifts possibly swell, yet empty of the grace of God, the Devil sits
down upon the man's lips, orders his pen, frames his tongue, and almost weapons
against the God of Heaven, yea otherwise sink him upon the sand-bed of
presumption, or chatter him upon the rock of despair. Luther one day spreading
his case before God, in recapitulating his Trespasses, Satan threw into his
Chamber a paper, containing dreadful aggravations, to which he shortly replied,
I will honor thee for the fire, who came from him, who would adjudge me into
eternal torments by dreadful forgeries. If God shall sugar our cup amongst many
bitter Ingredients, the enemy shall be sure to drop some poison.

Inference, O let principle and practice go hand in hand, the pride of some,
the peevishness of others, cannot let some recover, when engaged in a sad
practice; I am sure their master did never show such pattern; Christianily does
Augustine say, Errare possim, haereticus esse nolo.

Inference the third, To tamper in the matters of God, how dangerous is it? but
to dispute the Fundamentals of Godliness, how near damnable is it? either of
two he must speak, the Language of Ashdod, or the Language of Canaan. There is
not a third half way to Rome, shall not serve our turn, though hundreds huddle
themselves under the notion of Protestants, yet by practice declare themselves
Protestant-Atheists, or Protestant-Papists, putting to their hands to give Gods
Ark a wrong touch, Temple ruins, calls for Temple vengeance. Yea also acute
wits, intoxicating their brains into crabbed and ticklesome subjects, have
their spirits hell hot, drive on most furiously, which did sadly puzzle a
profound pate, in too much daubing, which otherwise might have produced to the
world a notable wit, as Vorstius. But we come closely home, have not we
sufficient warrant to take our Fathers Silver Trumpets and sound to Europe, no
peace with Rome, where to the satisfaction of all rational men, without the
least breach of Charity, I shall illustrate and confirm that Position in
serious sadness, a Papist qua Papist, so living, so dying, cannot be saved; and
this is satisfactory from Reason and Religion, if the Lord permit the basest of
them, if a zealous Papist entering the Chair of God, by a miscreant Priest, to
deifie a man, in robbing God of his Prerogative, in pardoning or punishing,

Quod non regina perunca donat. We are somewhat sensible, that multiplicity of
Arguments, pungently applying exhortations, cannot prevail with a deluded Soul,
the one perhaps may have weight with a profane person; we therefore address
our selves to Gods Tribunal, for the farther confirmation of all who love the
truth. In the name of the Son of God, we arrest Souls under the wrath of an
Eternal God, who from self-respect, self-honour, or worldly profit, shall bring
the truth of Christ in composition (with a penny) of the world, the basest of
all his slaves; to which perhaps the limbs of the least may probably entice; be
it known, the hinge of the Controversy depends now upon Salvation and
Damnation, from which men scarcely shall retreat when engaged with this Romish
Fouler, and bloody Edom. Cruel as Esau, his Apparel dyed with the blood of
Saints: Alas! too much proof for it, so long as men hope to be gainers by
Christ, so long they will follow joyfully, as if the truths of God were not
momentous, they turn Religion into a drudge. Christ could not be rid of sensual
Belly-gods, so long as he fed them with loaves, Joh 6.25. profit and preferment
will make a man hear diligently, profess openly, preach painfully, till
preferments choke both Preachers and Professors; what does this speak they are
all, but sublunary Soul? villifying a celestial interest, all men seek their
own, Vix queritque Jesus propter Jesum, and as the Proverb, do not diligere
Christum in Augustino, its only Christ for Augustines sake, love to the
Benefice, Preachers and Professors labor, but the spring of life says, I love
Augustine because of Christ's Image, which love scruples not upon difficulties
in prosperity and adversity. Though most professors now, would have two Summers
in one year, Heaven here, and Heaven hereafter; Yet Christ who had a right to
Heaven, by both Blood and Birth, could not have it without Blood and Blows, its
not got without stroke of Sword, says one speaking of affliction; yet in all
this the way of Free Grace is nothing ragged, Christ himself straws to glory,
as with pleasant flowers, it is but a bed of Roses to the Believer. Inference
the fifth, and that for direction as a general rule, all the Scripture is not
delivered in Aphorisms, or Canons, which occasion stumbling of many ignorant
Souls, when Satan, with some shadow of the word of God, drives home a
tentation, takes hold of them presently, as instance that of Extreme Unction,
Penance, Purgatory, all the Fopperies of Rome for our safeguard here, take
this one argument for all; why would we not sacrifice our firstborn with
Abraham, but no farther, this being sufficient. Now in one word, to exhaust all
the reason of a Souls declining from the way of God, deficiency in holiness,
truth and holiness being inseparable, and reciprocally, which produces so many
Sects; the want of this, persons without the habit of Faith, are Christless
persons, duties without the exercise of Faith, are duties out of Christ; what
wonder then Souls can never steam Heaven wards, but blind reason, deluded
fancy, enthusiastical injection is their Pilot.

Reader, travail one hour to the Sanctuary, and to the balance thereof. 1. Thy
Principle, whether from Heaven or from Earth. 2. Thy Practice. 3. Thy
Profession. 4. Thy Graces, Faith and Patience of the Saints. 5. Thy Conversion
in the work of Conviction and Compunction. 6. Thy decay in Grace, My soul
melts away with heaviness, Psalm. 119. 7. Thy experiences and manifestations
of Divine Love, time, year, day, month, upon the Sabbath-morning,
to record every week all the passages of Gods Providence, but much more the
enjoyments of his own person, all which God will try, Amos 9.9. Behold I will
command, and I will sift the house of Israel, like as corn is sifted in a
seive, yet shall not a grain fall to the ground.

Inference, read that of 1 John 5.1. Beloved try the spirit, whether they be of
God or no, put Preacher and Preaching to proof, a Crape profession will not do;
their Leaders caused them to err, and those that were lead of them are fallen
into destruction; when Satan glides into Pulpits, and sow his fair colored
seed of Free Will, universal redemption, universal grace, objective and
subjective; he sets the Soul upon the very threshold of Heaven, but never
further; how with specious pretenses, promising peace, and nothing but war,
safety and nothing but ship-wrackt; Salvation, and nothing but Damnation, which
that very Learned man, being the Chariot-driver of this League now intended,
could never effectuate; read his own words.

George Cassander his Legacy, being himself ordered by the Emperor to compose
the Quarrels of the Church. Consultation, p. 57.

YEt I cannot deny, but in the beginning that many out of a godly zeal and
care, were driven into a sharp and severe reproof, of certain manifest abuses,
and the principal cause of this calamity of the Church, is to be laid upon
these, who being puffed up with a vain insolent conceit of their Ecclesiastical
power, proudly and scornfully rejected them, who modestly admonish them for
their Reformation. Wherefore my opinion is, That the Church can never hope for
any firm peace, unless the beginning, which have been the cause of the
distraction; that is, unless those which are in place of Ecclesiastical
Government, to remit something of these too much rigor, and yield somewhat to
the peace of the Church; but above all, to hearken to the Prayers and
Admonitions of godly men, and to correct manifest abuses, according to the rule
of Divine Scriptures, yea of the Ancient Church, from which our Cardinals,
Prelates in Doctrine and Discipline, have swerved. This we present to your
Majesty, begging without partiality, that ye would sift the Clergymen, those
Asses who ride with Golden Bridles, when Princes walk on foot; from which we
infer, what peace, when they have razed the Fundamentals, can we expect: for
says another, Bishops, to the end that they might get Proselites, the Pagans
permitted them to intermingle many of their Superstitions with Christianity,
Clowis 1 Christian King sent a Crown of Gold to B. Hormisda, 513.
content that they should change the name of those false Deities, into the
blessed Martyrs; its ever proper to Error to retain what has affinity with it
self; and forasmuch as that pagan people had extreme veneration for their
Prelates, the same way did it tickle Apostatizing Ministers. Nay, we may take a
further reflection, look Tertullian in his Chapt. 7. for Christians, Tell me
where is your Religion, where is that reverence due by you to your Fathers,
into whom ye are become exceeding unlike; in your Habit, in your course of
life, in your Manners, in your Opinions, and finally in your Language. Ye still
applaud Antiquity, and yet engross Novelty, as much as ye can deviate from the
laudable institutions of our Ancestors, ye retain that which is of no value,
stopping the Channels of life, and streams of Salvation; stopping the Ministers
of Christ, in discharge of their Message; the Devil has sitten down upon that
man's lips, who would shut his Brothers. But let us view that pious and
judicious practice of the Bishop of Lincoln, Robert Groasthead, containing the
Reasons of his Non conformity to Pope Innocent; maintaining, That hindering of
Preaching is the sin next Devilism, Paganism, Antichristianism, Mat. Par. Ann.
12.53. p. 871.

Let Us yet take a look of the rise, progress, and success of those Ceremonies,
scattered amongst Reformed Churches, Ann. 2007. was very fruitful; for besides
they retained many things that proceeded from the Jews; the Pagans also
incorporating themselves into the Christian Church, intermingled various Pagan
Rites, having infinite number of Superstitions in their very ordinary converse.
Christians were promiscously conversant with them, not only in the same City,
but in the same House, at the same Table, notwithstanding they resolve to be
acknowledged for Christians; and for the evidence of their Faith, they
introduced the sign of the Cross; and forasmuch as it was judged ignominious,
Origin. Hom 3. in Psalm. 39. Cypr. 1. de Haeret. Baptiz.
they formed that badge in their Foreheads, going into, or coming out of their
Baths, lying down in their beds, and rising from their Tables, they thus marked
themselves; yea Satan gains ground even upon account of Martyr dome very
honorable, and those who were prisoners for the truth, by a frequent
intercourse of Letters, did maintain a correspondencie with the Church;
erroneous persons to purchase more credit to their Errors, and Delinquents to
cloak their knavery, solicited the Martyrs approbation, they having influence
by Letters, interceded with the Church, that they would admit such penitents
into their Communion; but sadly did they abuse the facile nature of the
Martyrs, by over-importunate solicitation, or misinformation, etc. Now this is
only the intercession of the Saints, and how much it differs from that which
was afterward introduced, ye may judge; the man of sin mounting the saddle,
every one making a Ladder to Heaven.

Summary Propositions concerning the Star.
NO simply National or Personal interest can answer the great design of God;
nor does our thoughtfulness for to morrow, solace our spirits, but aggredge our
grief, yet man to be as a beast, pudling in the ditch of sensuality, minding
only things present, clearly speaks out the irrationalty and sensuality of such
a Soul; in vain therefore do some confine the end (whether ultimate or mediate)
of such a Comet, to the death of a great person, as if God concerned himself
with one Nation, or persons in particular, yet do we grant a Nation or people
once by Contract Engagements, to be the Lords, (as Israel of old and other
Nations since) may comparatively be said to be more dear and near to God than
others, over which he takes more narrow inspection, Wizald. l. 2. Comety Aph.
300.
and punishes oftener than any Nation; as Israel of old, and other Nations
since, by Famine, Sword, and Pestilence 2. If God include any such luminary in
its circuit and compass, to one Island or City, and in that interim of time, it
does not show it self to other Nations, it palpably, denotes Gods particular
inspection into that Island for a future stroke; for proof whereof, we have the
City of Jerusalem and Bohemia, over which Stars perpendicularly appeared, in
the forms of flying Dragons, with their blue and red streams, to the one end of
the Land to the other, to the affrightment of the Inhabitants; so that the Moon
appeared with Stars somewhat remote from her the noon time of the day. 3.
Though all the ruins and rises of Kingdoms and Commonwealths of Europe,
cannot be deduced from the Position, or Mutation of Stars, yet from the
concessions, conclusions, and exact computation of Chronologers, such
Apparitions never past, but in the sequel, without some sad Judgment; preaching
to the world, as the Prophets of old, the burden of the word of the Lord; it
shall not then be justifiable to reject all the sad presages, Pom. Magdeb.
Synops. Bohem.
which from thence may be probably inferred, and of singular consequence, but
much more from such Blazing Comets; though with good ground we may comfort our
selves in the downfall of the man of sin, whose rise, reign, rage, seven seals,
seven trumpets, six vials, has brought to a end; though we grant such a short
tract of time, Tacitus Annal. Armsaeus Doct. Pot. p. 471.
the healing of the wound of the beast may be attempted, yet never cured, the
back of the beast being wounded incurable; for the farther confirmation of
which time, and possible very short, shall illustrate the Assassinations,
Machinations, etc. of that Antichristian party to be nothing but wind,
traveling to bring forth chaff; and this consequentially not from any
Impulsive cause in the generation, but singularly the glory of his own name.
Nor may we think it strange, such Comets 900 years ago did foretell there
rife, now their ruin; the thread of the Prophecy of the Revelation, painting
before us the rise, weig^, mu^^ (...) of Babel, (though and that to be ^^^e)
all Reformed Churches shall say, the joy of the delivery is so balance (...)
with Crosses and bitter things, as some would rather loose the joy of the one,
than to enjoy for a time, the joy of the other. 3. It is granted by most
Writers, if not by all that such Comets, when so illustriously appearing to the
world, never pass unverified in a sad Judgment; though God preach some years,
yet in series he punishes: for monuments of wrath of God, in the case, read
Cameracius, l. 3. Julius Obsequies, l. de Prodig. yet so as the Holy Land of
God is not limited, either to the kind or the measure of the Judgment, as some
would expound it to portend a plague; as if God had bound up his hands to use
no other, yea a raging Sword, as well as a smiting plague, as the event of this
has evidently been seen, which some judiciously note, seldom pass without all
those three, Famine, Sword, and Pestilence.

Proposition, (Whatever has been, or may be the long suffering patience of
God, to most places of the world to which this was visible, in America, as well
as Asia, as appears from the Sermon of that pregnant man of God, Mr. Increase
Manner, Minister of Boston) yet shall we not hood-wink our selves, and pull too
our casement when God looks through the firmament, as his window, making the
causes and appurtenances of this signal messenger of Christ, like to other
Meteors; and so likewise interpret it by low ends; as to portend a Drought, and
other frivolous and childish expressions, as if we could wheedle God out of his
Throne; be not deceived, for God will not be mocked. Though without boasting,
by our profession we are bound to show so much of Literature, as to vindicate
the same from all aspersions; yea, any silly Brain may do it, who ever dwelt a
Month at Mathesis. We shall not offer all might be afforded, least by some we
should be mis-construed Enthusiastic, which we abhor, or in plain speaking of
the truth offend; though herein God has remarkably honored Britain; as
instance, profound Rutherford, with the Spirit of Prophecy; yea, of late,
godly Mr. John Walwood; mistake us, we speak not of our self, assuming any such
thing. We shall offer therefore to your view, that famous observation of a
eminent man, That there has been more blood shed Wars seen in Christendom,
than the whole world besides; and that most of its Kingdoms, if not all, shall
be involved in blood at once, by its bloody face, and dreadful frowns to all
those Kingdoms at once. And of Reverend William Perkins, The Gospel travails
every hundred years. As also of that Famous, Faithful, and eminently pious Mr.
Knox, writing to his Son-in-law, and especially found written upon the Margin
of Callopins Harmony, Christ shall be crucified, but glorious shall his
Resurrection be, Mark 16.5. And after speaking of Europe, O doleful time, happy
were the man that could get a Cottage in peace, Isai. 34.7. The Land shall be
soakt with Blood; yea, his Son-in-law, directing his Letter to Lady Lillias
Graham, 1605.17. Jan. The rich man shall not be saved by his riches, the wise
man by his wisdom, the strong man by his strength; the furbishing Sword being
drawn, glittereth, it shall not return till it be drunk with the blood of men,
Jer. 46.9. The Sword shall be made drunk with blood. We add only that of Beza,
yet upon record this is the Star, which to the City small of David King; the
three wise men from out the east did bring, returning now, declares that Christ
returns in might, what hap to each it does portend, the God of Gods does know.
The sequel of which was marked, with intestine and Foreign Sword; though this
has a main eye to the second coming of Christ, Scriptures near fulfilled,
mockers of the Gospel stigmatized. Yea in the Primitive times, the earth
swallowed them up quick, as the Hierapolians for mocking of God: though herein
none can be punctual and positive in sobriety, without reflection upon our
Learned, Judicious, and Pious Fathers, Melancton, Regner Preden. Shelto making
the world to stand six thousand years, the last two thousand were to be
shortened for the Elects sake. Certain it is, things hasten to a close, Grace
and Literature, not so as when God raised up Valla, and Erasmus, etc. a decay
in Godliness, prodigal, liberal, rich men deemed best men; covetous good
Husbands, truth persecuted, error in credit, the world upside down, the whole
fabric out of order, great heats, great colds, great drought, great rains, the
fruitfulness of the field decayed, the world tottering upon its foundation; the
earth groans to be dissolved of such a heavy load, a burden of sin; the very
beast shows its resentment of a sinful generation, the sky is defiled, all is
polluted, love to God, and mutually to one another is gone. Cornelius a Lapide
brings in the very beast, as coveting to be engrafted or united to this or that
godly man. O to do him service, for now I fight against God, turn and lament ye
wicked men, the gates of hell are of brass, their bars of iron, they will never
break; lazy daughters, awake to zeal, for as the bells which hung in Aarons
garment, could not want Pomegranats, so God loves not sound without fruit. The
wrath of God is but kindling to make our bed in sorrow, how are we at league
with the Devil, and at war with God; no peace with God, and no peace with man;
its true, it was said of Spain, at peace with all the world, but at war with
their God; how in the reason can men look to live with God, and yet cannot live
a day with his Saints! O that God would put a Lump of Hell, and a Lump of
Heaven in them! the shadow of sin in Heaven would afright the very Angels.

Reader, I charge thee in the name of the Eternal God, extenuate not thy sin!
however some escape smaller strokes, yet in order to a farther Judgment,
looking back over our shoulder, not bowing the knee in the eye of sense! so
consulting argues a peevish humor to a roving Soul; and yet all Mankind shall
forfeit their right of glory for the first, and Lots wife remains a rocky
Mineral of Eternal vengeance for the second; and Daniel a Crown of life, shall
have for the third; the reviving presence of God is lost either ways, what do
we speak a Romance; yet truth to others when black-mouthed P. and Sh. can be
waged by Hell, O Sin thy death, O sin I Will be for killing the most hight,
Corruption, thy life I Will take, for thou have wounded me.
to rail against Gods Anointed, and declaim all personal acquaintance with
God, as folly and fancy; with such Delinquents we shall debate the matter
before Gods Tribunal; the Bible is not their rule, the Spirit of God their
Counselor. Luther can tell us, he can dwell in hell, and Christ were there;
his gracious presence counterballances all afflictions. Rationists can tell us,
the marrow of Philosophy consisted in solacing of the Mind; much more the
substance of Divinity. The Pagan Indian replied well to the Spanish Priest,
when threatening him to Popery, with fire and faggot, What shall I have if I do
so, whether shall we go after? they answer to Heaven, Life, and Salvation, I
would rather, said he, live in Hell, as dwell in Heaven with such company. The
bells of Hell ring the Trumpets of Heaven sound, half a hour in Hell, and a
hour in Heaven; the terror of the one, the joy of the other, a Proclamation at
the gates of Hell, come out and repent, should resolve our doubts; though some
go to the Devil with a light candle in their hand; yea creeping under a bush of
profession as they go; who can abide Eternal Torments, tearing and rending of
the caul of the heart; like to a fierce bird, tearing, dabbing, rending of a
Liver, yet no end of the same, so Lavater compares it. Reader, do the favor to
thy own Souls interest, unite thy thoughts, compose thy affections, retire one
hour, and to thee O Christian I appeal; the reality of the presence of God, the
ebbing and flowing of the Spirit of God. Naturalists, who never knew Christ,
can prove this Sea-stork, and pursuing ordinarily another fish, whose sins are
as wings to mount above the water, to preserve its life, does take so much
water, as to make it flee more nimble, and when once dried again, presently
falls down. When once a Christian is fastened with the Spirit of God, it soars
aloft, as the seed of the earth is brought into fruitfulness by continual
showers, the seed of grace in the heart is renewed by the acts of the Spirit
shed upon us; 1. by Molification; 2. Refrigeration; 3. Abolition, I will
sprinkle thee with water.

FINIS.

