THE Women's Conquest: A TRAGI-COMEDY. As it was Acted by his Highness the Duke
of York's Servants.

Written by the Honorable E. H.

Me lectori credere mallem,
Quam spectatoris fastidia far superbi.
LONDON, Printed by J. M. for H. Herringman, at the Sign of the Blue Anchor in
the Lower Walk of the New Exchange, 1671.

PREFACE.
THE best excuse that can be given for a Preface before a Play, is when the
Reader is not troubled with an Apology for the Authors faults, it being too
much to abuse his patience with both; since if just, they will soon be
perceived by an impartial apprehension, and more, that he bestows on the world
a needless Sophism; there being nothing more hard, then to cozen men by an
excuse of Wit, for which the generality of judgments have so little kindness,
as they will hardly receive any; nor do I find that the Ancient Poets, or any
of most repute of our Modern, assumed this kind of vindication to themselves;
though perhaps they might have done it, with more assurance of success, then
any that now most confidently undertake it; either as they contemned the
impotent censures and cavils, that were spread against their performances, or
else a judicious confirmation in themselves, that their works were the best
defiances that could be given their Enemies.

Not that I judge our unimitable Johnson, or those wonders of Wit, Beaumont and
Fletcher, were without their failings, or that in some things, their Plays were
not questionable, as well as ours; though I could wish our Muses were so
happily adorned, as their spots and beauties appear together: and I doubt it
may be truly affirmed, that in the greatest of their failings, they fell more
below themselves, then beneath us; which gives us some caution not to be too
busy with their faults.

It is one thing to be excellent, and another to be absolutely perfect; the
Diamond does require some polishing, though of most commendable figure and
brightness: The like may be said of these excellent Poets, their thoughts were
always precious, though not alike polished and set off by themselves.

Wit is one of the best Talents of nature, but like her other productions in
Men, must not expect an absolute perfection; it has been long a growing from
the Ancients to the Modern, and from them to us, and yet we do not find its
growth completed; like ambition, it seems to have no limit, and yet confined
in its aspiring: there are some, perhaps, vain enough to judge it high in
themselves, though far enough from the top of Parnassus; and notwithstanding
all the have, such endeavor to make, I doubt whether the swiftness of their
Muse may not fail them by the way.

Most men are naturally inclined to give to Antiquity its due respects, and
there is some reason for it (if no more) in that we must be old our selves; but
he were weakly an admirer of times past, that by an over dotage on them, would
continue himself in a Childhood of knowledge; since that were to go backward
with ingenuity, as we set too forward theirs, they have their fame, and we must
expect ours; though at present they challenge so long a prescription, that
until ours does number more then the three parts of an age, in equal repute
with theirs. I make some doubt whether the best Rhyme, or Reason, that the
Stage is now beholding to, will establish us as great in the judgment of those
who shall succeed us; which, as I am far from assuming it to my self, in behalf
of any undertaking of mine, so I shall as unwillingly allow it to the boldest
of Pretenders; besides this, we are obliged in so great a measure to those
great Artificers of Invention, and Wit, by which they raised our Stage to its
former glory, as also in a high degree for those excellent rules and
observations, which (if well heeded) cannot but improve our endeavors in this
kind, and from whom (if we do well) it is impossible to differ so far, as to
declare them Enemies, and like the example of the Trojan Hero, to erect a
Trophee and superscribe on it,

Aeneas haec de Danais victoribus arma. Butas I am nothing concerned, or envy
the reputation of any man, on what account soever the world is pleased to allow
it him; so I conceive that others have as little to do with mine, and I will be
as free in delivering my opinion, as I willingly allow them the liberty of
theirs; since I do not conceive the Muses have yet established their Dictator
in Poetry; though I am not desirous to controvert any thing (except I shall be
necessarily moved thereunto) and which signifies little more then to try who
can squirt Ink sarthest: to which purpose, I will retire to my self, desiring
the Readers excuse, that I have led him so far about, before I have spoken of
my Play; in order to which, I have chiefly designed this discourse; having made
my self so far a party on the side of our former Poets, that I have composed
this Play in some resemblance to theirs of the like nature, which in my
judgment I have esteemed best. I have given it the name likewise of
Tragi-Comedy, as I find they have done some of theirs, which I need not
particularize to the Reader, because they are well enough known to be at this
day no inconsiderable ornament and entertainment of the Stage; not that I will
undertake to justify the word (since every Play, if strictly taken, must be
either Tragedy or Comedy, excluding Farce, which does not so much as deserve a
Dramatis Personae to be set before it, as we shall soon manifest) And it was
doubtless created by former Poets, who finding that mixed Plays were very
suitable to the English Stage, and that it was somewhat below the denomination
of their Heroicks to call them simply Comedies (which as they are corruptly
understood, imply, little more then scurrility and laughter, though of far
greater dignity, if rightly applied) They allowed them the names of
Tragi-Comedies, and I do not find but the highest of our English Tragedies (as
Cataline, The Maids Tragedy, Rollo, The Cardinal and Traitor) considerable
enough to be ranked with the best of these, are at all undervalued by their
Authors, in being sweetened with mirth; for as all people do not come purposely
to sympathize their passions with those of the Plays, so some will expect to be
diverted accordingly; nor do I believe that it is less natural (as some have
thought) to form a Play, that shall have this variety of Genius, then I do to
find of mankind some grave, reserved, fierce, cruel, others of more aerie and
pleasant converse, to mingle humors and affairs together.

If we take our observations from the Courts of Princes, before we descend
lower, we shall find it familiar enough (and doubtless Plays are most
profitable as well as delightful, when they so represent humane things and
actions, as even the greatest are as obvious to our remarques, as those of a
lower orb of experience) nor do I conceive any kind of Plays more difficult to
be truly formed, then such as have this Heroic mixture, because it is not
easy to give humor and mirth a natural rise and generous correspondency with
the grandeur of the other, which if suitable in point of character, cannot
render it less grateful to the Audience, it being as it were two Plays in one.

Nor do I find that the serious Plays (now in use) wholly rely upon their
Heroic foundation, why else are we diverted by Scenes, Machins, Habits, Jiggs,
and Dances; but to give more variety of entertainment to the Spectators? either
as they are not otherwise to be trusted, or least the Audience should be too
soberly tired without them, which I will not presume to imagine: and whether it
be not as natural to admit of a course of Comedy that is made essential to the
Plot and dignity of the Play; I leave it to my Reader to judge.

Verse that ends in Rhyme is generally now the Mode of Heroic Plays, but
whether so natural and proper, I will not controvert, otherwise then by
declaring my opinion, that I like it not so well as I do Verse without it, and
I conceive I have reason enough on my side; for who can believe that words must
not of necessity lose much of their grace, and emphasis, when delivered in
Rhyme, which limits so much of both to it self; or that the thoughts of Seneca
in his Tragedies could have been so well, or better expressed in any language
whatsoever in Rhyme (though to an ear that is most delighted with the noise)
then they are delivered by him; or that our former Poets have been exceeded in
height of expression and fancy, because their Muses have mounted without these
Bells jingling at their heels; doubtless a judicious spirit may soon observe
the difference, nor can lines in Rhyme ever run so smooth, but there will be
some unnaturalness in them as to the freedom of dialogue, and converse (which
Plays should resemble) because Verse of that kind will of necessity be
sententious and restrain it, and consequently be improper to manage the various
intregues of a Play, or else in plain terms be forced to want them: Nor is a
grave or wise manner of speaking to be allowed the wittiest, because that which
is sober enough as to Wisdom, may be far enough off from being Witty; and he
that will not grant the former to be more easy to invent, must conclude that
the Wit of Poetry is as familiar with Men as Gravity and Prudence; nay, it is
plainly to be observed, that generally Men write better for the Stage this way,
(I mean in Rhyme) then they have, or can do, after the manner of our former
Poets without it; which is some demonstration that the latter is less
difficult, though more unnatural then the former: And for my greater Authority
I will add these few excellent Verses of our Famous Johnson on this subject,
which he calls a fit Rhyme against Rhyme. Rhyme the rack of finest Wits
That extracteth but by fits
True conceits,
Spoiling senses of their treasure,
Couzening judgment with a measure,
But fall weights.
Soon as lazy thou were known,
All good Poetry hence was flown, etc.
And as I doubt not well enough to wave any oblique exception that any man can
throw on my Opinion (since patronized by his) so I do not detract from the
deserts of any who have done well in this kind, otherwise then by declaring,
that as I find it not used by our former Poets, I likewise do not approve it,
or have made use of it in this Play of mine; it is true, according to their
example (which I wish I could have better imitated) I have writ a Masque in
Rhyme, and closed some Scenes, and all my Acts likewise with it, which places
have ever been allowed most proper for it, because they are Period in which the
Audience may best expect a weighty and sententious close; and whenever Verse
was used by Ben Johnson, as it is in Sylla's Ghost, or scattered in some places
in Sejanus; I cannot but observe his Art and Nature together, in not confining
the periods of sense and Rhyme together (as is too much used now) but most
commonly by carrying the sense of one verse into part of another, which
Elevates the style of Verse (as is to be seen in Virgil) and without which it
will never show so like Prose, and proper for Dialogue, as it ought to do; an
example to be worthily imitated by such as will write in Verse, to whose
consideration I presume to commend it.

In the Epick way, I judge that Rhyme is far more allowable, (though the
Ancients used it not) because Verse of that kind may be granted to appear more
grave and stately, which represents a continued gravity of Style and Matter,
(which not withstanding, by reason of the great extent of the Argument, the
variety of the Descriptions and Dialogues, will be more varied in this then in
any other manner of using Verse, as is well known to the judicious) besides,
that our English Language is neither so copious and great, as Greek or Latin,
as must needs be perceived in Homer and Virgil Translated; so that though Rhyme
in Verse be of little use to sense (and consequently one of the poorest talents
of the Muses) yet as it confers on Verse a Solid and sententious manner of
expression (a fault in Dramatick Poesy, if two frequently used, as is
discoursed before) I conceive it may be decently admitted in the Epick way; but
then it ought to be written with a free and unconfined nature, as is before
instanced in the measures of Virgil; and as it is my judgment, so I have made
it practicable in that small Heroic Poem of mine, called The British
Princess, which I will not presume to commend, more then that it is so far at
least an imitator of Antiquity.

Neither do I believe that Sir William D'avenant, who was the first introducer
of Rhyme on the Stage, did otherwise intend it then for vocal Representations,
and Operas, (in which it may do well) rather then for Plays, as was known in
his Peru, and Siege of Rhodes. And I presume that my Lord of Orrery (whose
Ingenuity in Verse brought it more in fashion; in those ornaments he bestowed
on the Stage in Mustapha, and other of his Heroic Compositions) would not
judge it a debasing of their worth, if they were distinguished by the name of
Poems, instead of Plays, for reasons that he is better able to give himself,
then any which I have here presumed to offer; but enough of this subject, which
I thought fit to touch, to justify so far my excuse in not complying in my
Play, with that manner of Verse written in others.

As likewise that I have not been helped by any History or known Tale in
forming of my Plot (not but that I conceive it very allowable, if well managed,
and that the truth of History be not evidently impaired by it, which were to
render the actions of men contradictory and fabulous, where they are otherwise
verifyed by authority) being willing to believe that a reasonable Genius (and
such a one I will only presume to) might produce that which should be at least
as new and useful, as any thing could be taken from either; nor do I find but
the greatest Plays formerly were the Poets own Tales, as well as Plots; and
doubtless they found few better then they could devise, as also that it was
natural and delightful for them to manage such best.

There are three things which chiefly the Muses require to complete their
perfections; the first is the beauty of Invention or Design, its two fair
seconds, Eloquence and Wit, with an useful improvement of these to our converse
and manners, (nor did I ever observe any man so ignorantly confident to affirm,
that a Poem, or Play, could be completed with Humors and Characters alone)
though above all, the first is to be allowed the greater value, as being the
fountain from whence these streams must flow.

Thus a Poet is said to be a maker or feigner, as the word (...) signifies in
Greek, from whence it is derived according to Aristotle; in like manner the
Structures of Poesy are not decently to be raised like other buildings, in
which the foundation is the design of one man, the model another, the fitting
of the timber, and other materials a thirds; whilst the Poet should not only
be the sole Architect, but all other operations contrived and performed by
himself; besides it destroys the improvement of Fiction (the exercise of the
Muses) pinioning those wings they delight to spread, and does advantage, though
little more, then to be lazily diligent; insomuch that it is very observable,
since Translating has been so much practiced, and taking from Romances and
Foreign Plays, the compositions arising from them appear not less
disproportioned and uneven, then if a Painter undertaking to describe a
History, should from the drawings of Masters, and Figures in Print (to a
judicious eye very discernable) take a posture from one, a head from another, a
body from a third, and having put them on such legs as he shall make for them,
confidently aver he has performed the noble invention and design that
belongs to a Story Painter. And I doubt not to affirm, that the great
veneration and repute of former Tales amongst the Ancients, lessened not only
fiction and contrivance in their works, but in like manner did mightily
prejudice most of all their Successors in Poesy, who have endeavored to lay
their designs after the same manner; insomuch, that who judicially examine it,
may soon find how thin and deficient their Poems were, in respect of that
beauty their sublime expressions gave them, (excepting Virgill's the Prince of
Poets to which I attribute all things) And had they equally been happy in the
glory of the other, there had been small honor to have been gotten by the
Muses at this day.

And that I may come nearer my Reader, I will presume to say, that I should be
unwilling (for the reasons here given) to have been Author of the contrivance
of Statius, Tasso, or any I have seen since Virgil in the Epick way, as in the
Dramatick I dislike the Tragedian Seneca in the choice of his Argument and
Characters, in both of which, he is so far outdone by our English Poets, that
he cannot in that kind (notwithstanding the greatness of his thoughts) stand in
any comparison with them; which can be attributed to no other cause, then his
doting on those pitiful Tales of Medea, Hippolitus, Theseus, Hercules, and the
like (that were less worthily then long the esteem of Ancient Poets;) and it is
something more a wonder, that the Schools being so frequent amongst them in
those days, they should forget to improve this obvious Philosophical Maxim,
Omne agens agit propter finem, which as it holds in all humane actions, so its
prudence ought to be heightened as far as possible, both in Epick, and Dramatick
writing.

I confess a Poet should not be so negligent, as to be unacquainted with the
Tales and Fictions of the Ancients, in which he ought to be well knowing, as
far as necessary, or as he ought to be conversant with all other learning of
times past, since the Muses seldom vouchsafe their favors, where there is not
a preparation suitable to their dignity and greatness; as it were absurd to
invite a Queen, and have no ornaments fit for her reception; so on the other
side, the advantages of literature should be rather assistant to Fiction, then
any way burthening or depressing it; Virgil perhaps of all Poets was most
learned, yet shows us in all parts of his works, that his Muse was the Mistress
of his Studies, and that their best splendors, were to serve for her greater
delight and entertainment. In other Sciences, Learning is a Tutor, but in this
of Poetry, Fiction must illustrate, and guide that, leading us unto those
pleasant retirements of the Muses, where as from various and beautiful
platforms of Gardens, is beheld the particular designments of shades, walks,
and flowers.

Words are the children of thought, and man must be granted to have first
imagined speech, before he could express any conception of his by words; so
that thought, was both the primitive ground, and glory of Tongues, which
successively came to be more improved; and doubtless it was the Wit of Poets
that (above all) refined their own languages; so that I wonder to find it
affirmed, that Been. Johnson (who had such a soul of thought) did by Translating
beautify our Tongue; as if his ingenuity was not to be allowed the glory of
doing far more by its single strength. I should be loath to wish any so ill, as
that he were alive to answer the imputation; however, I could be well content,
that such as will make him their president in Translating from others, could
dispose of it so well, and that they had like wise as much Wit, and Learning
besides.

Translating, may I grant, adds some perfection to a language, because it
introduces the wit of others into its own words, as the French have of late
done well in theirs; and we have pretty well requited their kindness to us, in
rendering so much of theirs in ours; but where I can make use of good Originals,
I shall be more sparing of my esteem of Copies, and I dare aver, that the
Ingenuiries of Johnson, Beaumont, and Fletcher, with some other of our former
Poets, left our language more improved, as it expressed their thoughts, then if
the best of Italian, Spanish, and French Wit, had been Translated by the
greatest of Pens. I wish it be our good fortune (for the benefit of future
times) to leave our Tongue as much enlarged and imbellished, as they left it to
us.

With as little reason can any man affirm, that Virgil did not elevate the
Latin Tongue to that strength and sublimeness of style, from the vivacity of
his thoughts, rather then from those few conceptions, and perhaps the meanest
of his works, which he copied from Homer, whether in honor of that ancient
Tale of Troy, or some other of his Fables which the world had long admired (as
it was the manner of the Ancients, as is already mentioned) and I doubt are
very imperfect in Homer, if compared with the manner of his delivering them in
his second Book, for which his more victorious Laurel might deserve no less
then what he expresses of himself, on another occasion in his Georgicks, in
reference to the Grecian Poets;

Primus ego in patriam mecum (modo vita supersit)
Aonio rediens deducam vertice musas.
Works that are great and singular, will, and ought to be the imitation of men
(as is more particularly the case of Epick Poesy) in those few Authors that
have writ of it in so many Ages; so that Statius and Tasso had some kind of
noble emulation in endeavoring to be the Successors of Virgil, notwithstanding
they were beholding to him for much of their Model and Characters, and could
not come so near his height, as he exceeded Homers; like small Structures that
must be content to be over-looked by a more stately Palace, though they
epitomize its resemblance; whilst in the Dramatick way, the Genius of men has
not been so confined, nor any particular manner and authority in point of
writing so much acknowledged for excellent; wherefore the same license is not
reasonably to be admitted, but if we will needs make the first our Presidents,
for the liberty that is now taken in the latter, it were well for the Stage, if
such things were only imitated of our Ancient Poets, that have had transcendent
applause from our former Theaters: And doubtless it is a commendable prudence
in Writers of what kind soever, if they endeavor to heighten their Works and
Styles, from the examples of others, that have been most approved in the same
kind, (since example were of small use otherwise) as he that would be master of
the Latin Tongue, might be well content to imitate the styles of Cicero and
Caesar; the like may be said of some excellent Presidents in our own Language,
the defect whereof is no small reason that neither Latin, nor English is so
well written, as it might be at this day.

Having thus far discoursed of Heroic Plays (and such other things as I
thought incident to them, and to which this Dramatick composition of mine is in
part relating) I shall in the next place (though with less prolixity) give my
Reader an account of the other part of it, which is Comedy, and of that kind of
Poesy in general.

Though the Nature of Comedy be not the same with Tragedy, the end of it is;
for Instruction is the part of both, as man may be disciplined under several
Schoolmasters.

The word Comedy was derived from the Greek word (...), or more largely
understood by the Ancients of a Play representing humane life and manners;
whereas the business of Tragedy is in a higher nature to dispose and elevate
the intrigues of passions and affections; I mean such as depend on Ambition,
Revenge, Love, Honor, and the like, and so detect their vices accordingly. As
it is the duty of Comedy to do the same, in those that come nearest our
Moralities, though it must be granted that the representation of Tragedy,
cannot be so universally practicable (and consequently not of that benefit to
mankind) because its concernments, and actions, are more sublime, and separated
from the universality of men, rather fit only for the ear of Princes, (who are
very often the greatest number of characters in a Tragical Fable) then for a
lower degree of Persons; which shows us, that Comedy has some merit above it,
in that it is of a more universal nature. Upon which occasion our famous
Johnson well observes, that Lysippus was not able to form with his Graver, or
Apelles to Paint with his Pencil, those life strokes and touches, that true
Comedy represents, in respect of the various affections of the mind, in
beholding the insolence of some in joy, the melancholy fretings of others, the
raging madness of such as are undone with love, avarice, riot, tortured with
expectation, consumed with fear, etc. as he gives the example, and to whom we
are obliged for so many excellent Dramatick Characters to this purpose.

And as Tragedy requires a strong intrigue and Plot (I wish it were more
observed now adays) as being the representation of highest passions, and
actions; so Comedy in like manner would abound with all delightful variety of
both, by which we behold the humors, and inclinations of men, in due
elevation, and magnitude; not that it is requisite that all the characters in a
Play should be equally great, or manage alike the main drift of the Drama, (as
lines drawn from the center of a circle, have an equal extent within its
circumference) but rather receive a becoming proportion, which is indeed the
Golden Rule to be observed in Plays, and requires no less the invention, and
skill of the Poet to make it practicable; for as in Mathematical Operations,
there is nothing more hard then to be cunning in the Symmetry of lines, and
figures they express; so the Poets disposition of his characters, ought in as
high a degree to be proportionable to that body of thought he designs for them.
This is that which enobles Language and Wit, giving to both a decorum on the
Theater; for though the Muses prescribe few rules, they abhor irregularity, and
license, it is their sublime instinct, where their excellencies meet in any, as
is divinely expressed by Ovid.

Sedibus aethereis spiritus ille venit. And as Lipsius affirms, Scio Poetam
neminem praestantem fuisse, sine part quadam uberiore divinae mentis.

Plays that are Historical, or have much of narration in them, are generally
ungrateful, because they dull the edge of the hearers, which as it is sharpened
by observing what is actually produced, so it is impaired by hearing of
relation instead of action, whether it be true or false, an unpardonable error
in most of the French Writers, who it seems did not well apprehend that things
actually represented, have more of nature, and life in them, then any account
of them, that can be given in words; as likewise such Plays may be censured,
the body of whose design consists more essentially on the mistakes of persons,
then the intrigues of passions, as most of the Spanish do, and some of the
French, where the grand design is to keep the spectators in suspense, till it
end with discovery of the true person, by reason that it cannot be of so much
concern to an Audience, as when Plays sympathize with those passions that are
observable in men; which is so obvious, that I need say no more as to these
particulars, they being equally defects in Tragedy and Comedy.

And as Plays in either kind, ought to have the same end, in respect of
manners, so there is an Analogy and commendable resemblance of characters in
both, though of different natures, according to the rule, contraria juxta se
apposita, magis elucescunt. For as in the characters of Tragedy there will be
some violent in love, others haughty, rash, and turbulent, above what is
ordinary to be observed in men; so Comedy will have its extravagancies (besides
many more) in morose, heedless, timorous and foolish persons, which are images
of the like contrary effects of nature; in like manner, the designs and
adventures depending on these, have their proportions; for as Dramatick
characters will have some remoteness from the ordinary actions of men, so must
their undertakings be suitable; wherefore I wonder to find it affirmed, that
extravagancies of actions should be fixed on Farce, (which is rather an
entertainment of Mimikry, than a Play in any kind) since Plays must not be so
even, as to represent nothing above nature, which were to make them more
reasonable, then Poetical; besides, it is a commendable license (especially in
Poetry) to represent what is rather useful to know, (as it seems actually done)
then the possibility of it, so it provide well for our manners; as we see in
Comedies, where we are taught from the mouths of Fools, and by such
extravagancies as are in some kind impossible to be supposed, how we may become
the wiser; why else did our learned Johnson complete that great work of his
Alchymist, with such persons that continue a prosecution of extravagancy of
humor or impossibility together, (except the making of the Philosophers Stone
be held a known truth) or that his Dol Common representing the Queen of Fairies,
was not to pass upon the weak capacity of Dapper deceived by it? The same may
be affirmed of his Cynthias Revells, where Cupid, Mercury, and Echo have
parts, or somewhat more extraordinary in his Devil's an Ass, where the grand
Demon, and a lesser, are made characters, as Satirical Reflections on Vanity
and Vice, to be corrected by them; which shows, that the truth or possibility
of the characters, is less to be considered, then the Morality they aim at. Et
hercule omnis salsa dicendi ratio in eo est, ut aliter quam est rectum verumque
dicatur, as Quintilian observes.

As the chief end of Comedy is improvement of manners, so the mirth arising
thence, is to entertain our passions, and affections with delight proper
thereunto; wherefore to make laughter the chiefest end of Comedy, is to impair
its more superior esteem, since what is ridiculous, is not therefore Comedy.
If a Clown were shown in a Ladies Gown, or a Scaramuchio that provokes
laughter, no otherwise then by making a wry face, or gesture, he must strangely
participate of vulgar folly, that would call either of these the parts of
Comedy, since they work nothing on the affections, no more then a man can be
said to laugh properly without mirth, or be sick, and have no disease.

But I need not trouble my Reader with a farther vindication of comedy, (though
it be some misfortune to our Theaters in being so little happy in it this Age)
other then by taking leave to suppose, that it is undervalu'd most by such as
do not rightly conceive of its worth, or else despair of writing, what shall
merit its esteem or name.

There is another sort of diversion on the Stage, much received of late (I will
not question with what prudence) and that is Farce; which, as I have said
before, consists of Mimikry and other ridiculous Gestures mingled together, for
which it may properly enough bear the denomination, though it is no more of kin
to a Play, then a Mule is to a Horse, in having somewhat longer ears; or that a
Pedlar who has some things in his Pack, that Drapers and Silkmen furnish their
Shops with, should be said to be of these Trades, though he has none lawfully
of his own.

No less does this French Mode of entertainment on our Theaters, vilify mirth,
and countenance for the most part debauchery, where it is frequent to observe,
the waiting woman's intrigue is to Pimp for the Madam, and the Valet de Chamber
for the Mounsieur he serves, which performed with some ease in the compass of
five Acts, they go to bed likewise for their labor; the rest of the characters
have commonly so little to say for themselves, that a man cannot discern a
Fantastic Fool, or Clown, otherwise then by their Habits or Gestures.

And as Farce cannot be allowed to be Comedy, in its meanest signification,
because it does not perform the requisites unto it; so I find no reason to call
Comedy low, though consisting of mean characters, if answering the ends already
expressed (as is to be seen in not a few of our ancient ones) and cannot
deserve a more worthy esteem, if by the skill and wit of the Writer, the
characters of vulgar men are made worth the observation of the greatest,
according to that of Virgil in his Georgicks, speaking on the familiar
subjects, he there treats of;

Nec sum animi dubious, verbis ea vincere magnum,
Quam sit, and angustis hunc addere rebus honorem,
Notwithstanding I would not be thought averse from such a choice of persons in
Comedy, as are most fit to character the most generous instruction of manners;
wherefore if for the greatest number they represent the same dignities in
either Sex, the entertainment is more suitable to the Audience, which most
considerably does consist of these; and here I cannot choose but reflect on our
mean imitation of French Plays, by introducing of servants and waiting women to
have parts, without being essential characters; an error well avoided by our
former writers, who never admitted any, otherwise then as messengers and
attendants, except on the account of being characters, as is to be seen by
Numphs in Bartholomew Fair, and Face in the Alchymist; the latter of which
(notwithstanding what can be objected against him) may deservedly be granted
one of the best parts on our English Stage.

But perhaps we are not now so destitute of characters, as we are of design and
wit to manage them, invention being ready to afford many, and observation some;
though here I cannot choose but censure the unpoetical, and no less offensive
license in particularly designing the persons of any, an abuse that deserves to
be severely resented, since (if permitted) no man can be secured, but that he
may give his money to observe his alliance, friend, or himself, made his
injurious entertainment on a public Stage; besides, Plays ought more to
reflect on manners, then men, as being their moral use, and when they do
otherwise, they are Libels rather then Plays, and nauseate the ear of a modest
Audience.

Having made these observations on our past and present Stage, I must be so
ingenuous with my Reader, as to fear, that the perfection of our former
Dramatick Poesy ought more politickly to have been my dispute with others,
then that I should have maintained its praise, since he is prompted by it, to
compare the excellency of their Plays with my defects in this, and for which I
have an objection to answer, though, I hope, a weak one, concerning the
character of Tysamnes, whom I find to be charged with a breach of promise to
Statyra; the matter of fact I confess; but as actions have their degrees of
evil, as the circumstances relating thereunto shall render them more or less
excusable; so I must say in the behalf of this my character, that the
temptation of enjoying of a Crown together with the love of the Scythian Queen,
did produce his neglect of Statyra; and whosoever shall consider the prevalency
of ambition in Princes, (especially in one without a Crown, which was his case)
and how often they forfeit the highest obligations to advance it, will grant I
suppose without much difficulty, that there needs small excuse for his
character; besides, there was such a reparation on his side, both to his Queen,
and her, that though he removed the former, partly for her sake, he did not
make himself so guilty, as to marry the latter; but by a due sorrow for his
ingratitude to both, confirmed an honorable reputation on his character; all
which the Reader may observe in the Play: so that it is not merely the doing of
ill, but the persisting in it, that fixes an indelible stain on persons;
besides, that no man is of necessity to be presented on the Stage with an
evenness of passion, as being neither common, or natural in men, in whom
defects will have some place with virtue.

This objection (though feeble enough) has been endeavored to be supported by
the impertinent cavils of some, who will hardly like any thing, and care as
little for what is good; whether this proceeds from their Spleen to the
ingenuities of men, or that they hold it a more noble employment for their
Criticism, I cannot tell; and yet I do not find any other objection made
against my Play, though both the design and characters were new as the hour in
which it was first seen, being wholly created without having reference to truth
otherwise, then possibly consistent with it in the persons I introduce,
according to Horace;

Ficta voluptatis causa, sint proxima veris. The misfortune it had in having
some of the Parts ill and imperfectly performed, as also the laying down of it,
the sixth day of its being presented, when the Audience was very near as
considerable, as the first day it was Acted, as also an intermission hitherto
occasioned by the long absence of some principal Actresses, could not but
prejudice the esteem it gained, and might have been improved in a further time;
not that I judge of the validity of Plays, according to the good fortune they
have in point of reception, it having been ordinary enough for very mean or ill
ones (especially in this Age) to have had the credit of getting money at a
small expense of Wit, whilst they have little more reason to glory in the heat
of their acceptance, or number of hearers, then the Fly had in the Fable, that
sitting upon a Wheel, most ingeniously boasted of the dust that was raised by
it.

I fear I have trespassed too much on my Readers patience (though I have not
troubled him with any other extraordinary Dedication) being ready to
acknowledge that what I have writ here, seems more a discourse, or Essay on
Dramatick Poesy, then a Preface to a Play; and indeed, I had thoughts of
compiling the discussing of that subject with some things of that nature, not
but I conceived it might be as usefully given him in this place, where he may
more readily observe how far I have made practicable the Theory of this kind of
writing I most esteem; nor do I undertake to rectify the judgments of others,
farther then theirs shall do mine, where I conceive their reasons to be more
prevalent; or would willingly employ so frivolously my Pen, as to entertain a
Polemick discourse of Plays, that to the prudent can signify little more then
to controvert which is the best way of performing a trifle.

Farewell.
The First Prologue.
Enter Angel and Underhill. Ang. MR. Underhill -- As I am a man of mirth, I am
so overjoyed to day, that I could caper from one end of our Stage to the other.


Und. I fear, Mr. Angel, you are too jocund beforehand; Wit is grown a
ticklish thing of late, and how our Play will take, is some question.


Ang. Take, why there is no doubt of it is taking, -- To which purpose be it
known to all here present, that we are to act a Farce to day, that has sixteen
Mimicks in it, several Jack-Puddings, and Punchinellos, never presented before,
with two and thirty Dances and Jiggs a-la-mode besides.


Und. A Farce to day, say you?


Ang. Yes, and I hope to morrow, and to morrow, and so to the end of our lives.


Und. Must we still persist then to fool Wit out of countenance, and so bid
farewell to good Plays and Comedy for ever?


Ang. We must, as I take it, until there are Poets that can write them.


Und. In the mean time, we are like to maintain a despicable Stage.


Ang. And why so, Sir, ought not that which gets the most money, be held the
best Wit? I suppose our Company are much of that opinion.


Und. However, as I am an Actor, and bound to honor true Mirth and Comedy, I
am so far concerned, that I could wish the Scaramuchos, and Jack-Puddings were
sent to their proper Stages, since Plays are now grown so greasy with French
Lard, that an Actor does not know how to handle them.


Ang. My right reverend Comedian, you are not wise, and thus I demonstrate it
-- I will play a Farce ten to one against a Comedy, Tragi-comedy, or any
Heroic Play whatsoever.


Und. And be sure it will take?


Ang. I told you before, that was no question -- nay more, I can assure you,
that many good Wits of the Town encourage it, who damn all Plays besides.


Und. Perhaps in compassion to us Actors, or out of contempt to the Writers of
this Age, whose Wit they judge cannot reach the elevation of their Brain.


Ang. No matter whether it be from the Poles above, or the Poles below, I am
sure they are better then Pole-stars to us, provided they dispense their
influence often here.


Und. And what shall become of the new Play, intended to have been this day
presented?


Ang. Why, our Actors have soberly resolved, it shall be deferred to some other
time.


Und. As I hope to act good part again, I am sorry for it; but is it certain?


Ang. There is nothing certain in the world, though it is so concluded, unless
some unexpected prohibition, or Fate hinder it -- but it is almost time.

Enter Noakes. We withdraw in order to our parts and properties -- here comes
Mr. Noakes ready dressed.


Und. Then I perceive we shall have a Farce to purpose, and it is odds, but he
personates one beetle-brow'd Fellow or other.


Ang. O Mr. Noaks, you have habited your self very properly.


Noak. According to my best apprehension, Gentlemen.


Und. But you should not have entered with your face grim'd, 'twill discover too
much of our Farces plot beforehand.


Noak. There Is good design in it, I warrant you.


Und. But what shall we do for a Prologue?


Noak. Leave that to me, Sirs, I Will give u'm one a new way.


Ang. Mark that, Mr. Underhill; and shall we have a novelty in our Prologue,
Mr. Noakes?


Noak. I have devised it purposely, because a new way is generally taking in
what kind soever.


Und. I am much of that opinion, since I have observed that new nonsense is
valued more then old Wit.


Noak. What think you then, if I speak to all the Judges in the Pit by looks
and grimasks?


Ang. A rare and prodigious thought! I have known a device like this, serve
well in a Play.


Und. And has been thought a good Scene too.


Noak. And first on you Critics, I Will leer thus, like a Satyr; for the
moderate Wits thus; for ho, ho, ho's, who laugh in such good earnest, when
there is no Jest given them, comically thus.

Enter Changling.
Und. No more of your grimasks, good Mr. Noakes.


Noak. And why so, Sir?


Und. Because I have considered better, and since it is resolved, we shall have
a Prologue to our Farce, here is one shall give it u'm the Farce way exactly.

[To the Changling.]
Ang. There Is nothing better -- the very Pudding of our Farce that must fill
the Audience up to the throat with laughter.


Noak. Since you will have it so, you shall find me reasonable; I confess it is
a pretty toyish modish way.


Und. And what is most extraordinary, he shall dance out a Prologue.


Ang. A Prologue to be danced, aha, aha, Boys.

[Angel leaps.]
Noak. And I make Still-Musick with my mouth the whilst, shall I, Sirs?


Und. It Is not amiss; come hither, Changling, and set your feet, and looks in
order for the Prologue.


Chang. Shall it be with my face, feet, and hands, tredoudling thus?


Omnes. It Is very innocent and well.


Chang. I Will warrant you, I Will tredoudle it so, that it shall take to purpose.


Omnes. Music there for the Prologue.

The Music plays, he dances a while, then is heard a noise wish Thunder and
Lightning, at which time Ben. Johnson personated rises from below.
Noak. Ha, Thunder and Lightning! -- I hope the Madam Muses are not displeased
with us.


Ang. But what apparition is this moving toward us?


Und. As I am an Actor, it is the Genius of the old Comic Poet Ben. Johnson, I
know it by his Picture that hangs up in the Strand.


Ang. Fly, fly, Associates, there is no being on the Stage longer, for us of the
Farce party.

[They go off several ways.]
After which Ben. Johnson personated, goes up to the Audience, and speaks a
Prologue.

The Second Prologue personated like Ben Johnson rising from below.
BEhold I Ben appear, your Poet once,
That living durst a vengeance here denounce
On all the Stages Crimes, and Judges dare
To make my Wit their sense, or else their fear;
Thus have I left the Elysium Shades and Groves,
The sacred Mansions of the Muses Loves,
Where I my Bays till now unwither'd saw
In my immortal Plays, that here gave Law.
But now provoked, the Muses quarrel take,
And from their call thus my appearance make;
Did I instruct you (well never half an Age)
To understand the Grandeur of the Stage,
With the exactest Rules of Comedy,
Yet now you are pleased with Wits low frippery,
Admitting Farce, the trifling mode of France,
T infect you with fantastic ignorance,
Forgetting 'twas your glory to behold,
Plays wisely formed, such as I made of old;
But by my Bays I swear, if you persist,
And my Judicious Cautions hence resist,
I Will next rise with the Furies from below,
That scourge vile Poets there with Scorpions too,
And with those circl'd, hiss at you, and them,
Except the Scenes just Grandeur you redeem;
Thus for your Crimes, but what this day will be,
The fate and merit of the Play you will see;
I scarce divine, nor did its Author raise
Me by a Poets charm to give him praise.
I never had an Ear was soothed by Rhyme,
Or flattered to protect a Writers crime.
And might this Authors modesty offend,
Should my Encomium here his Play commend;
Who now prevents it, whilst methinks I hear
A whisper of his doubtings in my ear;
His fears are many, there is such Fate in Wit,
That Plays from fortune more then merit hit,
Whose Muse would blush for such a guilty chance,
Since 'twere the bounty of your ignorance.
But though your crimes in judgment he forbears,
Take heed, how Ben provoked, once more appears.
Third Prologue.
YOU see what little Arts we are fain to try,
To give a Prologue some variety;
Wit you have had, perhaps, in many new,
Though Farce, and Dance, (your much loved mirth) in few.
But why Great Johnson's Ghost should thus appear,
As if to hector Wits, and Critics here,
Who (if the Devil were Poet) would not fear?
'Twas a bold Fiction, and so let it go,
Yet thus far it is instructive unto you;
That should you recollect your Judging Crimes,
The Ribaldry of Plays in Prose, and Rhimes,
Johnson might rise indeed, and own it true.
His Plays were Laws to Wit, and Plot well told,
But such you slight, (though wise) because they are old;
And well it is for Writers, since that way
You might expect from all who write a Play.
True Comedy, the moral Mirth of Plays,
Lives now the glory of dead Poets Bays,
And like the Phoenix (though confessed to be)
Produces few of her Posterity.
So rare a piece, our Poet dares not say
You now shall see, but as weak Pencils may
From Titian, or Vandike example take,
And in their figures small resemblance make.
So 'twas the business of our Authors Pen,
To paint some life of Comedy again,
And like to such as would, but cannot Feast,
Does wish your entertainment were the Best.
The Persons Names.
Tysamnes A Persian Prince Married to the Queen of Scythia. Mr. Harris.
Bassanes A General, and Prince of the Blood of Scythia. Mr. Young. Foscaris A
Gentleman of Quality, who longs for his Wife after he has parted with her. Mr.
Smith. Andrages Another Husband, who loves his Wife so well that he cannot part
with her, though she seems to provoke him to it. Mr. Crosby. Toxaris Courtier
to Parisatis Queen of Scythia. Mr. Standford. Alvanes Courtier to Parisatis
Queen of Scythia. Mr. Cademan. Araxis Courtier to Parisatis Queen of Scythia.
Mr. Norris. Draxanes Friend to Bassanes. Mr. Adams. Eumenes Friend to Bassanes.
Mr. Westwood. Two Courtiers. Parisatis Queen of Scythia. Mrs. Betterton.
Mandana A Queen of the Amazons. Mrs. Long. Statyra A great Persian Lady
formerly beloved by Tysamnes. Mrs. Johnson. Clarina Wife to Foscaris. Mrs.
Shadwell. Melvissa Wife to Andrages. Mrs. Dixon. Four Court Ladies. Daranthe
Chief Commandress of the Amazons. Mrs. Lee. Cydane Embassadress from the Queen
Mandana. Mrs. Lilborne. Renone Embassadress from the Queen Mandana. Mrs.
Wright. Masquers. Attendants. Guards.


The Scene Scythia.

THE Women's Conquest. A TRAGI-COMEDY.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Toxaris, Alvanes, and Araxis. Tox. WEll Mortals, if any live happy,
It Is we Scythians at this day.

Arax. And prithee why?

Tox. Are not we Men?

Arax. Yes, and Courtiers.

Tox. And what is more, have our Amors unquestioned
By those meager sort of Females, Wives, whose entails
We can cut off at pleasure, sometimes held necessary
In case of Age, or accidental Ugliness;
Is this no Felicity?

Alva. A sign we had our Predecessors men.

Tox. I, and such Souls of Matrimony, that
Would be all in all in every Act and
Concern of Woman; changing Wives at pleasure,
Sometimes, as often as Menial Servants* how would
The Wary Spaniard, the more Jealous Italian
Glory, had they like privilege?

Alv. And yet,
Methinks, this custom of our Nation
In so absolute a dominion over
That weaker sex, is not a little rigid.

Tox. Prithee marry then, and if thou do not
Find it necessary; thou wilt be more easy
Yoked then most in Scythia.

Alv. But our Queens marriage
Is my wonder, with this Persian Prince
Tysamnes.

Arax. She is wise in all her Actions.

Alva. Yet not by any privilege exempted
From this our Nations Law, though a Queen;
'Twere well, she had made it first, some Act of State.

Arax. At least to exempt her self: Princes are
But men, sometimes most various.

Tox. It speaks her
Confidence in her new made Husband.

Arax. Or rather the strength of her own virtue,
That dares trust her merit to embarque
In any storm, should it arise from what
('Twere sin to think) Ingratitude.

Alv. May they live great and prosperous.

Arax. Tysamnes is a Prince endu'd with many Graces,
Famed equal with the best Captains of our Times,
In noble deeds of War; and though but younger
Brother of the Persian Crown, against
Natures act, deserves the first place in that Throne.
Enter Foscaris.
Alva. Here comes Foscaris, a Gentleman, that has
Newly parted with his Wife, a fair one too.

Arax. But that is a change in this part of Scythia,
Few repent, where Women like to flowers,
Are often placed in bosoms, but till Love
Fades their sweetness -- what Foscaris! --

Fosc. The merry'st man 'twixt this and Babylon, Gentlemen.

Tox. You have parted with your Wife.

Fosc. And a fair riddance too; though as Women
Go now, I think she was virtuous.

Alva. Do thou not therefore feel some regret
For rejecting from thy embrace, so deserving a
Lady?

Fosc. No more then a child for throwing away
A toy, when weary of the pastime.
Alas, I have lain by her a whole Moon,
Enjoyed all her nights, and days varieties:
Passed the beginning, the middle, and even
The bottom of all can be called fruition;
Which I confess was most delicious;
But the heavy thought that this must prove
In the end, but dull repetition,
Did so cloy my appetite.

Tox. Perhaps before it had taken a just fill.

Alv. I confess, had I espoused such a Lady
I should have been content to have served Love
Two Apprentiships at least -- But oh the wonders
Of Matrimony! how soon has mankind
Enough of the honey of Wedlock.

Fosc. Nay, I dare commend her Graces, besides
I think she loved me; and for her person
Pigmalions Image might have been copied
From her lineaments. A Face in every feature
Pleasing: such an Eye! such a Lip! with a Cheek
Jove never was famed a smoother to impress;
With something yet, then all, more taking.

Arax. And had thou not better have kept this delicate
Food of Love, though thou had changed sometimes
A meal; rather then thus utterly to forsake her?

Fosc. Alas! I had my Surfeit, Gentlemen, and was
So Wife-sick; she seemed to me Loves potion.

Tox. For my part, were I in thy case, and had
A Face of Brass, I should go near to blush through't.
Here comes the Lady --
Enter Clarina.
Clar. To be thus thrown from him without a cause,
Or act of ill laid to my charge: on privilege
Of this our Countries Ignominious usage;
And by a man I loved so well?
Vile, and inhumane custom!

Tox. I hope her virtues, and thy crime will move thee
To repentance: thou art else such a
Tyrant-husband, as has no like, even
In this hard-hearted Clime of ours.

Fosc. Rather indulgent, that gave her means of
Freedom: I opened but the Cage, and
Now Love may fly, as it lists.

Clar. By my example --
Let none be henceforth made a Bride in Scythia;
Where sacred Ties, and chastest Love
Is no security.

Tox. Though I am a true Scythian and partly
Of thy humor, I could wish thee, (for this act,)
Some fatal penitence.

Fosc. Ha, ha, ha, -- Is that
Possible in a man of my complexion?

Clar. He scarce vouchsafes a look on me; when but
So late, each beam of mine was more
Considerable then warmth of Sunshine.

Alv. We must now leave you to your better thoughts:
The General Bassanes is arrived the Court.
Our attendance is expected -- pity
Clarina has no kinder Husband.
[Exeunt Alv. Tox. Araxis.
Fosc. I Will wait on you Gentlemen: I served
But lately under his command --

Clar. You have no pity left for me? --
[Offers to go out, Clar. stays him.
Fosc. A little somewhat; but thou see I am now
In haste.

Clar. I Will be as brief; take me to thy embrace,
My dear Foscaris: thou know I loved thee
Virtuously and truly well: if I have done
Amiss in any act unknown; I Will bend
My knees for pardon.

Fosc. Alas! I charge thee
With no crime; but Marriage is such a mischief,
It makes Friends sometimes differ, they know not why;
For which I thank my Countries dispensation:
Otherwise as a Mistress, I think no Lady
In our Court deserves before thee.

Clar. When e're you wed (as soon perhaps you may)
May you espouse one far more beautiful
And equal to my affection -- so farewell --

Fosc. Adieu -- adieu: I Will not kiss her at parting,
Lest I lick my self into Love again;
And yet methinks I could almost be content:
It Is a pretty black-ey'd rogue, and was so
Amorous and Airy. -- Heaven forbid
I be not once more smitten, and so proceed
To a second Wooing; but I hope I am armed --
[Ex. Foscaris. Enter Melvissa.
Clar. This unkindness grieves me.

Melv. What! sad Clarina?

Clar. I had never more cause, Madam -- my Husband. --

Melv. What of him? I dreamed that he courted thee
With more fire then ever; and my dreams I
Can tell thee, hit unhappily sometimes.

Clar. He is most unkind; a Husband of our cruel mode
Perfectly, who having gathered but so late
My Virgin flower, has thrown me from his breast,
As if already faded -- and yet I needs must say,
I love him still.

Melv. Thence came thy mischief;
The very spring of all thy Tears: we Wives
Must use more dexterity in managing
Of Husbands here; and that way, if possible,
Get some hand on their Affections: nor should They bed with us; but when we
please,
Or when our healths require it: the soft and gentle
Not seldom most slighted: The truth is, Marriage
Amongst us is a most dangerous food of Love:
And therefore we must use more wit for sauce,
Our men will be else so cloyed, and cast us off
With no more concern, then we give a dish
Of meat after having well fed on it, to our Waiters.

Clar. But I was so tender,
In giving cause of separation --

Melv. 'Thad fixed him surer to thee; nor is it hopeless,
But the sense of thy Virtues and Beauty
May work in him some thoughts of reconcilement:
There have been (though rarely) such examples.

Clar. Might I but live to be so happy! --

Melv. Besides I have a means, if all fail
To do thee service -- thou dare confide in me? --

Clar. With all assurance.

Melv. You must be secret.

Clar. As a thought within your breast.

Melv. And mark me; if thou find'st this work him up
To love again --

Clar. I doubt the end will prove impossible.

Melv. That Is as the means are ordered: Love will find out
Ways sometimes as extraordinary; which made
A famous Poet write a Book of Lovers Arts,
Not much inferior to Medea's Charms: --
And be sure when you see him next, let it
Seem against thy will, as if thoud'st stand
If possible, at like distance from him;
As the sphere of fixed Stars: adding convenient
Pride and scorn, no small artifice in our sex.

Clar. Your Copies somewhat hard
To be practiced by a Lover.

Melv. It Is but a just revenge in thy Case.

Clar. I shall observe your fair instructions.
Enter Andrages.
Melv. See, here is my man of Venus; an example
Of my skill and conduct -- observe him well,
And thou shall see, I have an humble servant
Instead of Lord and Master -- is it not so, Andrages?

Andra. Your will's a Law, Madam.

Melv. In spite of our Nations custom, is it not?

Andra. The same, Madam.

Clar. This is a language, I have
Not heard before from a Scythian Husband.

Melv. And yet, I Will say thus much, for this thing
Of my embrace: he dares vye with the best
Of our Gallants; and cope with Mars himself
If met in field; nor less would be concerned
For every frown of mine, with any he
That durst despise them: Am I not right, Andrages?

Andra. My life's at your command.

Clar. You have a power I see indeed, and doubt not but you will use it nobly.

Melv. We must rule thus, or we are lost here:
What Is a Venus that cannot lead her Mars
In triumph? -- Andrages, perhaps I Will sleep
With thee to night for this --

Andra. You Will be most welcome Madam.

Clar. This day some considerable of our Sex
Join in a Petition to our Queen and
New made King.

Melv. It Is to abrogate their abuse,
In the arbitrary rule of men.

Clar. I hope 'twill prove a seasonable request,
Since now the Queen has made her self a party;
In taking of a Princely Husband.

Melv. Thou have eloquence, and shall be one of
Our fair Speakers in this Cause.

Clar. You complement me Madam,
Though I am obliged to serve the interest.

Melv. We must appear with the fair number
Who expect us to confer -- Andrages --
Wait my coming home about the hour of nine.
[Ex. Melv. and Clarina.
Andra. With all observance, Madam --
Was ever Gentleman and Soldier thus hen-peck'd
As I am? nay, against the privilege of mankind
Here, endure it? that can discharge a Wife
With a breath: sure there is some extraordinary
Magic in it; and I find by my inclinations,
I am so unfortunate to love her at that rate,
As I cannot rid my self of her, though I
Suffer to death, or what is worse, the miseries
Of a vexatious wedlock.
Enter Foscaris.
Fosc. What Andrages? heavy and drooping!

Andr. Somewhat out of Tune.

Fosc. Nay, then it is odds, but thou
Art smitten, or at least ruminating
On some new beauty.

Andr. Would that were the worst.

Fosc. The very best of our Banes, that have proved
Wedlock -- Come I Will sing thee a catch I have
Made on this subject.
He Sings. What though her Eyes are black,
And kisses with a knack,
Natures best skill e're created?
In time she may prove
A surfeit to Love;
And so deserve to be hated.
2.
Love freed from this diet
Is best kept at quiet,
The wanton still longs for to range;
Let Us thank then our Laws
In Wedlocks frail cause,
Gave Husbands a License to change.

Andr. This is all discord to my malady.

Fosc. I took thee to have been longing after
New flesh and blood, or rather sick of thy wife,
Is not that it?

Andr. Thou do not mock me?

Fosc. No, of my life!

Andr. Why then I Will tell thee,
I love her a thousand times better, then
When I longed for her first enjoyment.

Fosc. Is that possible in a man of thy Genius?

Andr. Let me be punished else.

Fosc. Alas! poor Soldier of Cupid:
I have parted with a Wise fair enough
To have figured Venus by, and for that only cause,
Because a Wife: I Would fain see the power of Man,
Or Angel, bring me again to the like dotage.

Andr. Nay more, should she scratch me once a day,
Or use me with that Amazonian confidence
Practiced in our neighboring Scythia, where
Her Sex has the supremacy, and are
So many she Tyrants: I think I should
Endure it, and love her: If this be not Magic,
There Is none betwixt us and the North Pole.

Fosc. Visit her bed often; and if that does not do it,
There Is no surfeit in Wedlock.

Andr. Alas! I have not leave to come there, but rarely,
And on such terms of good behavior,
That I am almost in an Ague the while.

Fosc. The very name of Humourist, methinks
Should bid thee quit her, there is scarce a worse evil.
Or if she be modish, and a wit, it is odds,
But she makes it her luxury to abuse thee,
And bite thee at every turn of thy tongue. If not, make any thing thy quarrel,
to bid
Adieu to her, thou wilt else shame thy Countries privilege.

Andr. But I am such a Dotard --

Fosc. And yet in the Camp
And Court, well knowing, as most of our
Time; I pity thee --
Enter Bassanes, Alvanes, Toxaris, Eumenes, and Draxanes.
Andr. See the General Bassanes.

Fosc. A Prince of high renown and virtue;
Now returned from ending our Tartarian War:
We'll pay him our respects at time of fitter
Opportunity --
[Ex. Foscaris and Andrages.
Alv. The Queen by us, my Lord,
That have the honor to fore-speak her joys,
Congratulates your Excellencies return.

Bass. She is a gracious Lady; and though but late
Made my Intelligence, has taken
The Persian Prince, Tysamnes, for her Husband.

Alv. A Prince that Court does loudly fame, surpassing
All the race of the Arsacides, whence he derives
His blood.

Bass. Her virtue is a mate for his;
Let it be great as e're did live upon the name
Of mortal; but I that have a Soldiers plainness
A little wonder, although her King I hold
Of highest merit: since there is no act precedes
To exempt her Royal Person, from that fate
Of Marriage, the force of custom here
May even inflict upon the greatest.

Tox. It seemed below her Soul and Love, to make
That caution, some wise amongst us wish.

Bass. Tysamnes! married to the Queen! if I
[Aside. Forget not I had Advertisement upon his first
Arrival at her Court, and from a Persian hand
Of trust, that he there loved a Lady; nay more,
Was thought to have assured himself to her.

Eum. The General's a little discomposed.

Drax. Perhaps some discontent relating to the Queens marriage.

Bass. If this prove true, Heaven too soon may frown
On all these joys -- what are these Ladies?
Enter Melvissa, Clarina, and four other Ladies, each with a Paper in her
hands.
Tox. They are come to wait upon the King and Queen.
This day of State, on some concern of their Sex.

Bass. It Is well.
Enter Araxis.
Arax. The King and Queen are ready to come forth.

Alv. We must attend -- your Lordships pardon.

Bass. I have some orders to dispatch unto
The Camp, and then I Will wait their Majesty's --
[Exit Bassanes, etc. Tox. Alv. Arax. another way, manent Mel. Clar. and four
Ladies.
Melv. It behooves us now Ladies, to weigh the force,
And effect of those Arguments we have prepared
To assail so formidable an enemy, as Men and Husbands, fortified
With that so invincible Champion, Custom;
I hope you are all well provided?

1 Lady. Doubt it not Madam, women seldom want wit
To serve their desires and occasions.

Melv. Well said pretty one, young and forward,
And for Illustrations and Metaphors, of
This heinous usage and tyranny of our Matrimonial
Lords and Masters, such were to be wished,
Are most pathetical and persuasive. --

1 Lady. I have taken mine, Madam, from
The example of Socrates, that most grave
Philosopher, who not only endured the ill
Humor, but the supremacy of his Wife,
As worthy of imitation.

Melv. A famous president!

2 Lady. And I mine, Ladies, from that most dreadful
Story of Andromeda, chained to a Rock;
Is it not so, my dear Tysamnes?

Tysam. Thou art above my wishes excellent.

Arax. The Queen expressed her self most nobly.

Tox. If not too confiding in her choice.

Clar. We must submit.

1 Lady. Since there is no remedy.

Melv. I Will serve thee yet Clarina! it shall go hard else.
Enter Bassanes, Eumenes, and Draxanes.
Par. Welcome, as I can express Bassanes --
Thy Victories were early here on Rumors wing,
Which made the grim-look'd Tartars beg a peace
From us: and next my joys of love, completed here,
[To Tys. I must rejoice thy safe return, thou pillar
Of thy Country, and glory of my Crown,
To call thee both my Subject, and Alliance.

Bass. My duty is best paid in the performance
Of your services, which I shall ever study.

Tysam. Let me embrace thee worthy man;
The title which I have to thy brave merit,
In my enjoyment of this beauteous Queen,
Obliges me to hold thy virtues dear
That bring'st me Triumph home, before I scarce
Have warmed this Throne.

Arax. Our new King does caress him highly.

Tox. His interest is great.

Par. I understand
You saw Mandana's Court, our neighbor
Queen, on your return?

Bass. I did Madam.

Par. There Women govern all.

Bass. To wonder, Madam --
Make War, lead Armies, with all transactions
Of the highest Magnitude in State,
To whom the men are held subordinate.

Par. Their Queen's a Lady, Fame reports Wise,
Magnanimous, and no less Beautiful.

Bass. I think all these may well be said to meet
In her.

Par. But the manner of her rule seems strange
To me.

Bass. If compared with ours here; but they
Lay claim to that prerogative, from the
Ancient Amazons whence they derive descent.

Par. 'Twas said Mandana did intend an Embassy
Unto our Court in some short time.

Bass. She gave me so to understand.

Tysam. A beauteous one no doubt.

Bass. They are Women, Sir.

Tysam. We'll treat'm then as fairly.

Par. But credit me, I should not like my reign
So well, were my Sex here alike in power;
Since nature and the worlds best Laws
Have dignified the man superior.

Tysam. Spoke like my Parisatis -- methinks we
Are not cheerful; I have joys enough to raise
A man above the world, had he made forfeit
Of his bliss -- You told me of a masque,
My Soul does want a little clearing up --
[Aside.
Par. I did appoint one.

Tysam. By any means we'll have it.
-- Music plays a while, after which the Masque begins; the Scene a Grove, in
which Diana is beheld sleeping, having at one of the sides next the Stage a
Rock, from which -- Enters Arethusa habited like a Water-Nymph.
Areth. Echo! if thou do visit this fair Grove,
Where thou have often mourned Narcissus love;
At Arethusa's call appear.

Echo. Appear.

Areth. Once more it is Arethusa calls thee here.

Echo within. Here!

Areth. That Is but thy voice, thy person I would see,
Once known a Nymph of highest dignity.
Enter Echo as out of the other side of the Grove.
Echo. Behold bright Arethusa I resume
My long lost Figure, since Heavens fatal doom
Deprived me of my dear Narcissus flames.

Areth. I bear as great a grief confined to streams,
Could never yet with loved Alpheus join;
Think if thy loss can greater be then mine?

Echo. Fair Nymph, with yours I Will not compare my woe,
Since with thy tears thy crystal fountains flow;
And by a wondrous constancy do glide
Through veins of earth unmixt with other tide,
Which Thetis for thy glory did decree,
And great Diana Honors Constancy.

Areth. I wait to see her bathe in my cool floods,
Having a long chase followed in these Woods.

Echo. She in this Grove with her fair Nymphs does sleep,
While with my wakeful voice her watch I keep;
Lest Mortals here (Actaeon like) should pry,
And ravish blushes from her Deity. --
Behold she wakes.
[She wakes.
The Song in the Masque.
1 Nym. See, see, our Goddess wakes,
Whilst we harmonious notes prepare,
Such as bright Phoebus makes,
When to salute Aurora 's car,
The Music of his sphere he takes.

Diana rises and enters with her Nymphs. 2 Nym. Or as before her Curtains drawn
We welcome in the grey-ey'd dawn,
When for the Chase
Diana bends her matchless bow,
And gives her self the first hollow.

1 Nym. Then through Plains, Lawns, and Woods
Over Mountains and Floods
Nymphs tripit, Nymphs trip it apa^e.

2 Nym. Whilst the Heart, Deer, or Roe
They swiftly pursue,
Their Goddess best pleases to chase.

1 Nym. See she appears
More bright then Hesperus does rise,
Whose beams Stars borrow for their eyes.



Dian. Beloved of Nymphs whose chaste and constant stream,
Shall give thy Love an everlasting name;
More dear to me then Zanthus floods so bright,
Or my own Cynthia's beams that guild the night;
Art thou to tread a Chorus come with me,
As once a Nymph of my society?

Areth. Blessed Goddess know from Thetis I am sent
To wait thee first with her great Complement;
Who, if not too much Neptunes Billows rave,
Will soon pass hither in a Crystal wave.

Dian. She shall be welcome. But first Nymph on thee
Diana, (to renown thy constancy)
Does from her hand this precious gift bestow,
Sprung from the tree, whence grew her sacred bow;
On which with finest silk my Nymphs have wove,
The wondrous story of thy streams and love.
[Puts on a Chaplet.
Areth. This grace loved Goddess, I must ever own,
While Arethusa by that name is known;
But if I may thy Deity entreat,
I Would gladly yet with my Alpheus meet.

Dian. Thrice beauteous Nymph, thou su'st I fear in vain,
But for thy merit if I can obtain,
Or Cynthia's aid can help, she shall convey
His gentle current where thy stream has way.
Enter Thetis attended with several Sea-Nymphs.
Omnes. For which let us all Diana's praises sing.

Dian. Stay Nymphs, here comes the Queen to Seas great King.

Thet. Chaste Goddess, I am come to let thee know,
What to thy Graces, Neptunes Queen does owe
; And for this Nymph the honor of all floods,
As these with thee make sacred groves and woods.
For which to speak my thanks I Would gladly tread
The stately Chorus, thy bright self does lead.

Dian. Great Thetis know, no footsteps ever joined
With me a Chorus, but bear souls refined;
For which I have denied some gods of late,
Said to have fell from their celestial state.

Thet. I once gave ear unto such tales like thee,
But proved it soon my vain credulity;
Nor on my waves did then rough Boreas blow,
But I my Nymphs hid in deep Cells below.
Since fame had told his strong arms did embrace
The fair Orithia snatched over Seas to Thrace.

Dian. Nor was it Thetis truth, Achilles came
From great Peleus, and thy own soft flame.

Thet. Such stories may relate as much of thee,
Which tell the Moons sublime Divinity;
Though thy chaste brows her Heavenly figure wear,
Did for Endymions love forsake her sphere:
While such like Tales the guilty Poets sing,
To feign their Hero's from the Gods did spring.

Dian. Queen of the Seas my censure was too free,
'Twere sin to doubt truth in a Deity:
Nor will I think that Goddess e're did burn,
In such frail humane flames my chaste thoughts mourn:
But now behold with me this mortal Throne,
Merits from our immortal powers renown.

Thet. I do embrace the motion, since here is seen
A Throne as bright as each of us sat Queen;
May Love there find, serenest calms their days,
Such as my Halcyons choose that breed on Seas.

Areth. Or as my streams no mingled currents own,
So let their Loves be undivided known.

Echo. May Cupid else for ever loose his Bow.

Omn. And for Loves Goddess none his Mother know.

Thet. To honor whom, thy best known Chorus lead,
And with the Oceans race like steps I Will tread.

Dan. Then Nymphs express with mine your measures powers,
As when we dance on tender grass and flowers:
Leaving no signs our nimble footsteps show,
Or as on Mountains tops, we tread on snow.
[They Dance. Enter Cupid.
Thet. Cupid, art thou come hither?

Cup. I flew this way
To meet my Mother, is she amongst ye pray?

Dian. Away, thou amorous toy, dare thou be here,
Where I to honor constant Love appear?

Cup. I have a shaft here left within a Heart
I Would fain withdraw.

Dian. No more vile Boy, depart,
Thy Mothers Arts and thine, I too well know.

Cup. Then see I fly with an unbended Bow. --
[Ex. Cupid.
Dian. Thetis farewell! I Will to my Woods resort.

Thet. But e're I hence return to Neptunes Court,
Let Us yet more honor Arethusa's name.

Dian. This night I bathe my self in her clear stream.

Thet. Where I Will attend thee with my watery race,
And Nymphs, whose Songs shall there thy Chorus grace.

Areth. For which my fountains clearest springs shall flow.

Echo. And my best Eccho's voice pay duty too.

Dian. Till when farewell Seas Queen.

Thet. Goddess adieu.
[Exeunt Masks.
Tysam. It seems a Moral.

Par. And meant of constancy, I gave the Argument my self.

Tysam. Most fit To entertain thy Virtue. What sight is that?
Enter. Statyra.
Tox. The King seems troubled.

Bass. My heart misgives me this is she.

Par. How does my Love?

Tysam. Your leave a while -- Can thou forgive me fair Statyra? --
[Goes aside, to Statyra.
Stat. And wish you happy in your royal choice,
She is a Princess far above my merit:
Enough that I have seen your face and dye.

Tysam. Thou had my promise first, Heaven is my witness,
And give me but thy leave to expiate
My crime, in due expression of my penitence,
By some act unthought of; if possible,
To win thy Loves forgiveness.

Stat. It Is needless --
Your leave that I return, I Will not ask
So much as a farewell kiss --

Tysam. I must oblige a while thy stay: Bassanes,
Wait this Lady to my Garden lodgings
With all observance --

Bass. I shall Sir --
[Ex. Bassanes and Statyra.
Tysam. The ambition to possess a Crown has had too much
The better of my Conscience --
Come Parisatis.
[Goes to Paris.
Par. Your looks seem troubled.

Tysam. A trivial thought I Am moving from my heart.

Par. From mine, I Am sure, your love shall never part.
[Exeunt Omnes.
ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Eumenes and Draxanes. Eumen. IT seems the Ladies had but small success
In their Petition.

Drax. And yet they urged things
Home and unhappily.

Eumen. Women never want zeal, feldom wit
To perfect their desires; but men have here
So long had the Lee-ward point of love, as
They must be content with the Weather Gage;
Which casts not a few on the rocks of Wedlock.

Drax. For my part I could wish, that Nature had
Taken some other way for the procreation
Of mankind; since both Sexes have so much ado
To agree of the means -- But we are Soldiers.

Eum. And therefore have the less reason to blame
Our Countries freedom, since it is odds, but we
Take as much, if we make a true Muster
Of our Mistresses.

Drax. But the Queens opposing
This desire seemed to many unexpected.

Eum. 'Twas to oblige the King no doubt; and by
The prerogative of her virtues, live
Above the Law, or whatsoever could give a fate
To her enjoyment.

Drax. He Is now more absolute
Then e're was Sovereign that reigned
But in the right of Queen. His Creatures
Dignified in Court and Camp; that almost
It Is within his Will to rule alone, should
He be guilty of that vile ambition.

Eum. She has expressed in every act a kindness
Most unparalled.

Drax. I wish their Loves a peaceful happiness.

Eum. 'T was hoped she might have respected our
General Bassanes in her choice, a Prince
Of Scythia's Royal blood, and favored
In this Nation with an interest equal
To his birth.

Drax. But he it seems, as much in love
With Mars, or paying duties to her service
In the field, never raised his thoughts and merit
To that fair ambition.

Eum. We are his Creatures,
And have served his dangers.
Enter Toxaris, Alvanes, and Araxis.
Tox. Save ye Gentlemen;
Your general thanks to his virtues, has given
Our Crown at once both peace, and victory.

Drax. His conduct did deserve no less.

Alv. Had his return been sooner, perhaps 'thad
Given some stay to the Queens Marriage --
But that is between our selves.

Eum. The news surpised him,
We must witness; as one was scarce consulted
In that action.

Alv. She was a little hasty in her choice.

Arax. Though in her King, she seems to sum such joys
As if she would vye with Angels, as she shines,
Espoused on earth to his affection.

Tox. Nor does the face o'th Court, sometimes the glass
Of Princes, discover ought save joys, and smiles,
A sign to us Courtiers, the Throne's no less serene.

Eum. But in the midst of these methought the King
Appeared disturbed at the presence of a
Stranger Lady.

Arax. But that soon vanished.

Eum. Time will discover more.

Alv. This day, Mandana's
Embassy is expected; it is said, they are Women.

Arax. Perhaps to complement our Queens Marriage;
Or make some league betwixt their Amazonian
State and us.

Eum. But say they should provoke us
To a War; we must bring strange arms into
The Field to have the better of this Generation,
That dare fight with men.

Drax. I could methinks even wish a War,
To see how these she Militants would
Behave themselves; a home-charge with such Troops,
Were winning of a field indeed Gentlemen.
Enter Bassanes and Statyra.
Eum. Here comes the General and that Lady I spoke of.

Arax. She Is wondrous fair.

Alv. May her beams give no dazzle
To our Kings affection; methought she moved
Him strangely.

Tox. Our way lies this way to the Court --
[Ex. Tax. Alv. Arax.
Drax. And our's here --
[Ex. Drax. and Eumen.
Bass. Madam, you highly honor me
In this discovery, from which I find
Your name and birth illustrious, as Persia knows.

Stat. The acquaintance, Sir, I was obliged to make you,
Since here my stay upon the Kings command,
Might else have stained the honor of my blood
With such a character as curious eyes in Courts
Are but too apt to give the least of favors
That a Prince Vouchsafes a Lady.

Bass. You are wise
And noble: and give me your fair leave
To ask a question, my intelligence
Assured me most undoubted.

Stat. If it be truth
My Soul dares not deny it.

Bass. Then thus most noble Lady;
Did not the King once love you?

Stat. I did not think
Heaven had revealed what I had thought a secret --
[Aside. To his heart and mine -- suppose he did, and yet
I blush to charge him with a guilty truth.

Bass. It was my apprehension --

Stat. And since it is made your knowledge, I must further say
My wrongs are fit to be conveyed as far
As the world has bounds, or fame can stretch
Her wings to bear them.

Bass. I fear too sadly --
[Aside. But should you own this claim to his affection now.

Stat. My love's a truth too dear to smother, nor
Did I come, but armed with resolutions
Worthy of my Soul. And it is my highest service
To his Queen (whose virtues I much honor)
If I reveal to her my claim, and thence
Mark out her dangers in this man of falsehood
She enjoys.

Bass. I know you would not charge
Him with this crime, on purpose to create
Repentance; or if you did, who knows
What were your dangers (I speak it not to
Fright you Madam) that here must look like some
Prodigious Star on a great King, made now
So fully happy in the bed and glories of a Queen --
Which how he will resent --

Stat. Let it be death, it is welcome from him.

Bass. Heaven avert it, Madam; yet it is not safe
To tempt a passion past recall, though I
Want not a pity to your virtue.

Stat. I thank your goodness.

Bass. Or say you could attract his past affection
; And in each beam of yours, more deeply wound
His heart then ever (as you have all things
Summed at Natures dearest cost, that can
Enrich a Beauty) were it not glory
To recede from such a Conquest.

Stat. Your Counsel's noble I confess.

Bass. Besides we have a custom here that does
Empower each common man to loose the very
Gordian knot of love in marriage,
That other Countries hold inviolate:
What may then a King do to enjoy
So bright a Mistress as your self?

Stat. I find the World in this degenerate
Faithless age of man has yet one
Worthy left:
[Aside. Know then, most noble Prince, your Counsel does
Conspire with the honor of Statyra's heart;
And though I had a more superior title
To the Kings affection then the Queen can claim
Though made his Consort; yet I for her sake now
Forgive his breach of Faith; nay more, if 'twere
Required, would freely give my life, to see
Their Loves most happy.

Bass. Give me the honor
Of your hand, to pay my humble adoration
Of this virtue.

Stat. My stay shall not be longer here
Then taking leave, becomes me of the King.

Bass. 'Twill speak your worth.
Enter Tysamnes. The King -- your pardon Madam --
[Ex. Bassanes.
Tysam. Statyra! how do thou like thy welcome
In our Court?

Stat. As more then I intended to receive.

Tysam. Thou can not soon be weary
Of these shades, and pleasant walks, where
Nightingales will meet, and sing
New ravishments to entertain thy beauties:
More glad to welcome thy appearance, then
The morning joys, or evenings splendour that
Invites their rest. I think thou might be well
Content to live here still.

Stat. My honor is no child
To be deluded with such toys, though gay
As Paradise when first it is sweetness bloomed,
While but a thought of crime does ripen near me.

Tysam. Thou shal't be here as innocent as flowers
That yield their smiles unto the distant Sun.
You Will grant me sure, so much, Statyra?

Stat. I Will rather welcome death then yield to stay
A minute longer near your person.

Tysam. I know thou art not so unkind.

Stat. Alas I came without design of love,
Though once your lover.

Tysam. Statyra! hold, go not
Too far in goodness, lest Heaven (to surprise
My wonder) take thee hence, and place thee there
A Star, or make me fall I know not whither.

Stat. I have done Sir -- nor shall my presence give you
More concern; or further accent repetition
Of your sin to Heaven and me; that in despite
Of all the darts of Love (so late my wound)
Can with this smiling ease and calm of soul
Bid you farewell for ever. --
[She offers to go, the King stays her.
Tysam. You must not,
Shall not leave me thus --

Stat. You will not, Sir, detain me
Here by force? -- what will your Court then whisper,
Or the bolder world convey to both our infamies?
Enter Parisatis. I hope I have made enough expression
Of my affection --

Par. What do I hear?

Tysam. It Is but to give thee more assurance
Of my love, for which I dare adventure
Life and Crown.

Par. That word! oh my heart! --
[Aside.
Stat. Then know who it is you stay --
And thus dare frown upon your will.

Tysam. How Is this?

Stat. And what I thought this breast should have concealed,
I Will utter with a boldness does become my honor --
And when you know it, you will perhaps, as soon
Cherish a Tygress near your bosom --
Know Sir -- I came with full intent to kill you --
Mark me well: to kill you -- for your faithless promise;
But that the virtues of your Queen withheld me,
In whom I wish you ever blessed: the whiteness
Of whose Soul, I thought it sin to cloud
(From act of mine) with sorrow.

Par. Forgive me Heaven;
This Woman is some Angel sure; I can
No longer hold but pay my reverence.
[Par. goes toward Stat.
Tysam. We are interrupted -- my Guard there! --
Enter Captain of the Guard. Convey that Lady from my sight, and see
Her safe consigned within her lodgings.

Par. Let me beg for her freedom, though I do it
On my knees --

Tysam. I must not grant it; she came
To ruin my content, perhaps in thee;
A Treason too she has confessed against my life.

Stat. Let me deserve your fair opinion, Madam,
Though I dye.

Tysam. Away with her -- how does my Parisatis? --
[Ex. Statyra with the Captain of the Guard.
Par. Never better -- this dissipates my fear.
[Aside. Enter Bassanes.
Bass. Embassadresses from
The Queen Mandana are arrived.

Tysam. See their reception want no state our Court
Can give; they shall have Audience speedily.
Some thoughts require me to my Closet first.
[Ex. Tysamnes.
Par. Bassanes, never so happy, as this minute
In which I proved the fixed assurance of
My Kings affection. The Persian beauty
Who but so late gave apprehensions to
My love, is now no more my fear.

Bass. She is a noble Lady,
And gave me confirmation of her honor.

Par. It Is most unquestioned.

Bass. She does intend suddenly
To return back to Persia.

Par. Alas! the King
(To my great grief) in much displeasure
Has restrained her.

Bass. I hope she will soon have liberty.

Par. It shall not want my intercession.

Bass. Pray Heaven this be no Artifice.

Par. True love is soon confirmed; but in that Breast
[Aside. Suspicion storms, it never can anchored rest.
[Exeunt. Enter Clarina and Melvissa.
Clar. Our Petition had but small success.

Melv. No matter, as to thy case; did not I
Promise to serve thee?

Clar. But where is the faith
Believes it possible?

Melv. If it be next a Miracle,
And do the feat, thou wilt welcome the effect?

Clar. However, my obligement's great to your endeavors.

Melv. What if a smile or look of thine, or a toy
As inconsiderate as the least lock of thy hair,
Produce his Loves return, as I apply it;
Have thou not reason to thank the means?

Clar. It Is granted.

Melv. Therefore believe well; rememb'ring that
We are told, a dram of faith can do
Far greater wonders.

Clar. You shall confirm me,
But I hope it is no Charm or Magic?
I am strangely fearful of the Devil.

Melv. Rather a means from Heaven! my Mother
Left it as a Legacy to me.

Clar. A Recipe most Wives may wish for here.

Melv. I thought to have given it to the Queen,
But that perhaps 'twere death to own,
And this our custom unrevok'd.

Clar. I hope her virtues never will want affection.

Melv. As it effects, I Will tell thee more.
Enter Foscaris. Here comes thy Husband, and I am prepared
For him to purpose -- thou must withdraw
Till I give thee notice to appear.
[Ex. Clarina.
Fosc. Madam! your most humble servant.

Melv. And I perhaps ten times more yours.

Fosc. This sounds briskly.

Melv. Not that I intend to instance,
You have parted with a deserving Lady,
And so press a reconciliation from
The doctrine and uses of Love, as some Matrons
Amongst us might perhaps ring in your ears
In the like case.

Fosc. Far be it from me to
Think it, Madam; I know you are well bred,
And must therefore understand what better
Belongs to our Mode, and a Gentleman, then so.

Melv. Well said Gallant -- but I hope you will not teach
My Husband to follow your example;
And like such a Buck as your self, break
Through the toil and bonds of Marriage;
Though some of you allow it no more, then
A State device to catch fools.

Fosc. This is a Witty Rogue; a Wife that understand;
The intrigues of a Mistress.

Melv. Then say, my husbands wife
Should think you a fine Gentleman --

Fosc. I understand you Madam.

Melv. And were willing to bestow some affection
On your worth. --

Fosc. Go on Lady, go on; you are
Coming to a point indeed.

Melv. There it is, you have it to a hair --
[Gives him a Bracelet enclosed in a Paper. I hope you will keep Counsel --

Fosc. O Madam! 'twere sin to doubt it.

Melv. And wear it carefully, for the owners sake
I mean, and so farewell kind Foscaris;
If this fail, you are proof above Mortal.
[Aside. Now to be near and act further as occasion serves.
[Ex. Melv.
Fosc. What have I here? I Will open it carefully,
And first taste it by the smell; it scents
Most Lady-like, and amorous; methinks
It moves too, I know not how: Oh these Women
Are rare contrivers in these Scenes of Love --
Now for the enclosed --
[Opens it. Ha, ha, ha, a Bracelet of a lock of Hair,
In color much resembling my Wives: but
Such a trick on me, were to little purpose,
I Will tangle no more there -- but now I think on it,
I have found the knack; as sure as I am made
Of flesh and blood, it is Melvissa courts me
For her self, for which purpose she handles
Andrages, her husband, at that rate.
It Is a witty-gay female, as most within
Our Kingdom; and it seems the Rascal's
Willing to graft his forehead, and be beholding
To his Friend for the Horn. In the mean time
I Will pleasure her desire, and wear her favor.
[Puts it on his arm. The Devil on it, it warms the vein that leads
To the Heart strangely; and it is love I feel
In abundance -- I must vent it somewhere,
Or I shall burn to ashes; it is most certain I am
Charmed to purpose, and it is odds but some evil spirit
Waits at my elbow.

Melv. within. None but thy better Genius --
[Speaks altering of her voice.
Fos. Ha! a voice too, then there is a Devil in the
Case it is manifest -- what art thou, and from whence?

Melv. I am a Spirit belonging to the element of fire.

Fosc. Thou have some possession of me already then,
Who am flame all over -- what is thy business?

Melv. Love, kindest Love.

Fosc. The same is mine, and
Since thou art a kind Familiar, I dare ask
Thee a question -- Art thou a Genius of Love at large
According to our Gallantizing Mode? or art thou for
A more peculiar Courtship?

Melv. I incite Honorable, and Matrimonial Love.

Fosc. A most Heroic Devil indeed;
But take a care how thou do otherwise appear to me,
Lest my sword make bold with one of thy limbs,
And it prove afterward to belong to some
Sorcerer, or Witch.

Melv. You need not fear that.

Fosc. Prithee avoid me then, I would not willingly be haunted
By a Matrimonial Genius of all other.

Melv. Your desire is granted --
While only I Will thy heart incite
To love thy fair deserted Wife,
For whose sake, I am obliged thy sense to ply,
Since on thy wrist thou did a philter tie.
And so farewell.
[Ex. Melvissa.
Fosc. Adieu, adieu! had ever man such a Dialogue
As this?
[He studies. Enter Clarina and Melvissa.
Melv. Be confident I have performed to purpose.

Clar. I warrant you.

Melv. Nay more to his greater
Terror, I withdrew here, and counterfeited my self
A Spirit.

Clar. Most excellent!

Melv. And had
Such pleasant discourse with him.

Clar. You have done above my expectation.

Melv. He comes on fiercely I warrant thee.

Fosc. And yet I do not find my hair stares, or
A cold sweat on me, enough to dissolve me to a gelly,
Like some stories I have heard of this kind.

Melv. See, he is here, observe a little -- in the mean time
I Will withdraw.
[Ex. Melv.
Fosc. Whilst I feel such a heat dispersed through every vein
Of my body, no man, or longing virgin ever felt
The like in any burning wish, or actual enjoyment --
Well Foscaris, thou have got a tickling spirit in thee.

Clar. I perceive it takes.

Fosc. And yet methinks
It should not be in the power of Magic to make
Me affect my cast-off Wife; if it prove otherwise,
What a confounded Lover am I then -- she is here.
[Observes her.
Clar. Now I Will approach him.
[Walks toward him.
Fosc. As I am a man, it is she I long for,
The very element of fire is met
Within me, and my heart rises to my very lips
At her appearance.
[Gazes on her.
Clar. The Physic works; now to handle this patient.
[Aside.
Fosc. Oh thou art bright indeed Clarina;
Ariadnes Crown of Stars is Copper
To thy Eyes, and in each look methinks thou
Stain'st the evenings glory.

Clar. Good kind Sir, keep off, it is toward bedtime.

Fosc. It Is thither I would go with thee Love, and twine
More happily then ever! Alas, I did but this
To love thee ten times better then before;
As men restrain themselves from food they like
To make the next meal better.

Clar. Keep your ground good Sir Amorous;
You and I must not come to the close embrace
So easily; and lest you should be boyst'rous,
I Will be gone.

Fosc. Stay but a twilights time longer --

Clar. It Is more then I can well afford you.
Enter Andrages.
Fosc. Nay prithee let me beg it though I kneel.

Clar. You deserve some penance; I Will not entreat you
To be sparing.
[Ex. Clarina*
Andr. Foscaris kneeling! and to his own Wife?
The world sure turns round, or Plato's year
Is come about; if this Diamond he late
Discarded should again be Trump? --
What Foscaris! pensive?

Fosc. Oh I am undone!

And. What Is the matter?

Fosc. Nay, thou wilt laugh me into shame enough
When thou know it.

Andr. By no means.

Fosc. Why, I am wounded by Cupid the wrong way?

Andr. As how?

Fosc. I scarce know how to tell thee.

Andr. Nay prithee let me know.

Fosc. Understand then I am in love
With my own cast petticoat; if that be not
A curse to a Scythian Husband, I Will
Challenge fate to do worse if possible.

Andr. Though I found thee on thy knees, I hope
Thou do not pray over love again to thy Wife.

Fosc. But I do, and at such an intolerable rate,
That were every sense of mine a several soul,
She might command 'em all to express it.

Andr. Is It possible? --

Fosc. And more, look well to thy self,
I fear thy Wife's an Inchantress.

Andr. Ha, ha, ha --

Fosc. If thou do not see her flying steeple high,
And thy self atop on her shortly, I Will hang
As high for it.

Andr. But you thought there was no such thing
As Charm or Magic in Love, and that our
Scythian Wives would have still continued such
Tame things, as like bob'd Eyesses, they might
Have been turned off; and took to hand at pleasure.

Fosc. I have proved the Experiment dearly:
Take care and mock not, lest thou art beheld
Converted to a Cat, and cry Mew
To keep her company.

Andr. Is this the man
That could defy Cupid and all his Arts?
Nay shoot your Darts contrary to his, at
A minutes warning -- was it not so?

Fosc. I thought I could, till more then mortal powers
Conspired against me.

Andr. And for a Wife, 'twas
Such a potion, must have no more to do
With your palate.

Fosc. The very name of her
Inflames me like fire.

Andr. A little more to cool you
And I have done; come I Will put you in mind,
Of a Julip of your own composition;
[Sings. What though her Eyes are black,
And kisses with a knack, etc.

Fosc. No more, no more, though I deserve to be
Bitten with a Satyr could sting worse then
Scorpions.

Andr. Well; I have done.

Fosc. Let Us shake hands then,
And go thus postur'd to the Frantic Society here,
Amongst which I Will dye,
If e're there were two such Fanatic presidents
Of Husbands as our selves: Oh 'twould make such a
Novelty of distempers!

Andr. And there endure a little of the twig,
Shall we?

Fosc. By any means;
Thou for observing thy Wife with such a
Fond affection, as I beyond dotage
Long for mine again.

Andr. Good Foscaris,
Enough of this extravagancy: In the mean time
I have so far the better of the malady,
That I have no fear of thy relapse,
And for a cure, let me advise one more gentle;
Let Us drink some Wine, and give it spirit
In Clarina's health.

Fosc. Oh that I could taste her lips once more --
And mark me friend, it is odds as I am a Gentleman,
But in spite of all prevention I shall
Hang or drown my self for love, e're the next Moon.

Andr. Come I Will take care of thee.
[Exeunt. Enter Tysamnes, Parisatis, Bassanes, Clarina, Melvissa, Toxaris,
Alvanes, and Araxis, etc.
Tysam. We understand Bassanes, that the Embassadresses
From the Queen Mandana are arrived.

Bass. They are, Sir.

Tysam. Attend them to our presence.
[Ex. Bassanes. An Embassy few Courts have seen before,
Where Women bear their Princes Errands,
And rule supreamly even our Sex.
What think you Ladies, were your case alike
With us?

Clar. For mine I should not wish it, Sir,
'Twere too injurious to the right of men.

Melv. You are a little of the kindest Lady --
For my part, Sir, were I born under the like
Favorable Aspect of Venus, it is odds but I
Should wear a Bow and Quiver, to maintain
The privilege -- you will pardon, Sir, my freedom.

Tysam. A witty sprightly Lady -- and yet I dare believe
There Is none of all you Gentlemen, that has
A Wife predominant, who does not own
Submission to the custom here. --

Tax. This touches home.

Tysam. I am confirmed, that were the case my consorts here,
(So dear unto my soul) she would not claim
Her self exempted.

Alv. That parenthesis was odly placed.
[Aside.
Par. You know I am all obedience, Sir,
And hope you will now receive such offers, from
This our neighbour-Queen, as will not give your thoughts
The least disturbance; nor would I have a War
Wherein my Sex should fight, were I made a party
In the cause, or injury.

Tysam. Thou art all Excellence.
Enter Bassanes with Renone, and Cydane the Embassadresses. Now Ladies, your
Queens pleasure.

Renone. Who does by us, most Royal Sir, congratulate
Your great accession to this Throne, and more, your joys
In this your fair and virtuous Queen, who scarce
Has equal in her Sex: to which (if possible)
Her wishes do yet add more happiness.

Tysam. This is but usual form of State: proceed.

Cyd. It Is what our Queen expects you will welcome,
Who waves dispute of Territories,
The usual great concerns of Thrones;
And has but one demand instead of all,
To make your Greatness: whence may spring
A lasting league betwixt her mighty Crown
And yours.

Tysam. Speak it then!

Par. I hope 'twill find reception.

Cyd. Then know, our Mighty Mistress does demand
By us an Abrogation of that most
Rigid usage here, from which the Husbands will
Is too much Lord of love.

Tysam. Sure, you mistake your Embassy?

Ren. Nor can she reign without a blush must stain
Her glories, should she not (if denied)
Compel by arms her Sexes fair relief.

Clar. Nobly urged.

Melv. Methinks I could fight in this Cause my self.

Arax. The King is moved.
[Aside.
Alv. Observe the Queen.

Tysam. Your Queen's too bold with us in this demand;
But she is a Woman.

Cyd. And soon you will find, she will slight
All dangers in this Cause: nor is the world
Unknowing, that her arms (though guided
By the conduct of our Sex) has often gave
Wars rough Laws to men.

Par. Let me then intercede, my Royal Husband,
I would not have a quarrel in this Cause,
(Although I doubt not from your love security)
The world I know would say you but defend
A most unkind prerogative; and since it is thus,
Bestow it as a bounty on the Sex for my sake.

Tysam. Can this proceed from Parisatis?

Par. As truly as I wish your peace and love.

Tysam. Thou do mistake in both --

Par. Besides, what honor were in such a Cause
To be a Conqueror? or on your Warlike Trophee to
Inscribe, you did subdue the force of Women,
Led by a neighbor Queen, whose bravery
Of soul, deserves esteem and wonder --
I know you will condescend.

Tysam. Away, thou do abuse thy Love and me.

Par. Is It possible?

Tysam. Or else endeavour'st by compliance with
This Embassy, to betray the honor of
This Crown, and People; take which you like --
And know thou have forfeited thy Being
In my soul.

Par. Heaven defend.

Tysam. And tell your Queen I Will reign
[To the Embassadresses. A King of men in spite of all her power
Of Spinsters: whose honor by this grant would be
The mock of Women. Nor do I doubt their hearts
And swords will join with mine to assert this
Nations right.

Tox. The King is much incensed.
[Aside.
Alv. I hope 'twill not reflect upon the Queen.

Tysam. And by my Act, to assure the world how much
I Will own my Subjects privilege, behold my Queen.

Cyd. A Lady full of Grace and Virtue --

Par. Oh my fears!

Tysam. Who with no more concern I Will cast away,
Then Indians do a Pearl, that never did know
It Is value; and from this hour no more my Wife.

Par. Must it be so?

Bass. Consider Sir, this Act
May prove a rash one --

Tysam. My resolution's fixed -- nor do I fear
What Law can act, though hence I reign not jointly
With this Queen, while by the power I possess,
I can create a right above it.

Par. Nor shall I plead a word
Against your Will, though it severely fall
Upon my Love; or mention what should be
Your gratitude to me, that gave you both
My self and Crown, and yet will give my life,
If your concern require it --
You Will give me time convenient to withdraw.

Tysam. Thou shall to any place retire within
My Crowns Dominion, where thou shall live
In state and greatness of a Queen --
And so farewell.

Par. Adieu, my dearest.

Alv. This action of the King was unexpected.
[Aside.
Arax. Such as must breed some strange distemper here.

Tox. I wish our Almanacks were all burnt else.

Tysam. To morrow you shall have our Letters to your Queen.

Renone. And as becomes her she will resent this Act.

Tysaem. Bassanes --
[Ex. Tysamnes and Bassanes.
Cydan. Madam, you have our pity.
[Ex. Embassadresses.
Clar. The Queen deserves a sorrow
From all Hearts.

Melv. She has deeply mine.

Par. Though life has many ways to lose it is comforts,
Few hinder the distressed means of death:
And let my sad example teach my Sex,
That when they love embarque with men, it is like
A vessel, that with gilded streamers sails
On dangerous Seas, and in each calm must think
This smooth-faced Ocean may their Barques soon sink.
Exeunt.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Parisatis in a Mourning Vail led by Bassanes. Bass. I Want no sense of
your afflictions, Madam.

Par. It Is like your worth.

Bass. And dare express it more
Then entertaining of your griefs by naked Accents,
That were too low and common for Bassanes heart;
Each vulgar ear that hears from rumors breath,
Will do as much, and glory in the hope
Of making stubborn Heaven bend to hear
Your sufferings.

Par. You are a Prince allied unto my Crown,
Nor can I doubt, but every vein of yours
Has many streams of honor --

Bass. Know, Madam,
Since you are pleased to call me worthy of
Your great Alliance; I want no heart to tell
The King, your Husband (though sitting on the Throne)
His ingratitude.

Par. I wish I had been truly charged with any crime
That might have given his Act in my desertion,
Some vizard to outface the world: I dare believe
The Law that first here gave this liberty to man,
Did tacitly imply the Husband should
Not be a lawless Tyrant to the Wife.

Bass. The injustice is too palpable; and
Fitter 'twere this Law had no more being,
Or the Sex of women against Natures
Made supreme, then thus to be embittered
Against your virtue,
Though smoothed and gilded over with pretexts,
He calls State Policy, and Marriage Interest,
But simply Artifice to bring another
To his Throne and Bed.

Par. I fear it is too much a truth.

Bass. Statyra is no doubt designed to shine
In this Meridian, by your fair remove:
But think not, Madam, that your Eclipse of
Glory can pass without your Subjects due
Remorse, and vindication: he is a King here
But as you made him so, in giving him
Your self a Queen; and from your love has only
Title to your Subjects hearts.

Par. And had the world
Been mine in Kingdoms, with as many Hearts,
My affection had disposed 'em all to him.

Bass. You have given proof above parallel.

Par. But this ingratitude does combat with my soul!

Bass. Permit, I serve your Royal Virtue.

Par. I know thou dare revenge my wrong, and have
An interest in thy blood and merits, that
Can guide this Nations Arms, and raise a stream
Of vulgar force, enough to sink Tysamnes
Even to the depth of ruin, though fortified with
All the power he now enjoys.

Bass. I will employ my utmost in your service.

Par. I have I see a Subject great, brave, and faithful;
In spite of all adversity -- Bassanes
Thou will obey me strictly?

Bass. Be danger what it will;
Nor need you question, but the arm I shall apply
Is strong enough to right, or else revenge
Your injuries: nor want I means prepared
Even at this minute, that shall soon perform
The least breath of your commands.

Par. Then know, I do enjoin you all obedience
To the King --

Bass. How, Madam?

Par. I mean Tysamnes,
Who has thrown me from his heart, and that far
More strict, if possible, then had he met
My Love with equal constancy -- I would
Not live and underact the part of virtue.

Bass. You oblige me now to be your enemy --
Who knows how soon you may be taken from
The world by him, that thus has cast you from
His bosom?

Par. It Is not inglorious if I die,
Or split on any rock,
This storm shall throw me on,
If Innocence be my harbor.

Bass. The Worm that is trod on, bows in some displeasure
When it is grieved; what should then do your Greatness?

Par. But virtue's yet more gentle, whose value's
Most refined by suffering -- I know
You will obey me.

Bass. Since it is your pleasure.

Par. And be sure give out 'twas Act of State,
Or Crime in me, or any thing thou can devise
Most plausible, to assure the people
To Tysamnes. And more, that it is my strict
Enter Eumenes and Draxanes.
Eum. The Queen, Sir, is withdrawn.

Tysam. How Is that?

Drax. Removed Sir, none knows whither.

Tysam. I fear she has taken some precipitate resolve.

Bass. The joys this news will bring,
Must soon cause her appearance,
Where e're she is retired.

Tysam. Make strict and speedy search,
He wants no wealth brings happy tidings first.

Eum. Drax. We'll use all diligence.
[Ex. Eum. Drax.
Tysam. Bring forth Statyra.

Bass. I Will wait her to you, Sir.
[Ex. Bassanes.
Tysam. It Is fit she know
How much I have offended for her sake.
Enter Bassanes and Statyra. Statyra, I must beg a pardon of thy virtue.

Stat. Sir, you have proved I can forgive.

Tysam. Thy goodness I have injured next my Queens,
And I am making of my peace with Heaven
And her.

Stat. It Is worthy of your Soul -- But you will consider, Sir --

Tysam. I do, that 'twas my sin of love to thee
Which did induce this Act, to whom I first
Disposed my heart: and would to Heaven I had
Two souls, that I might give one to thy virtue,
And make thee twin in my affection with my Queen;
Excepting whom, the world and womankind
Are but trifles to my heart.

Stat. Mine is as truly yours;
And let this blush excuse my boldness,
If I claim you now my own.

Tysam. How Is this Statyra?

Stat. You are made free by Law,
(If such a one this Country owns) and can
That less then plead for my enjoyment now,
So much your Lover?

Bass. I did not look for this.
[Aside.
Tysam. Tempt me not fair Statyra, lest I fall
Below the sin of the Apostate Angels;
And call thy love my second crime.

Stat. I did but mention mine to prove your constancy.
May you for ever live most happy in
Your Queen; and for your sake I Will beg of Heaven
That she may late be taken thither.

Tysam. Thou art a pattern of perfection --

Stat. And since you now have made me free, I Will crave
Your leave to respite my return, till I
Congratulate your happy meeting with
Your Queen, and so to Persia, where I Will
Spread your joys.

Bass. This centers with my wish.
[Aside.
Tysam. Each syllable of thine does give my soul new wonder.
Since not alone, thou can my Crime forgive,
But yield I may another Lover live.
Ex. Tysamnes leading Statyra, Bassanes. Enter Melvissa with two Courtiers.
Melv. You are pleased to like my entertainment
Gentlemen; and I am apt enough to be
Proud of your good opinion.

1 Court. You are all diversion, Madam, our Court
Has not such another Lady.

2 Court. I hope you will
Give me leave to spend some hours with your converse.

Melv. You may be welcome as I please
Jointly, and severally.

Both. We understand you, Madam.

Melv. But methinks you are a little dull (though
Courtly bred) since you speak praises of my Wit,
But have little to say for my Beauty.

1 Court. Oh Madam! that is granted, the Court has no such
Star, bating the Queen.

2 Court. Besides, your Ladyship
Cannot so far mistake our inclinations,
As to suppose we pay adorations
To the ugly, though never so witty;
They are only fit to eat with, provided
They keep good Tables.

Melv. Now I perceive you.

1 Court. But for you, Madam, (so perfectly taking)
The day is too short to admire you, and
The night to enjoy you.

Melv. You aim well, and it is odds
But I guess the mark you would hit -- pray sit a while;
I can afford you some minutes --
[They sit by her.
2 Court. There Is no time
Long enough, we are not in haste. --

1 Court. It Is fit we wait your leisure.
Enter Andrages.
Melv. I keep my lodgings free enough for entertainment,
And live without the fear of Prying Watchers, or the
Jealous Husbands eye.

Andr. Oh my torment! she dares me to be jealous too.
[Aside.
2 Court. I suppose, Madam, you allow the Gentleman
His times of hawking and hunting, in order
To your more private Recreations.

1 Court. Let me be so happy I beseech you,
As to have notice when he is absent.

2 Court. Or I, Madam, I should endeavor to serve you.

Andr. I Will try whether I have so much courage
Left, as to mark these things (made up of perfumes
And Perriwigs) in the forehead with a
[Draws his Sword. Jealous token of mine, e're I am convicted
I wear a horn there my self -- now Gentlemen --

1 Court. Your Husband, Madam -- we are in haste --

Melv. You need not make so much.

2 Court. Your Humble Servant, Sir. --

1 Court. The King expects me, Madam.

Melv. You shall not part with any apprehension
Hence -- how now Sir Hot Spur? I must curb you
I faith, if you offer to take such
Careers as these.

Andr. You may command me, Madam -- a Lark is not
So dared as I am by this Hobby of mine.
[Aside.
Melv. Put up your Tool, and remove; your appearance
Was more unseasonable then I looked for.

Andr. Each word she speaks is a Charm; I have not
So much valor in me as to oppose her tongue,
What e're I have done, or dare do otherwise.
[Ex. Andrages.
Melv. You may now withdraw,
Gentlemen, the King expects you.

Both. Your Servant Lady.

Melv. There is no need of the expression;
I did but act a little of the most to show my prerogative;
I hope you will say there is one Woman amongst us
Has wit enough to rule her Husband
In spite of Law.

Both. We'll witness it to wonder, Madam.
[Exeunt. Enter Clarina hastily.
Clar. Oh Madam! your experiment has done
Wonders; my Husband --

Melv. Loves thee now to purpose. --

Clar. Beyond expression.

Melv. My mother proved
Such a like Artifice on my father,
For securities sake, yet loved him dearly.

Clar. You have given good proof in your own,
And for mine, I believe he feels love
In every fiber of his heart; kneels to
Adore me, compares me to Stars, and
Vows that I am more fair then ever.
Oh what a kissing time shall I have on it, If he and I meet in embrace again?

Melv. Tantalize him well first.

Clar. But to say truth,
I long my self, and would willingly be -- you guess --
Enter Foscaris.
Melv. He comes, withdraw a while --
[Ex. Clarina.
Fosc. Oh Madam! you
Have given me a present has had such
Powerful operation on me.

Melv. By this time
You well understand the meaning on it
I assure my self.

Fosc. It Is love Madam, in extremity.

Melv. Did I not tell you so?

Fosc. I thought I had hit your sense
To a hair indeed, while I conceived you
As Gentlemen should a Lady in the like case.

Meiv. It means as good a thing I can assure you.

Fosc. But I am doting on my Wife again,
And must (in spite of flesh and blood) woo her
'Twice over.

Melv. There it is -- Alas good Sir, who could
Have thought it in a man of your temper?

Fosc. That same bewitching Bracelet you gave me,
Which I am fain to kiss thus reverently
Most minutes of the day, nay, sometimes pray to it;
I cannot blame your Husband
For being such a strict Amorist; he
Has had his philter I suppose.

Melv. I never found it needful; if I had,
Perhaps I should have endeavored much
To preserve his love.

Fosc. There Is not a hair
On thy head, but I dare say can do more
Then all the Charms of Medea.

Melv. Excuse me, Sir.

Fosc. I should be loath to prove you guilty of
Magic, though it is certain.

Melv. Proceed, good Sir,
And accuse me, because Heaven has brought
Your affection back again to your Lady;
It Is odds but I shall answer it.

Fosc. Well, since it is thus,
I forgive thee; and as you are a Woman,
Speak a good word for me.
Enter Clarina.
Melv. That I assure you,
And perhaps have taken more care for you
Then you can imagine -- here she comes,
Apply your self first.
[Ex. Melvissa.
Fosc. And are we met thus?

Clar. If not happily, you may remove me
With the least breath of yours.

Fosc. Nay, prithee stay,
I love strangely to look on thee --
O that Eye of thine! --

Clar. And this Cheek, this Lip, (some think not ill)
So often tasted by you, with other amorous
Passages of ours: does this remembrance please you?

Fosc. To miracle! --

Clar. And do you truly repent
My desertion, as you protested to me you did?

Fosc. From the very bottom of my belly, sweetest.

Clar. Had you said your heart, perhaps I had
Took your word, and consented to have met
Your desires on honorable terms.

Fosc. This may be a device to bring my passion
To some further mockery: (these she Serpents
Want no wiles) I Will try whether or no
I can dissemble mine, though against the
Power of Magic.

Clar. You dare trust my Love?

Fosc. I could find in my heart --

Clar. You seemed of late
To adore me so strangely, that I am obliged
To take pity of you now for fear of your wits.

Fosc. It Is certain she mocks me --
[Aside. I confess I felt a kind flame, or so;
But I did not intend to keep a perpetual
Etna in my bosom, or such a Fevour
Of Love, that will only admit of one Julip.

Clar. Melvissa's Arts do fail I fear.

Fosc. Besides, you Women are such nice things
To handle, and as the world runs now,
Have such superlative devices. --

Clar. I can forgive you truly; by this
[Points to his Picture by her side.]
Image which never can hang too near my heart.
Fosc. My Picture still there? better and better;
[Aside. As sure as I live she is charmed too. Melvissa
I remember told me, that she had done
Something extraordinary for me; I may
Dissemble safely, and if need were, make her
Long as much for me now; what a rare turn
Of Love would that be?

Clar. You then continue cruel still?

Fosc. Alas my pretty fondling, I know thou
Were ever kind and tender; but to say truth
I did but counterfeit my passion, a little
To comply with thine, and gave out I had
Received I know not what charms of Venus,
Supposing thou had more wit then to believe
Such wonders.

Clar. Is It possible?

Fosc. Alas! what
Could thou expect from a man of my complexion?

Clar. I Will try my own Art a little then --
[Aside. Oh my Foscaris! -- behold I dye to show
Thee thy ingratitude
[She makes as if she swounded Enter Melvissa.
Fosc. Help, help, help, my dearest thing of life,
I love thee most outragiously.

Clar. Are you in earnest?

Fosc. Alas! I could even eat thee to express it.

Clar. May I confide?

Fosc. Besides, I Will tell thee more;
I am charmed to that purpose --
Behold this Bracelet, there is ten thousand
Spirits of Cupid in it.

Clar. May I be certain? ha, ha, ha --

Fosc. I Will swear it by a thousand Stars.

Clar. Ha, ha, ha --

Fosc. By this good light she jeers me.

Melv. And acts her part unto my wish.

Clar. Some other time you and I will dispute terms.
[Ex. Clar.
Fosc. Oh my folly!

Melv. If you want an Advocate,
Yet command me; in the mean time, I hope
You Will make much of your favor, and so adieu.
[Ex. Melv. Enter Andrages.
Fosc. If I am not put in a Ballad, or Lampoon'd
By some Scurrilous Poet before to morrow
This time, there is no mischief in being a
Subject of ridiculous wonder.

Andr. What Is the matter?

Fosc. Ask me no questions. --

Andr. But I could tell thee
Such a story of my Rancounters.

Fosc. But pronounce not the name of Wife.

Andr. I Will tell thee news then; it is said we shall have
Wars with our Amazon neighbors.

Fosc. Let it come,
I have quarrel enough to the whole Sex
For the sake of one.

Andr. But if they have many
Such Pentheselea's amongst 'em as my Wife,
We are beaten into corners.

Fosc. I am for any thing that is desperate,
And if I do not cut as many of 'em
Off at the waste, to be revenged of this
Evil Genius of mine, let me dye
By their Bodkins.
[Exeunt. Enter Tysamnes, Alvanes, Araxis, Draxanes, Eumenes, and others.
Tysam. Call in the Embassadresses.
[Ex. Eum. Drax. Enter Bassanes with Renone and Cydane. Here are our Letters to
your
Queen. -- We hear her Army
Is advanced near upon our Confines.

Renon. But first by us denounces War;
Who scorns to gain a foot of earth, but what
Her Sword shall fairly win.

Tysam. We'll soon prepare to meet her.

Cydan. And thus we take our leaves.
[King whispers Alv. and Arax.
Bassanes to the Embassadresses aside.] I hope your Queen, whose most
Illustrious
Person I admire, will grant me pardon,
[Aside. If in my Countries Cause I serve a Soldier.

Renon. She honors worth in all, amongst whom Your virtues have no small
effects, Acknowledged by the world A worthy Captain.

Bass. Your Servant Ladies.
[Ex. Embassadresses. Enter Fosearis and Andrages.
Tysam. You shall have all Commands become your valors;
I know as men, you stand obliged to serve this Cause.

Fosc. To a man, Sir.

Andr. And I (excepting one Woman)
Dare act as much against the Sex: but she
I must confess, Sir, has the better on me
In all Incounters.

Tysam. Your Wife I guess;
I am glad to hear I have a Subject who
Is so kind a Husband --
No news yet of our Queen?

Bass. Not any, as the best of my Intelligence can learn.

Tysam. My soul is on the torture.
Enter Toxaris.
Tox. I hope Sir, I have brought you happy tidings in this Letter.

Tysam. It Is Parisatis hand.

Tox. 'Twas given me
From an unknown person, who would not stay
To satisfy my further Queries.

Tysam. reads. Let this assure you from Parisatis,
That she is removed from this Life, before
It meets your hand: The means I have
Resolved on for my end, I will not give you the
Grief to hear, or charge you guilty of my death,
And to confirm you, this preoedes my last being;
I have sent you this Jewel, you must witness
I vowed should be kept to the death of Parisatis.
Oh Heavens! my Parisatis dead! read
Here Bassanes.
[Bassanes reads.
Bass. My tears are slow, but credit me,
The death of Armies, and the groans of War
When made from gasping Friends, just drowning
Of their souls in streams of blood, never shook
My heart like this.

Tysam. Thy griefs are truly mine.

Bass. But hope that providence, whose paths are
Labyrinths, may yet --
Enter Statyra.
Tysam. She Is dead, she is dead, too certain --

Stat. The King's disturbed.

Tysam. Beyond expression; Parisatis my Queen --

Stat. I hoped was now returned to your embrace.

Tysam. The other world contains her virtues, she is dead.

Stat. My eyes can never want streams to pour
With yours for such a loss.

Tysam. Mine are too guilty to partake
With thine; and had I more then Niobe
E're shed to drown my soul in; or turned
To Marble at this news like her, 'twere but
Too gentle to express my crime or grief.

Stat. This passion's glorious.

Tysam. What death can I devise, or torments
Give my soul enough, that have at once
To answer breach of faith to thee and death of her?

Stat. Your stain is deep in both, though far more vile
As you are a Prince who did unworthily
Possess the love and glories
Of so excellent a Queen; that no pretense
Of Power, or Law, can expiate --
But since by Heavens decree she is thus removed
To Stars, for which did I but know her Urn,
I Would visit it, and pay my tears as an
Oblation to her memory --
Yet now it is fit you live for my sake

Tysam. Thou have some justice to my life,
But wilt not now oblige it?

Stat. I do, and
Claim it as the greatest blessing of my own.

Tysam. There Is nothing left me, but in thee, that can
Invite a minutes breath.

Stat. You had my first love Sir,
So far you have an interest still.

Tysam. And for thy sake I will admit to live;
Nay more, I Will talk to thee of Love, and with
What penitence thou shall require, acknowledge
My past vows to thee, besides the guilt of my
Ingratitude unto my Parisatis.

Stat. Heaven must absolve your crime to both,
For this your noble sorrow.

Tysam. Thy words are comforts to my soul;
But this is such an hour the Stars must mourn,
Or find new trepidations in their orbs
To fright the earth with some calamity --
Besides an Enemy does threaten now to invade
Our Kingdom -- Bassanes, you shall command
As General.

Bass. With my best duty Sir, and 'twas
Your Queens command I should continue still your
Faithful Subject.

Tysam. I have no other title here to reign but from her love, --
Admit I leave thee, fair Statyra, in some place
Of best security.

Stat. I am obliged to be companion in your dangers.

Tysam. That were an endless peril, though thy virtue
Be above what fate can injure.

Stat. My heart were else not worth the owning yours.

Tox. A brave and gracious Lady.

Alv. The King it is sure affects her.
[Aside.
Tysam. I feel a cloud upon my soul, I know not when
Or how 'twill vanish --
Come Statyra, my Love and thine must wait
The calmer hours of time and kinder fate.
Ex. Omnes.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Mandana, Daranthe, Cydane, Renone, and other Women. Mand. THE King may
soon repent he gave our Treaty
Such neglect.

Cyd. We doubt it not, most royal Madam --

Mand. And for his Queen, whose fair desertion
Has the first place in our quarrel, would she
Were now alive, that we might with our arms
Impose her on his Love.

Daran. 'Twere to be wished.

Mand. The proof we have now given by taking
This strong City of Daxata on the River
Volga, must make 'em know, their force
Must yield unto our Sexes power,
We lead -- what thinks our chief
Commandress?

Daran. I judge that victory will soon
Make offerings at your feet.

Mand. This Pass we have
Secured must prove considerable, since it
Impedes all their recruits that way.

Daran. And what is more,
Hinders provision might else arrive
Unto their Camp: nor can they forage here
Much longer, environed on each side with
Mountains, where by your mighty conduct
All the passages stand seized by us.

Mand. I think
They dare not hope to force their passage.

Daran. Our Women's hearts must fail 'em strangely then,
And make your greatness wear a blush,
To see them this day prove degenerate,
Who from your conduct glory many Victories.

Mand. Spoke like the blood of Amazons.

Renon. Nor do we doubt the issue of this day
Will make your Prowess far more famed
Then brave Thalestris (stories tell) was from
Great Alexander, (the Prince of Captains)
Held in highest admiration.

Mand. I see You are all resolved, as does become
This Cause I fight, by which we'll force even Nature
To confess she was a partial Mother
To our Sex, when she made man
First heir of Glory.

Daran. Royal Madam --

Mand. Enough, they serve
Our drudgeries, our pleasures, or embraces,
To create us Soldiers, that scorn their uses
But for our heroic ends.

Daran. Did but the Women
Of this world besides hear this, they would be ashamed,
To think they had not broke the yoke of men,
And such a fair and great Protectress in your self.

Mand. An entertainment for our Greatness there,
That this haughty Prince, Tysamnes, (who dares
Make War against our Sex) may know that we
In this strong City, forced from his bold powers,
Keep our triumphant joys.

Ren. Some Prisoners of War desire to present
Your Majesty with a Dance, after the
Manner of their Country.

Man. We admit them.
Music and a Dance. Enter Messenger.
Mess. A Moorish Lady desires admittance
To your presence.

Man. She has our leave.
Enter Parisatis disguised like a Moor.
Man. Your business Lady.

Par. It Is such, most Royal Madam, must beg
A pardon for my craving this access,
Who have journy'd far, to see the glory
Of your Arms and Person, famed above all
The ancient Amazons so much renowned.

Mand. The ambition of this visit we can pardon;
And glad we are our Actions have
Obliged the world and fame.

Par. But more your Sex in this
Fair Cause your arms embrace.

Mand. This language suits
Our greatness --

Par. And though our swarthy clime
Cannot boast Natures Beauties in Rose
And Lilly cheeks; that gives us there as Daughters
Of the night; or that the kisses of the Sun
Were so unkindly spent, as it alone
Did darken us, and guild the world besides;
Yet we have there bright souls of honor.

Mand. I find thou have, above what I in this
Short view can read -- thy Name?

Par. Zeriffa, Madam --

Mand. Thy extraction
I need not ask, I know it must be great
That represents thy self so full of noble grace
Unto our presence.

Par. Your great esteem is
My ambition to improve, though with the
Greatest hazard of my life.

Mand. And do thou then love Arms? --

Par. So far, most Royal Madam, as I would
Be glad to dye, though not so much as mentioned
In the lowest place, among the Annals
Of your fair Atchievments.

Mand. I even dare
Already boast I have a Soldier in thee,
Worthy to lead with us, and these, whose veins
Are warmed with blood of Amazons, inciting
Deeds, which but reported to the softer
Of our Sex, give tremblings to their hearts.

Par. I should be loath to lose my share in honor,
Or miss the end I have designed my life;
Yet must avow I never yet have fought.

Mand. Though thy Complexion above all thy Sex,
Nature has fitted most to deeds of War,
In which the scars, and wounds of arms, cannot
Dig furrows in the fair brow of Beauty,
So dear unto the vainer of thy kind.
Yet I must now require, whether no other
Motive has produced this inclination?

Par. I Will soon confess I have not lived so much
Obliged by man, as that I may not justly
Be concerned in your great cause and quarrel
To make an offering of my life.

Mand. Thou have won my confidence.

Par. The command I ask from your great Majesty,
Shall be but mean, such as your prudence best
Will judge becomes a strangers trust.

Mand. And thou shall have it, worthy Moor.

Par. But crave it may be hazardous and daring:
Heaven knows how willing
I am to be rid of life.
[Aside.
Mand. Thou shall have fit employment for thy valor --
And take care my valiant Women, that this
Moor, who promises such wonders of her Faith
And Virtue, does not in noble emulation
Match your Prowess.

Daran. The Queen's soon taken with this stranger.

Cydan. She seems to promise much.

Mand. A suit of our best Arms and Quiver
For this Moor --
Daranthe, and you Ladies,
See her according to our warlike mode
Invested; nor do I doubt thou wilt use 'em
Nobly.
Enter one with Arms and Quiver. [They put 'em on.
Par. I should be else not worthy of that Soul
I would be thought to bear.
Enter Messenger.
Mess. The Enemy prepares for
Battle, Mighty Queen.

Mand. We will prevent 'em giving the onset first --
Mean while, let us hear a Martial Ode,
The Harmony our Women's ears delight;
While others of their Sex warble amorous
Notes to entertain their Lovers.

The Queen Mandana leads her Amazon Women in state round the Stage, making
several pauses while the Ode is Singing; at the end of which they go off. The
Amazons are supposed to sing the Martial Ode. To Arms, to Arms, the Warlike
fare,
As our Heroic Charms,
With Martial Eccho's fill the Air,
Inviting unto Arms.
Our Women with their Bows and Darts,
Dare Man's rough powers assail,
And Conquer such unshaken Hearts
To give Love laws as we Prevail.
Advance, advance, lest fortunes hacte
Our Onsets should delay,
Obliging time that flies so fast,
To curb his Steeds this day;
And hand in hand with mighty fame,
That wraps in Clouds her head,
Her glorious daughters us proclaim,
And first our stately Triumphs lead.
We challenge Dian and her Host
Of Nymph -like Archers all,
Who from their Quivers glory boast,
Or proud Acteons fall;
If ever their bright eyes beheld,
A Chorus like to ours;
Or saw themselves so far excelled
By Women's more Heroic powers.
[Exeunt. Enter Bassanes, Foscaris, Andrages, Eumenes and Draxanes. Bass. Be
courageous Gentlemen, the straight we are in,
I doubt not but my conduct with the Kings
Will find some brave expedient to relieve.

Omn. We Will all dye at your command.

Bass. And for the Soldiers wants, our valors soon
Shall feed, e're their pined bellies mutiny
For bread; my presence is required to see
What order keeps our other wing.
[Ex. Bassanes.
Fosc. Well Lads, we must fight it out to purpose,
I find there is no getting else a crum of sustenance.

Andr. Or be made such drudges to these Amazonia
Furies, their Camp has not the like.

Drax. In our late skirmish methoughts they fought
Like Dragons, and handled their Bows with more
Dexterity then Parthians.

Andr. There Is at least
A Legion of Women, or more Evil Spirits
In any one of them.

Eum. And should we fall
Into their hands, what might they expect
After that rate?

Drax. As I am a Soldier,
I think a Brigade of men would scarce do
The business of one Woman of this Generation,
If they have the same vivacity for Venus,
As for Mars.

Fosc. This morning I could have been contented
To have broke my fast with one of the fair
Sentinels next me; 'twas such a pretty
Hard-hearted Rogue.

Drax. And if I starve for want
Of Bread and Women, let me perish unpitied.

Eum. Nay, we must venture on their bodies some way
Or other; there is not a passage left us else
So wide as man enters the world.

Drax. It Is said they hold
Intelligence with our Scythian
Women: and have made such furious resolves
If we fall into their hands.

Andr. And for us Husbands --
If they Conquer --

Fosc. Eunuch'd to a Man, Gentlemen --
I look to carry my quill in my hat,
To show I am wholly castrated; For the rest of our Troops, perhaps they will give
'em
Leave to spin in Boots, or serve their other occasions.
Enter Tysamnes with Statyra, Bassanes, Alvanes, Toxaris and Araxis.
Eum. Here comes the King; we now shall be for
Action speedily.

Andr. His looks seem troubled.

Tysam. Our City taken on the Volga, and
Our Provisions, the Sinews of our Armies strength
Cut off before our eyes; nay more, enclosed
By female powers -- Can you be men and live
To this contempt?

Bass. Spare your passion Sir.

Tysam. I cannot, while I see I govern Soldiers
Scarce deserve the name of men, more fit,
By Heaven, to be converted to some other shape,
Or serve as Chamber Eunuchs to this female kind
Our Arms oppose.

Bass. This stratagem of theirs
Was unexpected; in all my time of war,
I never was so surpised.

Tysam. Think, dear Bassanes,
How we may redeem some part of this dishonor.

Bass. I judge the way must be to attacque
Their left wing with a brisk assault.

Tysam. Be it thy command. Foscaris, Andrages,
Draxanes and Eumenes, be you assisting
In this enterprise with such Troops you lead.

Omn. To our utmost, Royal Sir.

Bass. And hope I shall soon give your Majesty
A good account of this attempt -- Madam,
I have your happy wish.

Stat. And more, my Prayers for your safety.

Tysam. The other wing (my worthy Chiefs) I Will lead
To assist your valors.

Omn. We all are ready with our Duties.

Tysam. And if our Swords cannot yet subdue these
Women Warriors; let them triumph,
And tell Dame Nature
'T was her fond erroneous act,
Entitled Man Superior.

Stat. Consider, Sir,
For my sake, as you love Statyra's being,
That have no small concern in every danger,
Threatens you.

Tysam. 'T is for thy sake I Would only live
To crown this day with victory.

Stat. 'T were too much hazard for my Love.

Tysam. Thou would not have me tamely gaze upon
These Foes, and see thee pine for food?
Or yield our selves to this imperious woman's will,
That may, perhaps, give Laws unwelcom to
Our Loves, or take thy Beauty Captive for
Her slavish Handmaid, whom but to circle thus,
Is joy to me above the world and conquest.

Stat. Admit I intercede for some fair peace,
She is a Woman famed of Royal worth,
And cannot be so cruel you express.

Tysam. I know thou would not save my life by
Woman's mercy; besides, 'twould fright thy gentle
Person, to behold thy Sex in Armor,
And their breasts (while thine's Loves tender sphere)
Enclosed in Ribs of Steel, with one cut off,
More furiously to wield their Martial Bows,
With other Warlike horrors to afflict thy eyes.

Stat. I fear no danger, so I serve but yours.

Tysam. Admit I leave thee in my Tent,
Attended with my best reserves of Force --
Enter an Officer. What news?

Officer. Your Army, Sir, is in outrageous Mutiny
For Bread.

Alvan. I looked for this.

Tox. I fear as much the Consequence.

Tysam. A sign they are sons of Cowardice
That cannot take it from their Women-foes,
Or make them knead us more.

Officer. Your presence, Sir, may possibly allay
Their fierce disorder.

Tysam. We Will see who dares not fight,
Or starve if we command it -- or else
We Will look them dead -- your hand my dearest --
This Mutiny we will soon compose --
[Exeunt. He leads Statyra to his Tent, and exit with the rest. Enter Foscaris,
Andrages, Eumenes and Draxanes, disarmed and led Prisoners by three Amazon
Ladies and other Women holding their Spears at 'em.
Fosc. Nay, good Lady Errants some mercy --

Eum. As we are Soldiers --

1 Lady. It Is below our Amazon honor to afford it
To such Knights of Chivalry as you are.

Andr. As we are Gentlemen of good Nature to your Sex.

Drax. Or as you have had kindness to man.

Fosc. Or for Loves sake, of which I have store at your
Service.

2 Lady. You are Spirits indeed of Cupid.

Fosc. I am more than an ordinary man that way,
And have Venus about me in abundance.
Enter Daranthe.
1 Lady. Here comes our General.

2 Lady. We must not further act without her.

Daran. You have done bravely, valiant Ladies;
But where is their General Bassanes, who
Forced your Squadrons? the Queen would have been glad
To have led in triumph such a famous Chief.

1 Lady. He fought his way with many wounds unto the
Volga; in whose rough streams we judge him drowned.

Daran. The Queen will give his loss some pity --
For you Gentlemen, who have not been
Injurious to our Sex in practicing
Your Scythian custom; the Queen proclaims
She Will think of mercy; and for such prisoners
Who have Wives --

Fosc. What will be our Fate?
[Aside.
Daran. It is her Royal Pleasure
They be surrendered to their wills --
I must attend and give her notice
Of your brave success.
[Ex. Daranthe.
Fosc. 'Twere best to be aforehand with this Act
Of Grace -- I humbly lay hold on your Queens mercy.

And. And I, Madam.

Eum. And I.

Drax. And I.
Enter Melvissa and Clarina.
2 Lad. Have none of you Wives in being, Gentlemen?
What say you, Sir?

Fosc. Who I, Madam? I would not be so unfortunate
For a world; and would you
But espouse us to some of your Masculine
Generation, we'd get your Queen such Heroines.

Melv. Do hear how abominably these Creatures
Of our Loves dissemble?
[To Clar. aside.
Clar. They are obliged, it seems, to
Change the complexion of their hearts.

Melv. Let it be for life's sake, or love's, I Will have
My due acknowledgments --

Andr. Do not own us, dear Wives,
We beseech you.
[Aside.
Melv. How, not own our just proprieties?

Fosc. As you are Women, and have mercy,
We are coming off, and on the fairest terms
Heart can wish -- withdraw awhile,
And we'll be with you in a trice, and
Handle things kindly, as men and wives should do.

Melv. You shall excuse us, we'll reprieve you Our own way now.

Clar. And for you, Sir, whose Conversion,
I hoped, my better stars had wrought --

Fosc. Alas! my sweetest, I love thee with a flame
As warm as thou can wish; but was forced to
Dissemble for some motives of danger,
Which I know thou wilt pardon.

1 Lad. It Is fit we understand
Your business, Ladies.

2 Lad. You are not Spies. --

Melv. By your fair leaves,
We come to claim a pair of Husbands
By virtue of your Queens Proclamation.

Clar. Of which, one of them had the good manners
To part with his Wife, witness my self. --

Omn. How Is this?

Andr. What will become of us?

Fosc. Or me, that have provoked
Fate and Woman together?

Andr. I am like to suffer under both, that must again
Endure the insupportable, and endless
Civil war of wedlock.

Fosc. O, the star of Venus has had a strange influence
In our Horoscopes; there is no resisting destiny,
And she the Ascendant.

Andr. Might I choose, I had rather once more charge the
Amazonian Battle, and all the Viragoes
Of womankind together.
[The Ladies compass them in holding their Spears at them.]
Both Lad. Shall we kill them to revenge your injuries?

Clar. By no means, we beg their lives.

Melv. And having thus culled out our Cocks,
I doubt not, but we shall manage the game
Advantagiously enough.

1 Lad. You have them at your mercy.

Clar. Thanks to your Queens.

Melv. She has mine likewise in abundance Ladies -- But for you Husbands. --

Fosc. Nay, prithee we'll compose differences as you

Drax. Now for our Capitulations.
[Drax. and E^^
Eum. If we do not make fair ones for our selves
With such Victors as these,
We may curse our Nativities.

Fosc. What terms of composition, good sweet Wife?
Thou know I love thee above imagination.

Clar. Perhaps I may give you fair quarter.

Fosc. Let it be but in thine, and I will dye
Upon the spot, e're part with thee again;
I am thine now without a charm.

Clar. I promise nothing, though you see I have took
Some pains for your safety.

Andr. What says my Spouse?

Melv. It Is odds she will proceed as occasion serves.

Andr. Be not proud of thy victory, thou know
I have been a most submissive Husband.

Melv. You Will soon know my conditions --

Andr. And if they prove but gentle,
I am conquered happily --

1 Lad. You will not leave our Camp presently?

Clar. Not till the issue of this day be past.

2 Lad. If you doubt obedience from your Husbands,
Command a Guard from us.

Fosc. By no means Ladies,
We acknowledge an absolute Conquest.

Melv. Otherwise, you know our Commission.

Clar. Your servant, fair noble Warriors.
[Ex. Fosc. Clar. Andr. Melv.]
1 Lad. The Queen.
Enter Mandana with Cydane and Renone.
Mand. You have taken those fierce Militants
That did attempt to force their safeties
In despite of our bold powers.

2 Lad. We have, most Royal Madam,
And in obedience to your great commands,
Have gratified two Ladies of the Enemies part,
By surrendering of their Husbands to their wills.

Mand. I am glad my victory
Does give my name a Trophy in the
Obligation of my Sex; these men we war,
Have too injurious treated -- But where is
The Prince Bassanes, their General?

1 Lad. He forced his bold escape, if not drowned
In passing of the Volga.

Mand. We could have
Been content to have seen him made our Captive.

Renon. And must have added
Glory to your Victory.

Cyd. He much expressed himself your great Admirer.
Enter Messenger.
Mess. Glad tidings, mighty Queen, the King and all
His power is now surrendered to your General.

Mand. I knew the straight we had reduced 'em to,
Would soon compel 'em --
And where is his fair Persian Mistress, Statyra?

Mess. She is, besides some Prisoners of note
Guarded by the valiant Moor.

Mand. This Crowns our Conquest.
Enter Daranthe and Parisatis, with Tysamnes and Statyra, Araxis, Toxaris and
Alvanes. Daranthe, I must praise thy valor --
And all you my Women Soldiers
For this glorious day.

Daran. We are honored that our duties
Served your Greatness.

Mand. But thine, my valiant Moor, that gives
Such noble emulation in thy worthy Deeds
To all, I know not how enough to magnify,
But soon will raise thy merit to some higher
Trust, shall speak our great esteem, both of thy
Valor and fidelity.

Par. You oblige the humblest of your Servants.

Mand. The King's a gracious person.
[Looking on Tysam.
Par. I fear too taking.

Mand. Now, Mighty Sir?

Tysam. Your pleasure, Madam?

Mand. Is it not just, that I, who am the Mighty
Warrior, in my Sexes Cause,
Should frown thee dead?

Tysam. You cannot look me out of life, nor would
I turn my head aside, though every beam
Of yours, were Darts of Basilisks, that dare
Behold you thus --

Mand. You are resolute I find;
And would to Heaven your Queen were yet in being,
That she might witness my concern in her
Fair Cause; or from my power
Ask thee her Sacrifice,
Since thou have been so much her Tyrant Lover.

Tysam. My ingratitude to her great virtue
I acknowledge; though I meet all your rage
In pouring of revenge for her sake on my head;
And since she is no more, for which, Heaven knows,
How true I grieve, I would not live, but for
This Ladies sake.
[Looking on Statyra.
Mand. Your new made Mistress --

Tysam. And just possessor of my heart.

Mand. She has strange fascination in her eyes,
For which --
[Aside.
Stat. If you pronounce me guilty, speak my death;
Nay, I Will entreat it at your hand as royal mercy,
So you will spare the King,
For whose great safety,
Had I many thousand lives, I Would humbly
Lay them, as my offering, at your feet.

Daran. This Lady has a noble soul.

Par. Too much the Kings I fear.
[Aside.
Mand. I have cause enough to bid thee dye,
But will not cloud the glory of this day
With Woman's death; and were not for a sacred
Resolution of my soul, perhaps would grant
Thy Loves enjoyment; but I have now decreed --

Tysam. If death, I am ready to embrace it.

Stat. Oh speak some milder Accent! what can
Become a Woman's soul, like yours, so much
As gracious mercy?

Mand. My resolution's fixed irrevocable,
As when by Heaven's o're-ruling will, we guide
Our Justice: for know Tysamnes, I have vowed
Thy life a glorious victim of my Conquest;
Nor has it been unusual in the Wars we make,
For such a day as this, to grace our Altars
With the best of Captives, of which I judge
None worthy, like thy self.

Stat. You will not be divinely cruel?

Mand. I Will hear no more --
Zeriffa -- take these prisoners to thy custody;
Thy Complexion is most fit to serve this Trust;
And be sure you have a watchful eye
Upon this Lady; the rest, perhaps,
Shall find our mercy.

Par. I joy this trust.

Tysam. Grieve not, Statyra, since I dye thy Lover.

Stat. And might I bleed upon the Altar with you,
'Twere then my Loves true Sacrifice.

Mand. Thus far this day propitious does appear,
But from the end great Acts their Crowns must wear.
[Ex. Omnes.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Enter Mandana and Parisatis. Mand. HOw bears Tysamnes his restraint, and our
Declared resolves? I know they needs
Must bow his lofty heart.

Par. As unconcerned as Infants sleep,
Or as the Man you would choose the object of
Your mercy ought to be -- nay more. --

Mand. What means that more?

Par. You are a Woman.

Mand. But a Conqueror.

Par. Had I like power.

Mand. What then?

Par. I Would bid him live at least.

Mand. Thou would not have me love him?

Par. No by my life --
Though 'twere a gracious Act to Heaven, if you
Vouchsafe him mercy; since he is obliged to fair
Statyra's Love; you else will kill two hearts at once.

Mand. Away with this fond pity;
I have fixed my Justice

Par. Your pleasure Madam.

Mand. Bring forth the King,
I Will make him know it.

Par. I am all confusion.
[Ex. Parisatis.
Mand. This Moor is brave and loyal; my Mother once
Had such a Lady near her person, she
Would commend above what Faith can reach.
Enter Parisatis with Tysamnes. Zeriffa! admit none to our presence.

Par. I shall not -- but by your leave Queen
Will here observe --
[Pvr. Stands aside.
Mand. I hear, Tysamnes,
You contemn the vow I Have made,
Nor does my eye
Discern other then pleasing calms upon
The brow you seem to wear.

Tysam. Such as become a King,
And every vulgar man, when made a Sacrifice
To woman's passion --

Mand. Take heed, Sir, how
You entertain a Summer in your hopes,
Or slight the Justice I decree.

Tysam. What mean you, Madam?
Alas! I looked to meet the Miter'd Priest,
The Altar fixed, where I should bleed your Victim,
And if you superscribe it
With my crimes of Love,
Which caused at once my Parisatis death,
And fair Statyra's tears, I Will call it justice,
And due expiation of my sins to Heaven.

Mand. I Will soon my self convey you to the
Altar I intend --

Par. What means the Queen?
[Aside.
Mand. Or say I bid thee live?

Tysam. 'Twere then a mercy greater then I crave,
Or merit.

Mand. I Would have thee judge it more.

Par. It Is love most certain.
[Aside.
Mand. What think you of this look?
[She smiles.
Tysam. It Is somewhat gentler then I did expect.

Mand. And what of this?
[Smiles again.
Tysam. It seems more kind then common smile.

Mand. Is it not welcome to thy heart?

Tysam. 'Twere too much to bestow such beams on me,
And gives me greater wonder, then should Lights Orb
Contract its glory to the Artick Pole,
To quicken there some frozen spot of earth.

Mand. He does perceive -- thy pardon now is written
In my heart -- Zeriffa --
Enter Parisatis. See thou respect Tysamnes
Above observance of a Prisoner; I have
Some motives of a near concern require it.
[Ex. Mandana.
Par. Is this your vow, oh Parisatis?
Did thou walk as undiscerned as Ghosts
That cloth themselves in bodies of the Air;
This must affright thee more, then timorous hearts
Scared with such pale horrors --
Admit, Sir, I congratulate this Grace.

Tysam. 'Twas unexpected --
And I with glader eyes could have beheld
Thee made my deaths black Handmaid.

Par. You do not slight the Queen, that with her
Gracious beams of mercy quickens you to live?
Nay more, if I discern that have some trust
From her fair thoughts, is giving of her self
A conquest to your Love -- methinks
This should awake your apprehension,

Tysam. It does! but find my self
Unshaken to Statyra, and could have wished
Your Queens more rigid vow were unrepeal'd,
That I might bleed her Sacrifice.

Par. She is your Crime,
And therefore does deserve to be your Fate,
Or else embrace the same with her.

Tysam. Though thy dark visage is most fit to be
The messenger of death and all it is horrors,
I may enquire what cause incites thee
To appear thus cruel.

Par. It breaks like clearest justice
From my Soul, that am obliged to be
Your Queens Revenger --

Tysam. Thou art not sent from the other world
To be my Executioner, where she is adorned
With Crowns and smiles of Angels, still interceding
My forgiveness.

Par. I have grieved his Soul too much,
Pardon me, Sir, I was too bold to urge
Your penitence.
[Aside.
Tysam. It proves thee worthy.

Par. One word and I have done; were your Queen living?
Nay more, Sir, were soon as manifest, she
Hazarded her life, reprieved on purpose
For your safety, would you receive her
To your embrace and love?

Tysam. She is too dear to Heaven
To be given thence; and Stars which frowned upon
That fatal Act, already have enrolled her
In their first of bright Societies --
But this is all thy dream.

Par. Believe it such --
Yet so far I dare represent her self,
As to assure you, for her sake, I Will dye
To purchase your just freedom --
Let this tear confirm you, as 'twere shed from her.
Enter Statyra. [Ex. Parisatis.
Statyra Sir.
Tysam. The carriage of this Moor
Is honors riddle to my thoughts --
Oh my Statyra! I have yet a hope of thy
Enjoyment.

Stat. Does the Queen Incline to mercy?

Tysam. She has receded from her vow.

Stat. That Is happy --
And more cruel in decree, seeks
To divide my soul from thine --
Thou understand'st me?

Stat. I do too sadly --

Tysam. But this Moor, employed by Heaven
To be a Guardian of our Loves, or as
The night, or Hymen gave her this complexion
To be a sober guide unto his rights,
Devotes her self to serve our safeties.

Stat. This means of happiness was above my hope,
While through each vein of mine, my blood had ebbings
From my heart, in apprehension of your dangers;
Nor did I view her with less horror,
Conceiving her the Queens most cruel instrument.

Tysam. I thought her so, but she has given me such
Assurance of her Faith and Love, that had
Thy beauteous figure took a veil like her,
Or were my Parisatis
Represented such, I would not have expected
A more strict concern for me.

Stat. It seems too much
To credit from a stranger, or else it is but
Loves kinder Labyrinth.
Enter Parisatis.
Tysam. She Is here -- salute her
With thy kindest beams, she does deserve
Our near regards.

Stat. Madam, the King has given me such a character
Of your worth, as I must beg to join
Acknowledgments with his.

Par. I Will venture all that is dear to serve him,
And your virtue; but this is not a time
For Words: Things call to action --
Please you withdraw.
[Ex. Tysam. Stat. Enter Draxanes. Draxanes come?

Drax. I hope most happily.

Par. And have thou found him?

Drax. Yes, Madam, and have brought him.

Par. This place is safe from ears -- wait him to me.
[Ex. Drax. If fortune be not peevish now, the Scene
I have laid shall Crown my Acts.
Enter Bassanes disguised. I am wondrous glad to see thee live.

Bass. And I like to some man that is
Struck with Ecstasies of joy,
Could even resign my soul, as thus
I kiss the ground I tread, in adoration Of your being here, when feared beyond
a doubt
You had snatched your self away, to make its
Bosom in your grave more sacred.

Par. Draxanes told thee all?

Bass. He did Madam,
As I was levying of Recruits to free the King
From this restraint he suffers here.

Par. Then we'll spare further circumstance,
And only know I have prepared to do him
Signal service; for which end, I took this Cloud,
Either to dye unknown, or live a means
Of his loved preservation.

Bass. This deed must ravish Men and Angels
To express; who must admire at once
Your most heroic constancy and virtue.

Par. Enough Bassanes, and pardon me, that I
Sent my summons to join thee as companion
In the dangers I embrace.

Bass. You shall command
My utmost peril, though every man I meet
Could look me into Atoms.

Par. And know to my
More cruel Fate, the King not only has
A Mistress in Statyra, but the Queen
Mandana, his fair Conqueror, has vowed
Him for her own enjoyment.

Bass. What can be thought on
To resist this high injustice?

Par. I have resolved upon the means, in which
I Will use thy Conduct, not more approved to act,
Then sage in resolution; nor do I doubt
The instruments we'll use, are less then cordial,
To embrace the end we shall propose, which must
Be swift in execution.

Bass. I would not waste a minute e're I act to serve it.

Par. The Guards are here at my devotion, besides
A considerable number of our bravest Officers,
By the Queen Mandana, set at liberty.

Bass. They may be serviceable to your design.

Par. The honor of their King obliges it --
Within we'll debate more at large particulars.
[Exeunt. Enter Toxaris, Alvanes, Araxis.
Tox. Well Gallants, we are all Freemen now.

Alv. It Is a seasonable mercy to us Courtiers,
Not used to this kind of belly duty;
We otherwise must have been living Anatomies
By this time.

Arax. And so perhaps Metamorphiz'd
Into starved Ghosts, to walk with hideous
Lamentations these Fields of Victory.

Tox. I do not think
All the Infernal Region can fright these
Victrices, should they appear in Arms,
There Is not an Image of Mars, but does raise
Their fury above Miracle.

Alv. And yet
For all their being thus courageous and hardy
(Which must be acknowledged more then wonder
In their soft kind) they are refined as our Ladies
Of the best converse; and as modishly witty
As any she Platonic living --

Arax. If Venus make no Captives in this shape
Of Mars, may her Son never more wear Quiver.
Enter Eumenes.
Eum. Never men enfranchised on such terms
As we are, for which this great and fair
Warrior deserves a Jubilee.

Tox. She Is highly gracious.

Eum. And like the Sun diffusive in her beams;
I have been so Caressed by our fair Conquerours,
Under several Titles and Commands, as if they would
Invite us shortly to match by Regiments,
And so at last join Armies! what a day
Of Hymen would that be?

Alv. Could but our King be freed
On royal terms, 'twould add yet
Glory to this Queens great Acts.

Eum. Some did interpret
Favorably, when she late vowed him
To a sad destiny.

Arax. As how?

Eum. As men should construe in like case, a Woman's vow.

Tox. I am yet to learn, there is nothing but
Riddle in the whole Sex.

Eum. It Is said that Love's the Oedipus,
And has resolved it, to whose soft Altars
She has given the King some beams of invitation.

Alv. But that may add unto his greater peril,
Being so much devoted to Statyra,
That his heart is Ice to other flame.

Arax. Heaven guide things for the best!

Tox. Where did you leave Draxanes?
He shares of this Grace I hope?

Eum. Yes, and is advanced to no small favor. --

Tox. Not with the Queen?

Eum. No, but what is a step to it,
He is deep in the Moors;
I left him in close Conference with her.

Alv. That Moor carries the stream indeed of Grace:
Our King committed to her trust with his beauteous Mistress.

Arax. But what to judge her.

Eum. She bears a Soul of brightest temperament;
As if that providence had found a place
Elsewhere for her Nativity; or as she wore
An Ethiops Cloudy Veil, from Art, not Nature.
Enter Foscaris leading Clarina, and Andrages Melvissa.
Tox. Foscaris and Andrages come off thus
With their Wives! this must conclude
A strange day of Woman's Victory.

Fosc. I have paid my Arrears
Of Love, I hope to purpose; we are
Reconciled, and have embraced, and so forth Gentlemen.

Clar. You have so.

Fosc. And can bill like Doves now.

Clar. Not too much, I beseech you, lest you fall
Into a surfeit of Love again; too much
Of the honey of Wedlock is not good
For your palate.

Eum. We joy your Loves.

Fosc. If any be unkind henceforth to his Spouse,
May he suffer my penance; there is some
Mystery behind, which you shall all know
At leisure: in the Interim, I acknowledge
My happiness, from you Lady.

Melv. I am glad it was in my power to serve
Your felicity in Clarina's.

Andr. And I rejoice a kind Wife too, Gentlemen.

Melv. But take heed you don't presume;
You know my power when I please.

Tox. These Women Conquerours are strangely noble

Clar. We own our Husbands from their mercy.

Andr. And we our freedoms.

Fosc. Soldiers in every vein Gentlemen,
And can drink a smart health or two as they
Discourse of Arms -- and would they yield
Reasonable obedience to mankind, I Would wish
You all to match amongst them, they would spirit
Flesh and blood indeed.

Alv. I long to be doing.

Arax. And I as much.

Tox. Could but the King come off nobly.

Fosc. He must, if the Queen do not once more
Change her vow.

Alv. No news yet of the General Bassanes?

Eum. He vanished in a storm of darts! but what
His fate is Heaven knows.
Enter Draxanes.
Drax. A word in private.
[Whispers to Eumenes who deliver it to one another.
Eum. Is It possible? --

Drax. Rely your faiths on mine.

Tox. We are confirmed.

Melv. You may admit us to Council,
Wives should partake their Husbands secrets.

Andr. You shall, you shall.

Fosc. And know we have wondrous things in hand.

Clar. If honorable, I Will venture all that is dear
To serve it.

Melv. And I as far engage.

Fosc. Such as must fill your bosoms full of joy --
Within more of particulars.
[Ex. Omnes. Enter Mandana, Daranthe, Cydane, Renone, and others attending.
Mand. We have given our mercy to the King.

Daran. 'Twas gracious like your self. --

Mand. Nor will I blush to own
His Graces merit an esteem from us.

Cyd. The Queen is surely smitten with her great Captive?

Renon. Beyond a doubt.

Mand. Bring forth the King Cydane.
[Ex. Cydane. We'll treat him nobler yet, and make him joy
This day of Women's conquest.
Enter Cydane.
Cyd. Madam! the King's withdrawn.

Mand. How?

Cyd. Or else escaped.

Mand. Blister'd be thy tongue
That brings such tidings to my heart --
Where is the Moor?

Cyd. Not to be found.
Enter Statyra.
Mand. Her black Soul shall take a gloomy flight
To the other world for this.

Stat. I answer for her trust.

Mand. Thy life shall bear hers company.

Stat. I am glad
To yield it up a Victim to your wrath,
Since that must raise a Trophy to my Love;
Where every Virgin of a faith like mine,
Will drop a tear to give my memory
A name, shall blast the glory of your Conquest.

Mand. Away with this fond woman; it is an Ague
To my blood to hear her reason thus.
[As they offer to carry her off. Enter Bassanes disguised, with Foscaris,
Andrages, Drax. Eum. Tox. Alv. Arax. and others armed.
Bass. Hold and hear me first.

Mand. How! men in Arms before our presence?
Have we no Guard there? --

Bass. None but what I have placed;
And were your Women changed to Sons of Mars,
Nay, Cadmus fiercer issue joined to them,
When ripened first to horror of mankind,
As the earth trembling did contain their roots;
This Sword of mine should mow 'em down
To smooth the path I lead.

Mand. A combination of these humane things
So late our Arms reduced --
Methinks they should convert to nothing
From a look of mine; or I lose Majesty.

Daran. This surprisal was beyond the reach of thought.

Renon. It Is most ignoble.

Mand. And thou that seem an object
Fit to guide such base ingratitude,
What shall I call thee? Traitor?

Bass. A name that had an honor for your Soul,
That filled no less the world with wonders;
And lest your Women's frailty should stain
The brightness of your noble Deeds,
I thought it justice to resist your will,
Though I met Seas of danger in the act.

Mand. Bold and Impudent!

Bass. I must be plainer,
Do you not love the King?

Mand. Suppose it granted --

Bass. Heaven does not --
And think not, Madam, that my blood,
Though it bears fire of honor in each vein,
But it is as cold to treachery; nor does the Cause
That I maintain, less then command, without
An arm of force --
This Lady in her own fair right, methinks,
Should move you.
[To Statyra.
Stat. May Heaven reward thy virtue!

Mand. She is the Kings beloved; but I have won
Him mine by Arms.

Bass. And therefore nobler conquest
To subdue your self: The Bays you wear
In triumph, else must wither on your brow,
Where Majesty and Beauties luster twine
To make one Excellence.

Stat. What providence has Blessed me with this Advocate?

Renon. I have seen a face resembles that.
[Pulls off his Beard and Patches.
Daran. The Queen a little alters.

Mand. It must be he.

Bass. Behold then, Royal Madam, this face
Made but my own dark copy by disguise,
Thus cleared to own it is just original.

Mand. Bassanes living?

Bass. In which I wear
A mirror of my heart, that does without
A flattery express a Soul that highly
Honors yours, though it has seemed divested
Of those Charms in making this reflection
On your justice, which here is one most
Powerful to incline.
[To Parisatis. Enter Parisatis attended by Clarina and Melvissa.
Mand. What is this Lady?

Cyd. The Queen Parisatis, Madam.

Mand. It cannot be;
A mere imposture to abuse me.

Renon. We must avow it is she.

Mand. I am all wonder.

Stat. And I no less rejoice to see you live;
I hope you will pardon, that I claimed an interest
In your Kings affection, when 'twas assured
You had no Being in the world.

Par. And I more humbly beg one here;
Nor shall it e're be told that Parisatis
Walked in that dark Cloud (though it veiled her
Actings for preservation of the life and love
Of her Tysamnes) to live, your trust abused,
Without a pardon from your lips.

Daran. This Woman's brave.

Par. Nor shall you loose, besides,
One fruit of victory.

Mand. You were the Moor then?

Par. The same, most Royal Madam --
And if you are my Subjects, prostrate
Your selves and swords, with me, at these
Majestic feet.
[Kneels.
Mand. This is a Conquest happier then all;
Nor shall e're Woman boast she had the better
Of Mandana's honor -- Madam, you have
Forgiveness -- take up your weapons worthy Soldiers.
[To Parisatis.
Bass. You are highly gracious.

Mand. Where is the King?

Par. 'Twas but given out he had escaped.

Mand. Bassanes, you will attend him to us.
Enter Tysamnes whispering Bassanes, Foscaris, Andr. Tox. Alv. Arax. Drax.
Eumenes.
Tysam. Do I then live to be thus happy in
Your grace and pardon?

Mand. Your Queen has conquered me Tysamnes,
After the power of your Arms was made
My valor's glory; nor did the darts of Love,
Which I confess, made some impression here,
[Pointing to her breast. Leave wounds but to be healed more happily --
I vowed you, Sir, to love.

Par. No change I hope.
[Aside.
Mand. And thus will make your offering here;
She is a Jewel of a Crown indeed.
[Presents him to the Queen.
Tysam. I take her on my knees --
She is too great a blessing, thus restored
[Kneels. To my embrace, to be with less devotion owned
From Heaven, imploring (as I kneel) thy pardon.

Par. You have it Sir, though not a gift, where you
Command a duty; which when most passive
In a Wife, does but refine the gold of Virtue.

Tysam. Why did thou take this Cloud?

Par. To dye unknown, or serve your safety.

Daran. A most heroic constancy.

Tysam. Thy virtue's richer Then the world's vast globe, were it
Converted to one purest Diamond.

Mand. And does as far exceed what story can relate.

Tysam. But I have yet a load of mercy here
To beg, my crime of Love to thee Statyra,
Which else must cloud this day of comforts,
And bring eternal night upon my soul.

Stat. Though I have lost an expectation of
My greatest bliss in your enjoyment,
That in warm sighs might soon dissolve
A Virgins heart like mine, yet I can feel
No want of happiness, since I behold
Your Souls, that have already mingled joys,
Meet thus, and kiss each other.

Tysam. Heaven must reward thy goodness.

Par. And my for ever obligation.

Mand. This days example gives to Love
Such brave repute, that I who both have fought,
And men commanded, could even yield
To hold my Scepter from obedience.

Tysam. Here is a Prince within your eye (I hope
More near your heart) that might deserve
To rule a Throne like yours.

Mand. I know him noble.

Bass. And one, most Royal Madam, that owns
A soul, you have an interest to command
E're since I first beheld the glory of your charms:
Pardon me, I now avow it, that rather
To express my wonder of your virtue,
Should by an humble distance still admire.

Mand. It Is in my power to bring you nearer:
Bassanes is a Prince may well become
An Empress of the world's great choice; and were
Mandana such, she would not think her Love
Or Greatness stooped to match with thine.

Bass. You make me more then happy.

Mand. And I that honor Arms, and thy famed Deeds
In War, will call it noblest triumph
To yield thy Love a victory over mine.

Bass. This bounty stream's so powerful on my heart,
That I may fear it is guide, in such a Sea
Of joys you bring.

Mand. I am yours for ever, dear Bassanes.

Drax. This day surpasses wonder.

Fosc. I knew it must conclude with some
Extraordinary Love-miracle besides my own.
[Aside.
Mand. Daranthe! we must now no more make war,
I have matched a Soldier.

Bass. One that will live and dye your just admirer.

Mand. And Women, here divest
Your selves of Arms with me.
[They take off their Arms.
Dar. Ren. Cyd. We all obey your Majesty.

Mand. And let your conquests henceforth be to love,
And give Men sole supremacy --
I hope our Kingdoms shall unite in making
[To Tysamnes. Laws may fit each Sexes duty.

Tysam. I am obliged for Parisatis sake
To make Decrees, no arbitrary will
Of man shall henceforth e're reject a Wife.

Mand. Our Crowns will have a blessed union then --
What pattern shall we take?

Tysam. Such as the world
With best consent does practice.

Bass. Or what is most
Laudable, the form of happy England.

Mand. It has been most approved.

Par. Now Ladies, you are all well pleased to see
This peace that smiles upon your Loves, and gives
Both Sexes with our Crowns, such happiness.

Clar. A welcome joy.

Melv. We now can call our Husbands
Ours by lawful duty.

Andr. I am glad to hear that word.

Fosc. And I to be secured thus; I was in no small
Apprehension, this female victory
Might have imporw'd them to part with us;
What a mockery of Love's Magic had I been then?

Mand. My Warriors, you will all take Husbands now?
Here are men fit to match your spirits.

Daran. Your great example must invite it.

Tysam. What shall this day do for thee fair Statyra?
The bounty of thy soul deserves a recompense
Above what tongue can speak, that spreads
A volume of thy goodness, fit only
For the eye of Heaven to read.

Stat. And thither I Will devote my love,
Though while I live, no day shall pass without
A contemplation of your happiness.

Mand. You will not soon depart?

Par. For Parisatis sake you must not.

Stat. It Is my ambition first to fill an humble place
In your bright train of triumphs.

Tysam. For which thou do deserve a Chariot
Of Celestial substance,
Moved by the wings of Seraphims;
And every Virgin of most noble soul,
Attending thee with Songs of Raptures;
The Muses (as fair-Hand-maids to thy virtue)
Their best of Poets should inspire.

Stat. You too much honor my small merits.

Bass. This day does claim a glory from your worth,
And next my just devotion here -- my heart
[To Mandana. Shall keep an Altar sacred to Parisatis
Constant love and praise, with yours.

Stat. And mine no less
Shall speak Bassane's fame.

Par. I Will be your Rival Madam, there --
That am obliged unto this noble Prince
[To Bassanes. By highest gratitude.

Tysam. And I above expression thine.
[To Bassanes.
Mand. Tysamnes with your Queen must lead
The way unto our joys --
And Women hence from us this pattern take,
Love, and obedience, your best conquests make.
Ex. Omnes.
Epilogue Spoken by the Queen of Amazon.
WE Amazons did here unconquered yield,
And nobly too, when Love had gained the Field,
Against whose Darts, what Woman wears ashield?
This War our Poet taught us by his Pen,
But 'twas to be such Conqueresses then,
As you ought, Ladies, when you Captive Men.
Nor will we doubt if you protect our fear,
Though against our Gonquest Critics shall make War,
Such Foes no Amazons e're met with here.
Besides the stratagems you Gallants know,
Our Plays defeat and worse our Women too,
A Miss that is fine we cannot keep for you.
Then Gentlemen, since Love is much your way,
Be well advised how you are unkind to day,
Lest we defy all such who damn our Play.
Our Poet needs not apprehend what right
You Wits will do him, or your factions spite,
That Is their concern who do for Money write.
But with the Actors you may deal far worse,
For if you damn this Play, it is half their Curse,
Considering how its charge has plagued their Purse.
Which if you do, I Will tell you what they say,
They Will venture no more cost upon a Play,
You shill have Parce good store a cheaper way.
FINIS.

