A DISCOURSE Concerning the Redeemer's Dominion over the Invisible World, AND
THE Entrance thereinto by Death.

Some part whereof was preached on occasion of the Death of JOHN HOGHTON Esquire
eldest Son of Sir Charles Hoghton of Hoghton-Tower in the County of Lancaster;
Baronet.

By JOHN HOW, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers-Hall, 1699.

TO THE Most deservedly Honored, AND Truly Honorable, Sir CHARLES HOGHTON AND
THE Lady MARY HOGHTON
Of Hoghton-Tower.
Grace, Mercy, and Peace, etc.
YOU will, I know, count it no indecency, that, when God has so nearly, many
Years ago, joined you, in Relation, in Affection, and now, so lately, in the
Affliction, equally common to you both, I do also join your Names on the same
paper, and make this solemn Address to you together.

It is by the inestimable favor of Heaven, that the mutual Interest God has
given you in each other, as it obliges, does also (as I have great reason to
hope) effectually dispose and enable you; so, not only to partake in the
Comforts, but in the Sorrows that are common to you both, as that the former
shall be greatly increased, and the latter proportionably allayed, and
mitigated, thereby. Thus is the Advantage of your Conjugal State, both
represented in God's Designation, and apprehended, in your own Experience.

And you are to consider the Blessing of God herein, as having a peculiarity in
it, not being extended to all so related, neither to all that were great in
this World, nor to all that were Pious, and Good. Great worldly Felicity, has
been rendered insipid and spiritless. Great Calamities, much the more bitter,
by the want of a meet mutual helpfulness, between such Relations.

A Great, Job 1.1.
and a Good Man in his time. A Prince (as he is thought to have been) in his
Country, a Man that was perfect, and upright, one that feared God, and eschewed
Evil, when he lost not one, not the eldest, only, of his numerous Offspring,
(as you have) but all at once, seven Sons, and three Daughters, with such
concomitant Circumstances of accumulated Afflictions, as blessed be God, are
not in your Case; and might now expect some relief, from his other self, the
nearest and most inward Companion of his Life, and partaker of his Joys and
Sorrows; All the Succor he has from her, was ^n impious endeavor to provoke
and irritate his Spirit, that taunting Scoff, Do thou still retain thy
Integrity? and that horrid Advice, Curse God and Die. Whereas that rational,
religious, Soul-composing Thought, shall we receive good things at the hand of
God, and not also evil things? was deeply fixed in the mind of the one; how
much more effectually relieving had it been, if it had circulated between both
the Relatives; and they had, alternately, propounded, and enlarged upon it, to
one another!

With you, I cannot doubt, it has been so; and that you have made it your
Business to improve your mutual Interest, not to aggravate, but to alleviate,
your Affliction each to other.

You have, both of you, great occasion, and obligation, to revolve and recount
to each other, the many good things you have received at the hand of God, to
mitigate what there is of Evil, in this dispensation.

Both of you have sprung of Religious, and Honorable Families, favored of
God, valued, and beloved in the Countries where he had planted them. They have
been both, seats of Religion, and of the Worship of God. The Resorts of his
Servants. Houses of Mercy, to the Indigent. Of Justice, to the vicious. Of
Patronage, to the sober, and virtuous. Of good Example, to all about them.

You were, both, dedicated to God, early, and he gave early Testimony of his
accepting the Dedication. He began with you both betimes, blessing your
Education, and owning you for his, by disposing and forming your Spirits to
own, betimes, the God of your Fathers. He has blessed you indeed, adding the
spiritual Blessings in heavenly things, to your many earthly Comforts. Which
Jabez might mean, not content, with a common Blessing; and the more probably,
from the acceptance he found, 1 Chronicles. 4.9, 10. God granted his Request, as
Solomon's, 1 Kings 2.10. When his Request was as little vulga^.

You both concurred, in the Dedication of this your Son, as in the rest of
yours; and I doubt not with great seriousness; you Covenanted with God in
Christ, to be his God. And if he enabled you to be in good earnest herein, even
that was of special Grace and Favor; and ought to come into the account of the
many good things you ^ave received of God's hand, as offering to God willingly,
did, in the estimate of David: when the Oblation was of a meaner kind, 1 Chronicles.
29.14.

But then you ought to consider, what the import, and meaning was of that your
Covenant, wherein you accepted God in Christ to be the God of your Son; and
dedicated him to God through Christ to be his. Was it not absolute, and without
limitation? that God should be a God to him entirely, and without reserve? and
that he should be his, absolutely, and be disposed of by him, at his Pleasure?
Otherwise, there was a repugnancy, and contradiction, in the very terms of your
Covenant. To be a God to him! Is not, God, the name of a Being incapable of
limitation? Does it not signify infinite unlimited Power, and Goodness? To be a
God to any one, therefore, under restriction, is to be a God to him, and no
God. And so to Covenant with God, can neither have sincerity in it, nor good
sense. He can be under no restraint, in the exercises of his Power, and
Goodness toward any, to whom he vouchsafes to be their God in Covenant; but
what he is pleased to lay upon himself; which must be from his own Wisdom and
good Pleasure, to which in covenanting we refer our selves; with particular
Faith, in reference to what he has expressly promised; and with general, that
all shall be well, where his Promise is not express. But from our selves,
nothing can be prescribed to him. He must be our all, or nothing; in point of
Enjoyment as our Sovereign, all-comprehending Good; in point of Government, as
our Sovereign all-disposing Lord. So we take him, in Covenanting with him, for
our selves, and ours. For he so propounds, and offers himself, to us; If we
accept, and take him accordingly, there is a Covenant between him and us,
otherwise we refuse him; and there is no Covenant. When he promises, as to his
part, he promises his all; to be God all-sufficient to us; to be ours in all
his Fullness, according to our measure, and capacity: we are not straightened in
him, but in our selves. He undertakes to be to us, and do for us, all that it
belongs to him, as a God to be, and do. Psalm. 84.11.
To give us Grace and Glory, about which, there can be no dispute, or doubt,
they are always, and immutably good. And to withhold from us no good thing,
Here, are comprehended, with the former, inferior good things, about which,
because they are but mutably, and not always good, there may be a doubt,
whether, now and in present Circumstances, they will be good for us, or no. And
now, it belongs to him, as he is to do the part of a God to us, to judge and
determine for us: for which he alon^ is competent, as being God only wise, and
otherwise he were not God allsufficient; And not to leave that to us, who are
so apt to be partial, and mistaken, in our judgment.

But when he makes his Demand from us, of what we on our part are to be, and
do; he demands our all, absolutely; that we surrender our selves and ours,
whatsoever we are, and have, to his pleasure and dispose, without other
exception, or restriction, than by his Promise, he has laid upon himself.

Nor are we to think it strange there should be this difference, in the tenor
of his Covenant, between his part and ours. For we are to remember, The
Covenant between him, and us, is not, as of Equals; He Covenants as God; we, as
Creatures; He, according to the universal, infinite perfection and all
sufficiency of a God, we, according to the insufficiency, imperfection and
indigency of Creatures.

These things were (I doubt not) all foreknown, and, I hope, considered by you,
when you so sol^mnly transacted with God, concerning this your Son; wherein you
could not but then take him for your God, as well as his God. It needs now only
to be applied to the present Case; and it manifestly admits this Application,
viz.

That this his disposal of him, in taking him, now, up to himself, to be
glorified by him, and to glorify him, in the Heavenly state, was a thing then
agreed upon, by solemn Covenant, between God and you. It was done by your own
vertual, and unretracted consent. The substance of the thing was agreed to
expressly; that God should be his God, and finally, make him happy, and blessed
in himself. But if you say, you would only have had his complete Blessedness,
yet a while deferred; I will only say, could you agree with that God, whose he
was, and whose you are, about the substance of so great a Transaction, and now
differ with him about a Circumstance? And besides, all Circumstances must be
comprehended in your Agreement. For taking him to be your God, you take him to
be Supreme Disposer in all things: and his Will to be in every thing the Rule,
and measure of yours. Which you have expressly consented to as often as you have
prayed, either in the words, or after the tenor, of that Prayer, wherein our
Lord has taught us to sum up our Desires, and represent the sense of our
Hearts.

But besides the Duty, that is both by his Law, and by Covenant-agreement,
owing to God, it is also to be considered, as an high Dignity, put upon you, to
be the Covenanted-Parents of a glorified Son; a matter of greater boast, than
if you could say our Son (to repeat what I formerly ly wrote) is one of the
greatest Princes on Earth!

How far should Paganism be outdone, by Christianity! which exhibits to our
view Death abolished! Life, and Immortality brought to light, by Jesus Christ,
in the Gospel! 2 Timothy 1.10. Which sets before us all the Glories of the other
World in a bright representation! Which, if we believe, That Faith will be to
us, the substance of what we hope for, and the evidence of what we see not.
Thus, tho you saw not the kind reception, and abundant entrance of this Son of
your Delights, into the everlasting Kingdom, it will yet be a thing evident to
you; and your Faith will render it a great, and a most substantial Reality.
Pagans had but obscure glimmerings of such things; and in such afflicting
Cases, when they have occurred, comparatively lank, and slender Supports; yet
such as were not to be despised.

Should I transcribe what I find written in way of Consolation by Plutarch to
Apollonius, upon the loss of a Son, you would see what would give both
Instruction and Admiration. I shall mention some Passages. He praises the young
Person, deceased, for his Comeliness, Sobriety, Piety, dutifulness toward
Parents, obligingness toward Friends, acknowledges that Sorrow in the case of
losing such a Son, has ((...)) a principle in Nature, and is of the things
that are ((...)) not in our Power, or which we cannot help; That to be
destitute of it is neither possible, nor fit. That an Apathy, or insensibleness
in such a Case is no more desirable, than that we should endure to have a
Limb, a part of our selves, cut, or torn off from us without feeling it. But
yet affirms that immoderate Sorrow upon such an occasion is ((...))
preternatural, and has a pravity in it, and proceeds from a misinformed mind.
That we ought in any such Case to be neither ((...), nor (...)) unaffected, nor
ill affected. He tells his Friend a Story (The meaning whereof, is more
considerable to us, than the Credit of it, as perhaps it was to him) concerning
two Grecian Youths, Cleobis and Biton, whose Mother having a Duty to perform
in the Temple of Juno, and the Mules, not being at hand, in the instant, when
she expected them, to draw ^er Chariot thither, they most officiously drew it
themselves; with which act of Piety their Mother was so transported, that she
made her Request to Juno, on their behalf, that if there were any thing more
desirable unto Mortals, than other, she would therewith reward her Sons; who
thereupon threw them into a Sleep, out of which they awaked no more. Thereby
signifying, that Death was the best gif^ that could be bestowed upon Persons of
such supposed Piety, as they!

To which purpose, is what he relates concerning the Death of Euthynous an
Italian, referred to, toward the close of the following Discourse. Son, and
Heir to the ample Estate, of Elysius, a Person of principal Dignity among the
Terinaeans. To whom anxiously enquiring of Diviners, concerning the cause of
this Calamity, the Spectre of his Son, introduced by the Father of the latter,
appeared in his Sleep, showing him certain Greek Verses, the sum whereof was,
Thy Enquiry was Foolish. The Minds of Men are vain, Euthynous rests by a kindly
decreed Death,

Because his living longer, had neither been-good for him, nor his Parents.

He afterward adds, A good Man, when he dies, is worthy not so much of
Lamentations, as of Hymns, and Praises.

He animadverts upon the aptnes^ of Parents to quarrel with any circumstanc^s
of a Son's death; be they what they will, If he die abroad, then the
aggravation is, that neither the Father nor the Mother, had Opportunity to
close his Eyes; If at home, then, how is he plucked away, even out of our Hands!

He gives diverse memorable instances, of sundry great Persons, bearing with
strange composure of Mind, the same kind of Affliction. I omit what he wrote to
his Wife on their loss of a Child. As also to recite many, very instructive
Passages, out of Seneca writing to Marcia, on the same account, viz. by way of
Consolation, for her loss of a Son, and to Helvia, for her loss in the same
kind. To Polybius, having lost a near Relation, etc.

But we have the Oracles of God, and do, too commonly, less need to receive
Instruction from Heathens, than deserve to be reproached by them. That there is
so frequent Cause for the Complaint of that an^ient Worthy in the Christian
Church. Hierom.
Non praestat Fides quod praestitit Infidelitas. The Infidelity of Pagans,
performs greater things than the Faith of Christians. Their sedate Temper,
their Mastery over turbulent Passions, may, in many instances, shame our
impotency, and want of self-government, in like Cases.

For who of them have ever had, o^ could have so great a thing to say, as is
said to us by the Word of the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. For this very purpose, that
we may not sorrow concerning them that are asleep, even, as others, who have no
hope, i. e. ver. 14. If we believe that Jesus died, and rose again; even so,
them also, which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. For ver. 15. this we
say to you (and it is said by the forementioned Aut^ority, the Lord himself
having revealed it to this great Apostle, and directed him to say it) that we
who are alive, and remain unto the Coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them
which are asleep. Ver. 16. For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven wi^h
a Shout, with the Voice of the Archangel, and with the T^ump of God; and the
Dead in Christ shall rise first. Ver. 17. Then we which are alive, and remain,
shall be caught up, together with them, in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the
Air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Ver. 18. Wherefore comfort one
another with these words.

I have transcribed these few Verses, that they might readily appear to present
view. And because all their Efficacy, and all our Advantage by them, depends
upon our believing them; let us closely put the question to our selves, Do we
believe them? or do we not? The Apostle seems ^o design the putting us upon
this Self reflection. Ver. ^4. by inserting the supposi^ion, If we believe, --
q d. This will effectually do the business, of allaying all our hopeless
Sorrow. For, if we believe that one Fundamental Truth (and therefore let us see
whether we do or no) of Christ's dying and rising again, it will draw such a
train of Consequences, all tending to fill our Souls with a vital Joy, as will
leave no place for undue Sorrow any longer. That Faith, will be still urging
and carrying us forward, will make us wholly intent upon Prospect and
Expectation. What are we now to look for upon such a Foundation, so firmly
laid, and fully believed? If we believe that Jesus died! He did not submit to
die, without a design; and his rising again, speaks him Master of his Design:
and that he has it now entirely in his Power. He died not for himself, but for
them he was to redeem! And being now risen again, what must become of them! All
that follows is now matter of glorious Triumph!

If Plato, Plutarch or Seneca, had but once had such a Revelation from Heaven
as this, and had that ground to believe it, that we have; how full would their
Writings have been of it! How had they abounded, in lofty Paraphrases, upon
every Period, and word of it!

The Faith of such things, would surely make a truly Ch^istian Heart, so
earn^stly press forward, in the expectation of the Great things, still to
ensue, as to leave it little leisure for retrospection. And this is the source
of all our intemperate Sorrow, in such a Case as this, our framing to our
selves pleasing suppositions, of being as we were, with such, and such Friends
and Relatives about us, as we heretofore enjoyed. As hope of what is future,
and desirable, feeds our Joy; so, Memory of good things past, does our Sorrow.
In such a Case as this, which the Apostle here speaks to, the decease of our
dear Friends, and Relatives, fallen asleep; we are apt to look back, with a
lingering Eye, upon that former state of things: and to say, as he, O mihi
preteritos -- O that God would recall for me the Years that are gone over --!
Or, as in sacred Language, O that I were as in Months past -- When the secret
of God was Job 29.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
upon my Tabernacle. When the Almighty was yet with me; when my Children were
about me!

What pleasant Scenes do we form to our selves, afresh, of past things, on
purpose to foment present Sorrow! And whether we have that design or no, we are
more prone to look back to former things we have known, than forward to future,
we know not; especially, if the further we look back, the less we find of
Trouble intermingl'd in our former Course. A smooth and pleasant Path we would
go over again, if Reason, and the necessity of Affairs do not recall us, and
urge us forward.

And so, Sir, might you find matter for a very copious, and not ungrateful
recollection, to call over again, and revolve in your Thoughts, the pleasures
of your Youth, (more innocent than of many others,) when you were incumbered
with no Cares, entertained with various Delights, of one sort and another, in
this or that pleasant Seat of your Parents. But how remote is it from you, upon
Consideration, to wish your self back, into your juvenile State, and
Circumstances? How much a more generous, and God like pleasure is it, to be
doing good in the World, and still to abound therein, to go forward, and do
still more and more!

And, Madam, who could have a more pleasant Retrospect, upon former days, than
y^u? recounting your Antrim Delights! the delight you took in your excellent
Rela^ions, your Garden Delights, your Closet-delights, your Lords-days
delights! But how much a greater thing is it to serve God in your present
Station! as the Mother of a numerous and hopeful Offspring? as the Mistress of
a large Family; where you bear your part, with your like-minded Consort, in
supporting the Interest of God and Religion! and have opportunity of scattering
Blessings round about you!

But our Business is not recurring, or looking back. God is continually calling
us forward. Time is a stream, running on, toward the vast Ocean. Tending
backward, is vain striving against the Stream. And as it is the Course, and
Method, of Nature, of Providence, and Grace, to tend forward, and carry us from
less to greater things, in this World. So do all these conspire, to carry us
on, because our (...), our highest pitch, cannot be here; to yet far greater
things in the greater World. Of which vast World, it is the Design of the
following Discourse to give you some account; tho, God knows, it is but a very
imperfect one. Such as it is, if God only make it an occasion to you, of fixing
your Minds and Hearts upon that mighty Theme, you will find it easy and
pleasant to you to amplify upon it, and enlarge it to your selves. And thereby,
through God's Blessing, I doubt not, arrive to a fullness of Satisfaction,
concerning this late Dispensation, which has a gloominess upon it; but is in
very deed only gloomy, on one side, viz. downwards, and toward this wretched
World, this Region of Sorrow and Darkness: but on the side, upwards, and
toward that other World, which casts its luster upon it, its Phasis, and
appearance, will be altogether bright and glorious. And the more you look by a
believing intuition into that other World, where our Blessed Redeemer, and
Lord, bears rule, in so Transcendent Glory; the more will you be above all the
cloudy Darkness, of this event of Providence, toward your selves, and your
Family. Herein, your perusal of this very defective Essay, may be of some use
to you. And I reckoned it might be of more lasting and pe^manent use to you,
and yours after you, and to as many others, into whose hands it might fall, as
a little Book, than as one single Sermon.

You will, however, I doubt not, apprehend in it, the sincere desire to assist
you in this your present, difficult ^rial; followed by the faithful Endeavor,
of

Most Honored in the Lord, Your very respectful and obliged Servant, in him,
and for his sake, JOHN HOW.
May 17. 1699.
Rev. 1.18. -- And have the Keys of Hell (Hades, or the unseen World) and of
Death.


THE peculiar occasion of this present Solemnity, I mean, that is additional to
the usual business of the Lord's Day, may be somewhat amusing to narrower and
less considering minds, i. e. That I am now to take notice to you of (what the
most would call) the premature, or untimely death of a most hopeful Young
Gentleman, the Heir of a very considerable Family, greatly prepared by parts
and pious Sentiments, and further preparing by study and conversation, to be
useful to the Age, cut off in his prime, when the mere showing him Ostendunt
terris hunc tantum fata nec ultra esse si^unt.
to the World had begun to raise an expectation in such as knew him, of
somewhat more than ordinary hereafter from him, his future advantageous
circumstances, being considered, of which you will hear further toward the
close of this Discourse.

Nor did I know any passage in the whole sacred Volume, more apt to serve, the
best and most valuable purpose, in such a case, than the words now read; none
more fitted to enlarge our minds, to compose them, and reduce to a due temper
even theirs who are most concerned, and most liable to be disturbed, or to
instruct us all how to interpret and comment aright upon so perplexing, and so
intricate a Providence as this at the first, and slighter view may seem unto us.

In order whereto our business must be to Explain this most weighty awful
saying. and Apply this most weighty awful saying.


1. For the Explication, these 3 things are to be enquired into.

1. Who it is that claims, and asserts to himself this Power here spoken of?

2. What it is about which this claimed Power is to be conversant?

3. What sort of Power it is that this emblematical expression, signifies to
belong to him?

1. Who it is that claims the Power here spoken of?. Where the Enquiry is not
so much concerning the Person that makes this claim; which all the foregoing
context puts out of question to be our Lord Christ. But touching the special
notion and capacity wherein he claims it, and according whereto it must be
understood to belong to him.

And whereas he is described by very distinct Titles, and Attributes,
promiscuously interwoven in the preceding verses of the chapter, viz. that
sometimes he is introduced speaking in the style of a God; as ver. 8. I am
Alpha, and Omega, the beginning, and the ending, says the Lord, which is, and
which was, and which is to come, the Almighty. And again, v 11. I am Alpha, and
Omega. But that sometimes he is represented in the form of a Man* and
accordingly described even from head to foot, and said to appear in the Vision
that exhibits him, as one like the Son of Man, that we might certainly
understand him so to be, verse 13, 14, 15, 16. And such things said of him as
are incident to a Mortal Man, the shedding of his Blood, verse 5. and that he
was dead, verse 18. former part. Yea and expressions of this different import
intermingled, that we might know it was the same Person that was continuedly
spoken of under these so vastly different Characters, as, I am the first and
the last; I am he that lives and was dead, verse 17, 18. We may thereupon very
reasonably conclude that he is not here to be conceived under the one notion or
the other, neither as God, nor as Man, separately or exclusively of each other;
but as both together, as (...), as God-man, under which conjunct notion, he
receives, and sustains the Office of our Redeemer, and Mediator between God,
and Man

Which will enable us the more clearly to answer the third Enquiry, when we
come to it, concerning the Kind of that Power, which is here claimed. And
which, because there can be no doubt of the justice of his claim, we are hereby
taught to ascribe to him.

For the management whereof, we are also hence to reckon him every way
competent; that he was par negotio that it was not too big for him. No
expressions being used to signify his true Humanity, but which are joined with
others, as appropriate to Deity. And that nothing therefore obliges us to
narrow it more than the following account imports; which we are next to enquire
about; viz.

2. The large extent of the object about which the Power he here claims, is to
be conversant. i. e. Hades (as we read, Hell but which is truly to be read) the
unseen World, and Death.

The former of these, we with a debasing limitation, and (as I doubt not will
appear) very unreasonably do render Hell.

The Power belonging to Christ, we are elsewhere taught to conceive is of
unspeakably greater latitude. And here we are not taught to confine it to so
vile and narrow limits, as this translation gives it. All things in the Context
Conspire to magnify him, and, agreeably hereto to magnify his Dominion. When
therefore the apparent design is to speak him great, that he should only be
represented as the Jailer of Devils, and their companions, is, to me
unaccountable; unless a very manifest necessity did induce to it.

From the word (...), there can be no pretense for it. Though it ought to be
extended, it is by no means to be restrained to that sense: Which as it is the
ignoblest, so it will appear but a very small, minute part of its
signification; whether we consider the literal import, or the common use of the
word.

Literally it signifies, but what we see not, or what is out of our sight.

And as the word of which it is compounded signifies also to know, as well as
to see, it may further signify, that state of things which lies without the
compass of our knowledge, even out of the reach of our mental sight; or
concerning which, though we are to believe what is revealed, we cannot
immediately, or distinctly know it; and in reference whereto, therefore, we are
to walk by Faith, not by sight, 2 Cor. 5.7.

And the common use of the word, has been very agreeable hereto; with Writers
of all sorts, i e. to signify indefinitely the unseen World; or the state of
the deceased out of our World, who are, consequently, gone out of our sight,
whether they were good or bad; so as not peculiarly to signify Hell, or any
place, or state of Torment, only.

It were easy to abound in Quotations to this purpose, if it were either
needful, or proper in a Discourse of this nature.

What I intend in this kind, I shall only set down on the by in the Margin,
upon which they that will may cast their Eye And here it may suffice to take
notice that Greek Writers, Poets, Philosophers, Historians; and other Writers,
that have made only occasional mention of this word (...), or of the words next
akin to it (...), or (...), or Lexicographers, that have purposely given an
account of it, from Greek Authors, that must be supposed best to understand the
use of words in their own Tongue; generally such as have not been engaged in a
Controversy, that obliges men usually to torture words to their own sense, or
to serve the Hypothesis, which they had espoused; have been remote from
confining this, or the cognate words; to that narrow sense as only to signify
a place or state of torment for bad men, but understood it as comprehending
also, a state of Felicity for the pious and good.

For such as have been concerned in interpreting this or other like words with
reference to the known, and famous Controversy, which I need not mention,
their Judgments must weigh according to the reputation they are of with the
Reader.

The Greeks, no doubt, best understood their own Language. And among them can
we think that Homer in the beginning of his 1. Il. when he speaks of the many
brave Souls of his Hero's, those (...), which the W^r he is describing, sent
into the invisible Regions, (...), that he ever dreamt they were all
promiscuously dispatched away to a place of Torment. Not to mention other
passages where he uses the the word (...); to the same purpose. Diverse others
of of the Greek Poets are cited by several ready to our han^s, with which I
shall not cumber these pages. That one ^ enough, and nothing can be fuller to
our purpose, which is quoted by Clem. Alexandr. Str. l. 5. (as well as by
sundry others) and ascribed to the Comic. Diphilus (though by others to another,
Philemon.)

(...)
(...).
In Hades we reckon there are two paths, the one of the righteous, the other of
the wicked; plainly showing that Hades was understood to contain Heaven, and
Hell. Plato, when in his Phaedo, he tells us that he that comes into Hades,
(...), not initiated and duly prepared, is thrown into (...), (a stinking Lake)
but he that comes into it fitly purified, shall dwell with the Gods; as
expressly signifies Hades to include the same opposite states of misery and
felicity. In that Dialogue called Axiochus, though supposed not to be his,
written by one that sufficiently knew the meaning of such a word, we are told
that when Men die they are brought into the (...), the Field of Truth, where
sit Judges that examine (...), what manner of life every one lived while he
dwelt in the body, that they who while they lived here were inspired by a good
Genius, or Spirit, go into the Region of pious Men, having before they came
into Hades been purified -- such as led their lives wickedly are hurried by
Furies up and down Chaos -- in the Region of the wicked. In the third Book de
Repub. Plato blames the Poets that they represent the state of things in Hades
too frightfully* when they should (...), praise it rather. Plutarch de Superst.
brings in Plato speaking of Hades, as a Person, or a God, Dis, or Pluto (as
they frequently do) and says he is (...), benign or friendly to Men; therefore
not a tormentor of them only. Caelius Rhodigin. quotes this same passage of
Plutarch, and takes notice that our Savior speaks of the state of Torment by
another word, not Hades, but Gebenna; which sufficiently shows how he
understood it himself.

And whereas there are who disagree to this notation of this word, that makes
it signify unseen, as some will fetch it from the Hebr. and go as far back as
Adam in their search, alleging for this the Authority of an old Sibyll, will
have it go for (...), and signify as (...), unpleasant; nothing is plainer
than that this other is the common notion, which (though Fancy has not a greater
Dominion in any thing than in Etymology) would make one shy of stretching
invention to find how to differ from the generality. Therefore Calepin, upon
this word, tells us that the Greek Grammarians, do against the nature of the
Etymon (which plainly enough shows what they understood that to be) generally
direct its beginning to be writ with the asper spirit; but yet he makes it
signify obscure, or not visible. And though Plato is endeavored to be hook't in
to the deriving it from Adam by a very far fetch; yet it is plain that his
calling it (...), in a place before referred to, shows he understood it to
signify invisible. And so Lexicons will commonly derive it ( Vulgo, says
Caelius. Rhodis.) But its extensiveness, as comprehending a state of happiness,
is our principal concern, which way (as we might show by many more instances)
the common stream carries it. Pausanias in his (...), speaking of Hermes
(according to Homer) as (...), and that he did lead. Souls (...), could not be
thought to mean, they were then universally miserable. Sext. Empir. is an
Authority good enough for the meaning of a Greek word. When ( Adversus Mathem.)
he tells us, though by way of objection; all men have a common notion (...),
(using the Genitive with (...), as Homer, and others do, another word house, or
abode, in the Dative, being understood) And yet, as to the thing, he afterward
distinguishes Poets Fables, and what from the nature of the Soul it self, all
have a common apprehension of. As also Diog. Laert. has the same phrase,
mentioning the Writings of Protagoras, who, he says, wrote one Book (...),
using the Genitive, as here, after (...), as has been usual, on the mentioned
account. And though his Books were burnt by the Athenians, because of the dubious
Title of one of them concerning the Gods. So that we have not opportunity to
know, what his Opinion of Hades was, we have reason more than enough, to think
he understood it not of a state of Torment only for Evil Spirits.


; that the Discourse be not interrupted as to others that either have no need
to be informed in this matter, having known as much before, as can be now told
them; or no inclination to be diverted from their present purpose in reading;
apprehending that what is generally told them, only concerning the usual
signification of a word, is not said without some ground.

And let Texts of Scripture be consulted about that, how Hades, and (the
correspondent word in the O. T.) She Will, are used there. If we take the Help of
Interpreters, the impartial. Reader is to judge of their Fidelity, and Ability
who go our way Primate Usher's Judgment may be seen in his Answer to the
Jesuits Challenge, that this word properly signifies the other World, the place
or state of the Dead -- So that Heaven it self may be comprehended in it. Grot.
on Luke 16.23. Makes Hades most certainly to signify a place withdrawn from
our sight; spoken of the body, the grave; of the soul, all that Region wherein
it is separate from the body. So that as Dives was in Hades, so was Lazarus too,
but in separate Regions. -- For both Paradise, and Hell, or as the Grecians
were wont to speak) Elysii and Tartara were in Hades. You may have in him more
Quotations from the Poets, the sense of the Essenes from Josephus, and passages
from diverse of the Fathers to the same purpose. Dr. Hammonds mind was the same,
copiously expressed on Matt. 11.20. But differs from Grot. in ascribing to
Philemon, the Jambicks above recited, which the other gives to Diphilus. Dr.
Lightsoot is full to the same purpose. On the 4th Art. of the Creed. And though
Bellarmin will have this word always signify Hell (which if it do with Sheol
the correspondent word; Jacob desired to go to Hell to his Son, as Dr. H.
argues.)

Camero (as good a Judge) thinks, except once, it never d^es. If any desire to
see more to this purpose with little trouble to themselves, let them peruse
Martinius's Lexic. on the word Inserus, or Insernus. I could refer them to many
more whom I fo^bear to mention.

Only if any think in some or other Text of Scripture this word must signify
Hell only, since it is of that latitude as to signify Heaven in other places,
an impartial view of the circumstances of the Text, must determine whether
there, it be meant of the one, or the other, or both.


.

Upon the whole, it being most evident, that Hell, is but a small, and mean
part of what is signified by Hades, it will be very unreasonable to represent
or conceive of, the Power here ascribed to our Lord, according to that narrow
notion of it. And would be a like incongruity, as if, to magnify the Person of
highest Dignity, in the Court of a mighty Prince, one should say, He is the
Keeper of the Dungeon.

The word it self, indeed, properly taken, and according to its just extent
mightily greatens him i.e. it is as much as to say, his Dominion is of unknown
limits; such as no Eye can measure. We think with a sort of veneration, of what
is represented as too big for our knowledge. We have a natural awe and
reverence for unsearchable darkness. But in the mean time we herein suffer a
just diminution of our selves; that when our enquiry stops, and can proceed no
further, it being but a very little part of the Universe that lies within our
compass, having tired our enquiring Eye, and Mind, upon all the rest we write
Hades, call it unseen, or unknown.

And because we call it so; in reference to us, God himself calls it so too. It
being his way (as is observed, by that noted Jew Maimonides.
) speaking to men, to use the tongue of the children of men, to speak to them
in their own language, and allow them to coin their own words. Which at first
they often do very occasionally; nor, as to this, could they have a fairer, or
a more urgent occasion, or that is more self-justifying than in one word to say
of that other World, that it is Hades or invisible, when that is truly all that
they have to say, or can have any immediate notice of about it.

It has therefore its rise from our selves, and the penury of our knowledge of
things. And is at once both an ingenuous confession, with some sort of modest
cover, and excuse of our own ignorance. As with Geographers, all that part of
this Globe, which they cannot describe, is Terra incognita; and with
Philosophers, such Phenomenon, in nature, as they can give no account of, they
resolve, shortly and in the most compendious way, into some or other occult
quality, or somewhat else, as occult.

How happy were it, if in all matters that concern Religion, and in this, as it
does so, they would shut up in a sacred venerable Darkness, what they cannot
distinctly perceive, it being once by the undeceiving Word expressly asserted,
that it is, without, therefore, denying its reality, because they clearly
apprehend not what it is.

With too many their Religion is so little, and their pride and self-conceit so
great, that they think themselves fit to be Standards. That their Eye or Mind,
is of a size large enough to measure the Creation; yea and the Creator too. And
by how much they have the less left them of Mind, or the more it is sunk into
Earth and Carnality, the more capable it is of being the measure of all reality
of taking the compass, of all being, created and uncreated. And so that of the
Philosopher takes place in the worst sense can be put upon it [ to see Darkness
is to see nothing] All is nullity that their sense reaches not. Hades is with
such, indeed, empty, imaginary, Darkness; or in plainer English there is
neither Heaven nor Hell, because they see them not.

But we ought to have the greater thoughts of it, not the less, for its being
too big, too great, too glorious for our present view: And that it must as yet,
rest, as to us, and so let it rest a while, under the name of Hades. The
unknown Dominion of our great Lord. According to that most express account he
at his Ascension gave of the Existence of both parts together, that less known
to us, and that more known, Matt. 28.18. All power is given to me both in
Heaven and Earth.

That Death is added, as contained also within the limits of our Lord's
Dominion, does expressly signify his custody of the passage from this Visible
World to the Invisible; viz. as he commands the entrance into each distinct
part of Hades, the Invisible World, consisting of both Heaven, and Hell, so he
has power over Death too, which is the common outlet from this World, and
the passage unto both.

But it withal plainly implies, His very absolute Power over this Visible
World of ours also: For it signifies he has the power of measuring every ones
time here, and how long each Inhabitant of this World shall live in it. If it
belong to him to determine when any one shall die, it must by consequence
belong to him to assign the portion and dimensum of time that every one shall
live. Nor is there any conceivable moment in the time of any ones life, wh^rein
he has not this power of putting a period by death thereunto, at his own
pleasure. He is therefore signified to have the power of every man's life and
death at once. And the Power of Life and Death is very high and great Power. He
therefore herein implicitly claims, what is elsewhere expressly ascribed to him,
Romans 14.78, 9. None -- lives to himself, (i.e. de jure, no man should) or dies
to himself: For whether we live, we live unto the Lord, or whether we die, we
die to the Lord; whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lords. For to
this end Christ both died, and rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord,
both of the dead and living.

In sum, here is asserted to him a Dominion over both Worlds; this, in which
we live, and that, into which we die, whether the one or the other part of it.
And so in reference to Men, who once have inhabited this World, the sense of
this ^ext, and that we are insisting on, is the same. Though Hades is of vastly
larger extent than only to be the receptacle of such as have lived here; it
having also, in both the parts of it, innumerable Inhabitants who never had a
dwelling assigned them in this World of ours at all.

But thus far we have the vast extent of our Lord Christ's Dominion,
competently cleared to be the proper intendment of this Text. And that it never
meant so faint and minute a representation of it, as only to make him Keeper of
the bottomless Pit. Though of that also he has the Key; as we shall further take
notice. But are, now to enquire of, what will tak up less time.

3. The Kind of that Power over so vast a Realm, or manifold Realms, signified
by this emblematical expression, of having the Keys, and^.

Every one knows, that the Keys are Insignia; some of the tokens of Power; and
according to the peculiarity of the Object, may be, of Divine Power.

The Jews, as some Writers of their Affairs say, appropriate the Keys of three,
others of four things to God only. Of Life, or the entrance into this World. Of
the Rain, or the Treasures of the Clouds. Of the Earth (say some Weems.
) as of the Granary of Corn. And of the Grave. Of which, says one of their own.
-- The Holy Blessed, Pirke. R. Elie^er. Edit. per G. H. Varst. C. F.
one has the Keys of the Sepulchers in his hand, etc. And, as we may be sure
he admits thither, so he emits from thence; and (as he says) in the future Age,
the H. B. one will unlock the Treasures of Souls, and will open the Graves, and
bring every Soul back into its own body, etc.

Nor is this Key of the vast Hades, when it is in the hand of our Redeemer, the
less in the hand of the Holy, Blessed One; for so is he too. But it is in his
hand as belonging to his Office, of Mediator between God and Man, as was before
said. And properly the phrase signifies Ministerial Power, being a manifest
allusion to the common usage, in the Courts of Princes, of entrusting to some
great Minister the Power of the Keys; as it was foretold of Eliakim, Isa. 22.
that he should be placed in the same high station in Hezekiahs Court, wherein
Shebna was, of whom so severe things are there said; and that the Key of the
House of David, should be laid upon his shoulder, etc. ver. 20, 21, 22. And the
House of David, being a known Type of the House or Church of God; and he
himself, of Christ, who, as the Son, has power over the whole house, according
to this typical way of speaking our Lord is said, Rev 3.7. to have the Key of
David, to open so as none can shut, to shut so as none can open, i. e. to have
a final decisive power in all he does, from which there is no appeal.

Nor could any thing be more congruous, than that having the Keys of the
Celestial House of God, the Heavenly Palace of the Great King, the Habitation
of his Holiness and Glory, in which are the Everlasting Habitations, the many
Mansions, the Places prepared for his Redeemed; he should also have the Keys of
the Terrestrial Bethel; which is but a sort of Portal, or Vestibulum to the
other. The House of God, and the Gate of Heaven. And as he is implied to have
the Keys of this introductive, preparatory Kingdom of Heaven (as the Keys of
the Kings Palace, where is the Throne or Seat of Government; and the Keys of
the Kingdom must mean the same thing) when he is said to give them to the
Apostle Peter, and the other Apostles: This was but a Prelude, and a minute
Instance of his Power of those Keys of Hades, and of the glorious Heavenly
Kingdom it self contained therein, which he was not to delegate, but to manage
himself immediately in his own Person.

If moreover he were signified by the An^el, Rev. 20.1. who was said to have
the Key of the bottomless Pit; That also must import a Power, though great in it
self, yet very little in comparison of the immense Hades, of which he is here
s^id to have the Ke^s. So remote is it, that the Power ascribed to him there,
should be the measure of what he here assets to himself: And the difference
must be vastly greater than it is possible for us to conceive, or parallel, by
the difference between having Power over the Palace, and all the most
delightful and most spacious Territories in the vastest Empire of the greatest
Prince, and only having Power over a Dungeon in some obscure corner of it Which
for the great purposes, whereto all this is it be applied, we can can scarcely
too much inculcate.

And to such application let us now with all possible seriousness and intention
of spirit, address our selves. Which will consist in sundry Inferences, or
Deductions, laying before us some suitable matter, Partly of our Meditation,
Practice.



The former whereof are to prepare, and lay a ground for the latter.

1. Diverse things we may collect that will be very proper for our deep
Meditation; which I shall propose not as things that we can be supposed not to
have known before, but which are, too commonly, not enough thought on, or
considered.

And here we shall somewhat invert the order wherein things lie in the Text,
beginning with what is there latter and lower, and thence arising, with more
advantage, to what is higher, and of greater concernment. As,

1. That Men do not die at random, or by some uncertain, acciaccidental by
stroke, that as by a slip of the hand, cuts off the thread of Life; but by an
act of Divine Determination, and Judgment, that passes in reference to each
ones Death. For as the Key signifies Authority and Power, the turning this Key
of Death, that gives a Man his Exit out of this World, is an Authoritative Act.
And do we consider in what hand this Power is lodged? we cannot but apprehend
every such act is the effect of Counsel and Judgment.

What Philosophers are wont to discourse of fortuitous Events in reference to
Rational Agents, or Casual, in reference to Natural, must be understood but
with relation to our selves, and signifies only our own ignorance of
futurities; but can have no place in the all-comprehending Mind, as if any
thing were a contingency unto that. For them that live as if they thought they
came into this World by chance; it is very natural to them to think they shall
die, and go out of it, by chance too, but, when, and as, it happens. This is
worse than Paganish Blindness; for besides what from their Poets, the vulgar
have been made to believe concerning the three fatal Sisters, to whom they
ascribed no less than Deity concerned in measuring every ones Life. The grave
discourses which some of them have writ concerning Providence, and its extent
to the lesser intermediate concerns of Life, much more to that their final
great concern of Death, will be a standing Testimony against the too-prevailing
Christian Skepticism (they ought to excuse the Soloecism, who make it) of this
wretched Age! But such among us as will allow themselves the liberty to think,
want not opportunity, and means by which they may be assured, that not an
imaginary, but real Deity is immediately and constantly concerned in measuring
our Time in this World. What an awful thought is this! And it leads to a

2 Inference. That it is a great thing to die. The Son of God, the Redeemer of
man has an immediate presidency over this affair He signalizes himself by it,
who could not suppose, he should be magnified by a trifle! We slightly say,
such a one is Dead! Consider the matter in it self, and it is great. A
reasonable Soul has changed States! an intelligent Spirit is gone out of our
world! The life of a Gnat, a Fly, those little Automata, or self moving things,
how admirable a production is it! It becomes no man to despise what no man can
imitate. We praise the Pencil that well describes the external figure of such
an Animalculum, such a little Creature, but the internal vital, self moving
power, and the motion itself, what Art can express! But an humane life how
important a thing is it! It Was one of Plato's thanksgivings that God had made
him a man! How careful a guard has God set over every man's life! fencing it by
the severest Law. If any man shed man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed;
and how weighty is the annexed reason! For in the image of God he made man.
This then highly greatens this matter. He therefore reserves it wholly to
himself, as one of his peculiarities, to dispose of such a life! I am he that
kills and makes alive. We find it One of his high titles, The God of the
Spirits of all flesh. He had what was much greater to glory in, that he was The
Father of spirits, indefinitely spoken When he has all the heavenly Regions,
the spacious Hades, Peopled with such Inhabitants whose dwelling is not with
flesh; (and for vast multitudes of them) that never was, that yet, looking down
into this little world of ours, this minute spot of his creation, and observing
that here were Spirits dwelling in flesh* he should please to be s^yl^d also
the God of those Spirits, signifies this to be with him too an appropriate
glory, a glory which he will not communicate farther then he communicates
Godhead. And that he held it a divine right to measure the time unto each of
them of their abode in flesh, and determine when they shall dislodge.

This cannot be thought on-aright, without a becoming, most profound reverence
of him on this account. How sharp a rebuke is given to that haughty Prince, The
God in whose hands thy breath is have thou not glorified. Dan. 5.23.
That would prepare the way, and we should be easily led on, were we once come
to think with reverence, to think also with pleasure, of this case, that our
life, and every breath we draw, is under such a Divine Superintendency. The H.
Psalmist speaks of it with high complacency, as the matter of his Song, that he
had a God presiding over his life. So he tells us he would have each (...),
composed not more of Night and Day, than of Prayer and Praise directed to God
under this notion, as the God of his life, Psalm. 42.8. And he speaks it not
grudgingly, but as the ground of his trust and boast, Psalm. 31.14, 15. -- I
trusted in thee, O Lord, I said thou art my God, my times are in thy hand. That
this Key is in the hand of the Great Emmanuel, God with us, will be thought on
with frequency, when it is thought on with delight.

3. Our Life on Earth is under the constant strict observation of our Lord
Christ. He waits when to turn the Key, and shut it up. Through the whole of that
time, which, by deferring, he measures out to us, we are under his Eye as in a
state of probation. He takes continual notice how we acquit our selves. For his
turning the Key, at last, is a judicial act; therefore supposes diligent
observation, and proceeds, upon it. He that has this Key, is also said in the
next Chapter, verse 18. to have Eyes like a flame of fire; with these he
observes what he has against one or another, ver. 20. And, with most indulgent
patience gives a space of Repentance, ver. 21. and notes it down, if any then
repent not, as we there also find. Did secure Sinners consider this, how he
beholds them with a flame in his Eye, and the Key in his hand, would they dare
still to trifle? If they did apprehend how he, in this posture, stands over
them, in all their vain dalliances, idle impertinencies, bold adventures,
insolent attempts against his Laws, and Government, presumptuous affronts of
his high Authority; Yea or but in their drowsy slumbrings, their lingering
delays, their neglects of offered Grace. Did they consider what notice he takes
how they demean themselves under every Sermon they hear, in every Prayer
wherein they are to join with others, or which perhaps, for customs sake, they
put up alone by themselves. How their hearts are moved, or unmoved by every
repented Call that is given them to turn to God, and get their Peace made by
application of their Redeemer's reconciling Blood. In what Agonies would they
be! what pangs of trembling would they feel within themselves, lest the Key
should turn, before their great work be done!

4. Whatsoever ill designs by this observation he discovers, it is easy to him
to prevent. One turn of this Key of Death (besides the many other ways that are
obvious to him) disappoints them all, and in that day all their thoughts
perish. It Is not therefore from inadvertency, indifferency, or impotency, but
deep counsel, that they are permitted to be driven on so far. He that sits
in the Heavens laughs, and he knows their day is coming. He can turn this Key
when he will.

5. His Power as to every ones Death cannot be avoided, or withstood. The act
of this Key is definitive, and ends the business. No man has power over the
Spirit to retain the Spirit; nor has he power in Death, Eccles. 8.8. It Is in
vain to struggle, when the Key is turned; the Power of the Keys, where it is
supremely lodged, is absolutely decisive, and their Effect permanent and
irrevocable. That Soul therefore for whose Exit the Key is turned, must
thereupon then forthwith depart, willing or unwilling, ready or unready.

6. Souls that go out of this World of ours, on the turn of this Key, go not
out of being. He that has this Key of Death, has also the Key of Hades, a Key
and a Key. When he uses the former, to let them out from this, he uses the
latter, to give them their Inlet into the other World, and into the one or the
other part of it; into the upper, or the lower Hades, as the state of their
case is, and does require.

Our business is not now with Pagans, to whom the Oracles of God are unknown:
If it were, the best and wisest of them who so commonly speak of Souls going
into Hades, never thought of their going no whither; nor therefore that they
were nothing. They had reasons, then, which they thought cogent, that induced
them, though unassisted with Divine Revelation, to conclude they survived their
forsaken bodies. And what else could any unbrib'd understanding conclude, or
conceive? When we find they have powers belonging to them, which we can much
more easily apprehend capable of being acted, without help from the body, than
by it? We are sure they can form thoughts, purposes desires, hopes; for it is
matter of fact, they do it; and coherent thoughts, and thoughts arising from
thoughts one, from another. Yea and thoughts abstracted from any thing
corporeal, the notions of right and wrong, of Virtue and Vice, of moral good,
and evil with some agreeable resolves, Thoughts quite above the sphere of
matter, so as to form a notion of the Mind, it self, of a spiritual Being, as
unexceptionable a one as we can form of a body. Yea of an Original self
subsistent Mind and Spi^i^, the Former and Maker of all other. It Is much more
apprehensible, since we certainly know that all this is done, that it is done
without any help of the body, than how flesh, or blood, or bones, or nerves, or
brains, or any corporeal thing, should contribute to such Methods of thinking,
or to any thought at all. And if it can be conceiv^d that a Spirit can act
without dependence on a body, what should hinder but we may as well conceive it
to subsist and live without such dependence? And when we find this power of
thought belongs to somewhat in us that lives, since the deserted Carcass thinks
not, how reasonable is it to suppose, that as the body lives not of it self, or
life is not essential to it, for life may be retired and gone, and it remain,
as we see it does, the same body still, that the soul to which the power of
thought belongs, l^ves of it self, not independently on the first cause, but
essentially, so as to receive life, and essence together from that cause, or
life included in its essence, so as that it shall be the same thing to it to
be, and to live. And hereupon how obvious is it to apprehend that the Soul is
such a thing as can live in the Body; which when it does, the Body lives by it
a precarious borrowed life; and that can live out of the Body, leaving it, when
it does so, to drop and die.

These Sentiments were so reasonable, as generally to prevail with the more
deeply thinking part of Mankind, Philosophers of all sorts (a few excepted,
whose Notions were manifestly formed by vicious inclination) in the Pagan
World, where was nothing higher than Reason to govern. But we have life and
immortality brought to light in the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10.
and are forewarned by it that these will be the measures of the final
Judgment, to give eternal life at last to them who by a patient continuance in
well-doing, seek honor, Romans 2.7.
glory and immortality. To the rest, indignation, and wrath, v. 8.
etc. because there is no respect of persons with God. v. 11.
As supposing the discovery of another World, even by natural light (much more
by the addition of supernatural) to be so clear, as that the Rule of the
Universal Judgment, even for all, is most righteously to be taken from hence,
and that there is nothing but a resolution of living wickedly, to be opposed to
it.

It is also no slight consideration that a susceptibleness of Religion should
among the Creatures that dwell on Earth be so appropriate, and peculiar to Man,
and (some rare Instances excepted) as far diffused, as Humane Nature. So as to
induce some very considering Men, of the Ancients, as well as Moderns, both
Pagans and Christians, to think Religion the more probable specifying
Difference of Man, than Reason. And whence should so common an impression be,
but from a cause as common? Or how can we avoid to think that this signature
upon the Soul of Man, a capacity of Religion should be from the same hand that
formed the spirit of Man within him, and that a Natural Religiousness, and
Humane Nature it self, had the same Author. But who sees not that Religion as
such, Philo Judeu^, Quod Det^r. potiori insid. sole^*

(...).


has a final reference to a future state? He was no despicable Writer (though
not a Christian) that positively affirmed, hope toward God to be essential to
Man; and that they that had it not, were not partakers of the Rational Nature.

It Is so much the more a deplorable and monstrous thing, that so many, not only
against the light of their own Reason, but of Divine Revelation, are so
industrious to unman themselves. And having so effectually in a great degree
done it really, and in practice, aim to do it in a more compendious way
notionally, and in principle too. And make use (or show) of Reason to prove
themselves not to be reasonable Creatures: or to divest themselves of the
principal dignity, and distinction of the Rational Nature. And are incomparably
herein more unnatural than such as we commonly count (...) upon themselves, who
only act against their own bodily life, but these against the much nobler life
of their Soul; They against the life of an individual; These against their own
whole species, at once. And how deplorable is their case, that count it their
interest, to be in no possibility of being happy! when yet their so great dread
of a future state, as to urge them upon doing the most notorious violence to
their own faculties to rid themselves of it, is a very convictive Argument of
its reality. For their dread still pursues, and sticks close to them. This
shows it lies deep in the nature of things which they cannot alter. The
terrible Image is still before their Eyes; and their principal Refuge lies only
in diverting, in not attending to it. And they can so little trust to their own
Sophistical reasonings against it, that when they have done all they can, they
must owe what they have of ease and quiet in their own Minds, not so much to
any strength of reason they apprehend in their own thoughts, as in not
thinking. A bold jest may sometimes provoke others laughter, when it does not
extinguish their own fear. A suspicion a formido oppositi will still remain, a
misgiving, that they cannot nullify the great Hades, pull down the spacious
Fabric of Heaven, or undermine the profound Abyss of Hell by a profane scoff.
They will in time discern the difference between the evanid passion of a sudden
fright, that takes its rise from imagination, and the fixed dread which is
founded in the Reason of things. As one may between a fright in a dream, and
the dread of a condemned Criminal, with whom, sleeping, and waking, the real
state of his case is still the same. Nor are the things themselves, remote, or
unconnected, God's right to punish a reasonable Creature that has lived in
contempt of him, and his own reasonable apprehension hereof, or his Conscience
both of the fact and desert. They answer as face to face, as the stamp on the
Seal, and the impression on the Wax. They would sain make their Reason a
protection against their fear, but ^h^t cannot serve both ways. The Reason of
the thing lies against them already, and there cannot be an eternal War between
the Faculty and the Object. One way or other the latter will overpower the
former, and draw it into consent with it self: Either by letting it see there
is a just true cause of fear, or (assisted by Divine Grace) prevail for the
change of the sinners course. Whereupon that troublesome fear, and its cause,
will both upon the best terms cease together: And that what has been proposed
to consideration under this Head, may be the more effectually considered, to
this blessed purpose. I add that,

7. The Discovery of the Invisible World, and the disposal of affairs there,
have a most encourageing Aspect upon this World. For both the Discovery and the
Disposal are by our Blessed Redeemer, in whom Mercy and Might are met in
highest perfection. How fragrant breathings of Grace, how glorious a display of
Power are there, in what he here says, Fear not! I am the first and the last; I
am he that lives and was dead, and I am alive for evermore, Amen. And I have
the Keys of Hades and of Death. He has opened the Celestial Hades to our view,
that it might be also open to our safe entrance and blissful inhabitation. He
who was Dead, but Lives and had made his victorious triumphant entrance before
us, and for us: He who had overcome him that had the Power of Death --
Conquered the Gigantick Monster at the Gate, gained the Keys, and designed
herein their deliverance from the fear of Death, who were thereby Subject to
Bondage, Heb. 2.14, 15. He who has abolished Death, and brought Life and
Immortality to light in the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. It Is he who bids us lift up
our Eyes, and behold the Heavens opened, and himself standing at the right hand
of God. The horrid, infernal Hades, he has discovered too, only that we might
fear and shun it. But yet more distinctly consider, why does he here represent
himself under this Character, He that lives and was dead? But that he might
put us in mind of that most convictive Argument of his Love, his submitting to
Die for us. Greater love has no Man -- And that he might at once, put us out
of doubt concerning his Power, that he yet survives, and is sprung up alive out
of that Death, victorious over it: How amiable is the representation of such
Power in conjunction with such Love! The same person having an heart so
replenish't with Love, an hand so armed with Power, neither capable of unkind
design, or unable to effect the most kind. Behold him in this representation!
who would not now fall at his foot and adore! Who would hesitate at resigning
to him, or be appalled at his disclosure of this unknown World!

Do but consider him who makes the Discovery, and who would not expect from him
the utmost efforts of Love and Goodness? From him who is the Brightness of his
Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his Person! His Essential Image who is
Love! From him who came into this wretched World of ours full of Grace and
Truth! And who could not have come but by the inducement of Compassion to our
Miseries. From him who knows all things, and whose ^ye penetrates into every
recess of the vast Hades: All his own Empire, in whom are hid all the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge: Put who only knows not to deceive: Who has told us,
in his Fathers House are many Mansions, and if it were not so, would have told
us that, Joh. 14.2. From him into whose mouth guile never entered, but into
whose Lips Grace was poured, and is poured out by them; so that the Ear that
has heard him has born him witness, and filled with wonder those that heard
the Gracicious words which came out of his Mouth. Who has told us all
concerning that unseen world, that in this our present state it was fit for us
to know; and enough, in telling all that will be his followers, that where he
is, there he will have them be, Joh. 17.24.

And consider the manifest tendency of the Discovery it self. What does it mean
or tend to, but to undeceive miserable mortals, whom he beholds from his high
Throne mocked with shadows, beguiled with most delusive impostures, and easily
apt to be imposed upon? Foolish, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures;
feeding upon ashes, and wearying themselves for very vanity; sporting
themselves in the dust of this minute spot of Earth; wasting their little inch
of time, wherein they should prepare for translation into the Regions of unseen
Glory. To these he declares he has formed a Kingdom for all that cover to mend
their states, and that his Kingdom is not of this World; that for such as will
be of this Kingdom, he will provide better, having other Worlds, the many
Heavens above all which he is ascended, at his dispose, Ephesians. 4.10. But they
must seek this Kingdom and the Righteousness of it in the first place; and
desist from their care about other things. He Counsels and Warns them not to
lay up their Treasure on Earth -- but in Heaven, and to let their hearts be
there with their treasure. And what can withstand his power who having been
dead lives victorious over him that had the power of Death; and is alive for
evermore possessed of an Eternal state of Life.

And have we not reason to expect the most equal and most benign disposal of
things in that unseen World: When he also declares I have the Keys, Rightful
Authority, as well as Mighty Power, to reward and punish? None but who have a
very ill mind can fear from him an ill management. He first became capable of
dying, and then yielded himself to die, that he might obtain these Keys for
gracious purposes. He had them before to execute just vengeance, as he was
originally in the ^orm of God, and without robbery equal with God; an equal
sharer in sustaining the wrong that had been done by Apostate Rebels, and an
equal sharer in the right of vindicating it.

But that he might have these Keys to open the Heavenly Hades to reduced
Apostates, to Penitent Believing, Self-devoting Sinners, for this it was
necessary, he should put on Man, be found here in fashion as a Man, take on him
the fo^m of a Se^vant, become obedient to Death (even that servile punishment,
the Death of the Cro^s, Phil. 2.7, 8. For this he is highly exalted into this
Power, that every Knee might bow to him, -- in hope of Saving Mercy, ver. 9,
10. compared with, Isa 45.22, 23. He had the Keys without this, of the Supernal
Hades to shut out all offenders, and of the infernal to shut them up for ever.
But that he might have them to absolve repenting believers, and admit them into
Heaven, and only to shut up in Hell implacable Enemies. For this he must Die,
and live again. He was to be slain and hanged on a Tree, that he might be a
Prince and a Savior to give Repentance and Remission of Sin, Act. 5.30, 31.
That to this intent he might be Lord of the Dead and the Living, he must both
Die and Rise, and Live so as to Die no more, Romans 14.9. These Keys for this
purpose, he was only to have upon these terms. He had a right to punish as an
offended God, but to Pardon and Save, as a Mediating Sin expiating God-Man

But as he was to do the part of a Mediator, he must act equally between the
disagreeing Parties: He was to deal impartially on both sides. To render back
entire to the injured Ruler of the World his violated Rights, and to obtain for
us his forfeited favor, as entire. And undertook therefore when as a Sacrifice
he was to be slain, to redeem us to God by his Blood, Rev. 5.9. To give him
back his revolted Creature, Holy, Pure, Subject and Serviceable, as by his
methods, he shall be at last; and procure for him Pardon, Acceptance and
Eternal Blessedness.

When therefore he was to do for us the part of a Redeemer, he was to Redeem us
from the Curse of the Law, not from the Command of it; to save us from the
Wrath of God, ^al. 3.13, 14.

Romans ^. 3.^.


not from his Government. Had it been otherwise, so firm and indissoluble is
the connection between our Duty and (...) f^licity, that the Sovereign Ruler
had been eternally injured, and We not advantaged. Were we to have been set
free from the preceptive obligation of God's Holy Law, than most of all from
that most fundamental precept, Thou shall Love the Lord thy God with all thine
Heart, Soul, Might and Mind. Had this been Redemption? Which supposes only what
is Evil and Hurtful, as that we are to be Redeemed from. This were a Strange
sort of Self-repugnant Redemption, not from Sin and Misery, but from our Duty
and Felicity. This were so to be Redeemed as to be still Lost, and every way
lost, both to God, and to our selves for ever. Redeemed from loving God! What a
monstrous Thought! Redeemed from what is the great Active and Fruitive
Principle. The source of Obedience and Blessedness. The Eternal Spring, even in
the Heavenly State, of Adoration and Fruition. This had been to legitimate
everlasting Enmity and Rebellion against the Blessed God, and to Redeem us into
an eternal Hell of horror and misery to our selves! This had been to cut off
from the Supreme Ruler of the World for ever; so considerable a ^imb of his
most rightful Dominion, and to leave us as miserable, as everlasting separation
from the fountain of life and blessedness could make us.

When therefore our Lord Jesus Christ was to Redeem us from the Curse of the
Law, it was that the Promised Spirit might be given to us, Gal. 3.13, 14. who
should write the Law in our Hearts, Jer. 31.33. Ezekiel. 36.27. Fulfill the
Righteousness of it in us, by causing us to walk after his dictates, according
to that Law, regenerating us, begetting us after Gods Image, and making us
partakers of a Godlike nature: So we through the Law bec^me Dead to the
malediction and curse of it, that we may Live to God more devoted Lives than
ever, Gal. 2.19. Thus is Gods lost creature given back to him with the greatest
advantage also to it self.

With this design it is apparent our Lord Redeemed us, and by his Redemption
acquired these Keys. Nor are we to doubt, but in the use of them, he will
dispense exactly according to this just and merciful design. And what a
perverse distorted Mind is that, which can so much as wish it should be
otherwise? viz. That he should save us to the Eternal wrong of him that made
us, and so as that we should be nothing the better, i. e. that he should save
us without saving us?

And has this no pleasant comfortable aspect upon a lost World? that he who
has these Keys, will use them for such purposes, i. e. to admit to eternal
bliss, and save to the uttermost all that will come to God by him not willing
to be everlastingly alienated from the life of God) because he ever lives to
make intercession, or to transact and negotiate for them, (as that word
signifies) and that in a rightful way* and even by the power of these Keys!

8. That there must be some important Reason why the other World is to us
unseen, and so truly bears the Name of Hades. This expresses the state of the
case as in fact it is, tha it is a World lying out of our sight, and into which
our dim and weak Eye cannot penetrate: That other state of things is spoken of
therefore as hidden from us by a vail. When our Lord Jesus is said to have
passed into the Heavens, Heb. 4.14. he is also said to have entered into that
within the vail, Heb. 16.19, 20. alluding to that in the Temple of Solomon, and
before that, in Moses's Tabernacle; but expressly signifying that the Holy
places into which Christ entered, not those made with hands, which were the
Figure of the true, but Heaven it self, filled with the glorious presence of
God, where he appears for us, Heb. 9.24. is also veiled from us. As also the
Glory of the other State is said to be a Glory as yet to be revealed, Romans
8.18. And we are told, Job 26.9. The great God holds back the face of his
Throne, and above, ver. 6. it is represented as a Divine Prerogative, that Sheol
which is there groundlesly rendered Hell) the vast Hades, is only naked before
him, lies entirely open to his view, and therein the dark and horrid part of it
Destruction (by which peculiarly must be meant Hell) is to him without a
covering, not mo^e hidden from his Eye.

Which shows this to be the Divine pleasure; so God will have it be, who could
have exposed all to common view, if he had pleased.

But because he orders all things according to the Counsel of his will, Ephesians.
1.11. we must conceive some weighty reason did induce hereto, that whatsoever
lies beyond this present state of things should be concealed from our immediate
view, and so come uno nomine, to be all called Hades. And if the reason of Gods
conduct, and the course of his dispensation herein had been equally hidden, as
that State it self is, it had been a bold presumption to enquire and pry into
it; modesty and reverence should have restrained us. But when we find it holds
a manifest agreement with other parts of his Counsel, that are sufficiently
revealed; and that the excellency of the Divine Wisdom is most conspicuous and
principally to be beheld and admired, in ordering the apt congruities and
correspondencies of things with each other, and especially of the ends he
proposes to himself, with the Methods and Ways he takes to effect them; 'twere
very great oscitancy, and an undutiful negligence not to observe them, when
they stand in view, that we may render him his due acknowledgments, and honor
thereupon.

It Is manifest that as God did not create Man, at first, in that which he
designed to be his final State, but as a Probationer, in a State of Trial, in
order to a further State: So when he Apostatized and fell from God, he was
graciously pleased to order for him a New Trial, and put him into the hands of
his merciful Redeemer, who is entrusted with these Keys, and with the Power of
Life and Death over him, to be managed and exercised according to the terms
plainly set down and declared in His Gospel. Wheresoever he is with sufficient
evidence revealed and made known, Men immediately come under obligation to
believe in him, to entrust and commit themselves into the same hands; to rely
upon the truth of his Word, in every thing he reveals, as the ground of their
submitting to his Authority in every thing he requires. What concerns their
present practice, he has plainly shown them, so much as it was requisite they
should preapprehend of future Retributions, Rewards and Punishments he has
revealed also; not that they should have the knowledge hereof by immediate
inspection, but by taking his word. That as their first Transgression was
founded in Infidelity; that they did not believe God, but a lying Spirit
against him; their first step in their Recovery, and return to God, should be
to believe him, and take his word about things they have themselves no
immediate sight or knowledge of. This point was by no means to be quitted to
the first Apostates. As if Gods saying to them, if you Transgress, you shall
Die, or go into Hades, was no sufficient inforcement of the Precept, unless he
had given them a distinct view of the States of felicity, or misery, which
their Obedience, or Disobedience would lead them into. This had been to give
away the whole cause to the revolted Rebels, and rather to con^ess error and
oversight in the Divine Government, than impute fault to the impugners of it!

This being the State of the Case, How suitable had it been to the design of
this Second Trial to be made with Men, to withdraw the vail, and let every ones
own Eyes be their informers of all the Glories of the Heavenly State! and
hereupon proclaim and preach the Gospel to them, that they should all partake
herein, that would entirely deny themselves, come off from their own bottom,
give themselves up absolutely to the Interest, Love, Service and Communion of
their Redeemer, and of God in him? To fortify them against the assaults and
dangers of their Earthly Pilgrimage by reversing that Rule, The Just shall live
by Faith; even that Faith which is the Substance of the things hoped for, Heb.
10.38. c. 12.1.
and the Evidence of things not seen; or by inverting the method, that in
reference to such things, We are to walk by Faith, 2 Cor. 5.7.
not by Sight, and letting it be. We are to walk by Sight, not by Faith! And
that lest any should refuse such Compliance with their Great Lord, Whole Hades,
should be no longer so, but made naked before them, and the covering of Hell
and Destruction be taken off, and their own Eyes behold the infernal horrors,
and their own Ears hear the shrieks and howlings of accursed Creatures, that
having rejected their Redeemer, are rejected by him. We are not here to
consider, what course would most certainly effect their Salvation, but what
most became the Wise Holy God, to preserve the Dignity of his own Government,
and save them too, otherwise Almighty Power could save all at once. As
therefore we have cause to acknowledge the kindness and compassion of our
Blessed Lord, who has these Keys, in giving us for the kind, such notices as
he has, of the state of the things in Hades. So we have equal cause to admire
his Wisdom, that he gi^es us not those of another kind, that should more
powerfully strike sense and amaze us more, but instruct us less That continues
it to be Hades still, a state of things to us unseen as yet. As the case would
have been on the other supposition, the most generous noble part of our
Religion had been sullied or lost; and the Trial of our Faith -- which is to be
found unto Praise, Honor and Glory at the appearin^ of Jesus Christ, even upon
this account, that they who had not seen him in his mean circumstances on
Earth, nor did now see him, amidst all the Glories of his exalted State, yet
believing, loved him, and rejoiced in him with joy unspeakable, and full of
Glory, 1 Pet. 1.7, 8. This Faith, and all the glorious trials of it, with its
admirable achievements, and performances, whereby the Elders heretofore
obtained so good a Report, and high renown on Earth, Heb. 11.2.
and which filled the World with wonder, had all vanished into obscurity and
Darkness, i. e. If they had believed no more, or no greater things, than every
Man besides, had the immediate view of by his own Eyesight.

And yet the trial had been greater, on another Account, than the Divine Wisdom
in conjunction with Goodness, and Compassion, thought fit ordinarily to put
sincere Christians upon. For who could with any tolerable patience have endured
longer abode on Earth, after they should once have had the glory of the
Heavenly state immediately set in view before their Eyes! especially
considering, not so much the Sufferings, as the impurities of their present
State! What for great reason was a special vouchsafement to one Apostle was for
as great to be common to all Christians. How great is the Wisdom and Mercy of
our Blessed Lord in this partial concealment of our future State, and that
while so much as is sufficient is revealed, there is yet an Hades upon it, and
it may still be said, It does not yet appear what we shall be, 1 John 3.2.

But as these Majestic Life-breathing words of our Great Lord, do plainly
offer the things that have been mentioned (and many more such that might occur)
to our Thoughts and Meditation; so will they be thought on in vain, if they be
not followed and answered by suitable Dispositions, and Actions of Heart and
Life. Therefore the further use we are to make of this great Subject will be to
lay down

2. Diverse correspondent things to be practiced and done, which must also
suppose dispositions and frames of Heart and Spirit agreeable thereto.

1. Let us Live expecting a period to be ere long put to our Life on Earth For
remember, there are Keys put into a great hand for this very purpose, that
holds them not in vain. His Power is of equal extent with the Law he is to
proceed by. And by that it is appointed for all once to Die. Heb. 9.26.
Therefore as in the Execution, he cannot exceed, so he will not come short of
this appointment: When that once shall be, it belongs to him to determine. And
from the course we may observe him to hold, as it is uncertain to all, it can
be very remote to none. How short is the measure of a Span! It Is an absurd
vanity ^o promise our selves that which is in the power of another. How Wise
and Prudent a thing to accommodate our selves composedly to his pleasure, in
whose power we are! And to live as Men continually expecting to die! There are
bands of Death out of which, when they once take hold, we cannot free our
selves. But there are also bands of Life, not less troublesome or dangerous.
It Is our great concern to be daily by degrees, loosening and disentangling our
selves from these bands; and for preventing the necessity of a violent Rupture,
To be daily disingaging our Hearts from an ensnaring World, and the too close
embraces of an over indulged Body. Tell them resolutely, I must leave them,
whenever my great Lord turns the Key for me, and I know not how soon that may
be. It is equally unhappy and foolish to be engaged in the pursuit of an
impossibility; or in a War with necessity, the former whereof cannot be
obtained, the latter cannot but overcome. We owe so much to our selves, and to
the ease and quiet of our own Minds, to be reconciled, at all times, to that
which may befall us at any time. How confounding a thing is surprizal by that
which our selves regret and dread! How unaccountable and ignominious must it be
to pretend to be surprised with what we have so great reason always to expect!
And whereof we are so often forewarned! Is it no part of Christian watchfulness
to wait for such an hour? Though that waiting all the days of our appointed time,
mentioned John 14.14. refers to another change than that of Death, viz. (as the
foregoing and following verses show) That of the Resurrection, yet it cannot
but be equally requisite, upon a no less important reason. And the requests,
that the Lord would make us know our end, and the measure of our Days that we
may know how frail we are, Psalm. 39.4. And that he would teach us so to number
our Days that we may apply our hearts to wisdom, Psalm 90.12. are equally
monitory to the same purpose, as the most express Precepts: As also the many
Directions we have to watch and wait for our Lords appearance and coming are as
applicable to this purpose. For whenever his Key opens our passage out of
this World, and These Bodies, Hades opens too, and he particularly appears to
us, in as decisive a judgment of our case, as his universal appearance and
judgment will at last give for all. The placid agreement of our Minds and
Spirits with Divine determination, both as to the thing, and time, of our
departure hence, will prevent the trouble and ungratefulness of being
surpised; and our continual expectation of it, will prevent any surprizal at
all Let this then be an agreed resolution with us, to endeavor being in such a
posture, as that we may be capable of saying, Lord whenever thou shall move
thy Key, and tell me this night, or this hour, I Will require thy Soul, thou
shall not, O Lord, prevent mine expectation, or ever find me counting upon many
years enjoyment of any thing this world can entertain me with.

In further pursuance hereof,

2. Be not over-intent on designs for this present World; which would suppose
you to count upon long abode in it. Let them be always laid with a supposition,
you may this way, even, by one turn of this Key, be prevented of bringing them
about; and let them be pursued with indifferency, so as that disappointment
even this way, may not be a grievance. A thing made up of thought and design,
as our Mind and Spirit naturally is, will be designing one way or other; nor
ought we to attempt that violence upon our own Natures, as to endeavor the
stupifying of the intelligent, designing Mind, which the Author of Nature has
put into us. Only let us so lay our designs, as that how many soever we form,
that may be liable to this sort of disappointment; we may still have one
greater and more important, so regularly and surely laid, that no turn of this
Key shall be in any possibility to frustrate, but promote it rather* The design
for the Kingdom of God to be first sought, with his Righteousness, Mat. 6.33.
or which is pu^sued by seeking Glory, Honor* and Immortality, to the actual
attainment of Eternal Life, Romans 2.7. may, if prescribed methods be duly
observed, have this felicity always attending it, to be ^ucessfully pursued,
while we live, and effected when we Die,

But this is an unaccountable vanity under the Sun, that Men too generally form
such, projects that they are disappointed both when they do not compass them,
and when they do. If they do not, they have lost their labor, if they do they
are not worth it. They dream they are Eating, and enjoying the fruit of their
labor, but they awake, and their Soul is empty. And if at length they think of
laying wiser and more valuable designs, the Key turns, and not having fixed
their resolution, and begun aright, they and all their thoughts (foolish or
more wise) perish together. Because there is a fit season for every fit
undertaking, a time, and judgment for every purpose, or a critical time, such
as is by Judgment affixt to every such purpose, Eccles. 8.6. and because also
Men know not their time, c. 9.12. therefore their Misery is great upon the
Earth, and as Birds caught in a snare, they are snared in an evil time that
falls suddenly upon them. O miserable, miserable Mortals! So are your
immortal Spirits misimployed and lost!

Their most valuable design for another World is seldom thought on in season,
their little designs for this World they contrive and p^osecute with that
confidence, as if they thought the World to be theirs, and themselves their
own, and they had no lord over them. This rude insolence that holy Apostle
animadverts upon, of such as say, To Day or to Morrow we will go to such a
City, Jam. 4.13, 14, 15.
and continue there a ^ear, and Buy and Sell, and get Gain, whereas they know
not what shall be on the morrow. And What is their Life? a Vapor, etc. So much
of Duty, and becoming Behavior is in the mean time forgotten as to say, If the
Lord will we shall live, etc. This is to bear themselves as absolute Masters of
their own Lives. How bold an affront to their Sovereign Lord? They feel
themselves well in Health, Strength, and Vigor, and seem resolved it shall be
a Trial of Skill who has the Power, or to whom the Keys belong, till it come
to the last irrefragable demonstration, that he changes their Countenance and
sends them away, Joh. 14.20. and then they go driven, plucked, and torn away
from their dewlling place rooted out of the Land of the living, Psalm. 2.55.

But if any premonitory decays make them doubt the perpetuity of their own
abode here, they some what ease their minds by the pleasure they take in
thinking, when they have filled their own Bellies, Psalm. 17.14. What they shall
leave of their substance to their Babes, and to them that shall come after. And
their inward thought is, that their Houses shall continue for ever, and their
Dwelling places to all Generations; and they call their Lands after their own
Names, and their Posterity approve their sayings, think and act as wisely as
they, Psalm 49.11, 12. -- Thus they take upon them, and reckon they for their
time, and theirs after them shall still dwell in their own A wise thought! They
are the Owners when another keeps the Keys.

Several other things of like import, I shall more lightly touch, that may be
collected from what has been already more largely said, and leave to be
further enlarged upon, in your own thoughts, and shall dilate more upon some
other, as they are either more material, or less thought on by the most.

3. Be not prodigal of your time on Earth, which is so little in your Power.
Because you are not to expect much, make the best use you can of your little.
It Is so precious a thing that it is to be redeemed, it is therefore too precious
to be embezelled and trifled away. The connection of those two precepts, Ephesians.
5.15, 16. of walking circumspectly not as Fools, but as Wise, and that of
Redeeming the time more than intimates, that to squander time is a foolish
thing. Of the several sorts of things that we make our selves, their shape and
frame, shows their use and end. Are we to make a less judicious estimate of the
Works of God? If we therefore contemplate our selves, and consider what a sort
of Production Man is, Can we allow our selves to think God made him a
reasonable Creature on purpose to play the Fool? Or can we live as if we
thought so, without reproaching our Maker? But whereas he who has been the
Author to us of such a Nature, capable of improving a life's time in this World
unto most valuable purposes, has also been the Autho^ of such a Law, requiring
us to red^em time. The reproach will be wholly turned off from him upon our
selves, and our consequent ruin be upon our own guilty Heads. And he will find
some among our selves, who by the advantage only of the reasonable Nature,
common to us and them; that are instructors to us, not to waste our days in
vanity, and will be witnesses against us if we so foolishly consume, what we
cannot command.

Some such have unanswerably reprehended the common folly of those that dread
the thought of throwing away their whole Life at once, that yet have no regret
at throwing it all away by parcels and piecemeal. And have told us a wise Man
can find nothing of that value, for which to barter away his time Neque qui^
quam reperit dignu^, qu^d eum temporsu^ permutare! Sen.
.

And we are to consider, that as we are reasonable Creatures we are
accountable. That we are shut up in these Bodies, as in Workhouses. That when
he that keeps the Keys lets us out, we are to receive the things done in the
Body, according to what we have done, whether good or evil, -- 2 Cor. 5.10.
That it belongs to him that measures our time to Censure it too, and the use we
have made of it.

4. Let him be at once both great and amiable in our Eyes, who has so absolute
power over us, and so gracious propensions toward us, i. e. Who has these
Keys, and who acquired them with so merciful intentions, even upon such terms
as could not but signify the greatest compassion and good will toward such as
we.

Reconsider, what has been offered as matter of Meditation, to both these
purposes. And now, hereupon, let us endeavor to have a correspondent sense,
inwrought into our Hearts, and to bear our selves toward him accordingly. The
power and efficacy of whole Christianity depends upon this, and does very
principally consist in it. What a faint, impotent, languishing thing is our
Religion, how does it dwindle into spritless, dead form without it? Either the
form of knowledge is nothing else but insipid dead notion; and our forms of
Worship, only fruitless unpleasant formality, if we have not a vivid sense in
our Hearts both of his glorious greatness, and of his excellent loving
kindness. As much as words can signify toward the impressing such a sense
into our Hearts, we have in these words, uttered from his own Mouth, so that he
may say as that memorable type of him once did, you may plainly perceive, it is
my Mouth that speaks to you. I am the first and the last. Genesis 45.
I am he that lives and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore. And
hereto he now sets his solemn ratifying Seal, Amen. Wherewith he leaves us to
pause, and collect, that thus it was brought about, that he could add, and I
have the Keys of the vast Hades, the whole unseen World, and of Death.

And God forbid that, now, these words should be with us an empty sound, or a
dead Letter! Let us cast in our minds what manner of Saluta^ion this should be!
Does the Son of God thus vouchsafe to bespeak miserable abjects, perishing,
lost wretches! How can we hereupon but bow our Heads and Worship! What
agitations of affection should we feel within! How should all our internal
Powers be moved! and our whole Souls made as the Chariots of Amminadib. What
can we now be unwilling of, that he would have us be, or do? And as that,
whereof we may be assured, he is most willing.

5. Let us entirely receive him, and absolutely resign our selves to him, as
our Prince and Savior. Who would not covet to be in special Relation to so
mighty, and so kind a Lord! And can you think to be related to him, upon other
terms? And do you not know that upon these* you may? when in his Gospel he
offers himself, and demands you. What can that mean but that you are to receive
him, and resign your selves? The case is now brought to this state, that you
must either comply, or rebel. And what? Rebel against him who has these Keys,
who is in so high Authority over the whole unseen World! Who is the head of all
Principality and Power, who is gone into the Heavens, the glorious upper Hades,
and is at the right hand of God, Angels, Authorities, Powers being made Subject
to him, 1 Pet. 3.21. We little know or can conceive as yet, the several orders
and distinctions of the Celestial Inhabitants, and their great and illustrious
Princes and Potentates, Thrones, Dominions, etc. that all pay him a dutiful and
a joyful subjection and obedience. But do we not know God has given him a Name
above every Name? and that in his Name (or at it, as it may be read, i. e. in
acknowledgment of his Sovereign Power, every knee must bow, of things in
Heaven, on Earth and under Earth, and all confess that he is Lord to the Praise
and Glory of God the Father? And who art thou, perishing wretch! that dare
dispute his Title? or that when all the Creation must be subject to him, wilt
except thy self?

And when it cost him so dear, that his vast power might be subservient to a
design of ^race, and thou must at last be saved by him, or lost for ever. What
can tempt thee to stand out against such Power, and such Grace?

If thou were to gratify thy ambition, how glorious a thing is it to be a
Christian! a Subject, a Devoted Homager to so mighty a Prince! If to provide
against thy necessity, and distress, what course can be so sure and successful,
as to fly for refuge to so Compassionate a Savior! And do thou not know
there must be to this purpose, an express transaction between him and thee?
Wonder he will condescend to it! To capitulate with Dust and Ashes! To Article
with his own Creature, with whom he may do what he will! But his merciful
condescension herein is declared and known. If there shall be a special
Relation settled between him and thee, he has told thee in what way it must be,
i. e. by way of Covenant-transaction, and agreement, as he puts his People of
old in mind, his way was with them; I entered into Covenant with thee, and thou
becamest mine, Ezekiel. 16.8. This I insist upon and press, as a thing of the
greatest importance imaginable, and the least thought of: Nor the strange
incongruity animadverted on, viz. That we have the seals of such a Covenant
among us, but the Covenant it self slips through our hands. Our Baptism soon
after we were born, with some foederal words then, is thought enough, as if we
were a Nation of always Minors. Who ever therefore thou art, that hear these
words, or read these Lines; know that the Great Lord is express toward thee
in his Gospel proposal. Will thou accept me for thine, and resign thy self as
mine? He now expects and requires thy express Answer. Take his Gospel as from
the Cross, or take it as from the Throne, or as from both, it is the same Gospel
interwoven of Grace and Authority, the richest Grace, and the highest Authority
at once inviting and requiring thee to commit and submit thy self unto him.
Take heed lest his Key turn before thou have given thy complying answer
importing at once both thy Trust and thy Subjection.

Give not over pleading with thy self, with thy wayward stupid heart, till it
can say to him, " Lord, I ^ield, thou have overcome. Till with tender
relentings thou have thrown thy self at his feet, and told him, Lord, I am
ashamed, I am confounded within my self, that thou should Die upon a Cross to
obtain thy high Power, and that thou art now ready to use it for the saving so
vile a miscreant as I! That when thou have so vast an unknown World, so
numberless myriads of excellent Creatures in thy obedience, thou should yet
think it worth thy while to look after me! and that I should so long have
withstood thy kind and gracious overtures and intendments! O forgive my wicked
aversion! I now accept and resign.

And now this being sincerely done, with fullness of consent, with deep
humility, with yearning bowels, with unfeigned thankfulness, and an inward
complacency, and gladness of Heart.

6. Let your following course in this World be ordered agreeably hereto, in
continued dependence, and subjection. As we have received Christ Jesus, the
Lord, so we are to walk in him, Col. 2.6. Take him according to the Titles here
given him, as Christ --, a Person anointed, authorized, qualified to be both,
Jesus, a Savior, so we are to walk (according to our first reception of him,)
in continual dependence on his Saving Mercy, and and to be a Lord, or as it is
here expressed with eminency, the Lord, so we are to walk in continual subjection
to his Governing Power. Otherwise our receiving him, at first, under these
notions, has nothing in it but mockery and collusion.

But if his obtaining these Keys, upon the terms here expressed, as having been
dead, and now living, and having overcome Death (as it is also Romans 14.9.) did
signify his having them for saving purposes, as it must, since for other
purposes, he had them sufficiently before; and if we reckoned this a reasonable
inducement to receive him, and commit and entrust our selves to him as a
Savior, that he died, and overcame Death? for his Grace in yielding to Die,
had not rendered him a competent object of trust, otherwise than in conjunction
with his Power in overcoming Death, and so gaining into his hands these Keys:
Then, the same reason still remaining, how constant an encouragement have we to
continue accordingly walking in him all our days! How potent an argument should
it be to us, to live that life which we live in the Flesh, by Faith in the Son
of God who loved us, and gave himself for us? Gal. 2.20. i. e. inasmuch, as
having been crucified with him (which is also there expressed) we feel our selves
to live nevertheless; yet so as that it is not so much we that live, as Christ
that lives in us; who could not live in us, or be to us a spring of Life, if
he were not a perpetual spring of Life, in himself.

And consider, how dare thou live otherwise in this Flesh, in this Earthly
House, whereof he keeps the Keys, and can fetch thee out at his pleasure? When
he has warned thee to abide in him, that when he shall appear, thou may
have confidence, and not be ashamed at his coming, 1 John 2.28. He will
certainly then appear, when he comes to open the Door, and dislodge thee from
this flesh (though there be here a further, and final reference to another
appearance, and coming of his) and if he then find thee severed, and disjoined
from him (thy first closure with him, not having been sincere, truly unitive
and vital) how terribly will he look! how confoundedly will thou look in that
hour!

Neither have thou less reason to live in continual subjection to him,
considering that as he died, and overcame Death that he might have these Keys,
so he now has them, and thou art under his governing Power. The more thou
consider'st his right to Govern, the less thou will dispute it. When he was
spoken of as a Child to us born, that he might become a Man of sorrows, and be
sorrowful unto the Death, and have all the sorrows of Death come upon him, he
is at the same time said to be the mighty God, Isa. 9.6.
and it was declared the Government should be upon his Shoulders. As he was the
first begotten from the Dead, viz. both submitting to Death, and conquering it;
so he was the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, (a small part of his Kingdom
too) his Throne being founded on his Cross, his Governing Power, in his
Sacrifice, i. e. The Power whereby he so governs, as that he may also save;
making these two things the salving the Rights of the Godhead, injured by Sin,
and the delivering of the Sinner from an Eternal ruin, to agree, and consist
with one another.

What an endearing obligation is this to obey! That he will be the Author of
Eternal Salvation to them that obey him! Inasmuch as, while our obedience
cannot merit the least thing from him, yet his vouchsafing to govern us does
most highly merit from us. For he Governs by writing his Law in the heart,
which makes our heart agree with the Law, and by implanting Divine Love in us,
which vanquishes enmity and disaffection, and vertually contains in its self
our obedience, or keeping his Commandments, Joh. 14.15. and 23. 1 John 5.3.
Therefore this Government of his, over us, is naturally necessary to our
Salvation and blessedness, and is the inchoation and beginning of it; as our
perfected Love to God, and conformity to his Nature, and will, do involve and
contain in themselves our complete and perfect blessedness, with which a
continued enmity, or a rebellious, mutinous disposition against God, is
naturally inconsistent; and would be to us, and in us, a perpetual, everlasting
Hell.

There can therefore be no inthralling servitude in such obedience, but the
truest liberty, that by which the Son makes us free indeed, Joh. 8.36. Yea a
true sort of royalty: For hereby we come in the most allowable sense, to live
as we will, our will being conformed to the will of God. Whereupon that was no
high extravagant rant, but a sober expression, We are born in a Kingdom, to
serve God is to reign. Sen.


And we know this to be the will of God, that all should honor the Son, Joh.
5.23.
as they honor the Father. Herewith will the Evangelically Obedient comport
with high complacency; accounting him most highly worthy that it should be so.
Wherein therefore the Christian Law seems strictest, and most rigorous in the
enjoined observance of our Lord Christ, herein we shall discern an
unexceptionable reasonableness, and comply with a complacential approbation.
And let us put our own hearts to it, and see that without regret, or
obmurmuration they can readily consent to the equity of the precept.

It Is enjoined us (constructively at least) that because Christ Died for us,
when we were Dead, quite lost in Death, we that live hereupon, should settle
this which our selves as a sixed judgment, and upon that intervening judgment,
yield to the constraint of his Love, so as henceforth no more to live to our
selves, q. d. God forbid we should henceforth be so profane! we must now for
ever have done with that impious, unlawful way of living. What? after this!
that we have so fully understood the state of our case, that we should be so
assuming, as ever, again to offer at such a thing, as living to our selves, to
make our selves Deities to our selves: Or to live otherwise than unto him who
Dyed for us and Rose again, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. This is high and great, and may
seem strict and severe. What? to have the whole stream of all the actions, and
aims, the strength and vigor of our Lives, to be carried in one entire
undivided current unto him, and (as it must be understood, Gal. 2.19.) to God
in him, so as never more to live to our selves, a divided, separate life apart
from him! or wherein we shall not finally, and more principally design for him!
How high is his claim! but how equal and grateful to a right mind! with what a
plenitude of consent is every Divine Command, (taking this into the Account)
esteemed to be right in all things! So as that whatsoever is opposite is hated
as a false way, Psalm. 119.128. And as the precept carries its own visible
reason, the keeping of it carries its own reward in it self, Psalm 19.11. And is
it too much for him who bears these Keys, and obtained them on such terms, and
for such ends, to be thus affected toward him!

We are required, without exception, without limitation or reserve, whatsoever
we do, whether in word or work, to do all in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Col. 3.17.

Enquire we, Do our Hearts repine at this Law? Do not we? Does not this World
owe so much to him? Why are we allowed a place and a time here? Why is not this
World a flaming Theater? Is it not fit every one should know under whose
Government they live? by whose Beneficence, under whose Protection, and in
whose name they may act so, or so, and by whose Authority? Either obliging, or
not restraining them, requiring, or licensing them to do this or that? Does
this World owe less to him, that bears these Keys, than Egypt did to Joseph,
when thus the Royal word went forth in reference to him? I am Pharaoh, and
without thee shall no Man lift up his hand or foot in all the Land of Egypt?
How pleasant should it be to our Souls, often to remember and think on that
Name of his which we bear, Isa. 26.8. Mal. 3.18. and draw in as vital breath,
Psalm. 45.6 -- 11.

Joh. 20.28.


the sweet odours of it, Cant. 1.3. How glorious a thing should we count it,
because he is the Lord our God, to walk in his Name for ever and ever, as all
People will walk every one in the Name of their God, Mic. 4.5. And then we
shall account it no hard Law, whatever we do, to do all in the Name of our Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father by him, and for him; blessing God every
Day, that we are put by him, under the mild and merciful Government of a
Redeemer. Then, we shall rejocyingly avow, as the Apostle does, 1 Cor. 9.21.
That we are not without Law to God, but under Law to Christ.

VVhereupon, when you find your special Relation is thus settled and fixed,
unto the great Lord both of this present visible World, and of Hades, or the
invisible World, also, by your Solemn Covenant with him, and evidenc't by the
continued correspondency of your heart and Life, your Dispositions and actions
thereunto.

7. Do not regret or dread to pass out of the one World into the other at his
call, and under his conduct, though through the dark, passage of Death;
remembering the Keys, are in so great and so kind a hand. And that his good
pleasure herein is no more to be distrusted, than to be disputed or withstood.
Let it be enough to you, that what you cannot see your self, he sees for you.
You have often desired your ways, your motions, your removals from place to
place, might be directed by him in the World. Have you never said if thou go
not with me, carry me not hence? How safely and fearlesly may you follow him
blindfold or in the dark any whither! not only from place to place, in this
World, but from world to world! how lightsome soever the one, and gloomy and
dark the other may seem to you. Darkness and light are to him alike. To him
Hades is no Hades, nor is the dark way that leads into it to him an untrodden
path. Shrink not at the thoughts of this translation, though it be not by
escaping Death, but even through the jaws of it.

We commonly excuse our aversion to Die, by alleging that Nature regrets it.
But we do not enough consider that in such a compounded sort of creature as we
are; the word Nature must be ambiguous. There is in us a sensitive Nature that
regrets it; but taking the case as it is now stated, can we think it tolerable,
that it should be regretted by the reasonable Nature? unto which, if we appeal,
can we suppose it so untrue to its self, as not to assert its own Superiority?
or to judge it fit that an intelligent, immortal Spirit, capable of so great
things, in another World, should be content with a long abode here. Only to
keep a well-figured piece of Flesh from putrefying, or give it the satisfaction
of tasting meats, and drinks, that are grateful to it, for a few years! And if
for a few, why not for many? and when those many were expired, why not for as
many more? And the same reason always remaining, why not for always? The case
is thus put, because the common meaning of this allegation, that Nature reg^ets
or abhors this dissolution; is not that they are concerned for their Souls how
it may fare with them in another World, which the most little mind or trouble
themselves about; but that they are to have what is grateful to them in this
World. And was this the end a reasonable Spirit, was made for, when, without
reason, sense were alike capable of the same sort of gratifications? What Law,
what Equity? what rule of Decency can oblige the Soul of a Man, capable of the
Society, and Enjoyments of Angels, to this piece of Self-denial* for the sake
of his incomparably baser Body? Or can make it fit that the nobler and more
excellent Nature, should be eternally subservient to the meaner, and more
ignoble? Especially, considering that if (according to the case supposed) the
two last foregoing directions be complied with, there is a sort of Divine
Nature superadded to the whole Humane Nature, that cannot but prompt the Soul
ennobled by it, to aspire to suitable, even to the highest, operations and
enjoyments, whereof it is capable, and, which are not attainable in this
present bodily state.

And if there were still a dispute between Nature and Nature, its enough that
the great Lord of Hades, and of this present sensible World too, will determine
it. In a far lower instance, when the General of an Army commands it upon an
enterprise, wherein life is to be hazarded, it would be an ill excuse of a
cowardly declining, to say, their Nature regrets and dreads the adventure. The
thing is necessary. Against what is so unavoidable as Death, that is an abject
mind that reluctates. Miser est quicunque non vult, Mundo secum moriente, mori
Sen. Tr.


Come, then, let us imbolden our selves, and when he brings the Key, dare to
die. It is to obey, and enjoy him who is our life, and our all. Say we
cheerfully each of us, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, into thy hands I commit it
who have Redeemed it.

8. Let us quietly submit to Divine Disposal, when our dear Friends and
Relatives are by Death taken away from us. For consider into what hands this
affair is put, of ordering every ones decease, and removal out of this into the
other World, and who has these Keys* It Is such a one, whose right, if we use
our thoughts, we will not allow our selves to dispute, or to censure his
administration. His Original Right, is that of a Creator and a God. For all
things were Created for him, and by him, Col. 1.16. And without him was nothing
made that was made, Joh. 1.2. ^he First and the Last to all things, v. 17.

His supervening Right, was that of a Redeemer, as has been already noted from
this context, and, as such, he had it by acquisition, dying to obtain it, and
overcoming Death! I am he that lives and was dead. And then, as he elsewhere
declares, by constitution, All Power is given me both in Heaven and on Earth,
Mat. 28.19. The word ((...)) imports rightful Power. And who are we? or any
Relatives of ours? whom all the Power of Heaven and Earth has no right to
touch? What exempt jurisdiction, can we pretend our selves to belong unto?

Or will we adventure to say, not denying his right, he did not use it well in
this case? who is more fitly qualifyed to Judge, than he that has these Keys?
And let this matter be yet more thoroughly discuss't. What is it that we find
fault with in the removal of this or that person, that was near, and delightful
to us? Is it that he was to Die at all? or that he Died so soon? If we say the
former; Do we blame the constitution, appointing all Men once to Die, by which
this World is made a portal to another, for all Men, and whence it was
necessary none should stay long in this, but only pass thorough, into that
World wherein every one is to have is everlasting abode? Or is it that, when we
think it not unfit this should be the general and common course, there should
yet have been a particular dispensation for this Friend or Relation of mine?

Let the former be suppos^^ the thing we quarrel at, and consider the
intolerable consequences of the matters being otherwise; as the case is with
this Apostate Sinful World. Such as upon second, better-weighed thoughts, we
would abhor to admit into our minds, even as the matter of a wish. What would
we wish to Mankind a sinning immortality on this Earth, before which a wise
Heathen professed to prefer one Day virtuously spent? Cicer.
Would we wish this World to be the everlasting Stage, of indignities and
affronts to him that made it? Would we wish there should never be a judgment
Day? and that all the wise and righteous Councels of Heaven should be ranverst
and overturned, only to comport with our terrene and sensual inclinations? Is
this our dutifulness and loyal affection to our Blessed Lord, the Author of our
Beings, and the God of our ^ives, whose rights and honors should be infinitely
dearer to us than our selves? Is it our kindness to our selves, and all others
of our kind and order, that are all naturally capable, and many, by gracious
vouchsafement, sitly qualified, to enjoy a perfect felicity in another World,
that we would have all together confined for ever, to this Region of darkness,
impurity and misery?

Or if it displease us, that our Relatives are not, by some special
dispensation, excepted from the common Law of Mortality? we would, surely, as
much have expected an exemption our selves; otherwise our dying away from them,
would make the so much regretted separation, as well as theirs from us. And
what then, if we were required to draw up our petition? to put it into express
words? to turn our wish for our selves, and all our Relatives and peculiar
Friends, into a formed, solemn prayer, to this effect, that we are content the
Law stand in force, that all the World should Die, with only the exception of
some few Names, viz. our own, and of our Kindred, and more inward Friends. What
ashamed confounded creatures should we be upon the view of our own request!
Would we not presently be for quelling, and suppressing it, and easily yield to
be nonsuited, without more ado? What pretense can we have not to think others
as apt to make the same request for them, and theirs? And if all the rest of
the World shall Die, would we and our Friends dwell here alone! or would we
have this World be continued habitable only on this private account, to
gratify a Family! And if we, and our Friends be holy, heavenly minded persons,
how kind were it to wish to our selves, and them, when fit for the Society of
Angels and Blessed Spirits above, a perpetual abode in this low Earthly State!
Would we not now, upon riper, second thoughts, rather be content that things
should rest as they are; and he that has these Keys, use them his own way.

But if by all this, we are put quite out of conceit, with the desire of a
terrestrial immortality, All that the matter finally results into is, that we
think such a Relative of ours Dyed too soon. We would not have coveted for him
an Eternity on Earth, but only more time. And how much more? or for what? If we
were to set the time, it is like that when it comes, we should be as averse to a
separation, if coexistent, then, as now, and so we revolve into the exploded
desire, of a terrestrial immortality, back again at last. If we were to assign
the reason of our desire, that would seem as in the present case, a plausible
one to some, which is mentioned by Plutarch in his consolation to Apollonius
for the loss of his Son, concerning another such case (as he instances in many)
of one Elysius an Italian, whose loss of his Son Euthynous, was much aggravated
by this, that he was a great Heir. But what was said to that, there, and what
is further to be said to any thing of that kind, I shall reserve to a more
proper place.

It is a more weighty Allegation, and of more common concernment; When an
useful person is gone, and one very capable of becoming very eminently so. And
this requires deeper consideration, and sundry things ought to be considered in
order to the quieting their minds, who are apt to behold such darker
dispensations, in the course of Providence, with amusement, and disturbance of
Spirit, i. e. When they see persons of excellent endowments, and external
advantages, beyond the most, cut off in their Prime, while the World is cumbred
with Drones, never likely to do good, and pestered with such, as are like to
prove plagues to it, and do great hurt and mischief to the Age wherein they
live. An ancient and not uncommon scruple to pious observers heretofore.
Wherefore (says Holy Job) do the wicked live, become old, yea are mighty in
power? Their seed is established in their sight -- Chapter 21.7, 8. When his Seed
was cut off before his Eyes. And here let us consider,

1. That this World is in Apostasy from God: And though he is pleased to use
apt means for its recovery, he does what he thinks fit herein, of mere grace,
and favor, and is under no obligation to do all that he can. His dispensation
herein must correspond to, and bear upon it the impress of other Divine
perfections, his Wisdom, Holiness, Justice as well as Grace. And for Grace it
self, whereas all since the Apostasy lie together in a fearful gulf of
impurity, and misery, and some, made more early sensible hereof than the most,
do stretch out a craving hand and cry for help. If now a merciful hand reached
down from Heaven take hold of them, and pluck them sooner out; Is this
disagreeable to the God of all Grace, to make some such instances, and
vouchsafe them an earlier deliverance; though they might, being longer delayed,
be some way helpful to others, that continue stupid, and insensible?

2. When he has done much, in an Age, still obstinately unreclaimable, he may
be supposed to let one appear, only with a promising aspect, and in just
displeasure, presently withdraw him, that they may understand they have
forfeited such a blessing, to this or that Country, as such a one might have
proved.

3. This may awaken some, the more to prize, and improve, the encouragements
they may have from such as remain, or shall spring up in their stead, who are
gone, and to bless God that the weight of his interest, and of the cause of
Religion, does not hang and depend upon the slender thread of this Man's Life.
The God of the Spirits of all Flesh, can raise up instruments as he pleases;
and will, to serve his own purposes, though not ours.

4. He will have it known that though he uses instruments, he needs them not.
It Is a piece of Divine Royalty and Magnificence, that when he has prepared,
and polished, such an utensile, so as to be capable of great service, he can
lay it by, without loss.

5. They that are most qualified to be of greatest use in this World, are
thereby also the more capable of blessedness in the other. It Is owing to his
most munificent bounty, that he may vouchsafe to reward sincere intentions, as
highly as great services. He took David's having it in his Heart to build him
an House, as kindly as Solomon's building him one. And as much magnifies
himself in testifying his acceptance of such as he discharges from his Service
here, at the third hour, as of them whom he engages not in it, till the
eleventh.

6. Of their early Piety he makes great present use in this World, testifying
his acceptance of their works, generally in his word, and particularly by the
reputation he procures to them in the minds and consciences, of such as were
best able to judge, and even of all that knew them, which may be truly
accounted a Divine testimony, both in respect of the object, which has on it a
Divine impress, and speaks the self recommending power of true goodness, which
is the Image of God, and in respect of the subject, shows the Dominion God has
over minds, engaging not only good Men to behold with complacency of such
pleasant, blooming goodness, correspondent to their own; but even bad Men to
approve in these others, what they entertain not in themselves. The same things
are accepted with God, Heb. 11.4.
and approved of Men, Romans 14.18. Thus being Dead, they, as Abel, yet speak.

7. And it is a brighter, and more unsullied testimony, which is left in the
minds of Men, concerning such very hopeful persons as Die in their Youth. They
never were otherwise known, or can be remembered, than as excellent Young
Persons. This is the only Idea which remains of them. Had they lived longer to
the usual Age of Man, the remembrance of what they were in youth, would have
been in a great degree effaced, and worn out, by latter things; perhaps
blackened, not by what were less commendable, but more ungrateful to the
greater part, especially, if they lived to come into public Stations. Their
just zeal, and contestations against the wickedness of the Age, might disoblige
many, and create them Enemies, who would make it their business to blast them,
and cast upon their name and memory all the reproach they could invent. Whereas
the luster of that Virtue and Piety which had provoked no body, appears only,
with an amiable look, and leaves behind nothing, of such a person, but a fair,
unblemisht, alluring and instructive Example; which, they that observed them,
might, with less prejudiced minds compare with the useless, vicious, Lives of
many that they see to have filled up a room in the World, unto extreme old age,
either to no purpose, or to very bad. And how vast is the difference in respect
of usefulness to the world, between a pious, young Gentleman, dying in his
youth, that lived long in a little time, untainted by youthful Lusts, and
Vanities, and Victorious over them; and an accursed Sinner of an hundred years
old, Isa. 65.20. One that was an Infant of days, and though an hundred years
old, yet still a Child, that had not filled up his days with any thing of real
value, or profit to himself, or others, (as some very judicious Expositors
understand that Text) that (as he aptly speaks) had nothing besides Gray Hairs,
Non est quod quenquam propter canos aut rugas putes diu vixisse. Non ille diu
vixit, sed diu fuit. Sen.
and Wrinkles, to make him be thought a long liver; but who might truly be said
not to have lived long, but only to have been long in the World. How sweet and
fragrant a Memory, does the one, how rotten and stinking a name, does the
other, leave behind him to survivors!

Therefore such very valuable young Persons as are taken hence in the flower of
their Age, are not to be thought, upon that account of usefulness to this
World, to have lived in it, that shorter time, in vain.

They leave behind them that testimony, which will turn to account; both for
the Glory of Gods grace, which he has exemplified in them, and which may be
improved to the good of many who shall have seen that an Holy Life, amidst the
temptations that the youthful Age is exposed to, is no impracticable thing; and
that an Early Death, is as possible also to themselves.

But besides their no little usefulness in this World, which they leave, we
must know,

8. That the Affairs and Concernments of the other World, whither they go, are
incomparably greater every way, and much more considerable. And to this most
unquestionable maxim must be our last and final resort, in the present Case.
All the perturbation, and discomposure of mind, which we suffer upon any such
accasion, arises chiefly, from our having too high and great thoughts of this
World, and too low, and diminishing thoughts of the other; and the evil must be
remedied by rectifying our apprehensions in this matter. Because that other
World is Hades, unseen, and not within the verge of our sense, our sensual
minds are prone to make of it a very little thing; and even next to nothing, as
too many, will have it to be quite nothing at all. We are concerned, in duty to
our blessed Redeemer and Lord, and for his just honor, to magnify this his
Presecture, and render it as great to our selves as the matter requires, and as
our very narrow minds can admit. And should labor to correct it as a great and
too common fault, a very gross vulgar Error, to conceive of persons leaving
this world of ours, as if they hereby became useless; and, upon the matter,
lost out of the Creation of God. So is our fancy prepossest, and filled with
delusive Images, that throng in upon it thorough our unwary senses, that we
imagine this little spot of our Earth to be the only place of business, and all
the rest of the Creation, to be mere vacuit^, vast, empty space, where there is
nothing to do, and nothing to be enjoyed. Not that these are formed, positive
thoughts, or a settled judgment, with good Men, but they are floating
imaginations, so continually obtruded upon them, from (what lies next) the
objects of sense, that they have more influence to affect the Heart, and infer
suitable, sudden, and indeliberate, emotions of Spirit than the most formed
judgment, grounded on things that lie without the sphere of sense can outweigh.

And hence when a good man Dies (elder or younger) the common cry is among the
better sort (for the other do less concern themselves) O what a loss is this!
Not to be repaired! not to be born! Indeed this is better than the common
stupidity, not to consider, not to take it to Heart, when the Righteous Man
perishes, or is taken away. And the Law of our own Nature, obliges and prompts
us, to feel, and regret, the losses which afflict us. But such resentments
ought to be followed, and qualified, by greater thoughts, arising from a
superior Nature, that ought presently to take place with us, of the nobler
employments which God calls such unto, of whom this World was not worthy, Heb.
11.38. And how highly his great and all comprehending interest, is to be
preferred before our own, or the interest of this or that Family, Country, or
Nation, on Earth!

And, at once, both to enlarge and quiet our minds, on such occasions we should
particularly consider,

1. The vast amplitude of the Heavenly Hades, in comparison of our minute spot
of Earth, or of that dark Region (wheresoever it is) reserved for the just
punishment of dilinquents, according to such intimations as the Holy Scriptures
give us hereof, which being writ only for the use of us on Earth, cannot be
supposed to intend the giving us more distinct accounts of the state of things,
in the upper World, than were necessary for us, in this our present state.

But it is no obscure hint that is given of the spaciousness of the Heavenly
Regions, when purposely to represent the Divine immensity, it is said of the
unconsined presence of the great God, that even Heaven, and the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain him, 1 King. 8.27. 2 Chronicles. 6.18. How vast scope is
given to our thinking minds to conceive Heavens, above Heavens, incircling one
another, till we have quite tired our faculty, and yet we know not how far
short we are of the utmost verge! And when our Lord is said to have ascended
far above all Heavens, Ephesians. 4.10. Whose Arithmetic will suffice to tell how
many they are? whose Vranography to describe how far that is?

We need not impose it upon our selves to judge their rules infallible, who,
being of no mean understanding, nor indiligent in their enquiries, have thought
it not improbable that there may be fixed Stars within view, at that distance
from our Earth, that a movable, in as swift motion, as that of a Bullet shot
from a Canon, would be fifty thousand years in passing from the one to the
other Computation by the Honorable Francis Roberts, Esquire Philosoph.
Transactions for the Months March and April, 1694.
. But how much remoter that Star may be from the utmost verge of the Universe,
is left altogether unimaginable. I have been told that a very ingenious Artist
going about, in exact proportions, to describe the Orb or Vortex to which our
Sun belongs, on as large a Table as could be convenient for him to work upon,
was at a loss to find a spot not too big, in proportion, for our Earth, and big
enough, whereupon to place the point, made very fine, of one foot of his
Compass.

If any suspect extravagancy in our Modern Computations let him take a view of
what is discoursed to this purpose by a Writer of most unexceptionable wisdom,
and sobriety (as well as most eminent sanctity) in his time Bolton in his four
last things, who speaking of Heaven, directs us to guess the immeasurable
magnitude of it: (as otherwise -- so) By the incredible distance from the Earth
to the Starry Firmament; and adds, If I should here tell you the several
computations of Astronomers, in this kind, the sums would seem to exceed all
possibility of belief. [And he annexes in his Margin sundry computations which
I shall not here recite, you may find them in the Author himself, p. 21.] And
yet besides, (as he further adds) the late learnedest of them place above the
8th sphere, wherein all those g^orious Lamps shine so bright, three moving Orbs
more. Now the Empyrean He^ven comprehends all these; How incomprehensible then,
must its compass and greatness necessarily be! But he supposes it possible, the
adventure of Mathematicians may be too audacious and peremptory, etc. And
concludes the height and extent of the Heavens to be beyond all Human
investigation.


Now when the Lord of this vast universe beheld upon this little spot,
intelligent creatures in transgression and misery, that he did so
compassionately concern himself, for the recovery of such as should, by apt
methods, be induc't to comply with his merciful design; and appoint his own
Eternal Son to be their Redeemer, in order whereto, as he was God with God, he
must also become Man, among Men, one of themselves, and so as God-Man, for his
kindness to some, be constituted universal Lord of all. Shall mere pity toward
this World greaten it above the other?

But we are not left without ground to apprehend a more immediate Reason for
his being, as Redeemer, made Head and Lord of all those Creatures that were the
Original Inhabitants of the Invisible World. For when it had been said, Col.
1.16. That all things were created by him, not only the visible things on
Earth* but the invisible things in Heaven, here is a regression to these
latter, who were before (for their greater dignity) generally, first mentioned,
and now some enumeration given of them, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions,
or Principalities, or Powers, and all things again repeated, that these might
appear expressly included, said over again to be created by him, and for him,
which was sufficient to express his creative Right in them. It Is presently
subjoyned, v. 17. And he is before all thin^s, and by him all things consist.
All owe their stability to him, viz. The mentioned ^hrones, Dominions, etc. as
well as other things. But how? or upon what terms? That we might understand his
Redemptory right was not here to be overlook't, it is shortly after added, and
having made Peace by the Blood of his Cross, it pleased the Father (to be
repeated out of what went before) by him to reconcile all things to himself;
and this by him, iterated, q. d. by him shedding his Blood on the Cross,
whether they be things on Earth, or things in Heaven, lest the Thrones,
Dominions, mentioned before should be forgot. And a word is used accommodable
enough to the several purposes before expressed, (...), which does not always
suppose enmity, but more generally signify, upon a sort of commutation, or
valuable consideration, to procure or conciliate, or make a thing more firmly
ones own, or assure it to himself, though it is afterward used in the stricter
sense, v. 21.

I have often considered with wonder and pleasure, that whereas God is called
by that higher, and far more extensive Name, the Father of Spirits; He is also
pleased so graciously to vouchsafe, as to be styled the God of the Spirits of
all Flesh, and thereby to signify, that having an order of Spirits so meanly
lodged that inhabit frail and mortal Flesh, though he have a world of Spirits
to converse with, whose dwelling is not with Flesh; yet he disdains not a
Relation to so mean and abject Spirits ( his Offspring also) in our World. And
that, because this was the place of offending delinquents that he would
recover; the Redeemer should sort himself with them, and, as they were
partakers of Flesh and Blood, himself likewise take part of the same! This was
great, and Godlike! and speaks the largeness, and amplitude of an all
comprehending mind, common to Father and Son; and capable of, so, applying it
self to the greatest things, as not to neglect the least.

And therefore so much the more magnifies God, and our Redeemer, by how much
the less considerable we, and our World are. But that hence we should so over
magnify this World, as if nothing were considerable that lies without its
compass, is most perversely to misconstrue the most amazing condescension.

The Spirit of God, by Holy David, teaches us to reason the quite contrary way.
And from the consideration he had of the vastness, and splendour, of the upper
World, of the Heavens, the Moon and Stars, etc. not to magnify but diminish
our World of Mankind, and say, What is Man?

And let us further consider,

2. The inexpressible numerousness of the other Worlds Inhabitants, with the
excellencies wherein they shine, and the orders they are ranked into, and how
unlikely is it, that Holy Souls that go thither, should want employment? Great
concourse, and Multitude^ of People, make places of business in this World, and
must much more do so, where creatures of the most Spiritual, and active
Natures, must be supposed to have their residence. Scripture speaks of Myriads
(which we read an innumerable company) of Angels, besides all the Spirits of
Just Men Heb. 12. Who are sometimes said to be more than any one, (which we
causlesly render Man) could number, Rev. 7. (...).
And when we are told of many Heavens, above all which our Lord Jesus is said
to have ascended; are all those Heavens, only empty solitudes? uninhabited
glorious deserts! When we find how full of vitality this base Earth of ours is,
how replenish't with living creatures, not only on the surface, but within it,
how unreasonable is it to suppose the nobler parts of the universe to be less
Peopled with Inhabitants, of proportionable spirituality, activity, liveliness
and vigor to the several Regions, which, the remoter they are from dull Earth,
must be supposed still the finer, and apt to afford fit, and suitable
habitations to such Creatures? Whether we suppose pure, unclothed Spirits be to
the Natives in all those Heavens, all comprehended under the one Name of
Angels, or whether (as some think of all Created Spirits) that they have all
vital union with some or other vehicles, Ethereal, or Celestial, more or less
fine, and pure, as the Region is, to which they belong, having gradually
associated unto them the Spirits of Holy Men gone from us, which are said to be
(...), Angels-fellows, Luk 20.36. it is indifferent to our purpose.

Let us only consider them all, as intelligent, Spiritual, Beings, full of Holy
Light, Life, active Power, and Love to their common Lord, and one another. And
can we imagine their state to be a State of torpid silence, idleness, and
inactivity, or that they have not much higher, and nobler work to do there,
than they can have, in such a World as this, or in such bodies, as here, they
lugg to and fro!

And the Scriptures are not altogether silent, concerning the distinct orders
of those glorious Creatures, that inhabit all the Heavens, with this upper
Hades, must be understood to contain. Though it has not provided to gratify any
ones curiosity, so far as to give us particular accounts of their differences,
and distinctions. And though we are not warranted to believe such conjectures
concerning them, as we find in in the supposititions Dionysius' his Celestial
Hierarchy, or much less the idler dreams of Valentinus, and the Gnostics about
their Aeones, with diverse more such fictions, yet we are not to neglect, what
God has expressly told us, viz. That giving us some Account of the Creation, in
the Hades, or the invisible part of it; there are Thrones, Dominions,
Principalities, Powers, Angels, (and elsewhere Archangels, Authorities, Col.
1.16. with 1 Pet. 3.21. which being terms that import Order, and Government,
can scarce allow us not to conceive, that of all those numberless multitudes of
glorious Creatures, that r^plenish and people those spacious Regions of Light,
and Bliss, there are none, who belong not to some or other, of those
Principalities and Dominions.

Whence therefore, nothing is more obvious, than to conceive, that whosoever is
adjoined to them, ascending out of our Wo^ld, presently has his Station
assigned him, is made to know his post* and how he is to be employed, in the
se^vice and adoration of the Sovereign Lord of all, and in paying the most
regular homage, to the Th^one of God and the Lamb. It being still to be
remembered, that God is not worshipped there, or here, as an (...), or as though
he needed any thing, since he gives to all breath and being and all things,
Acts 17. But that the felicity of his most excellent Creatures, does in great
part consist, in acting perpetually according to the dictate of a just and
right mind. And that therefore tehey take highest pleasure in prostration, in
casting down their Crowns, in shrinking even into nothing, before the Original,
Eternal, Subsistent Being, that he may be owned as the all in all, because they
follow, herein, a most satisfied judgment, and express it when they say, Thou
art worthy O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor and Power, for thou have
created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created, Rev. 4.11.
And worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive Riches, and Wisdom, and
Strength, etc. chapter 5.12.

And they that rest not Night or Day from such high and glorious employments,
have they nothing to do? Or will we say or think, because we see not how the
Heavenly Potentates, lead on their bright Legions, to present themselves before
the Throne, to tender their obeisance, or receive commands and dispatches to
this or that far remote Dynasty --; or (suppose) to such and such a mighty Star
(whereof there are so numberless myriads. And why should we suppose them not
replenish't with glorious Inhabitants?) Whither they fly as quick as thought,
with joyful speed, under the All-seeing Eye, glad to execute wise and just
commands upon all occasions. But alas! in all this we can but darken Counsel
with words without knowledge. We cannot pretend to knowledge in these things;
yet if from Scripture intimations, and the concurrent reason of things, we only
make suppositions of what may be, not conclusions of what is; let our thoughts
ascend as much higher as they can. I see not why they should fall lower than
all this. And because we cannot be positive,

Will we therefore say or think, there can be no such thing, or nothing but
dull inactivity in those Regions? Because that other World is Hades, and we see
nothing, shall we make little, or next to nothing of it? We should think it
very absurd reasoning (if we should use it, in reference to such mean trifles
in comparison, and say) there is no such thing as Pomp and State, no such thing
as Action or Business in the Courr of Spain or France, of Persia or Japan,
because no sound from thence, strikes our Ear, or the beams of Majesty there,
dazzle not our Eye?

I should indeed think it very unreasonable to make mere magnitude, or vast
extent of space, filled up with nothing but void air, Either, or other fine
matter (call it by what name you will) alone, or by it self, a very
considerable note of excellency, of the other invisible World, above this
visible World of ours. But I reckon it much more unreasonable and unenforc't,
(to say no more) by any Principles, either of Philosophy, or Religion, finding
this World of ours (a baser part of the Creation*) so full of Life, and of
living Inhabitants, of one degree or another; to suppose the nobler parts of
the Universe, still ascending upwards, generally unpeopled, and desert! when it
is so conceivable in it self, and so aptly tending to magnify our Creator, and
Redeemer, that all the upper Regions be fully inhabited with intelligent
creatures, whether mere Spirits, unclothed with any thing material, or united
with some or other matter, we need not determine.

And whereas Scripture plainly intimates, that the Apostate revolted Spirits
that fell from God, and kept not their first Stations, were vastly numerous; we
have hence scope enough for our thoughts to conceive, that so spacious Regions
being replenisht with intelligent Creatures, always innocent and happy, the
delinquents compared with them may be as despicable for their paucity, as they
are detestable for their apostasy. And that the horrid Hades, wherein they are
reserved to the blackness of Darkness for ever, may be no more in proportion,
nay, unexpressibly less, than some little Rocky Island, appointed as a place of
punishment for Criminals, in comparison of a flourishing, vast Empire, fully
peopled with industrious, rich, soberminded and unhappy Inhabitants.

We might further consider,

3. The high perfection they presently attain to, who are removed, though in
their younger years, out of this, into that other World.

The Spirits of just Men are there said to be made perfect. Waving the Olympic
Metaphor, which is, at most, but the thing signifying: That which is signified,
cannot be less than the concurrence of Natural, and Moral Perfection. The
perfecting of all our faculties, mind, will, and active power, and of all holy
and gracious excellencies, knowledge, wisdom, love, holiness. The Apostle makes
the difference be, as that of a Child, and that of a Man, 1 Cor. 13. And would
any one that has a Child he delights in, wish him to be a Child always, and
only capable of Childish things? Or is it a reasonable imagination, that by how
much we are more capable of action, we shall be the more useless, and have the
less to do?

We may further lastly add, that which is not the least considerable.

4. That all the active, Services, and usefulness, we are capable of in this
World, is but transitory, and lies within the compass of this temporary State
of things, which must have an end. Whereas the business of the other World,
belongs to our final and eternal State, which shall never be at an end. The
most extraordinary qualifications for service on Earth, must hereafter, if not
by the cessation of the active Powers and Principles themselves, as Tongues,
Prophecies, and such knowledge as is uncommon, and, by peculiar vouchsafement,
afforded but to a few, for the help of many.

^hese endowments designed for the Propagation of the Christian Faith, and for
the stopping Mouths of gainsayers, must in the use and exercise, at least, by
the cessation of the objects, and occasions, fail, and cease, and vanish away,
1 Cor. 13.8. The like may be said of courage and fortitude to contend against
prevailing wickedness; skill, ability, with external advantages, to promote the
impugned interest of Christ, and Christian Religion; of all these there will be
no further use in that other World. They are all to be considered as means to
the end. But how absurd were it to reckon the means of greater importance than
the end it self? The whole present constitution of Christ's Kingdom on Earth, is
but preparatory and introductive to the Celestial Kingdom. And how absurd were
it to prefer this Temporary Kingdom to the Eternal one, and present
serviceableness to this, to perpetual service in the other?

It Is true, that service to God and our Redeemer in this present state, is
necessary in its own kind, highly acceptable to God, and justly much valued by
good Men. And we ought our selves willingly to submit to serve God in a meaner
capacity in this World, while it is his pleasure we shall do so, especially if
God should have given any signification of his mind, concerning our abode in
the Flesh, some longer time, as it is likely he had done to the Apostle Paul,
Phil. 1.24. because he says, he was confident, and did know that so it should
be, ver. 25. we should be abundantly satisfied with it, as he was. But to
suppose an abode here, to be simply, and universally more eligible, is very
groundless, and unreasonable. And were a like case, as if a person of very
extraordinary abilities and accomplishments, because he was useeful in some
obscure Country Village, is to be looked upon as lost, because his Prince,
being informed of his great worth, calls him up to his Court, and finding him
every way fit, employs him in the greatest affairs of State!

To sum up this matter, whereas the means, are always, according to usual
estimate, wont to derive their value from their end. Time, from Eternity. This
judgment of the case, that usefulness in this present State, is of greater
consequence, and more important, than the affairs of the other World, breaks
all measures, overturns the whole frame, and inverts the Order of things, makes
the means more valuable than the end: Time more considerable than Eternity; and
the concernments of a state that will soon be over, greater than those of our
fixed, permanent, everlasting State, that will never be over.

If we would allow our selves the liberty of reasoning, according to the
measure and compass of our narrow minds, byast, and contracted by private
interest, and inclination, we should have the like plausible things to think,
concerning such of ours as Die in Infancy, and that when they have but newly
looked into this World, are presently again caught out of it; that if they had
lived, what might they have come to? How pleasant and diverting might their
Childhood have been? How hopeful their Youth? How useful their Riper Age? But
these are commonly thoughts little wiser than theirs, and proceed from a
general infidelity, or misbelief, that whatsoever is not within the compass of
this little, sorry, World, is all emptiness, and nullity! Or if such be pious
and more considering, it is too plain they do not, however, consider enough, how
great a part it is, of Divine magnificence, to take a reasonable immortal
Spirit from animating a piece of well figured Clay, and presently adjoyn it to
the general assembly above! How glorious a a change is made upon their Child in
a moment! How much greater a thing it is to be adoring God above, in the
Society of Angels, than to be dandled on their knee, or enjoy the best
provisions they can make for them on Earth! That they have a part to act upon
an Eternal Stage! and though they are but lately come into Being, are never to
go out of being more, but to be everlasting Monuments, and Instruments of the
glory of their great Creator and Lord!

Nor, perhaps, is it considered so deeply as it ought, that it has seemed meet
to the Supreme Wisdom, upon a most important reason, in the case of lengthning,
or shortning the Lives of Men, not ordinarily, or otherwise, than upon a great
occasion, to interrupt the tendencies of Natural Causes, But let Nature run its
Course: For otherwise, very frequent innovations upon Nature, would make
Miracles cheap, and common, and consequently, useless to their proper, great
ends, which may be of greater significancy in the course of Gods Government
over the World, than some addition to this, or that Life can be worth. And
therefore should this consideration repress our wonderment, why God does not,
when he so easily can, by one touch upon this, or that second Cause, prevent,
or ease the grievous pains, which they often suffer that love him, and whom he
loves. He reckons it fitter, and they will in due time reckon so too
themselves, when the wise methods of his Government come to be unfolded, and
understood, that we should any of us bear what is ungrateful to us, in point of
pain, loss of Friends, or other unpleasing events of providence, than that he
should make frequent, and less necessary breaches upon the common order, and
course of Government which he has established over a delinquent, sinful, World.

Whereupon it is a great piece of wisdom and dutifulness toward our great
Lord, not to pray absolutely, peremptorily, or otherwise than with great
submission, and deference to his wise and holy pleasure, for our own or our
Friends lives, ease, outward prosperity, or any external or temporary good
thing. For things that concern our Spiritual and eternal welfare, his good and
acceptable will is more expressly declared, and made known already, and before
hand.

But as to the particular case of the usefulness of any Friend or Relative of
ours in this, or the other State, the matter must be finally left to the
arbitrament and dispose of him who has the Keys o^ Hades, and of Death. And
when by his turn of them he has decided the matter, we then know what his mind
and judgment is, which it is no more fit for us to censure, than possible to
disannul. Whatever great purposes we might think one cut off in the flower of
his Age, capable of serving in this World, we may be sure he judged him capable
of serving greater in the other.

And now by this time I believe you will expect to have somewhat a more
particular Account of this excellent young Gentleman, whose early Decease has
occasioned my Discoursing so largely on this subject. Not more largely than the
importance, but much less accurately, than the dignity of it did challange.

He was the Eldest Son of Sir Charles Hoghton, of Hoghton Tower, in the County
of Lancaster, Baronet, and of the Lady Mary, Daughter of the late Lord Viscount
Masserene, his very Pious Consort.

A Family of eminent Note in that Northern part of the Kingdom, for its
antiquity, opulency, and interest in the Country where it is seated; and which
has intermarried with some or other of the Nobility, one Generation after
another. But has been most of all considerable, and illustrious, as having
been it self, long, the immemorial known seat of Religion, Sobriety, and Good
Order, from Father, to Son; giving Example, Countenance, and Patronage to these
praiseworthy things to the Country round about. And wherein, hitherto (through
the singular favor and blessing of Heaven) there has not been that visible
degeneracy, that might be so plainly observed, and sadly deplored, in diverse
great Families. As if it were an exemption from what was so anciently remarked
by the Poet, Aetas Parentum, pejor avis, -- etc. But on the contrary, such as
have succeeded, have, by a laudable ambition, and emulation, as it were,
striven to outshine such as have gone before them in Piety, and virtue.

In this bright and lucid tract and line, was this most hopeful young
Gentleman, now arrived to the Age wherein we use to write Man, beginning to
stand up in view, and to draw the Eyes, and raise the hopes of observers, and
well-wishers, as not likely to come short of any of his worthy Ancestors, and
Predecessors. But Heaven had its Eye upon him too, and both made and judged him
meet for an Earlier translation, to a more eminent Station there.

He was from his childhood observed to be above the common rate, docile, of
quick apprehension, solid judgment, and retentive memory, and, betimes, a lover
of Books and Learning.

For Religion; his knowledge of the Principles of it, continually grew, as his
capacity did more and more admit, under the Eye and endeavors of his Parents,
and such other Instructors, as they took care he should never want. But his
Savor and Relish thereof, and the impression made thereby upon his Soul, was
so deep, and so early, as to be apparently owing to an higher cause, the
gracious operation of the Holy Spirit, and a singular blessing thereby, upon
his pious Education. And in this way, it could not be easy to such as were his
most diligent, and constant observers, to conclude, or conjecture, when God
first began to deal with his Spirit.

Above ten years ago, I had opportunity for a few days, to have some converse
with him, in his Fathers House. And, as I could then perceive, his Spirit was
much tinctured with Religion; so I received information, that for a
considerable time before, there constantly appeared in him such specimina of
serious Piety, as were very comfortable to his Parents, and might be
instructive to others, that took notice of them.

In the course of diverse following years, he greatly improved, under Domestic,
and Private Instruction, both in Grammar-Learning, and Academical Studies, for
which he wanted not apt helps. When there was great reason to hope he was so
well established in Religion and Virtue, as neither to be shock't by the
importunate temptations of a skeptical vicious Age in the general, or betrayed
by the facility of his own youthful Age. His prudent, worthy Father, judged it
requisite, and not unsafe, to adventure him into a place of more hazard, but
greater advantage, for his accomplishment in that sort of culture, and
polishing, that might, in due time, render him both in reality, and with better
reputation, serviceable in a Public Station, i. e. where he might gain such
knowledge of the World, of Men, and of the Laws of his Country, as were proper
for his rank, and one that was to make such a figure in the Nation, as it was
to be hoped he might. And upon that Account, not yet a year ago, brought him
up to London, entered him in the Temple, took for him convenient Lodgings
there, and left him settled, unto mutual satisfaction.

He was little diverted by the noise, novelties, or the gaities of the Town,
but soon betook himself to a course of close Study; discontinued not his
converse with God, and thereby learned, and was enabled, to converse with Men,
warily, and with caution; so as he might be continually improving and gaining
good, without doing, or receiving hurt.

The Substance of the following Account, I received from a pious intelligent
young Man, who several years attended him before his coming to Town, and
afterward, to the finishing of his course.

Mr. Hoghton 's early Seriousness, increased with his years. His deportment was
grave, composed, without any appearance of Pride, which he carefully avoided
His diligence in Study was unusual, and his proficiency very great; neither was
this less an effect of his Conscientiousness in the improvement of his time,
than of his desire after knowledge.

As to his demeanor, and performance of Duties, toward his several Relations,
his self denial, his sedateness of mind, his fear of sin, his tenderness of
Conscience, love of the best things, and unconcernedness about things of an
inferior Nature, so far as has fallen under my observation, in near six years
time, I believe few, if any of his years, did exceed him.

In his Sickness he was very patient, submissively undergoing those heavy
strokes it pleased God to lay upon him.

Upon his apprehension of Death, he seemed very little discouraged, but quietly
resigned himself into the hands of the all-wise Disposer of All things.

Some time before his Sickness, and in the time of it, he said, Afflictions
were very proper for ^ods Children, and those that were never Afflicted, had
reason to question the Truth of their Grace, and Gods Love to them, quoting
that Scripture, If ye are without chastening, then are ye Bastards, and not
Sons.

He often repeated those words, in the beginning of his illness.

-- It Is an hard thing to make our Calling, and our Election sure.

-- I desire to glorify God. --

When he understood, from some expressions of his Physician, how dangerous his
Distemper was, he said, he knew very well the meaning of his Physicians words;
But that however it proved, he hoped he was safe.

He was so strict in the observation of the Lords day, that if he happened to
lie longer than ordinary in the Morning, he would continue the later in Duties,
in the Evening; saying, we ought not to make that Day shorter than other Days.

Though he was very intent on his Studies, yet on Saturdays he always broke
them off at Noon, and spent the Afternoon in reading Divinity, and preparing
himself for the Lords Day.

He was always constant in his secret Duties, and suffered nothing to hinder
him from the performing of them.

Before he expired, he spoke with great assurance of his Future happiness, and
hopes of meeting his Relations in Glory. Thus far goes that Account.

His Sickness was short. When, hearing of it, I went to visit him, I was met in
an Ante-chamber, by his ingenious, dear, Brother, to whom it is no reproach to
be second to him, and who, it is to be hoped, will be at least, truly so;
making him, though a fair Example, yet not a Standard; who has for diverse
years, been most intimately conjunct, and conversant with him, known his way,
his Spirit, his manner of Life, his purity: And may be led on, and excited
thereby, wherein he has observed him to excel others, to endeavor not to come
short, but, if it were possible, to excel him; remembering, he is to be the next
solace of his Parents, hope of his Family, and resort of his Country (if God
shall vouchsafe to continue him) in succeeding time.

From him, I had little expectation of finding his Sick Brother in a
conversable condition; the malignity of his Fever having, before seized his
head, and very much disordered his intellectuals; but going in, I was much
surprised to find it so far otherwise. He presently knew me; and his
understanding that served him for little else, fai^ed him not in the
concernments of Religion, and of his Soul. There was not an improper or
misplac't word (though the case could not admit of interchanging many) that came
from him. Concerning the substance of the Gospel of Christ, (as it could be
shortly summed up to him) he said, he had no doubt, and his transactions with
Christ himself, accepting him; resigning, and entrusting himself absolutely,
and entirely to him, and God in him, were so explicit, distinct, and clear, as
could leave no place of doubt concerning him. He professed his concurrence to
such requests, as were put up to God concerning him; and the next Morning,
slept quietly in the Lord.

Nor now will it be unfit, to shut up the Discourse, with some few, suitable
Reflections, upon this double Subject. The Text, and This Providence, taken
together.

1. How happy is it! when this Power, of our Great Redeemer, and Lord,
mentioned in the Text, and a preparation, with cheerful willingness, dutifully
to comport with it, concur and meet together, as they have done in this
instance. Our Lord has shown his Power. He asserted it, in the Text. In this
Instance he used it, giving an open Testimony, that he takes it to belong to
him, to make such translations from one World, to another, whenever he judges
it a fit season. Nor is solicitous, whether men acknowledge his right, so to
do, or no; or what Censures they will pass upon what he has done. He does his
own work, and leaves men to their own talk, or mutterings, or wonder, or
amusement at it, as they will. So it becomes Sovereign Power to do, established
upon the most unquestionable foundations; exercised according to the wisest and
most righteous Measures. He has used his own right, and satisfied himself in
the use of it. He thought not himself concerned to advise with any of us, about
it, who, as his Counselor, should instruct him? Isa. 40.13. Romans 11. v. 34. He
owes so much to himself, to act as unaccountable to no one, nor liable to any
ones control.

Here is most rightful, resistless Power, justly and kindly used on the one
hand;

And, on the other, how placid, how calm, a resignation! Here was no striving!
no crying! no reluctant motion, no querulous, repining voice. Nothing but
peaceful, filial submission; a willingness to obey the Summons given.

This was an happy accord, the willingness of this departing Soul, proceeding
not from stupidity, but trust, in him who kept these Keys; and such
preparedness for removal, as the Gospel required. O happy Souls! that finding
the Key is turning, and opening the door for them, are willing to go forth upon
such terms, as knowing whom they have believed, etc. And that neither
principalities or powers -- life or death -- etc. can ever separate them from
the Love of God in Christ Jesus their Lord. Life, they find, has not separated
-- whereof was the greater danger; and Death is so far from making this
separation, that it shall complete their Union with the blessed God in Christ,
and lay them infolded in the everlasting Embraces of Divine Love! Happy they!
that can hereupon welcome Death! and say, Now, Lord, let thou thy Servant
depart in peace! that, before, only desired leave to die, and have, now,
obtained it; that are, with certainty of the Issue, at the point of becoming
complete Victors, over the last Enemy; and are ready to enter upon their
Triumph, and take up their (...), Death is swallowed up in Victory. O Death,
where is thy sting! O Grave, where is thy Victory! -- Thanks be to God, who
gives us the Victory through Jesus Christ our Lord. Happy Soul! here will be a
speedy end of all thy griefs, and sorrows, they will be presently swallowed up,
in an absolute plenitude and fullness of Joy. There is already an end put to thy
tormenting cares and fears; for what Object can remain to thee, of a rational
fear, when once, upon grounds (such as shake not under thee) thou art
reconciled to Death? This is the most glorious sort of Victory, viz. by
reconciliation. For so, thou have conquered, not the Enemy only, but the Enmity
it self, by which he was so. Death is become thy Friend, and so no longer to be
feared; nor is there any thing else, from whence thou art to fear hurt; For
Death was thy last Enemy, even this bodily Death! The whole Region beyond it,
is to one in thy case, clear, and serene, when to others, is reserved the
blackness of darkness for ever. There are no terrible (...), no formidable
consequences, no reserves of misery, no treasures of wrath to be feared by
thee. To one, in thy condition, may that, without hesitation, Sen. ^r.
be applied, nihil metuit, qui optat mori; He fears nothing, who desires to
die. What is the product of some men's infidelity, is the genuine product of
their faith. From so contrary Causes may proceed the same Effect. The Effect, a
willingness to die, or a bold adventure upon Death, is the same, but only in
respect of the general kind; with great differences in the special kind,
according to the difference and contrariety of the Causes, whereof they
discernibly taste and savor. With Infidels, it is a negative, dead, stupid,
partial willingness, or but a non-aversion; and in a lower, and much diminished
degree; Or if some present, intolerable, disgraceful calamity urge them, a
rash, obstinate, presumptuous rushing upon Death; because they do not consider
consequences. With Believers, such as in reference to the concernments of the
other World do walk by faith, while as yet, they cannot walk by sight, in
reference to those things, 2 Cor. 5.7. it is a positive, vital, courage, v. 8.
(...).
We are confident, and a preponderating inclination of will; We are willing
rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord; because (as
is manifest) they do consider consequences, and how blessed a state will
certainly ensue! How vast are these special differences, of the same thing in
the general, willingness to die!

O the transports of Joy that do now most rationally result from this state of
the Case! when there is nothing left, lying between the dislodging Soul, and
the glorious unseen World, but only the dark passage of Death; and that so
little formidable; considering who has the Keys of the one, and the other. How
reasonable is it upon the account of somewhat common herein, to the Redeemer,
and the Redeemed, (although every thing be not) to take up the following words,
that so plainly belong to this very case. Therefore my heart is glad, and my
glory rejoices; my flesh also shall rest in hope. For thou will not leave my
Soul in Sheol, or Hades; thou will not forsake, or abandon it in that wide
World, neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption. Thou will
show me the path of Life; the path that leads unto that presence of thine,
where is fullness of Joy; and to those pleasures which are at thy right hand; or
in thy power, and which are for evermore; and shall never admit either of end,
or diminution, Psalm. 16.9, 10, 11.

Now, what do we mean to let our Souls hang in doubt? why do we not drive
things for them, to an issue? Put them into those same safe hands that holds
these Keys; absolutely resign, devote, entrust, and subject them to him; get
them bound up in the bundle of Life; so adjoyn and unite them to him (not
doubting but as we give them up, he will, and does, in that instant, take hold
of them, and receive them into union with himself) as that we may assure our
hearts, that because he lives, Joh. 14.19.
we shall live also. Thus the ground of our hope becomes sure, and of that joy
which springs from such an hope. Romans 5.2.
Our Life, we may now say, is hid with Christ in God (even though we are, in our
selves, dead, or dying Creatures) Col. 3.3. Yea, Christ is our Life, and when
he, who is our Life, shall appear, we shall appear with him, in glory, verse 4.
He has assured us, that because he is the Resurrection, and the Life; he that
believes in him, though he were dead, shall yet live. And that, whosoever lives,
and believes in him, has thereby, a life already begun in him, in respect
whereof he shall never die, Joh. 11.25, 26. What now can be surer than this? so
far we are at a certainty, upon the included supposition, i. e. that we believe
in him.

And what now remains to be ascertained? what? Only our own intervening death?
we must, it is true be, absent from these bodies, or we cannot (as we would) be
present with the Lord. And is that all? can any thing now, be more certain than
that? O happy state of our Case! How should our hearts spring and leap for our
joy, that our affairs are brought into this posture! that in order to our
perfect Blessedness, nothing is farther wanting but to die. And that the
certainty of death, compleats our assurance of it. What should now hinder our
breaking forth into the most joyful thanksgivings, that it is so little
doubtful we shall die! that we are in no danger of a terrestrial Immortality!
and that the only thing that it remained we should be assured of, is so very
sure. That we are sure it is not in the power of all this World, to keep us
always in it. That the most spiteful Enemy we have in all the World, cannot do
us that spite, to keep us from dying! How gloriously may good Men triumph, over
the impotent malice of their most mischievous enemies, viz. that the greatest
mischief, even in their own Account, that it can ever be in their power to do
them, is to put it out of their own power ever to hurt them more (for they now
go quite out of their reach) They can (being permitted,) kill the body, and
after that (Luke 12.4.) have no more that they can do. What a remarkable,
significant, after that, is this? what a defiance does it import of the utmost
Effort of humane power and Spite! that here it terminates! it is now come to its
ne plus ultra!

And so we are to look upon all our other Trials and Afflictions, that in any
providential way may befall us; we may be sick, in pain, in poverty, in
disgrace, but we shall not be always in mortal flesh, which is the subtratum,
and the root of all the rest. Can we be upon better terms, having but two
things to be concerned about, as necessary to our Complete Felicity, union with
Christ, and disunion from these bodies? God is graciously ready to assist us,
in reference to the former, though therein he requires our care, subserviently
hereto: in reference to the latter, he will take care himself, in his own fit
season, without any care or concern of ours in the matter. And only expects us
to wait with patience, till that sit season Come. And come it will, perhaps,
sooner than we may think. He does not, always, go by our measures in judging
of the fit season; as this present instance shows.

2. From the text, taken in conjunction with this act of providence, we may
observe the great advantage of a pious Education. Though the best means of such
Education do not always prove Effectual; yet this being much the more probable
course, upon which to expect Gods blessing, than the Parents profane
negligence of the souls of their Children; such an example, wherein God by his
blessing testified his approbation of Parental care and diligence; should
greatly quicken the endeavors of Parents herein; as hoping, hereby, to serve
his great, and merciful, and most principal design, who has these Keys; and
whose office it is, to transmit Souls, when they are prepared and ready, out of
this World of ours, into that Blessed glorious World above. And, though they
may think themselves disappointed, when thorough Gods blessing upon their
endeavors, they have educated one, to such a pitch, as this young Gentleman
was raised and brought up unto; with a Prospect, and Hope of his having a long
course of service to run through here on the Earth: Yet let Parents hence learn
to correct what was amiss, or what was wrong; not what was right, and well.
Their Action and Endeavor was, what ought to be. Their Error or Mistake (if
there was any) was more principally, as the Case is here stated, about their
design, and end. Not that they designed such an end, for that also was very
justifiable, and laudable: But if they designed it as their more principal end;
Which the Case, as it is now put, supposes, that is, that they take themselves
to be disappointed, for no Man complains of it as a disappointment, if he miss
of an inferior end, and attain that which is far nobler, and more excellent.
Our great aim should be the subserving the design of the Great Lord of Heaven
and Earth; which ultimately and supreamly refers to the heavenly, eternal state
of things; and that Souls may be ripened and fitted for that, and to do service
here on Earth, subordinately to the other; and while they are in Preparation
for the heavenly state. His principal design must be for that which is
principal And concerning that (as was formerly argued) there can be no more
doubt than whether Heaven or Earth, Eternity or Time, a fixed, permanent,
everlasting, or a temporary, transitory, vanishing state of things be more
valuable, and to be preferred.

Our Redeemer has acquired, and does use these Keys, for the translating of
Souls, as soon as he shall judge them meet to be Partakers of the Inheritance of
Saints in Light, Col. 1.12. Some he makes meet much earlier than others. His
design, so far as it is known, or may be supposed, should give Measure to ours;
therefore ours must be to make them meet, as early, for his purposes, as is
possible; as knowing it cannot be too early: They were devoted to him early,
and pursuantly hereto, no time should be lost from the great Business of
fitting, and forming them for him; inasmuch also, as the same Qualifications,
viz. that are of higest Excellency, and Value, do equally prepare them to
serve, and glorify him, in either World, as he shall choose to, dispose of
them. And it unquestionably belongs to him to make his Choice, as it does to
us, to endeavor to make them ready. If any of us, having purposely educated a
Son for the Service of his Prince, and present him accordingly, we would submit
it to his Pleasure, to choose the Station, wherein he shall serve him:
Especially if he be a Prince of celebrated Wisdom, and Goodness. And should we
complain, That he is put early, into a Station of much higher Dignity, than we
thought of?

How little is this Matter considered, by most, that go under the Name of
Christian Parents; that are ( more generally) very solicitous to have, as they
call it, their Children Christ'ned. But never have it in their Thoughts to have
them educated in the Knowledge of Christ, or trained up for Christ. As if their
Baptism were intended for a Mockery, their Education in the whole course of it,
has no such reference. It Is how they may with better Reputation, bear up, not
the Name of Christ, but their own. Their Aim, looks no higher, than that they
may inherit their Lands, maintain the Honor of their Families; appear (if such
be their own Rank) well-accomplisht Gentlemen: And of some of those little
things that are thought requisite hereto, we may say as our Savior did in
another Case, These things ought ye to have done, and not to have left the
other (the much greater things) undone.

What should hinder, but that learning to Sing, or Dance, or Fence, or make a
modish Leg, might consist with learning to know God in Christ, in which
Knowledge stands Eternal Life! Whatsoever has real Excellency, or has any
thing in it of true Ornament, will no way disagree with the most serious
Christianity. And how lovely is the Conjunction of the well-accomplisht
Gentleman, and the serious Christian! Only sever Inconsistencies, as how
fashionably to Curse, and Swear, and Damn, and Debauch, which are thought to
belong to good Breeding in our Age.

Let not Religion, Reason, Shame, and Common Sense, be so totally abandoned all
at once, as that the same Persons shall take care to have their Children
baptized into Christ's Name, and be taught to renounce, by their Deeds, that
Great Name, almost as soon as they can pronounce the Word.

Where so direct a Course is not taken to make those of the succeeding Age
ignominionsly bad, yet how little is done, toward the making of them truly,
and usefully good? Much Care is taken to shape, and adorn the outside of the
Man, how little to form, and furnish their Minds! Here, if they can be brought
to make, or judge of a Verse, or a Jest, or a piece of Wit, it is a great
Attainment. Or if, at Home, they can have them taught so much Law, as shall,
hereafter, enable them to squeeze their Tenants, and quarrel with their
Neighbors, or so much of Behavior, as shall qualify them to keep Gentlemen
Company; Or if (as our pious Poet phrased it) they Ship them over, the thing is
done. Then, they shall be able to talk a little of the Fashions of this or that
Foreign Country, and make much the better Figure in their own.

But if, with all other parts of useful Knowledge, and good Breeding, that are
thought requisite for this World, they be also well-instructed touching their
Redeemer's Dominion over it, and the other World also; and concerning the
Nature, Constitution, Design, Laws, and Privileges of his Kingdom; If it be
seriously endeavored to make them apt, and prepared, Instruments of serving
his Interest here, as long as he shall please to continue them in any Station,
on Earth; and that they may also be made meet to be Partakers, at length, of a
far more excellent Inheritance, than an earthly Parent could entitle them to,
that of the Saints in Light, Col. 1.12. If they can be fitted to stand in the
Presence of the Eternal King, and to keep company with Angels, and blessed
Spirits above! How worthy and noble a design is this! And with what
satisfaction is it to be reflected on, if the Parents have ground to apprehend,
they are herein, neither unaccepted, nor disappointed!

3. It is of ill presage to our Land, that when he that has these Keys, uses
them in the so early translation of so hopeful a Person as this young Gentleman
was, so few such are observed to spring up, for the support of the truly
Christian Interest, in the succeeding Generation. That the act of our Great
Redeemer and Lord, herein, was an act of Wisdom, and Counsel, we cannot doubt.
Against the Righteousness of it, we can have no exception. The kind design of
it, toward them whom he so translates, is so evident in the visible agreement
of their spirit and way, with the Heavenly State, as their end, as puts that
matter out of question. But we are so much the more to dread the consequences,
and to apprehend what may make our hearts meditate terror.

By the Christian Interest, I am far from meaning that of a Party. But what
every one must take for Christianity, that will acknowledge there is any such
thing. And for the support of that, in the most principal Doctrines, and Laws
of it, what is our prospect?

To go down here somewhat lower.

Let us suppose a rational susceptibleness, or capacity of Religion, to be the
difference of Man, wherein the Controversy may seem to admit of being
compromis'd; whether it be Religion, alone, or Reason, alone, of which this
must be said, that it distinguishes Man from the Inferior Creatures. And let
it be Reason, with this addition, an aptness (suspicere numen) to be impressed
with some Religious Sentiment, or to conceive of, and adore, an Original Being.
The wise, and mighty Author, and Cause of all things. And now, how near akin
are Religion, and Humanity

Let us, next, understand Christianity, to be the Religion of fallen Man,
designing his Recovery, out of a lapsed, and lost State; i. e.

Man having violated the Law of his Creation, and offended against the Throne
and Government of his Creator, the Supreme, and Universal Lord of all. It was
reckoned not becoming so great a Majesty (though it was not intended to abandon
the Offenders to an Universal Ruin, without Remedy) to be reconciled,
otherwise than by a Mediator and a Reconciling Sacrifice. For which, none being
found competent, but the Eternal Son of God, the Brightness of his Glory, and
the express Image of his own Person, who was also the First and the Last, the
Lord God Almighty; and partaking with us of flesh and blood, was capable, and
undertook to be both Mediator and Sacrifice. It seemed meet to the offended
Majesty, to vouchsafe Pardon and Eternal Life, and the renewing Grace requisite
thereto, to none of the Offenders, but through him; and accept from them no
Homage, but on his Account. Requiring wheresoever the Gospel comes, not only
Repentance toward God, but Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, as the Summary of
the Counsel of God contained therein, Acts 20.21 -- 27. And that all should
honor the Son, as he the Father requires to be honored, John 5.23.

Whereas now so apt a Course as this was established, for restoring Man to
himself, and to God, through the Influence of the Blessed Spirit, flowing in
the Gospel Dispensation, from Christ as the Fountain: What does it portend
when, amidst the clear Light of the Gospel, that affords so bright a Discovery
of the Glorious Redeemer, and of all his apt Methods for bringing to full
effect, his mighty Work of Redemption, an open War is commenced against him,
and his whole Design, by Persons, under Seal, devoted to him! If there were but
one single Instance hereof in an Age, who would not, with trembling expect the
Issue?

But when the Genius of a Christian Nation, seems, in the rising Generation, to
be leading to a general Apostasy, from Christianity, in its Principal, and most
Substantial Parts; and they are only patient of some External Rituals, that
belong, or are made appendent to it, so as but to endure them, either ^ith
Reluctance, or Contempt. When the Juvenile Wit, and Courage, which are thought
to belong to a Gentleman, entering upon the Stage of the World, are employed in
satyrizing upon the Religion, into which they have been Baptized, in bold
Efforts against the Lord that bought them! Whither does this tend!

Some would seem so modest, as in the midst of their profane Oaths, and
Violations of the Sacred Name of God, to beg his Pardon, and say, God forgive
them. But so ludicrously, as he whom Cato animadverts upon, For begging Pardon
that he wrote in Greek, which he was unacquainted with; saying, He had rather
ask Pardon, than be Innocent; Corn. Nep Frag.
for what should induce him to do so unnecessary a thing, for which Pardon
should be necessary? Th^se Men think Pardons very cheap things! But will God be
mocked? Or does he not observe? It Is the prevailing Atheistical Spirit we are
to dread, as that which may provoke Jealousy, and to make himself known by the
Judgments he shall execute.

There is great reason to hope, God will not finally abandon England. But is
there not equal reason to fear, that before the Day of Mercy come, there may be
a nearer Day of Wrath, coming? A Day that shall burn as an Oven, and make the
Hemisphere about us, a fiery Vault! In our Recovery from a lapsed State, which
the Religion professed among us, aims at; There are two things to be effected.
The restoring Reason to its Empire over the sensitive Nature, that it may
govern that; and the restoring Religion, and Love to God, to its Place and
Power, that he may govern us. While the former is not done, we remain sunk into
the low Level, with the Inferior Creatures; and till the latter be effected, we
are ranked with the Apostate Creatures, that first fell from God. The Sensualty
of Brutes, and the Enmity of Devils, rising, and springing up observably among
us, import the directest Hostility, against the Redeemer's Design. And them
that bid this open Defiance to Him, he has every Moment at his Mercy!

In the mean time, Is this Emmanuel 's Land? His Right in us he will not
disclaim. And because he claims it, we may expect him to vindicate hims^l^. His
present Patience, we are to ascribe to the Wisdom, and Greatness of an
All-comprehending Mind. He counts not an heap of impotent Worms his Match! But
when the Besom of Destruction comes, one stroke of it will sweep away
Multitudes. Then Contempt will be Answered with Contempt. They cannot express
higher, than to oppose and militate against a Religion, introduced and brought
into the World by so Clear, Divine Light, Luster and Glory, not by Arguments,
but by Jeasts! O that we could but see their Arguments, to dispute those Keys,
out of his Hands that holds them! But do they think to laugh away the Power of
the Son of God? He also will laugh at their Calamity, etc. Prove. 1. or expose
them to the Laughter of Men wiser than they, Psalm. 52.5, 6. It Is little wit to
despise what they cannot disprove. When we find a connection between Death, and
Judgment, how will they contrive to dis-joyn them? They will be as little able
to disprove the one, as withstand the other.

But a great residue, it is to be hoped, our Blessed Redeemer will, in due time,
conquer in the most merciful way* inspiring them with Divine Wisdom, and Love,
detecting their Errors, mollifying their hardness, subduing their enmity,
making them gladly submit to his easy Yoke, and light Burden. He is, before
the World end, to have a numerous Seed, and we are not to despair of their
rising up more abundantly than hitherto among our selves, so as no Man shall be
therefore ashamed to be thought a serious Christian, because it is an
unfashionable, or an ungenteel thing.

Then will honor be acquired, by living as one that believes a Life to come,
and expects to live for ever, as Devoted ones, to the Ruler of both Worlds, and
Candidates for a blessed Immortality, under his Dominion. Nor will any Man
covet to leave a better Name behind him, here, or a more honorable Memorial of
himself, than by having lived an holy, virtuous Life. It signifies not nothing,
with the many, to be remembered when they are gone. Therefore is this Trust wont
to be committed to Marbles, and Monumental Stones. Some have been so wise, to
prefer a remembrance among them that were so, from their having lived to some
valuable purpose. When Rome abounded with Statues, and Memorative Oblisks, Cato
forbad any to be set up for him, because (he said) he had rather it should be
asked, why had he not one? Pl^tarch de gerun^. (...).
than why he had?

What a balmy Memory will one Generation leave to another, when the savor of
the Knowledge of Christ shall be diffused in every place! 2 Cor. 2.14. and
every thing be counted as dross and dung, that is in any competition with the
excellency of that Knowledge; when that shall overflow the World, and one Age
praise his Mighty Works, and proclaim his Power and Greatness to the next. And
the Branches of Religious Families, whether sooner or later transplanted, shall
leave an odor, when they are cut off, that shall demonstrate their nearer
Union, with the true Vine, or speak their relation to the Tree of Life, whose
Leaves are for the healing of the Nations, even those that were deciduous, and
have dropped off, may (without straining a borrowed expression) signify somewhat
toward this purpose.

4. From both the mentioned Subjects, Good Parents may learn, to do God, and
their Redeemer, all the service they can, and have opportunity for, in their
own time; without reckoning too much upon what shall be done, by a
welleducated, hopeful Son, after they are gone, unless the like dispensation
could be pleaded unto that which God gave to David, to reserve the Building of
the Temple to his Son Solomon, which without as express a revelation, no Man
can pretend. The Great Keeper of these Keys, may cross such purposes; and
without excusing the Father, dismiss the Son, first. But his Judgments are a
great deep, too deep for our Line. And his Mercy is in the Heavens, Psalm. 36.
extending from everlasting to everlasting, upon them that fear him: and his
Righteousness unto Childrens Children, Psalm. 103.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, the lower
End of Cheapside, near Mercers-Chapel.
Books Written by the Reverend Mr. J. How.
OF Thoughtfulness for the Morrow. With an Appendix concerning the immoderate
Desire of foreknowing things to come.

Of Charity in reference to other Men's sins.

The Redeemer's Tears wept over lost Soul^; in a Treatise on Luke 19.41, 42.
With an Appendix, wherein somewhat is occasionally discoursed concerning the
Sin against the Holy Ghost, and how God is said to will the Salvation of them
that perish.

A Sermon directing what we are to do after a strict Enquiry, Whether or no we
truly love God.

A Funeral Sermon for Mrs. Esther Sampson, the late Wife of Hen. Sampson, Dr.
of Physic, who died Nov. 24. 1689.

The Carnality of Religious Contention. In two Sermons, preached at the
Merchants Lecture in Broadstreet.

A Calm and Sober Enquiry, concerning the possibility of a Trinity in the
Godhead.

A Letter to a Friend, concerning a Postscript to the Defense of Dr. Sherlock's
Notion of the Trinity in Unity, relating to the Calm and Sober Enquiry upon the
same Subject.

A View o^ that Part of the late Considerations addressed to H. H. about the
Trinity: Which concerns the Sober Enquiry on that Subject.

A Sermon preached on the late Day of Thanksgiving, December. 2. 1697. To which
is prefixed Dr. Bates's Congratulatory Speech to the King.

A Sermon for Reformation of Manners.

Books Written by J. Flavel.
THE Fountain of Life opened, or a Display of Christ in his Essential and
Mediatorial Glory. Containing Forty Two Sermons on various Texts. Wherein the
Impetration of our Redemption by Jesus Christ is orderly unfolded, as it was
begun, carried on, and finished by his Covenant Transaction, Mysterious
Incarnation, Solemn Call and Dedication, Blessed Offices, Deep Abasement, and
Supereminent Advancement.

A Treatise of the Soul of Man, wherein the Divine Original, Excellent and
Immortal Nature of the Soul are opened; its Love and Inclination to the Body,
with the Necessity of its Separation from it, considered and improved. The
Existence, Operations and States of separated Souls both in Heaven and Hell
imm^diately after Death, ass^rted, discussed and variously applied. Diverse
knotty and difficult Questions about departed Souls both Philosophical and
Theological, stated and determined.

The Method of Grace in bringing Home the Eternal Redemption, contrived by the
Father, and accomplished by the Son, through the Effectual Application of the
Spirit unto God's Elect, being the second Part of Gospel Redemption.

The Divine Conduct, or Mystery of Providence, its Being and Efficacy asserted
and vindicated: All the Methods of Providence in our Course of Life opened,
with Directions how to apply and improve them.

Navigation spiritualized: O^, A New Compass for Seamen, Consisting of Thirty
Two Points of pleasant Observations, profi^able Applications, serious
Reflections, all concluded with so many spiritual Poems, etc.

Two Treatises, the first of Fear, the second, the Righteous Man's Refuge in
the evil Day.

A Saint indeed: The great Work of a Christian.

A Touchstone of Sincerity: Or, Signs of Grace and Symptoms of Hypocrisy;
being the second Part of the Saint indeed.

A Token for Mourners: Or, Boundaries for Sorrow for the Death of Friends.

Husbandry spiritualized: Or, The Heavenly Use of Earthly Things.

FINIS.

