A Twofold Vindication OF THE Late Archbishop of Canterbury, And of the Author
of The History of Religion.

The first Part defending the said Author against the Defamations of Mr. Fr.
Atterbury's Sermon, and both those eminent Persons against a Traitorous Libel,
titled, The Charge of Socinianism against Dr. Tillotson considered.

In two Letters to the Honorable Sir R. H.

The second containing Remarks on the said Sermon, and a Reply to the same
Libel.

Wherein some Right is done to that great and good Man Dr. Tillotson, in the
Points of the Original of Sacrifices, the Sacrifice of Christ, Future
Punishments, etc.

And a word in Defense of the Eminent Bishop of Salisbury.

By another Hand.

London, Printed in the Year 1696.

SIR,
I Have received by your favor some Papers written by two very Learned
Persons, which you say are ready for the Press, occasioned by two extraordinary
angry Men, Mr. Atterbury and Mr. Monroe, who have expressed their Displeasure
against my History of Religion. I dare not give my Opinion of their Writings, I
am too much an obliged Party; besides, their own Abilities will much better
show it than I can express it: but I fancy, that if Mr. Atterbury and Mr.
Monroe had imagined they should have raised such a Strength against them, they
would hardly have mustered up their own weak Forces.

For Mr. Atterbury, I know him not, but he has made himself known by choosing a
very improper place (the Pulpit) to vent a Passion unsuitable to Christianity,
or common Morality; for such must an injurious Violence be esteemed, that has
no Reason pretended to excuse, or at least to extenuate the Passion: From that
place we expect to be taught by Persuasion, not by Railing; yet he seems to
have a Christian Consideration that hinders him from writing some Body's Life;
if he means mine, I will free him from his tender Christianity, and own that I
writ the History of Religion; and if he pleases to use the freedom I give him,
I assure him I shall not be displeased at any Truth that he can write: but if
his usual Passion guides him other-ways, I shall attend him with such Answers,
and make him such suitable Returns, as will be proper for the occasion, and
consider his Calling with as little respect as he did the sacred Place where he
chose to rail.

For Mr. Monroe he is angry at every thing, he sputters at the Government, and
will not allow that most excellent Man Dr. Tillotson, late Archbishop of
Canterbury, either to have a Title to that, or any Parts or Abilities; but at a
venture, among many other Errors, charges him to be a Socinian, and at the same
time discovers he does not know what a Socinian is; then falls upon the Bishop
of Salisbury, and then with an obliging Anger ranks me with those great Men:
but his furious Wildness is sufficiently laid open by these two Learned Men.

When I writ the History of Religion, I was very much pleased to see the Church
of England (which I have fought for, and shall ever defend) so free from all
those Heathenish Rites and Superstitions, retained by the Priestcraft of the
Church of Rome, and could not but admire to see any that professed to be a
Minister of the Church of England offended at it; nor can I imagine any Reason
for such a Concern, unless they would have the very Name of Priest of what
Persuasion so ever, so sacred that it should not be irreverently handled: if
this should be the cause, I dare venture to assure them they will find no
return, for could any write with such a Disadvantage to the Ministers of the
Church of England, the Popish Priests would not show any Displeasure to see
them condemned here, that they pretend to believe will be damned hereafter.

But Mr. Monroe seems to grumble something about Sacrifices, as if I had writ
concerning the Original of them. I could not be so dull as not to know the
beginning of them was as early as Abel, I only traced the use of them, with the
Rites and superstitious Ceremonies taught and enlarged from time to time by the
Heathen Priests, and how they were still continued and imitated by the
Priestcraft of the Church of Rome, which I thought I had made evident by
Matter of Fact. A Friend of mine, of Quality and Learning, told me, he asked a
Minister why he was displeased at the History of Religion? he answered, that
they were whipped upon the Backs of the Romish Priests; I could not but wonder
how they got up there to receive the Lashes of the others.

I believe that there are some so in love with Power, that they were displeased
I inveighed against Persecution, by which they exercise it: if that offend any,
I shall always persist in receiving their Displeasure; for I presume I have
clearly showed that it is contrary to the teaching of the Gospel; we are there
taught to love our Neighbors as our selves, and certainly they would hardly
seem such Neighbors that would be Executioners; they would not seem to love
others as themselves, unless they were equally desirous to be their own Hangmen.

But Mr. Monroe is yet more severe, and will be the Judge of what I mean; for
being displeased, as it seems, that I writ against Transubstantiation, he says
I meant it against the Trinity, though I had not a thought, nor writ a word
that could give him the least cause to pronounce so rash a Sentence. I remember
a Justice of Peace in a Play that bid his Clerk make the Mittimus while he
examined the Party; but of all Men living I would not have him my Arbitrary
Judge, for he that makes himself worse than others, would probably condemn me to
be worse than I am.

But I leave these two angry Men to the Correction of those two Learned
Persons, to whom (as in Gratitude I ought) I shall ever acknowledge great
Obligations, by whose Strength my Weakness is sufficiently supported: I shall
only add, that I have read of a wise Philosopher that would not trust himself
while he was in Passion; but these reversed Philosophers raise all their
Confidence from their Passions. I have seen an angry Cur bite at a Wheel
because it moved from him; and I presume that dark keeping is the cause of such
a causeless Fierceness.

At the latter end of one of these Learned Men's Writings, I find a very
charitable Answer for me to Dr. Sherlock, who in his Defense of that excellent
Man Dr. Tillotson, late Archbishop of Canterbury, (in answer to The Charge of
Socinianism against Dr. Tillotson considered) is pleased, unprovoked by any
Cause, to call my History of Religion an execrable Pamphlet, and me an Atheist
or Deist, which it seems is all one to him, for he says, it matters not which,
and that my Design is to ridicule Christian Religion. If these heavy Charges be
true, I readily confess it is an execrable Pamphlet indeed; but he is not
pleased to give the least reason to excuse or justify so much undeserved
Bitterness: if it be Dr. Sherlock's, as generally believed, I will not venture
to pretend to cope with him in harsh and virulent Expressions, he is more
furnished than I am with Ammunition proper for such a War, witness the Muster
of his angry Forces in that learned Book which charges him with Tritheism; but
I hope he will not be displeased if with an unmoved Temper I endeavor to: free
my self from such uncharitable Imputations. But of all Men living, the Doctor
seems to me the most improper Man to charge any one with ridiculing Religion,
and not accompany his Charge with the least Cause or Reason for it, since he is
not only indicted for it, but the Indictment made good upon him; if the Proof
of Idolatry, Impious and Heretical Opinions can do it, and the Charge made out
by a Doctor of the Church of England, a Man of most extraordinary Learning and
Parts, with strong Reason and Authority, and for ought I can see to the
contrary, very unanswerable by Mr. Dean; and not only charges him for his
public Writings, but for his private Practice, if no regard of Conscience can
ridicule Religion. This is set forth by that most Learned Person in his
Animadversions on Dr. Sherlock's Book, entitled, A Vindication of the holy and
ever blessed Trinity, which charges him with Tritheism, tho Mr. Dean is pleased
most peremptorily to declare that he has made his Notions plain and obvious,
tho by Words and Phrases neither obvious nor plain: but the Charge is made out
upon him with strength of Reason and Learning; neither of which Dr. Sherlock is
pleased to bestow on me for his severe Judgment, perhaps he believes (as indeed
he may) that his only pronouncing makes it as obvious and plain, as his
endeavoring to prove it would have been.

The Charge of ridiculing Religion in his own Practice, arises from his seeming
Contempt of Conscience, one of the chief Rules of Christianity, by professing
he would suffer Martyrdom rather than take the Oaths; but he was easily
converted when Interest more prevailed upon him than such a slighted part of
Christianity; nor stopped there, but ridiculed Providence it self, to bring it in
Aid to justify his contradictory Consciences: for what can more appear the
ridiculing of Providence, than to endeavor to make it the Justifier of
Mischief and Injustice, if but successful enough? But if the Doctor can make
this good, he will reach a more sublime Art of Priestcraft, than any that I
have described in the History of Religion. But it may be he does not believe
that I ridicule the Christian Religion comprehended in the Gospel, but the
Religion which he calls Christian, that differs from the Gospel, and is founded
upon new and extravagant Notions; for he is charged with Blasphemy by the same
Learned Person, in his Book of the Knowledge of Christ; on such a Religion I
confess if I had the Art of ridiculing, I would willingly bestow it.

But since he is not pleased to give the least reason for his hard and
uncharitable Censures cast upon me at a venture, I will take the opportunity to
refer it to any impartial Reader, if he pleases to examine it, whether I have
not in my History of Religion pursued the blessed Rules and Precepts of the
Gospel with a sacred Veneration, and upon that strong and sure Foundation have
endeavored to build all my Reasons and Arguments: but the Doctor perhaps would
have his Notions received as true Christian Religion, tho not founded on the
Gospel; and consequently not to believe those dark Notions, is to ridicule
Christianity.

With the same passionate Liberty he calls me a Deist or an Atheist, it matters
not which. I cannot imagine how any Man should venture to pronounce such a
blasphemous Indifferency: but seriously reflecting upon what the Doctor has
writ, I began to imagine that he had so fully and clearly convinced himself,
(since he thought he had made it so plain to others) that there were three
distinct equal and Infinite Beings; that consequently he presumed if any did
not believe in three Gods, it mattered not whether they believed any at all;
and if his Notion of three Gods equally Infinite and Almighty were true, it
seems to follow, that he that does not believe the three, must be guilty of
Atheism, tho he believes in one. By this he seems to have reason to make Deism
and Atheism of equal respect: So that every one is concluded an Atheist that is
not of the Doctor's Opinion. This adventurous Passion can only proceed from the
Opinion of his own Infallibility, and is angry at any that will not believe in
him.

I know not what Answer to make to his downright calling Names, there is no
Argument can arise from direct railing, and such in the common Method of the
World are replied to with nothing but Blows; but I shall only say that he calls
me what I am not, and to wave the harsh word which is due to him, I shall only
add, that what I say is true, and leave the contrary to rest upon him.

I will conclude with one Assurance, that I shall not take it ill of any one
that shall offer Reasons unclogg'd with Passion against any thing I have writ;
and if I cannot clearly answer them, I will submit and acknowledge my Error; and
that any one may have the freer Invitation, I own that the History of Religion
was writ by,

SIR, Your true Friend, and most humble Servant, To. Howard.

A VINDICATION OF His Grace, the (late) Archbishop OF CANTERBVRY; And of the
(Honorable) Author of The History of Religion:

From the Defamations and Scandals of Mr. Fr. Atterbury; and of a (Traitorous)
Libel supposed to be written by Dr. M -- roe, with this Title, The Charge of
Socinianism against Dr. Tillotson considered, etc.

In two Letters to the (Honorable) Author of The History of Religion.

Printed in the Year, 1696.

TO THE PUBLISHER.
SIR,
I Hear, my Letters to our honorable Friend, the Author of the History of
Religion, are in your Hands; and that you have thoughts of putting them into
the Press: if so, I pray, let this to your self go along with them. For I ought
to inform you: that I have received an Answer from our Friend, concerning the
great Favors, and Liberalities of King James to him. He avows, that His
Majesty, both when he was King, and while he was only Duke of York, never did
him any Favor, nor made him the Offer of any: but on the contrary, showed to
him all the Unkindness, that Occasion and Opportunity (at any time) enabled him
to express.

It appears then, that the Libeller, knowing the great Services of our Friend
to the Crown and Royal Family, took it for granted; that King James had
endeavored to win him, to the Popish and Arbitrary Interest, by Preforments
and Liberalities: and so (at adventures) he makes it one part of his Guilt and
Naughtiness; that he would not be bought by Favors, the meaning of which he
might so easily guess at. But had his Majesty been as bountiful, as the
Libeller supposed; Why might not our Friend have taken those Favors, either as
part of the Reward, due to his Services; or as His Majesty's Royal Munificence,
to Wit and distinguishing Abilities: Why was he obliged to understand them, as
Bribes and Corruptions, as the Libeller would have them interpreted? This
Ungrateful Man, says our Popish Accuser, forgot all the King's Bounties to him,
and was with the most forward in turning him out. Let us grant to a Fool both
his Lies; yet where (however) is the Ungratitude, when never any thing was
given to our Friend by the Royal Family, which he might not most justly put to
the account either of his Services, or his Abilities?

But King James, Father Petre, and the Nuncio, knew better things, than to
fling away their Money on a Person, whom his Virtue, more than his Fortunes,
had set so much above the reach of Bribes: they were for a contrary method, to
Brow-beat, and Mortify him by Oppositions. But neither would this do, he
remained the same to his Religion and Country, as he was to the Crown and Royal
Family, when they were attacked by the Republican Faction: that is, he was
(Heroically) firm to both, while they were the weaker side, without seeking
afterward from either, the Rewards of his Merit to them. You and I, Sir, have
nothing so much valued by us, as the Friendship and Esteem of a Fortitude,
Constancy, and Virtue so extraordinary; nor any thing that we desire so much,
as the long Life and Prosperity of a Friend, whom with so much reason we value
and love. This is all that I need now to say, saving that I am, with the
greatest Respect,

Your most Obliged, and Assured Friend, N. S.

The First LETTER; Being Reflections on a Sermon, preached before her (late)
most Excellent Majesty, on these words of Solomon, The Scorner seeks Wisdom,
and finds it not: By Francis Atterbury, Student in Christ-Church, Oxford.
To the Honorable and Learned Author of The History of Religion. SIR,
AS I had the Honor, to see The History of Religion, before you gave way, that
it should go to the Press: So I cannot but wonder, that any should be so
rouzed, and even affrighted and scared, by a Book, which seemed to me, not only
true and useful, happily thought and as well expressed, but also altogether
inoffensive to every true Lover of (a sincere undisguised) Piety and Morality.
I deny not, that when I began to read the Book; the Term Priestcraft, there
often used, and the Instances you give of it, made me a while doubtful, what
might be the Author's Aim; whether he might not (at length) stretch his Notion
of Priestcraft, not only to the impious Frauds of Pagan Priests, and the pious
Frauds (as you civilly call them) of some Christian Priests, but even to all
Revealed Religion, as if it were an Imposture that has depraved, rather than
explained and enforced Natural Religion, that new Mistress of many of our
Modern Wits. But when I had gone over the whole, with such an Attention, as I
thought was due to the Subject treated of; and of the Conceptions and
Observations of an Author, whose Pen had always hitherto been successful: I
perceived, to my great Satisfaction, that the Thoughts in the Book had been
conceived in the last Reign; and by occasion of the danger we were in, from
Popery. You draw a Parallel, between the Pagan and the Romish-Priests: you are
so impious as to think, nay to say and publish it to the World, that a Popish
Priest is as errant a Knave, as Cato thought the (old) Roman Augurs: you even
dare to add, that their Sin and Guilt is greater, because the latter had not a
Rule to direct them, but the other act against a most plain Rule ( a directing
Gospel, as you speak) merely for Profit. You give so many, and so pertinent
Instances of this, that had you published your Book in the last Reigns, when it
was thought and written, you had been enrolled among our Confessors: but now
that the Danger is past, and the Church's turn is served by you, and (the few)
such as you are; Mr. Atterbury is for putting you into the Seat of Scorners.

After you had finished the Scenes, in which you expose, first Rome-Pagan, then
Rome-Antichristan; you are so unlucky, as to drop some words against
Persecution; and also to advise the contending Parties of Christians, that,
Setting aside their Wranglings about obscure and undecidable Questions and
Mysteries; they would consider the Gospel as a Doctrine (chiefly) of Love,
Mercy and Charity, and behave themselves accordingly toward one another. Haec
tetigit Gradive tous urtica Nepotes: this (envenomed) Sting in the Tail of your
Book, has so wounded Mr. Atterbury; that he could not forbear running up
(immediately) into his Pulpit, to tell (no less Persons than) the Queen of
England, and her whole Court, what kind of Man you are. See here, what
Characters he has given you. He is so possessed with the Notion of pious Frauds
and Priestcraft, as to apply it (indifferently) to all Religions, and to every
thing in Religion. Bless me, and deliver me, from the Malevolence of a Student!
as he writes himself. But choleric and revengeful Men, commonly wound
themselves most, when they are endeavoring to wound others: here is a Book
written against Popery, and Persecution; Mr. Atterbury is so angry at it, that
he cries out, Men of Israel, help, here is a damnable Book written against all
Religion, and every thing in Religion. That is, he owns no Religion, nor any
thing as part of Religion, but only Popery and Persecution. Truly, he has been
a Student at Christ-Church so long, to good purpose: but was it necessary, he
should vomit up such a secret, before the Queen, and the Court of England;
might it not have been better whispered, among his Jacobite Friends? But her
Majesty was pestered with too many such Chaplains: Men that cannot abide to
hear, I do not say, our holy Father the Pope, or the sacred College, but not a
Romish Priest, spoken disrespectfully of.

At Page 16. he suggests the writing the History of your Life, in revenge for
your History of Religion. He is (surely) a pleasant Man; he would write the
History of an Anonymous, or nameless Author; that is, of one he does not know.
But as before he told us his Religion, Persecution and Popery; so here he lets
us know his Wit and Honesty: he would write, he says, of he knows not whom, and
he cares not what, provided it be black enough. For that is the (only possible)
meaning, of writing a Life in Revenge.

But if his blind Rage will permit a third Person, to interpose between him and
the Author of the History of Religion; I entreat him, that when he writes, I
may furnish him with some Memorials: better, I assure him, than Malice, and
Ignorance of his Adversary, will ever minister to him. I can tell him, that
(the sad Man) the Author of the History of Religion, has a good degree of
Charity to the Poor, and as great of the Virtue of Liberality to the Learned: I
can inform him, of your Compositions to the Theater, which made your younger
Years so famous; and of the (unanswerable) Defenses you have since made for the
Nation's Rights against Arbitrary Power and Tyranny. I dare not, I confess,
tell him of your Posts of Trust and Honor: for he will be unreconcileably
alienated, when he knows, that to all your other Naughtiness, you are a
Williamite too.

He takes for his Text, the words of Solomon, Prove. 14.6. A Scorner seeks
Wisdom, and finds it not. From hence he would raise an Invective, a Sermon he
calls it, against you, and the History of Religion. A Man would wonder, how
this Text should make for Popery and Persecution; or against the Patrons of
Sincerity, and Liberty, in Religion. But what is there, so remote, or hid from
others, that a Student cannot discover it? Father Atterbury is able, I doubt
not, to prove from this Text, or to disprove any Proposition in Euclid. For
Students do not hold themselves obliged, to reason accurately and closely, as
other (common) Men must; but by leaping over some (intervening) unsuitable
Propositions, may skip from Tumult to King Pipin, or what is as good, from
Historian to Scorner. Yet methinks, since this Gentleman had a mind to declaim
(before the Queen) against the History of Popish Jugglers and Cheats, he should
have shown his Zeal in some other way, rather than in a Sermon, or from a Text
of Holy Scripture: for of all Abominations, there is none so detestable; as to
wire-draw, wind, and bow the sacred Text, to argue against it self; that is, to
patronize Impostures and Deceits.

In the Prosecution of his Text, so pat (as every one sees) to his purpose; he
falls to considering, what may be the Reasons, why the Scorner seeks Wisdom,
and finds it not. One of the Reasons he offers is very mavelous; it is
this, because the Scorner (says he, page 12.) is a Man of quick and lively
Parts. Such Men (says he further, there) are apt to give themselves a Loose,
beyond plain Reason and common Sense. I know not, I confess, what he means; nor
(I believe) can all the Students of Christ-Church, interpret it to me. But be
that as it will; the thing he aims at, in that whole Page, is, that quick and
lively Parts are mavelous Hindrances, in the Quest of Wisdom and Truth;
according to him, the only hopeful Candidate of Wisdom, is a Sancho Pancha.

But it will not yet go out of my Mind, nor can I keep my Eye off it; that a
Court-Chaplain should have so little Government with him, that, so soon as he
had read a Book against Popery and Persecution, he should from the Pulpit and
in the Royal Presence, attack the Author in such Terms as these: He has written
the History of Religion, and were I not withheld by Religion, I would write his
History. What! is it such an Offense, at this time of day, to write a few
Sheets against Popery; that no Person of Honor must put Pen to Paper, on that
Subject, on pain of being libelled by her Majesty's Chaplain, for that is the
unquestionable Meaning of writing his Life? But he is withheld, he says, from
writing this Life, by Religion. By what Religion, Sir? Would you have us to
think, after you have defamed him in such Language as this, and to such an
Auditory, it is from Conscience, and Love of your Brother, that you do not libel
him to the (unsignificant) Rabble? It is evident then, that you have
(hypocritically) feigned a religious Tenderness; to which you are an utter
Stranger: must we be obliged to call it your Religion, your Charity, and
Tenderness, that you are content not to write his Life to the common Herd; when
you have actually pointed at him, in a sacred Place and Exercise, in the
Presence of the Prince, and most illustrious Personages of the Kingdom? And for
whom is it, that you counterfeit this pious Tenderness? For an Anonymous
Writer, for one you do not know. For as to Report, and the Whispers of those
sagacious Men, who so certainly know all Authors, they are so often mistaken:
that, except it be here and there a Student, no body heeds them; or rather,
every Body abhors them.

I am amazed, that any Man (especially a Man of Learning and Wit) should utter
so many Follies, and Contradictions, in a Pulpit: and also oversee them all
again, when he prepared his Notes for the Press.

For Instance.

He asperses an honorable Person, in the very highest degree, in the Royal
Presence: and yet it is mere Religion, he says, that withholds him, from writing
his Life to the common People. That is, he has swallowed the Camel, and is now
grievously straining at the Gnat. Again,

He has an Inclination to libel (or as he calls it, write the Life of) the
Author of the History of Religion: and yet this Author is nameless; that is,
utterly unknown to Father Atterbury, and his whole Fraternity.

Again; He says, this Book is directed against all Religion, and every thing
in Religion: and yet the very design of the Book, is this; that ' it is a shame,
that so many have had no Religion but their Belly and their Profit; and a Pity,
that others are persecuted only for Religion, and Conscience toward God. Once
more,

He says; that the thing which the Scorner seeks for, is Wisdom: and yet he
adds; he finds it not, because he has quick and lively Parts. That is,
according to this Student; the Scorner seeks, for what he has: and he misses
it, because he possesses it. It is well, that the Student's Sermons are so
short, as they always (I observe) are: for these are such flat and direct
Contradictions; that if there were many of them, they would too much expose the
Preacher, to the Contempt of his (very meanest) Hearers.

I have done with Father Francis, for the present; only this, Sir, I shall
promise you: that when he is disposed to try his Hand in writing Lives; he
shall have the Satisfaction, to see his own Picture, drawn in such lively
Colors, as Time shall not easily deface.

Sir, I think, I shall not need to mind you; that you ought not to be in the
least disturbed, at the Sawciness of an obscure Academick. For being bred, as
they are, among mean Companions; and comparing themselves only with
Under-graduates, Servitors, and Gippoes: when they first appear abroad in the
World, the poor Wretches always make themselves ridiculous, by not knowing
themselves, and their Rank in the World. They think, that all Mankind has that
Reverence for them; which their Sizers, and College-Servants, are forced to
show them: and from hence, when they get into the wooden Box, instead of (the
Apostolical) Reprove and Exhort; they fall to (Porterly) Reproach and
Scandalize.

On the contrary; I doubt not, you will always be pleased and happy, in the
Recollection of the immortal Services; which you have done the Royal Family,
the Monarchy, the Liberties of the Nation, the Commonwealth of Learning,
particularly Learned Men; and that nothing may escape your Influences, to the
calamitous and poor. I promise my self, that you will not lay Father
Atterbury's want of Honesty, good Sense and Government, against such Advantages
as these: but rather you will be mindful to give Thanks to God, who has lifted
you (by favorable Providence) so much above the (unheeded) Reproaches, of an
unfinished Pulpiteer.

Sir, I am your most obliged, most assured, and most humble Servant, N. S.
April 3. 95.
The Second LETTER, In Answer to, The Charge of Socinianism, against Dr.
Tillotson, considered; and to the Appendix, concerning the History of Religion.
SIR,
SInce my last, here is another weak Brother that has taken Offense, at The
History of Religion.

I confess, I wish the History had gone to the Press, with that Title, which
your self (in the Manuscript Copy) gave it; The History of Religion, as it has
been abused by Priestcraft. The words, as it has been abused by Priestcraft,
might have prevented some Peoples Mistakes: who now seeing in the Title Page
The History of Religion; and meeting with little in the Book it self, but an
Account of the various Perversions of Religion by (Pagan and Popish)
Priestcraft; they infer, that by Religion the Author means even all Religion.
The Publishers of your Book feared, it should seem; that if Priestcraft were
not left out of the Title of your Book; it would raise such a Jealousy in those
for whose Use and Good the Book is designed: that they would never suffer
themselves to be undeceived; that is, they would never read it, and thereby be
informed of the Abuses put on them, by Impostors pretending to Religion. Either
way, the Book was like to be mistaken; but the Publishers (who put it forth, I
may add that also, against your Inclination, because you thought it now not so
necessary or seasonable) judged it not advisable, to give occasion of Offense
in the very Title. But (as I said) it appears by the Event; that it had been
better to keep the Title, given to his Book by the Author himself: for all your
Maligners (that have hitherto appeared) seem to be misled by the present Title.
Because the Title is The History of Religion; and the Book is only an
Exemplification of the Corruptions and Abuses thereof, by some wicked Priests:
therefore they cry out, it is written against Religion, and the Sacerdotal
Function. But jacta est alea; it is now too late, to recall the oversight of the
Title: we must be content, to examine what your Opposers have to object to the
Book.

Enough (I think) has been said to Mr. Atterbury; you are now attacked by one
who does not put his Name to his Book; but the Title of it, is this. The Charge
of Socinianism, against Dr. Tillotson, considered: with a Supplement, by
occasion of an History of Religion. In the former Part, that against Dr.
Tillotson, late Archbishop of Canterbury; our Author pretends at p. 10. that
the Archbishop's Design in publishing his four Sermons against the Socinians
was, only that he might be soundly answered by them: and further, that they and
the Archbishop play booty, into one another hands. Page 9. He adds, The
Archbishop printed his Sermons, and procured the Recommendation of them by the
Court, that he might serve the Socinians, and more reconcile Men to their
Principles. But lest the Confederacy between him and the Socinians should be
discovered, they agree, (says our Author) like Counsel at the Bar; to fall
foul (sometimes) on one another, and even to scold and call hard Names: which
to wise Observers (says he again) serves only to discover so much the more
their Hypocrisy and Deceit.

But it is the least part of his Charge against the Archbishop, that he is a
Socinian; and wrote only to oblige them, and to betray the Cause into their
hands: for he says, page 13. Dr. Tillotson is owned by all the Atheistical Wits
of England, as their true Primate and Apostle; in him they glory and rejoice,
and make their Boasts of him. He leads them, not only the whole length of
Socinianism; they are slender Beaux who have got no further; but to call in
question all Revelation. He sums up almost his whole Charge against the
Archbishop, at page 32, and 33. in these words. He exceeds the Theistical
Juncto, in the Barbarous Accounts he gives of the Rise of Christian Religion:
for they make it to be only the Invention of wicked Men, and of Devils; he
makes it to be a mean Compliance with those Inventions, of Devils and wicked
Men. He contends, that all Revealed Religion is good for nothing, but only to
preserve outward Peace, in this World. It Is a Maxim with him, that a Mother's
suckling her own Children, is of more necessary and indispensible Obligation;
than to believe in Christ. He disputes openly, and professedly, against the
Satisfaction by Christ: and according to him, not only the Eternity, but the
Being of Hell, is a precarious Supposition. To add now no more; he he says at
p. 16. that a plain and downright Hobbism appears in the Archbishop's Sermons;
and that the same Thread runs through all his Works. Besides these (as every one
knows, most false) Imputations on the Archbishop's Books and Doctrine; our
Author speaks of his Person, with like Malevolence and Contempt: he never calls
him Archbishop, but Dr. Till. or Jo. Cant, or such like. And he concludes his
whole Performance, with an Address to the Clergy and People; to separate from
this, and some other Heretical and Impious Bishops: He assures them, that by
the Canons of the Catholic Church, they not may, but ought to separate; and
that it is not Schism, to depart from those Guides, who corrupt Religion by
their Heresies.

After these Compliments to the Archbishop; our famous Author (for his Book
will certainly make him so) proceeds to sprinkle his Flowers, upon you. At
first, he is much in doubt, whether the Archbishop was not Author of The
History of Religion: but that Doubt he soon dismisses; and he resolves, that it
is written by Sir R. H -- d. I suppose, for no other reason; but that he
thought fit, to divide the nauseous Load of his Stomach, between two: it would
have seemed too malevolent and implacable, to discharge it all, upon one Man.
Besides, as it is one of the Delights (as well as Undecencies) of excessive
Anger and Malice; to repeat the same Charges and Reproaches, over and over: if
our Author had wrote but against one, he had missed the Satisfaction of easing
his Mind by re-iterating his Scandals; and saying again and again the same lewd
and mad things.

When the most learned Writer had fixed in his Mind upon an Author, for the
History of Religion; tho he is content it should not be the Archbishop
himself, yet of necessity it must be one of his Grace's Disciples and
Proselytes. And for this most (dangerous) Charge, I confess (Sir) your self
gave occasion enough, in your Book: by the respectful mention you make of his
Grace; and by your quoting, and (most wickedly) applauding some Passages of his
Sermons, which recommend a pacifick Temper and Carriage, as the greatest and
surest Argument of a right Christian.

But here, before we go farther, it will be proper and useful; seeing our
(immortal) Author has been so careful, to discover the (Heretical and
Blasphemous) Writer of the History of Pagan and Popish Cheats in Religion, for
you meddle with no other; to inquire, and (if we can) to ascertain our
Conjecture, who it is that is thus greatly concerned and angry at their
Detection: and whether I rightly guess at the Man, or no; yet I shall not fail
(I think) to give his true Character, both as to his Honesty, Principles and
Abilities.

The Vogue of the Town lays this Libel, to a certain Jacobite Club; others
again to a late Dean, who has quitted his Deanery, because he would not take the
Oaths that are required, since his present Majesty was declared King. I do not
believe, it was written by a Club; for this, in my Opinion, incontestable
Reason: that whereas it consists of three Parts, and (were it not printed in an
extreme small Character) would be a bulky Book, yet the whole is very uniform;
the Language, Thoughts, Theology, are throughout the same, every where of a
piece. As to the Dean, having read his former Works, to which his Name is
affixed; I dare to discharge him wholly, from having the least hand in, or
liking of, this (equally silly and wicked) Trifle. The Dean writes after
another manner, Elegantly, Judiciously, Learnedly; I doubt not, he is a much
better Man, than so much as to approve the (shameless) Falsifications and
Scandals, that appear here in every Paragraph. No, no, the Author came from
beyond Tweed, if not beyond the Tay: the many Northern Improprieties and
Barbarisms (both in the Phrase, and the writing particular Words) never used by
any Englishman; and the Calvinism, or rather the Knoxism, in the whole; are
manifest Indications that our Author is a Scot. Nor has Dr. M -- roe been able
to keep his own Secret: it is got abroad among a great many, that this late
Professor in one of the Scotch Universities, and a Bishop Elect, is the Man
that has thought himself qualified, to censure the Doctrine of an Archbishop
of Canterbury; and to encounter with the (Great) Author of the History of
Religion.

That he is a Scot, I prove (I say) first, by the Northern Improprieties and
Solecisms (as well in the writing of particular Words, as in the Phrase) which
abound in every Page of this Pamphlet: I believe, Sir, you will be of my Mind;
if you cast your Eye but on a few of them.

For Positive, he always writes Possitive.

For Estimation, our Highland Aristarchus says Esteemation; and never other
ways.

When you say Innoscence, the most Learned Professor takes it to be Innocence:
and hereupon commits I know not how many Blunders; and vents his Follies as
fast, as elsewhere his Malice.

Then, for his Phrase, or improper Application of Words, and Proverbial
Expressions; his Elegances are such as these. The Man above-told. The Reasons
above-told. Barbarous Notion of the Christian Religion. Barbarous Account of
the Rise of the Christian Religion. It makes all my Flesh to creep. No
Englishman ever writes so, or uses these words in that sense, or that order.

His Theology too, as I observed before, is Knox all over. For tho the Scotch
Divines of the Episcopal Party, forsook Mr. Calvin and Mr. Knox in the Question
about Church Government: yet in Points of Doctrine, they have varied nothing at
all from Mr. Knox, Author of the Reformation in Scotland; and Mr. Knox took Mr.
Calvin for his Copy. Hence it is, that our present Libeller so often Cants and
Calvinizes; you would think the Bishop Elect were some Speaker in a Quakers, or
Anabaptists Meeting Place: of which, I suppose, the Reason is; because he would
pass for an Elect Bishop, as well as a Bishop Elect. For Example.

Page 15. I compare our Natural Light or Knowledge, to the Creation of the first
Day. And it is the Light of the first Day, that we enjoy still; but not as it
was that day created. It was regulated and modelled the fourth Day into the
Sun, Moon, and Stars; and now we have no Participation at all of the Light of
the first Day, but what we have from its Regulation on the fourth Day, and
conveyed to us from the Sun: which I compare to Revealed, that is, to the
Christian Religion. God is Light (1 John 1.5.) and Christ is called ( Mal.
4.2.) the Sun of Righteousness: and tho there is a precedent natural Knowledge
of God, like the Light of the first Day; yet now that Christ is revealed, the
true Knowledge of God must be had in the Face of Christ.

Page 8. As we explain the matter, [he means the Satisfaction by Christ] all
the Attributes of God stand full and infinite; they rejoice and exalt together.
But this I cite, not for the Divinity, but for the monstrous Impropriety and
Cant of the Language: the words full and exalt being altogether senseless here.

P. 21. God is not only Just, but is Justice in the Abstract, Justice is the
Nature of God. -- All the Justice we have, is but a Ray sent down, from the
Essential Restitude [he aimed to say Rectitude] in God.

At p. 7. He affirms, that the Law and Gospel are the same; and he thinks that
St. Paul has so taught us, Heb. 4.2. At p. 9. he contends; that it was
indispensably necessary, that a full and adequate Satisfaction should be made
for Sin, to the Justice of God. At p. 21. he will have it, that Justice will
exact the uttermost Farthing, Justice MUST do it, and otherways it were not
Justice: and from hence he concludes; that because God is Justice, and Justice
cannot forgive the Debt of Sin, therefore God cannot forgive it. All this is
Calvinism, or rather Knoxism. But what Name shall we give to his Impiety, when
speaking of our Savior, he fears not to call him ( p. 22.) that accursed and
devoted Head? He did not learn this of Mr. Calvin, or of Mr. Knox; Mr. Calvin
makes this judicious Note on Gal. 3.13. Christus peccati and maledictionis reus
erat, non in se, sed in nobis; sive quatenus nostram Personam susceperat. As
who should say, the Lord Christ is not to be called accursed in his own Person,
but only as representing or sustaining our Persons, the Persons of Sinners.
Therefore Accursed Head, when spoken of our Savior, is not only harsh,
improper and overbold; but heretical and impious. But of our Author's Divinity,
more hereafter; let us now see, what are his Principles, and how he stands
affected toward the Government: it may be, we shall find that all this Cry
about Socinianism, Hobbism and Irreligion, is nothing but this; that they are
Charges, very fit for a Jacobite to lay to a Williamite, because they are black
enough.

He often intimates that the Court, and the King and Queen, did design to
countenance the Archbishop's Blasphemies, Socinianism, and Super-Hobbism,
that is his word, by their commanding his Sermons to be printed.

He will not own the Archbishop, the Bishop of Sarum, or any of the new
Bishops, to be Bishops, as being set up by an incompetent Authority; but only
Persons bearing themselves to be Bishops: and the peculiar Name he has found
for them, because he delights in abusing the words of Sacred Scripture, is,
Spiritual Wickednesses in High Places.

At p. 15. he discharges his Choler upon those; who (as he phrases it) have
deserted, betrayed, and taken Arms against King James.

With respect to the Oaths, that are required to the present Government,
because he cannot jest but in the words of Holy Scripture, he says, because of
SWEARING, the Land mourns. He was so afraid, that some dull Reader might
overlook his Contempt of the Scriptures, and his Treason to the Government;
that he was careful to write the word Swearing in Capital Letters.

He compliments the present Archbishop, upon his Accession to the Chair of
Canterbury, in these words. On November. 16. 1694. Dr. Tillotson was struck with
that fatal Apoplexy, that carried him out of the World the 4 th day after; to
make room for another comprehensive Latitudinarian, who looked over Lincoln, to
succeed him. He intended (without doubt) to allude to the Proverb, the Devil
looked over Lincoln: but to spoil his Conundrum, the Proverb does not intend
Lincoln Cathedral, but Lincoln College, to which place his Grace never had a
Relation. It Is easy to see, by these Passages, that the late Archbishop, the
Author of the History of Religion, and other great Men, are out of this
Author's good Graces; not for any real Socinianism or Hobbism, but only because
they are notorious Williamites: Hobbian and Socinian are the worst Names, that
we can now give; so it is expedient, that all Williamites should be represented
as Socinians and Hobbists.

A Man that shall thus undertake to reproach his Sovereign, to spit upon the
Government, and to accuse the greatest Divines of the Kingdom, as partly not
understanding, partly heretically perverting the Doctrine of the Church, ought
to be a Person of very great Abilities; in respect both of Judgment, and
Learning. Every one will blame such daring Attempts, in a Man of very mean, or
no Wit and Erudition: such a one, let the Grounds of his Opposition and
Complaints happen to be never so just, should patiently expect, till a
sufficient Head and Hand shall enterprise to manage the Accusation. But the
Chitt who at present has ventured upon all this, is so utterly unfurnished of
the Qualities, requisite to such a Work; that the Care of a Village-Cure, or of
a Country-School, is hugely above him. I pray (Sir) have the Patience if you
can, to take account of some Instances of our Author's Learning, and Judgment.

He had heard say, or had read somewhere; that St. Peter's words, which things
the Angels desire to look into, are very emphatical in the Greek; therefore to
seem learned in a Tongue which he can scarce read, with much to do he finds the
Text, and sets it down thus; which things the Angels desire (...), to stoop
down with Reverence, and admire. Here first, the High-land Critic instead of
(...) reads (...); which last will never be found in any but a High-land
Vocabulary. In the next place, he interprets (...) by to stoop down with
Reverence, and admire; a sense never put on the word by any Lexicographer, no
not by the meanest Abcedarian Grecian. Indeed (...) (or as the Learned
Professor speaks (...)) is rendered by some Critics, se inclinando
introspicere; which (it may be) he took for to stoop down with Reverence and
admire: but the Critics meant thereby, to view exactly, after the manner of
Persons that stoop or bow that they may observe a thing the more distinctly:
the Signification of stooping down to honor and admire, is a discovery that we
owe to this great Author only, all the Grammarians and Critics will reject it.
In my opinion, our Author acted prudently, when foreseeing that with the late
Revolution in Scotland, the Presbytery would be the Trump-Card; that he might
quit his Station with Credit, he feigned himself a Jacobite, and refused the
Oath: he was conscious to himself, that the Presbytery would never continue a
(...) in the Professor's Chair; much less, allow of this Criticism on (...),
that it denotes stooping down to honor and admire, when (here) it so certainly
signifies only stooping down to view distinctly and exactly.

He falls upon the Bishop of Salisbury, for his Explication of the Incarnation
and the Divinity of our Savior; he says, this Explication implies both Heresy
and Idolatry. He (kindly) instructs the (poor) Bishop, how the Incarnation is
to be understood. It Is not (says our Professor) rightly accounted for, by the
Similitude of the Inhabitation of Jehovah in the Cloud of Glory: no less
Inhabitation [of the WORD] than an Impersonation can declare or truly describe
the Incarnation; for no other sort of Inhabitation can carry with it
Communicatio Idiomatum, that is, can make God to be called that thing, or that
thing be called God. Mr. Hill and this Author were best to confer Notes, they
alike understand the Church's Doctrine about these Mysteries; and have equal
right to censure the Doctrine of this Learned Prelate. If he slights Mr. Hill,
yet it may be his Lordship may have so much Charity for his Countryman; as to
inform him, that Impersonation of the Divine WORD, is the Eutychian Heresy. The
Catholic Church never says, that the Divine WORD, but the Humane Nature is
impersonated by the Incarnation. It Is the Manhood that is impersonated in the
WORD, or as the Athanasian Creed speaks, is taken into God; not the WORD that
is impersonated in the Manhood. The Manhood which is not a Person, is rightly
said to be impersonated by being taken into the Person of the Divine WORD; but
the WORD being always a Person, cannot be impersonated by the Incarnation. It
was with great Propriety that his Lordship used the word Inhabitation; as not
only not implying any heretical Ambiguity, as Impersonation does, but being the
very term used by St. John; who ( John 1.14.) explains (...) (or He was made
Flesh) by (...), or He inhabited in our Nature, in the Human Nature or Manhood.

The Archbishop had said; It pleased God there should be some Mysteries in the
Christian Religion, such as, three Persons who are but one God, the Incarnation
of God in the Human Nature, God satisfying for Sin in his own Person: probably,
says the Archbishop, for this Reason among others; because it had been found
by Experience, that Men have a great Inclination for Mysteries, and are hardly
contented with a Religion that has not something in it Sublime, Mysterious, and
above Human Capacity. What says Momus to this? Why, his Answer is not more
morose and malevolent, than it is impious and profane. P. 6. Blessed God, this
Man makes no more of the Mysteries of our Religion, than only to satisfy Men's
foolish Curiosities. He that will have a May Pole shall have a May Pole; since
you will have Mysteries, here is one for you, God manifested in the Flesh. This
is to satisfy your foolish longing after Mysteries, and to give you your full
of Mysteries. Was there ever so impious a Burlesque upon God, and the Religion
of Christ; -- as if He was incarnate and crucified, only to outdo Raw-head and
Bloody-bones. -- What are Mysteries, without any farther Consideration than as
Mysteries; but the height of Folly, perfect Rary-shows. The Archbishop said
not, that Mysteries are of no other consideration or use in Religion, but only
to satisfy the Curiosity and Inclination of Men; but that this is one Reason,
among many others by him assigned, why there are some Mysteries in the
Christian Religion: he gives diverse other Reasons of the Incarnation and the
Satisfaction, and some Illustrations of the Mystery of the Trinity; besides
this which so much displeases our Professor. Was it becoming of a Man,
pretending to Probity and Learning; to run out into such wild Expressions as
these, by occasion of the Archbishop's (inoffensive) saying, that the
Christian Mysteries might be (in part) intended to satisfy the general
Inclination of Mankind, for Mysteries and sublime things? Would any but our
(mad) Author have fallen hereupon, to comparing the Trinity to a May Pole; the
Crucifixion of our Savior, to Raw-head and Bloody-bones; and all Mysteries to
Rary-shows and the height of Folly? Is this the Sobriety of a Bishop Elect; or
a Reflection to be prefaced with, a Blessed God? He that manifestly perverts
the words of another, to an impious sense; or puts innocent Words and
Sentences, into profane Terms and Expressions, is guilty of Blasphemy against
God, and the highest Injury and Uncharitableness to his Neighbor. And if the
Archbishop's words had in the Consequences of them, ministered real occasion
for such kind of Comparisons; as the May Pole, Rary-show, Raw-head, and the
rest of this Author's Extravagance and Wickedness: yet seeing those
Consequences were never intended by the Archbishop, but are most contrary to
his Mind and Sentiments concerning the Mysteries he defended: this Author out
of Reverence to those Mysteries themselves, should have forbore such horrid
Terms; which would have been very foul and black, even in the Mouth of a
Socinian. I know not what Excuse can be made for our Author; unless we should
say; that, poor Man, with his Preferments he also lost his Wits.

Not quite to tire you, Sir, with the Specimen (I promised) of our Author's
Honesty, Wit and Learning; I will give you but one Example more of it. It Is the
principal design of his Book, to prove the Archbishop, the Bishop of
Salisbury, and the Author of the History of Religion, are Socinians; the other
Charges of Irreligion and Hobbism, come in only by the by, and only sometimes,
when his inflamed Choler wholly disorders his Brain. Therefore now, does he
himself understand what that Socinianism is, which he charges upon others: for
it is not uncommon with malicious Men, to charge others with Socinianism,
Popery, Hobbism, and such like, which they have heard (from diverse) are very
bad things; without knowing (scarce) at all what is implied in those words. I
assure you, this is (very much) our Author's case: he has charged you and
others with Socinianism, not as it is an Heresy understood and detested by him;
but only as it is a word of Scandal and Reproach. You will believe me, when you
know that he says;

P. 32. None were more violent Persecutors than the Arians, that is the
Socinians; when they had Power. When he says here; the Arians, that is, the
Socinians: you know, Sir, he might as well have said; the Jews, that is, the
Roman Catholics.

P. 2. There was no Shibboleth, which all these our Adversaries [the
Anti-Trinitarians] did refuse; but that of Consubstantiality, or that the
Father, Son and Spirit are Consubstantial: which also this Author [the
Arch-bishop] does refuse; and while he does so, he must be reckoned among those
Adversaries. First, the Archbishop never refused the word Consubstantial.
Then, you (Sir) who have been so conversant with the ancient History of the
Church, remember very well; that neither did all Anti-Trinitarians reject
Consubstantial, nor all Catholics admit of it. It was first advanced by Paul
of Samosata (Patriarch of Antioch) who held as the Socinians now do; and was
rejected by a Council of 72 Catholic Bishops, assembled at Antioch against the
said Paul. Afterward, it was approved by the first Nicen Council, but refused
by the Bishops of Britain, Gaul and Germany; not because they disliked the
thing signified thereby, but because they would not admit of an unscriptural
Term in declaring Points of Faith. As for the Arians, they were only the
Anomaean Arians who disliked the word Consubstantial, the rest admitted of
(...) (Consubstantial) as well as (...) of like Substance. Socrat. H. E. l. 3.
c. 25.

P. 2. They (the Socinians) puzzle Peoples Understandings, tho by very foolish
and contradictory Arguments; how God by his Infinite Power may bestow true and
real Divinity upon another, and that from all Eternity: because what he can do
to day, he might have done yesterday, and so backwards for ever. All this, Sir,
is a Chimera of his own; and was never held, or said, by any Socinian: they
hold, on the direct contrary; that it implies a Contradiction that Divinity (or
so much as simple Existence) can be bestowed by one Person on another Person
from all Eternity; they suppose, that bestowing and receiving imply an actual
Priority of the Person who bestows Being or Divinity, and that in this case the
Giver and Receiver cannot be Coeternal. In a word, our Anti-Socinian Professor
imputes the very Doctrine of the Catholic Church, to the Socinians: it is the
Church (not the Socinians) that holds, that God can bestow true and real
Divinity on another, and that from all Eternity; and it is the Churches, not the
Socinians Argument, because what he might have done to day or yesterday, he
might also do from forever. When he calls this, a foolish and contradictory
Argument; all Men (but himself) know, that he declares himself a Socinian, as
often as he says it.

P. 30. Of the English Socinians, some say, the Trinity is three, who are one
Person: others of 'em say, the Trinity is three Persons, whereof two are
Creatures. But if there be any such, as he pretends, neither Party of 'em are
Socinians: English they may be, but Socinians they are not.

It Is with like Truth, and Knowledge of our English Vnitaries, that he says in
the same Page; They excommunicate, and depose from their Ministry, those of
their own Party, who deny that Divine Worship is to be paid to the Lord Christ.
I am certainly informed that the Unitarians in England have no Ministry at all;
they do not separate from the Church, on the account of their different Opinion
from the Church: they never separated in England, from the common Assemblies to
worship; which, in my Opinion, is pious, charitable and prudent; for it is the
Separation, not the difference of Opinion, that begets the Heats among
contending Parties. But the occasion of these Mistakes of our worthy Author,
is; that tho (it should seem) he has read the Brief History of the Unitarians,
his (Northern) frozen Head perceives not the Subtleties, of this Mercurial
Tribe: he knows neither their Discipline, nor Doctrine; and is of their mind
without being aware of it.

I know, Sir, you are weary of these Follies: I will therefore draw our Author,
in little; and having so presented him to you, leave him to your Pity and
Prayers.

He was a Bishop Elect, in that Juncture, when only such were chosen by the
King and the Nuntio, to the Episcopal Chairs of England and Scotland; as would
not fail to make those Churches contemptible and ridiculous, by their notorious
Unsufficiency and Incompetency.

He is a Jacobite; but made so, by nothing but his (too certain) Fears, that
the Presbytery would never endure a (...) in the Theological Chair.

With him, the Archbishop, the Bishop of Sarum, and the Author of the History
of Religion, are most blasphemous Socinians; because our Professor mistakes the
Doctrine of the Church, and the Arguments she uses, for the Socinian Doctrine
and Reasons.

He is an Anti-Socinian, who believes that God the Father could not bestow true
and real Divinity on another Person, from all Eternity: and that it is foolish
and contradictory, to say, that what God might do to day, he'might do
yesterday, and backwards for ever.

An Antiquarian he is, who has discovered (in ancient History) such an only
Shibboleth of Orthodoxy, in the Trinitarian Questions; as was first advanced by
one of the Socinians Patriarchs, and rejected by a Council of (72) Catholic
Bishops.

He is a Christian, who is not content to think it, but publishes it (in Print)
to all the World; that Jesus Christ is an accursed and devoted Head.

This is your Man, Sir; the Critic, Wit, Historian, Divine, who resolves to
make an Example of all Latitudinarian Archbishops and Bishops, and all their
Disciples and Seconds: of which number, he says, you are the first and most
considerable; and as such, it is but just and fit, that you should be treated
accordingly. What he objects, is partly against your self, and partly against
your History of Religion.

As to your self; he says. You are a Disciple of (that late execrable) Jo.
Cant, or (as he otherwise call him) John Till. You have copied, he says, after
him, very exactly: insomuch that this Critic himself is sometimes in doubt;
whether The History of Religion were written by you, or by the Archbishop.
Elsewhere he says, your History does square most exactly with the Archbishop's
Notions and Scheme of Religion. Yet he owns, that you are not altogether so
profligate, or have more of Art and Address, than that Archbishop of Theists
and Hobbists: you are more modest or more cunning, those are his words, than
the other; you do not attack Religion in such broad words, as he. But it is the
endeavor of both of you, of him more openly, of you more secretly, to ridicule
all Religion; and to resolve it wholly into Priestcraft. And I must confess,
Sir; that your History and the Archbishop's Sermons have a like Thread. He, in
most of his Sermons, combats the seven-headed Beast; as a Divine, by Argument;
you as a Gentleman, in the Historical Way: he shows, how defenseless and weak,
Popery is; you, how ridiculous and foppish it is. And the learned Professor, by
exclaiming thereupon against both of you as designing to ridicule all Religion,
abundantly intimates; that to him, there is no other Religion but Popery.

He has an obscure Period at p. 31. that you assisted in turning a certain
Neighbor out of House and Home, who had not only never injured you, but had
done more for you than all your Relations and other Friends ever did. The
meaning is, you had a share in effecting the late Revolution; or as our Author
elsewhere speaks concerning some others, in deserting, betraying and excluding
King James: who (as this Man says) did more for you, than all your Friends or
Relations ever have done. I am wholly a Stranger, to the Particulars of this
Charge; therefore I can only say: either it is true, or it is false. If it is
false, his Lordship Elect is a great Rascal, saving the Reverence belonging to
his Coat and Profession; to devise and publish to the World a Tale, that (in
his opinion) implies the very foulest and blackest of Crimes and Scandals. But
if it is true, that when King James had done a great deal for you; after all,
you concurred with, nay you highly promoted the Revolution: the Charge here
brought against you, will amount to thus much. That whereas it is too well
known, that his late Majesty's Favors to any of his Protestant Subjects, were
designed only to gain them to the Popish and Arbitrary Interest: you could not
be bought, no not by more than all your Friends and Relations ever did for you,
to side against the Interests of your Religion and Country. No Money, no
Preferments, no Favors (it should seem) could bribe you; to give up the
Protestant Religion, or the Freedom and Properties of the Nation. A most
terrible Accusation; and on your part a Treachery not to be purged, with
Sacrifice or Offering for ever! But then after all this, to write a History too
against (the holy Cheats of) your King's and Friend's Religion: this is such an
Aggravation of your former Fault, that our Author will not say, the Lord have
Mercy on you; but in the Highland Phrase, It makes his Flesh to creep. I am of
opinion, that an Highlander's Flesh naturally creeps: for our Beggars say, that
set a -- on a Board or Table, with the Head West, or East, or South, the --
will not fail to turn it self, and creep Northward.

As to your Book, his general Charge against it, is; that it is designed against
all Religion, and especially all Positive (or revealed) Religion: from whence
he takes occasion to Nickname you Sir Positive; or as he writes (according to
the High-land Orthography) Sir Possitive. If you say; but what Instances can he
give out of your History, from whence any sober Man would infer, that you meant
to expose Religion in general; and not, only the pious Frauds of Modern Rome,
and the Tricks of Rome Pagan? I can only answer, that what Collections (out of
the History) he may have by him, I know not; but the Particulars which he
mentions, are these.

P. 27. You set up, he says, unreconcileable War against all Mystery. How so;
have you dropped the least word against the Doctrines of the Trinity, the
Incarnation, or the Satisfaction? No, you are more modest or else more cunning
(he says) than the Archbishop; you are a Man of more Art and Address, than to
expose your Credit by broad words: but this you do. You make Transubstantiation
your (pretended) Mark; but your Level (or Design) is against the Trinity, and
other Mysteries of the Catholic Church. I perceive, Sir, you must never
expect; to be delivered from the Imputations of Irreligion, Socinianism, and
such like: for it should seem, when your Mark (which you openly set up) is
Transubstantiation; your Design, Level or Aim (in spite of you) shall be
Religion and the Trinity. I think, I may say; as what you have done, admits of
no Defense, with such Judges as Dr. M -- roe: so with others, it can need none.

At p. 29. he falls upon the word Priestcraft, and mauls it most terribly. He
says, that the thing by you designed, ought rather to be called Lay-Craft, or
State-Craft; than Priestcraft: for Religion has been more corrupted by
Laymen, especially by Parliaments, than by Priests. Yet at length, he is
willing to admit (there) of the term Priestcraft; provided it be applied
rightly: that is, to those cursed Priests, the Latitudinarians and Socinians.

You manifest your Impiety again, in what you say (in the History) concerning
the Creeds; that have been devised by Arians, Photinians, Catholics, Papists,
Protestants, and all the Sub-divisions of these Parties: for you note, that in
very deed, Creeds are the spiritual Revenges, of dissenting Parties, upon one
another. I must confess, that you but too plainly intimate, in the History;
that according to your (weak) Judgment, it had been better to content our
selves with the Apostles Creed, as unsufficient as those poor Men were to pen a
Creed for the Church, which they had planted: than that every Party should
contrive a new Creed, with Anathema's and Damn 'ems to every Clause of it. But
the Professor (a sagacious Man) does not at all believe, that you had any
pacifick or charitable Aim, in what you offer: no, no, your Intention (he says,
p. 30.) was this, That Atheists, Latitudinarians and Socinians might get into
the Church without swearing, or subscribing to I know not how many Lies. And
all to no purpose; for no subscribing or swearing will ever keep 'em out.

Again, he observes; that you would persuade People, that there is no
Condemnation for Error; because it proceeds (say you) from Innoscence, which is
to say Ignorance and Weakness. Here he has got a common place, upon which to
read: for not having Grammar enough to distinguish Innoscence from Innocence;
he proves largely (and most learnedly) that all Ignorance is not Innocence; or
that all Persons shall not be judged as innocent, because they were ignorant.
He says further, that it is very hard to determine, which are Sins of
Ignorance: but be sure, says he, Sins of Intrigue and Design are not Sins of
Innocence; and here comes in your (black) Ingratitude in not betraying your
Country and Religion, to your great (Arbitrary and Popish) Friend, tho you were
tempted with such mighty Offers and Liberalities, as he says.

His last Instance of your bad Inclination, is; that you argue so largely
against punishing People for mere Conscience, and simple Error. Your Arguments
against Persecution, are; that Force does not convince, it may make Men
Hypocrites, but never true Converts: and that the Prescriptions in the Gospel,
concerning the erroneous, are all gentle and meek; not Arms, or Proscriptions,
or Mulcts.

To the first, he answers; Punishments are inflicted for other Ends, besides
converting the Criminal: they are intended, for vindicating the Honor of God;
and to prevent the Infection of others.

Our Author, it would seem, knows not; that God is honored, not dishonored,
by every Person's professing and acting, as his Conscience persuades him that
it is the Will of God he should act and profess: and consequently that to punish
such Persons, however erroneous; is no other, but to punish them for their
Loyalty and Obedience to God.

But Punishment, he says, may prevent the Infection from spreading among
others. Yes, witness the Persecutions of the Primitive Christians; which were
so successful for suppressing their Opinions: that they begat the famous
Proverb, Sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae, the Seed of the Church is the
Blood of its Martyrs. But admitting it were true, what he says, that
Persecution may prevent the growth of Opinions and Sects; yet how will the
Inquisitor General help it, if God himself has forbid this means of Prevention?
It is our Savior that said; let the Tares grow up with the Wheat, lest with
the Tares you pluck up also the Wheat. The Tares are Errors, which therefore in
that Parable are said to be sown: yet the Tares must not be plucked up, nay
must be suffered to grow up with the Wheat; lest our (ignorant) Zeal mistake
the true Wheat for Tares. The Judgment, which are Tares and which Wheat, is
reserved (says our Savior there) to God; if it were left to Men, while they
(think they) gather the Tares, they will root up also the Wheat, Mat. 13.29.

But to this, and to your other Argument; that the Gospel prescribes only
gentle means, to be used to the Erroneous: He replies, the Prescriptions
against Force, and the gentle Methods hinted in the Gospel, are directed only
to Preachers; not to the Civil Magistrates. Who is no more bound up by those
Prescriptions, from punishing the Erroneous; than the Commands of turning the
other Cheek, and give him thy Cloak also, restrain him from punishing the
Injurious, or such as steal from others. It Is only to Preachers, he says, not
to the Magistrate; that Forbearance and Gentleness is required, toward the
Erroneous. On the contrary, it is certain to me; that not to root up the Tares
is a Charge, given wholly to the Magistrate, and not at all to Preachers.
Preachers (as Preachers) must root up the Tares; by Argument, Exhortation, and
such like Christian Means. It Is well known to all, that Preachers have no Power
(either from God or Men) to root up by Force or any external Punishment: it
would be a senseless Prohibition, let not Preachers hang, or burn, or sequester
Men for their Errors; because every one is aware, it is not at all in their
Power, nor ever was, but only in the Magistrates. I say, for this reason it is
even self-evident; that the Prescriptions against Force or rooting up, belong
not (as our Inquisitor contends) to Preachers, but to Magistrates, who only
have that Power.

Whereas he adds; you might as well plead the Charges of turning the other
Cheek, and give him thy Coat also, against the Magistrates punishing Violence
and Theft: I answer, the Cases are altogether unlike. The Magistrate is
permitted, nay required to punish Violence and Theft; because in such Offenses
we sin both wittingly and wilfully: but Error and Mistake (which some call
Heresy, and this Author calls Blasphemy) are involuntary, and pure Innoscence;
which I would not have the Professor mistake again for Innocence, tho it also
implies and supposes Innocence.

I cannot see any thing more, Sir, in this Libel, that concerns you, or The
History of Religion; I will conclude therefore, with only saying: that as you
were somewhat concerned that Mr. Atterbury, a Man of Learning and Wit (O how
unlike, to this other, he!) should first mistake the Design of your Book, and
then make such haste to scandalize you for it in the very Royal Presence; so
without doubt you will smile at it, that all the Irreligion, Profaneness and
Socinianism charged upon it, is resolved at last into only this (and by Malice
it self) that it is a perfect copying after the Sermons and Opinions of
Archbishop Tillotson. This is the utmost, we see, that yours and the
Government's worst Adversary could make of it.

Sir, I am your most assured, most obliged, and most affectionate Friend, N. S.
July 17, 1695.
THE AUTHOR OF The History of Religion VINDICATED From the Scandalous and
Unchristian INVECTIVES of Mr. F. A. IN A SERMON At WHITE HALL, On Proverbs
xiv.6.

Buchanan Franciscanus and Fratres. -- In sanctos quicquam cave dicere fratres.

Printed in the Year, 1696.

KING Charles the Second, and James the Just, that waited for the Divine Right,
as long as waiting was good, were often nicked with punishing Texts, which, by
being maliciously timed, were in mere reading turned into downright Satyr: but
our Preacher is not for a dry Bob and away, he will serve himself of his Text,
before he, and that Part; and the words are these, Prove. 14.6. A Scorner
seeks Wisdom and finds it not.

The first thing Mr. Fr. At. propounds for his Inquiry, is, who is the Person
represented under the Character of the Scorner. Solomon, no doubt, designed a
general Reproof, but our Preacher's whole Sermon is levelled at a particular
and honorable Person, Sir R. H. the Author of the History of Religion, him he
would have us to understand by the Scorner, let Solomon intend whom he will.
Here let me borrow an Allusion from Mr. Bays in the Rehearsal [much such a
Poet, as Mr. F. A. is a Preacher.]

As dull Mortals fear
The Event of such things as shall never appear;
So tho it be hard
To find in the Word
What was never at first by the Writer put there,
Yet a Preacher acute
By the help of his Priestcraft-Resentment can do it.
Of the Jewish Scorner in his Text, typical of our English Gentleman [as he
would have us conceive] he says. The frequent Revolutions in the Jewish State
contributed mightily to unsettle the Scorner's Thoughts, and create in him a
slight opinion of the eternal Differences of Right and Wrong, Good and Evil:
but our Gentleman was, in the Revolutions intimated, fixed and settled in his
Thoughts on the loyal suffering Side, and his unshaken Virtue held out, till it
happily reached its merited Reward. But there were a sort of zealous Pretenders
to Religion among the Jews, [tho whether typical of any such among us, I know
not] that were never loyal, but when they were caressed.

After the Character of the Scorner, it had been proper for Mr. At. to have
defined, and explained what was the Wisdom, which he sought, and found not, but
that he declined, and he had reason; for had he determined the Wisdom mentioned
in his Text, to have been true Religious Wisdom, he had been prevented of much
of his Malice, and must have been forced to allowed Sir R. H. the Praise of
having sought true Religious Wisdom, and had he called it profane worldly
Wisdom, then his angry Libel had ran into ridiculous Jest; For what strange
thing is it, that a Man who seeks Worldly Wisdom should not find Spiritual?
it is as if I should say Mr. At. seeks a Prebendary's Place, and cannot find a
Captain's. It Is not to be expected that a Man should find what he does not
seek. But tho he will not explain the nature of the Wisdom in his Text, yet he
will tell us, what is meant by seeking it, i. e. he will tell us what is meant
by seeking the Lord knows what. And he makes nothing of broad undisguis'd
Contradictions, now affirming that, The Scorner makes freer Inquiries after
Truth, shakes off the Prejudices of Education more thoroughly, than the rest of
Mankind; and presently after saying of this self-same Scorner, that he is
unconcerned what God and wise Men in all Ages and Countries have said. But
great Men can contradict themselves as well as Mr. At. tho perhaps not reach
the just height of such a particular Atterburianism as this.

He sets down as a Note of Infamy, that which adorns the Character of a wise
Man above any thing else, viz. his examining things to the bottom, taking
nothing upon trust, not relying on the Authority of Man. Well, Sir Robert! if
these be the Sins you have to answer for, you have the noble Beraeans to keep
you company, and at the day of Judgment St. Paul shall speak a word for you
both. But it must be confessed, that a Church-Pharisee is ten times more civil,
than a Heathenish Knight, for he takes all upon trust, all he hears from his
Superiors is Gospel, out of Reverence to Authority he examines nothing to the
bottom.

Thus far I have considered Mr. Att's Preface, and the opening of the Text, as
he calls it, and now I come to his Observation, which, what it is, we are to
seek, for he has not set it down; but as when he did not define Wisdom, he
explained the meaning of seeking it, so now an Observation, which he never
made, he will justify, and he justifies it, by as extraordinary a method, as
ever ill made or unmade Observation was justified. For he wisely shows how it
comes to pass, that Men who set up for a more than ordinary Fame in Wisdom and
Goodness by contemning Religion, and Religious Men, do, and must fail of the
End they propose, because, as wise as they are in other things, they are
incapable of impartial Inquiries after Divine Truth, in plain English, they
fail of the End which they propose, because they do not propose the End which
they fail of. Well! go thy ways honest Fr. At. thou art a shrewd Fellow, I Will
say that for thee, and have Logic and Wit enough to write against the
Socinians.

Mr. At. assigns four things, which render a Man incapable to search
successfully after Truth, especially Divine Truth. The first is Pride, this he
defines to be, an undue value which a Man has for himself, and his own Opinion,
with a Disregard for every thing beside. Having thus defined, immediately he
starts an Abuse upon old Hobbs, whose Leviathan, tho I hold to be an ill Book,
a very ill Book, more impious, tho not more malicious, than the Sermon about
the Scorner, yet the Passage cited from his Epistle, by way of Reproach, is
ingenious and honest. I will set it in its proper Light, not that Mr. At. may
be ashamed of his Misrepresentation, he is more hardy than so, but that all
Lovers of Honesty and Truth among the Clergy, may be ashamed of their Brother
At. Hobbs had said, what he thought proper to recommend his Book to the
Patronage of his honored Friend Mr. Fr. Godolphin, and supposing that what he
had said, was yet hardly enough to furnish Mr. G. with a satisfactory Reply to
them who might happen to condemn his Work, he comes off with a witty piece of
Railery, thus, If notwithstanding this, you find my Labor generally decried,
you may be pleased to excuse your self, and say, I am a Man that love my own
Opinions, and think all true I say, and that is more than any Man will be
persuaded to say for the Author of the Scorner. But if loving a Man's own
Opinions must be an Instance of Pride, let the Reader consider, whether most
loves his own Opinions, Sir R. H. who can indulge a peaceable good Subject to
differ from him, and enjoy the present Parliamentary Liberty of Conscience,
without envying or censuring him, or Mr. At. who in bold defiance of the Laws
of his Country, reproaches all Men that do not believe, as he does; and then if
this be a piece of Pride, and Pride hinders Knowledge, has not Mr. At. proved
himself a Blockhead, which he need not have done neither? but some Orators will
use, in spite of Tully's Caution against it, in re non dubia, argumentis non
necessariis, in a matter not doubtful, Arguments not necessary.

It Is crudely said by him, that Pride is a great Enemy to Knowledge, he ought to
have shown how; for an Inclination to be proud of Knowledge, seems to prompt a
Man to Study, and let Mr. At. say what he pleases, there are more humble
Blockheads than proud ones.

He reproaches the Gentleman whom he represents under the Character of a
Scorner, for a superficial Sciolist, positive in his Opinions, and hardy in his
Assertions. Now tho that honorable Person is ever as ready to give, as take a
sober Liberty of philosophizing and prophesying, yet Positiveness would be less
odious in him, whose excellent Natural Parts, and all desirable Advantages of
Study and Conversation, make it as probable for him, as any Man breathing to
come to the knowledge of the Truth, whatever is the Object of his Inquiry: But
what an insufferable Presumption is it, in young Mr. At. who translated
himself but the other day, from working on another Man's profane Satyr, to the
study of Divinity? What an insufferable Presumption is it in him, to be
positive? whereas if his Genius had inclined him to the search of Religious
Truths, and all his Time been spent that way, and no Hours given to wild Joys
or soft Delights, he could yet have but slenderly stored himself with wise and
useful Notices, being yet but a young Man, and a very young Divine: and what
sets his Credit still lower, Divinity his Fate, and not his Choice, the Study
not which he passionately loves, but comfortably lives by. And then I must tell
him, one had better be a half Philosopher, a half Physician, or a half-bred
Man, than a half Divine; for the half-bred Man is not in so much danger of
becoming a Fop, the half Physician an Emperick, the half Philosopher an
Atheist, as the half Divine of becoming a merciless Persecutor of all that
differ from his Opinions, pursuing them, when the Law ties his Hands, with an
unchristian reviling Tongue. But Mr. At. has one extraordinary Remark
concerning the Mischief of Pride. He affirms that it will harden the Scorner in
his way against whatever wise Men can think or say. This precious Youth that
translated Absalom and Achitophel, cannot but have heard of Elkanah Settle, who
has two Verses, for whose Character soever they were intended, that agree well
with the Translator's.

At his wise Thinkings some Diviners guess,
But his wise Sayings no Records express.
I am sure there are no such in his Libel. As for the humble Duties of the
Cross, Sir R. H. does as sincerely own his Obligations to them, as any good
Christian can, and needs as little Forgiveness, at least as Mr. At. Indeed for
Mysteries, it is likely he could wish none imposed, but such as are clearly
revealed, which also by being revealed cease to be Mysteries, and are then but
improperly so called. But Mysteries which are not plainly revealed, but plainly
contradict Sense and Reason, them his Conscience seems not strong enough to
digest. It Is impudent Calumny to intimate, that if Sir R. H. cannot give
himself a certain plain account in what manner, and to what end God did a
thing, he therefore concludes that God did it not at all. But it really is Sir
R. H's Weakness not to believe the Interpretation of a Text given by a Priest,
which serves his Priestcraft. Even any Explication which tends to the increase
of the Priest's Honor, or Power, Wealth, or odd Worldly Convenience, he is too
apt to suspect; nay I have heard it said of him, that he thinks it an Instance
of subtle Impiety for Priests to twist their Worldly Sensual Advantages with
the Honor of God Almighty; and fancies that they learned the Trick of a
Heathen Painter, one Phidias, who was hired to draw only the Picture of
Minerva, but the ambitious Artist so curiously joined his own in the same
Tablet, that his mortal Phyz was not to be expunged without impairing the
Glories of the Goddess.

Nay, and which is worse than all this, tho Mr. At. has strenuously belied Sir
R. H. yet he has unluckily charged him with one thing, which I am afraid will
stick; I will be fair, and repeat it in the Preacher's own words, If he has not
as clear an Idea of every term in an Article of Faith, as he has of those in a
Mathematical Proposition, it is presently unphilosophical, absurd, and foolish,
invented by those whose Interest it is to puzzle Men's Understandings, that they
may have their Wills and Affections at their Service.

On my Conscience Sir R. is guilty, and he really wrongs Mr. At. that says
there is not one true word in his scurrilous Libel. But the Charge which can
hardly be avoided, may admit of some Plea in its Defense, or Excuse, for I do
not see how an Article can be believed that is not understood, Can a Man
believe he knows not what? if that be in his Power, Sir R. has not only a proud
but a stubborn Understanding; but then also it will be in Mr. Att's power to
believe Transubstantiation, and if in his power, I think it was not well done
to refuse it to King James; for he that can believe a Proposition whereof he
has no Idea, ought in Conscience to oblige the chief Magistrate, under whom he
lives, with being of his Religion, unless he had beforehand given his Promise
to the King of Morocco. But I have another thing to reason with Mr. At. All
Articles of Faith necessary to Salvation are plain and easy to be understood by
an ordinary Capacity, the best Preachers have ever professed it. Now I would
fain know of Mr. At. whether their being proposed in difficult Terms, whereof
we have no clear Idea, be that thing which makes them plain and easy; if it be,
then we are more beholding to the Schoolmen and their Followers, than to the
first Apostles; but if difficult Terms cannot make an Article of Faith plain
and easy, I desire to be acquainted for what end such are made use of, except
to puzzle Men's Understandings.

To see how some Teachers can vary their Notes! when they treat of the
Reasonableness of the Christian Religion, then all the Doctrines thereof are
plain and easy to be understood: but when they plead in defense of Mysteries,
whereof we can have no clear Idea, and they that plead for them, have confused,
and different Idea's, then they may be difficult, inexplicable, and never the
worse.

The next Particular in the Character of the Scorner is said to be a strange
and unreasonable Suspicion. Upon this Head Mr. Att's Discourse is loose, and
undetermined; he will allow an Inquirer to be cautious, but not suspicious: but
how these two differ, where wise Caution ends, and where faulty Suspicion
begins, as for that, he begs his Reader's Pardon. Caution and Suspicion are but
different words for one and the same thing. A Man may be too cautious, and he
may also be not suspicious enough, as the elegant old Man of Ascra notes, (...).
Credulity and Diffidence have both undone Men.
Between foolish Suspicion, that is not to be satisfied with good Reasons, and
easy Credulity which is satisfied without any at all, there is a certain Virtue
[says Casaubon upon Theophrastus] (...) without Name, prudentiae velut (...),
which flows from Wisdom, by which we believe them who deserve Belief, and
suspect their Honesty who believe well of no body, that is not of their Opinion.

The third Topic whence Mr. At. draws the Character of the Scorner, is, false
Wit, which he defines to be bold jesting upon things sacred and serious.
Quickness of Wit he commends, coldly indeed, but as well as a poor Pretender
could; but, false Wit, that which exerts it self in Satyr and Drollery, that he
inveighs against, and says it betrays a Man into a thousand Errors, for one it
discovers to him; and I believe it, and that is the reason, himself is so often,
and so much in the wrong. He never aimed at any Wit, but this satirical,
drolling false Wit; and he made the greatest show of it, when he took upon him
to be John Dreyden's Broker, and with a sorry Roman Gloss calander'd for
Colleges and Schools, that infamous English Libel of Absalom and Achitophel,
which an old cankered Poet stuffed with commonplace Wit, and mercenary
dictated Scandal. Now since Mr. At. never pretended to any other Wit but this
satirical drolling false Wit, and to this still continues his Pretense; if his
Character of the Scorner represents any Man now living, it represents himself:
and therefore all this while what has he been doing, but drawing his own
Picture, and like an inverted Narcissus, throwing Stones at it?

It cannot be denied, but that the eminent deceased Person, on whom Mr. At.
reflects, p. 12. excelled in false Wit, with quickness of Thought he would
ridicule Religion, and plead surprizingly for Vice; but then he openly and
bitterly repented, which is more than I ever heard that Mr. At. has done for
his vile Journey-work under a hungry rhiming Sinner.

As for Miracles, I see nothing in the History of Religion, but that Sir R.
firmly believes all which are recorded in the Bible, tho I am indeed apt to
suspect he may imagine, [for I will not tell a Lie for him] that the
counterfeit Miracles of juggling Priests first tempted cautious and suspicious
bad Men, to call in question the truth of the Miracles of Jesus Christ. Just so
it is the Impudence, Pride, and Lordly ill Nature of such Priests as At. that
makes the Worthy and Reverend Clergy of the Church of England, had in no
greater Veneration.

If Mr. At. had censured old Hobbs for teaching that Right is founded in
Power, or that the Command of the Civil Magistrate makes the Scripture a Law to
us, God forbid that I should speak a word in his Vindication: But the
Accusation preferred against him, p. 13. is so shamefully false, that I much
wonder, if this notorious Slanderer can henceforth ever hope the least Credit
should be given to what he affirms or denies of any Man whatsoever. The
Accusation is this: The great Leader of the Libertines of this Age, thought he
had said something very prejudicial to the Divinity of Christ, when he had
translated, after an absurd manner, the Greek word (...), and blasphemously
told us, that that was as much as to say, the Verb of God.] But the words of
Hobbs in the 36 th Chapter of his Leviathan are these. Our Savior is called
the Word, not because he was the Promise, but the Thing promised; they, that
taking occasion from this place, do commonly call him the Verb of God, do but
render the Text more obscure, they might as well term him the Noun of God; for
as by Noun, so also by Verb, we understand but a part of Speech, a Voice, a
Sound, that neither affirms, nor denies, nor commands, nor promises, nor is any
Substance Corporeal or Spiritual; and therefore it cannot be said to be either
God or Man, whereas our Savior is both. In this place Hobbs reproves those
that called Christ the Verb of God, and At. says that Hobbs speaks against the
Divinity of Christ, whereas Hobbs openly professes that our Savior is both God
and Man. The Jesuits have not with greater Impudence belied Luther and Calvin.
With the same hardness of Brow and spirit of Falsehood, he affirms, that Hobbs
pretended to give a mighty Blow to the Doctrine of Grace, by saying, that
Infusion and Inspiration signified in plain English, inpouring and inblowing;
whereas all I meet with in Chap. 34. is, that Inspiration taken properly
signifies blowing into a Man [inblowing is Att's term] some thin and subtle
Air, etc. but the word is used in Scripture metaphorically only, as where it is
said, God inspired into Man the Breath of Life, no more is meant, than that God
gave unto him Vital Motion: and where it is said, All Scripture is given by
Inspiration from God, it signifies, that God inclined the Spirit or Mind of the
Writers to write that which should be useful to such and such good purposes. I
have taken Pains to vindicate Hobbs [who has Faults enough to answer for,
without being unjustly charg'd] from these particular unjust Charges, that the
Reader may understand how convenient it is, to imitate the noble Beraeans, and
examine carefully, whether all those things are true which are sometimes told
them e Cathedra.

In the fourth place, Mr. At. ascribes the Deception [that is his word] of the
Scorner, to his Sensuality. Now I can hardly believe but that the Translation
of Absalom and Achitophel was done by another hand, tho it goes under Att's
Name, who perhaps might be hired to father it, because he seems not to have
Learning enough to be so wicked; for here he imagines the word Deception to be
synonimous with Error or Ignorance, whereas it signifies Deceit or Cozenage:
Sensuality indeed is likely to prevent a Man from Knowledge, but poor Mr. At.
by his Ignorance of Grammar is fallen into another Doctrine, viz. that
Sensuality is the cause of the Scorner's Deceptions, i. e. Sensuality helps him
to deceive others. -- -- Nec te vox barbara turbet,
Aut temere erumpens lingua titubante Solacus:
Tot sanctos oppone Patres, Mysteria sacra;
Turpe est grammaticis submittere colla capistris.
Buch. Fran. But that which Mr. At. would have said, had he had Skill to
express it, is, that Sensuality does discourage the Scorner from inquiring
after, and fatally prevent him from finding Wisdom. Very true: But what will he
hence prove? I know what naturally follows, viz. that Sir R. H. whose Knowledge,
whose Observations, and Experience through all the most useful Parts of
Learning, are so very considerable, has led a studious Philosophical Life, and
that Mr. At. who does not understand Grammar, has spent his time in
Sensuality, when he should have pli'd his Book. But of all the Lines in Mr.
Att's holy Invective, Sir R. ought to forgive him two or three, p. 14. where
telling his Reader in what Age of Life the Humor of scorning is most
prevalent, he pertinently observes, it is commonly incident to Men at that time
of their Lives, when their Lusts are most ungoverned, and their Blood boils
hottest; it is chiefly the young robust Sinner, that indulges himself in it,
while he is in the midst of his Enjoyments. That is as much as to say, that old
Age has banished from Sir R's Breast, or at least abated the Humor, while
young and robust Mr. At. -- But this Humor of the Scorner will in time wear
off with him also.

But pray how has Sir R. set his Face directly against the Doctrines of
Religion? it does not appear from his late History, unless his Accuser means
the false Doctrines of Religion; and let him set his Face, and his Heart as
directly and strongly against them as he pleases, I am afraid he will be able
to do little more than save his own Soul. But in truth Sir R. has dealt very
sparingly on this Argument, and has chose such particular inoffensive Instances
of Priestcraft, that none but Pagan and Popish Priests have the least reason
to be angry: I am sure no Presbyters of the Church of England are concerned,
unless those few, who make it their business to have the Belief of
unintelligible, an unexplicable Mysteries, enforced by cruel and unchristian
Penalties. Let our Preachers be but content, that the People own the Authority
of the Sacred Book, particularly, that they agree to those Texts [whose Sense
is so much controverted] as true, in that sense which the Writer designed, tho
what that is, is not certain, and not compel them to confess something more,
something against their Consciences, till a Majority of Convocation-men [who
only pretend to make, I should say declare Articles of Faith] shall determine
what is the true sense of the controverted Texts, and their Credit shall stand
fair with the Ages to come, for all that Sir R. has said in his History of
Religion.

P. 16. l. 1. Mr. At. has these remarkable words, Some Men who write pretended
Histories of Religion, are beholding to the real Religion of others that their
Histories are not written.

Here we are, first, to inquire how Sir R. H. has provoked Mr. At. that he
threatens to write his History.

2. How dangerous it is to provoke a Priest to write one's History.

3. Whom is Sir R. H. beholding to, that his History is not written. Of these
in their order.

1. How Sir R. H. has provoked, etc.

Has Sir R. H. questioned the Existence of a Deity? or denied the Truth of
Revealed Religion? this were to provoke the generality of Mankind, but by good
luck no such thing is laid to his Charge, tho if it were, it might be easily
disproved from his Writings. What then? has he slurr'd the Divine Right of
Episcopacy, and given the Prelates but a Parliamentary Right in the room? has
he dressed up the grave Doctrines of Non-Resistance, and Passive Obedience in
an odd Disguise, which were ugly enough in their own true Shape, that so they
may be laughed at, as well as hated by the People? Has he confounded Arbitrary
Power that had well nigh confounded the Nation? for ought I know, something of
this nature he may have done, but it is no matter, Mr. At. has swallowed all
this; that which sticks, and will not down, is a pretended History of Religion:
Well then! what is the fault of that History? what Injury is it to Mr. At. if
the World be made acquainted, how the Heathen Priests topp'd false Doctrines
upon the People, and by cunning wicked Arts made a Gain of them? how they
puzzled their Understandings and stole their Wills and Affections, how they
cherished their Ignorance, and scared 'em from the free use of their Reason?
What heinous Provocation is it against a Priest of the Church of England, if
the Nation be told how the Priests of the Roman Communion imitate the Religious
Frauds of the Priests of the Heathens? If Mr. At. will be concerned at this,
he will tempt Men to believe, that our Religious Guides pursue the same Methods
of Priestcraft as the other, but then it is At. that libels the Church, and
not Sir R. H. for he only in general Terms, and very modestly wishes that
Reformed Churches did not violently pursue the same; nay, in his Preface, he
gladly takes occasion [so studious is he to make his Court to our Church] to
commend the excellent Spirit, and useful Teaching of the late Archbishop,
whose Life and Learning, whose honest, wise and useful way of plain teaching,
sets his Honor far above the most venerable Names in all Antiquity.

2. How dangerous it is to provoke a Priest to write one's History, that is next
to be inquired. Luther and Calvin wrote [tho not under that very Name]
Histories of Religion, widely different from what the Romanists write, insomuch
that the incensed Jesuits have wrote their History; and never did the famous
Society themselves practice more enormous Villainies, than they laid to the
Charge of those two famous Reformers. Now if Mr. At. should look back on his
own Life, and charge Sir R. with all the vile Deeds, whereof he himself has
ever been guilty, in troth he would make a fine Picture of the old Gentleman,
and be fully even with him for his History. It were a good Motto for a Clerical
Historiographer, Nemo me impune lacesset; for I don't think any Man's Innocence
a sufficient Security while he exposes Priestcraft. I shall content my self to
give but one Example, but that an illustrious one, to justify my Opinion. When
King John began to set his Face directly against the Corruptions, the
Priestcraft Corruptions of the Church of Rome, a parcel of ungracious Monks
could not bear it, not they, no, not from their Sovereign, therefore they
poisoned him with the Sacrament of the Altar; and when they had done, they
wrote his History, and published him for a Wicked and Atheistical, a Foolish
and Tyrannical Prince; yet Protestant Authors give him a better Character, and
there are Circumstances which will incline an unprejudiced Man to believe that
this King deserved it.

I did not think to have given another Instance, but just as I am writing this,
there comes into my Head a very remarkable one, which also has a particular
Circumstance fit for Mr. At. to consider, so that I know not how to pass it
by. Pausanias in his Baeotics gives an accurate Description of Trophonius's
Antrum, and says, that he himself consulted the Oracle there. Now Pausanias was
a Grammarian of Caesarea in Cappadocia, and lived in the second Century; so
that by Mr. Att's favor, Oracles did not cease at the coming of Christ, which
Anthony van Dal^ has proved beyond all Contradiction. But to my Instance.
Pausanias declares by what Rites and Ceremonies, they prepared themselves, who,
to consult the Oracle, would descend into the Cave, and how they returned back,
by the same Hole they went down, their Feet foremost. Then has he these words
(...), etc. They say that none ever miscarried in the Cave, but that all
returned that went down, except one only, one of Demetrius's Halbadiers: Now
that Fellow had not run through the ritual course of Preparation for the Descent,
and descended, like an ungracious Fellow as he was, not to consult the Oracle,
but to discover the Priestcraft: him therefore for this unpardonable Sin, the
Priests of Trophonius made away, knowing that the dead tell no Tales; his Body
was afterward found the Lord knows how far from the mouth of the Cave, and
then they wrote his History, the Substance whereof was this, That he was a
profane Scorner, who with much ado, had made a shift to get rid of good
Principles, and such stiff Opinions, as he found inconsistent with a Soldier's
Life, and that he knew very little of the Divine Mysteries of the Gods, by
reason he was a proud, suspicious, witty, sensual Fellow.

The third and last thing to be inquired is, to whom Sir R. H. is beholden that
his History is not written, i. e. that he is not scandalously abused, for that
Mr. At. means; otherwise, to write his History, were to oblige the Age, and
perpetuate an honorable Name to a nobly descended Gentleman, who deserves it,
with our latest Posterity: And what a noble Theme were it to a Man that had a
Genius capable! The Roman and Grecian Orators prodigally wasted their Eloquence
on meaner Subjects than the unshaken Loyalty of Sir R. H. during the Troubles
of K. Charles the First, and Second, his Faithfulness to his Country during the
Reign of King James, his Courage and Wisdom in defending the happy Choice of
the People, and the Right of our present successful Deliverer, our just and
lawful King William.

But we are to inquire to whom Sir R. is beholden, that after he has exposed
Priestcraft, he himself is not scandalously abused, and defamed in a virulent
and lying sort of a History. Mr. At. says that Sir R. is beholden to the real
Religion of others, meaning, no doubt, of himself and Friends. Now real
Religion will certainly restrain a Man from false Reproaches, but nevertheless
[to suppose that Mr. At. has some Religion] that was not the thing which
restrained him from a scandalous History, for then it would have restrained him
also from a scandalous Sermon; much less was it any Reverence to Sir R. H. as
being a Person of Honor, and a Privy-Counsellor: for Priests have not given
such a Divine Right to Kings, but that they dare open their Characters, and
will do it, when they find themselves neglected. King William our invited
Defender, our successful Deliverer, our rightly chosen, just and lawful
Sovereign, has not escaped from impudent and wicked, unrighteous, and
ungrateful Reflections in Priestly Protestations, Prints and Preachments: Was
it then Sir R. H's good luck which saved him from unchristian Reproaches? A Man
must have very good luck that lives unreproach'd in the midst of a crooked and
perverse Generation, the late excellent Archbishop could not do it, but was
even by Priests reported a Socinian, tho he has wrote against their reputed
Heresy, if not with all the Evidence which could be desired, yet beyond any
other Trinitarian; and [which recommends him to the Esteem of all sincere
Christians] he has wrote with a due Charity to Dissenters, which also is part
of the honorable Character of that good Man, the present Bishop of Gloucester.
But what do I talk of good luck? a word which unthinking Men use when the
Reason of a thing is not very plain. A little thinking and reasoning will
perhaps satisfy the curious why the Author of the History of Religion has not
been dressed up in the San Benito. For, reason we thus: Would Mr. At. be
content that his Character should be opened, and the History of his Life drawn
forth? he must needs have more Tenderness for his own Reputation than so. He
knows it is not Prudence [or should know so] to break his Neighbor's Windows,
when his own House is made of Glass.

Again, we may consider, that tho a Dog may bark, and no body mind him, yet if
he bite, he may chance to have his Teeth knocked out.

The railing of Mr. Fr. Atterbury I have reproved; as to the other short part
which may be called Sermon, I will remark but one thing, upon one Period.

They say, a fair Reasoner ought to represent the full force of his Adversary's
Argumentations, but there is no need he should mend them, unless he begin to be
sick of his own Hypothesis; wherefore I cannot but wonder at one Period of Mr.
Att's Sermon, p. 19. The Jews were a Proverb and a Byword to the rest of the
World, the perpetual Subject of Contempt and Reproach; and who would have
thought [may we suppose one of those wise Heathens to have said] that Truth
should have lain hid, among such an odd sort of People in such a little spot of
the World? Now what Disciple of Spinoza or Hobbs could have put such pointed
words into the Mouth of a wise Heathen? and what Preacher beside At. would
have done it? there too, where he held not himself obliged to make something of
a Reply, to take off the ill Influence it might chance to have on young
unstable People? it would have become him, at least to have subjoined, that
that odd sort of People were God's chosen, and the special care of his
miraculous Providence, and the little spot of Ground by them inhabited, blessed
above all the Earth.

SIR,
IT IS to no purpose to tell the World what moved me to write this Pamphlet, yet
for my own sake, I am contented that they know what did not: It was not a
desire of your Favor, I had that before, and was in no danger of losing it; it
was not any Command from Sir R. H. he hardly knows my Face, needs none of my
Defense, and I heartily beg his Pardon for the Sawciness of the Attempt; it was
not to get Bread, but that proves it self, for I conceal my Name, that I may
not lose my Curacy; yet could the Age bear plain dealing as well from a poor
Priest, as from a generous Poet, I would soon be known: for tho no Man who has
so little, is so little concerned about getting more, yet I am not of so poor a
Spirit neither, but that I could pati divitias, suffer to have my Commons
mended. You called to my mind the other day [I thank you] this excellent Proverb,
Wisdom is good with an Inheritance; take me a disputing the Inspiration of the
Author, and tell my Friends, a kind Wish is too good for me.

As to the Reasons and Arguments which I have used against the Libeller, I
doubt not but that they will appear to the impartial Reader, plain, strong and
convincing; but whether my Readers be impartial, or biased, it is all one to
me, I shall be as well satisfied in angring a Zealot for Priestcraft, as in
pleasing an honest Enquirer after, and Lover of Truth.

My Style is careless, but I hope intelligible, it should have been quick and
sharp, but you forbad it, wherein you were to blame. For, 1. The lewd Libeller
is the most virulent and audacious that ever wrote. 2. His Friends among us,
that are most fierce for securing the Trade of Priestcraft, are least
concerned for the Honor of God, in restraining vile Immoralities. 3. I never
yet knew nor heard of a Zealot for Priestcraft, but the same was, as the
Libeller, an Impugner of the Right and Title of King William to the Crown. Now,
Sir, what do you think of your self, that would have me deal gently with Men
that blaspheme both God, and the King? Do you think your good Nature will bear
you out? I hope you are not hedging in an Interest against the Return of Popery
and Slavery, which, since the Reduction of Namur, even the Jacobites are grown
weary of expecting. I know not what to say to you, but for once, since I have
complied with the excess of your Humanity, if the World will forgive my fault,
I will forgive yours; nay, and be so liberally obliging to you, as to lend an
Ear to your softer Counsels another time. So fare you well.

Nov. 4. 1695.
A REPLY TO THE Anonymous Edinburgh Libeller,

Wherein the Honorable Sir R. H's History of Religion is vindicated from the
invidious, and unreasonable Exceptions of Priestcraft.

Also some Right done to that great and good Man Dr. Tillotson, late
Archbishop of Canterbury.

And a Word offered in Defense of his surviving Friend, the Eminent Bishop of
Salisbury.

Printed in the Year, 1696.

HAving lately had sight of a Libel, said to be printed at Edinburgh, and
forged by a true Son of the Church, [so the Author would have it believ'd] I
congratulate Sir R. H. the being plentifully railed at, in so good Company as
the late Archbishop, a Prelate of the most consummate Worth that ever sat on
the Throne of Canterbury, and the learned Bishop Burnet, to whose singular
Merits, the English may well forgive the flagitious Attempts of hundreds of his
Countrymen, provided there be never an Edinburgh Libeller among them.

Were I the Praeceptor entrusted with the breeding of a hopeful young
Gentleman, to season his tender Mind with the sound and honest Principles of
holy Religion, I would have him carefully read Archbishop Tillotson's Sermons.
To acquaint him with the nature of the English Government, to instruct him in
the true Interest of his Country, and to let him into the Differences between
the Romanists, and the Reformed, I would put into his Hands no Book sooner,
than Bp Burnet's exact and faithful History of the Reformation: and to teach
him to distinguish Truth from Falsehood, [that so he might happily conjoin the
Christian and the Philosopher, which is impossible to be done, but by a free
use of Reason, and an unawed Examination of the Grounds of what is commonly
receiv'd] Sir R. H. should be none of the last Examples, which I would propose
for his Imitation; for as every Man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own
Lust, so every Man is cheated, when he is misled by his own Credulity.

That part of the infamous Libel, on which I shall chiefly reflect, is called a
Supplement. A Supplement, bless us! and yet the two former carried convitiorum
plaustra, Waggonloads of Slander; such store of Lies quantum in Acheronte
mortuorum est, the dead may as easily be numbered: I will make him swallow some,
and let things take their course; for who can forbear his Amen to the
Bilbo-prayer, Rumpatur quisquis rumpitur invidia, Let Envy burst the
Malcontent with its rank poisonous Plethory.

When Caiaphas told the Chief Priests and Pharisees, It is expedient that one
Man should die for the People, he prophesied, tho he did not know it, and his
words were true in a sense which he never intended: So our true Son, but of the
Lord knows what Church, [I am sure of no Church under the King of England's
Dominions] speaks more Truth in his first Paragraph, than in all his Work
beside. Some of his words are these, The History of Religion gives a like
account of Religion as Dr. Tillotson, and quotes him with great Applause, as
the true Pattern of Orthodox Divinity, and much in the Doctor's Style and Air.
If Sir R. H. in his History gives such an account of Religion as the ABp does
in his Sermon, what good Christian, or what but morally honest Deist, would
offer to open his Mouth against it? If the honorable Layman quotes the
venerable Prelate with great Applause, as the true Pattern of Orthodox
Divinity; who, but an inveterate Schismatical Non-juror, would be so
contemptibly foolish, as to accuse him of want of Reverence to Priests because
of their Character? and if the History of Religion be wrote in the Style and
Air of the Archbishop, then all ingenious and discerning Men will confess,
that it has, beside the usefulness of its excellent Matter, all the happy
accession of winning Ornament, which Wit and Words can give it. Naturalists
say, that venomous Serpents carry their Antidote with them, but this foolish
pestiferous Animal presents his Antidote first; so that his Poison is like to
have no effect on his Readers. Sir R. H. he lastly says, ridicules all
Revealed Religion, and turns it into what he calls Priestcraft. Whereas it is
that Gentleman's formed Design to separate Religion both Natural and Revealed
from Priestcraft. He is concerned that there should be any Knaves among the
Priests, and so many Fools among the People; wherefore he does his part, to
instruct the one, and convince the other: and tho there be little hopes, that
Argument should prevail much upon the latter, who by their Craft maintain their
Pride, their Power, and Luxury, yet by making the former wiser, these may
chance to be brought to something of Reason.

The Libeller hopes to detract from Sir R.H. by accusing him of having borrowed
his History, from a Work of Mr. Blount's: In Answer to this I note, that
neither of those Gentlemen pretend to invent their Matter, and since they treat
of one and the same Subject, it is not strange, if they make some the same
Observations. I wish the former had published none, but wherein the latter does
agree with him. As for the latter, he has through a long course of Life, shown
a steady Honesty, in all his Writings, a solid Judgment; and whosoever has Wit
enough to lend, he has no need to borrow. He adorns his Subject with that just
reasoning and proper method, with that Manly Style and agreeable turns of
Ingenuity, which must needs win the Heart and convince the Understanding of
every Reader, that is not interestedly obstinate, nor naturally stupid: And
then, without giving any just cause of Offense, [which it is to be confessed
Mr. Blount has done] he entertains us delightfully and usefully on several
Topics, that are not to be met with in the Great Diana. Had Mr. Blount but
borrowed from Sir R. H. and confined his Wit to Sir Robert's juster reasonings,
his Fame also might have defied the impotent Malice of the Libeller.

But the Libeller is no Borrower; what he says of them, whom he has chose to
hate, is pure Invention, so false, that no body could have the Impudence to say
it before him; and tho there is a wonderful variety of false Doctrines preached
up and down in the World, yet he has advanced some new, and is gone beyond his
best-worst Masters. I shall take notice of the Particulars as I meet them. But
when he reproaches Mr. Blount for an Atheist, [whom I will not vindicate, tho I
think him but a Deist, which is no good Character neither for one bred up in
the Christian Religion, and capable of examining the Grounds of it] and tells
of his Intimacy with Dr. Tillotson, the Reader cannot but be amazed at the
senseless Calumny. There Is an ironical way of Commendation, whereby the Person
commended is exposed to Contempt and Scorn; and there is a witless way of
railing, whereby a spiteful Wretch destroys his own Credit. Machiavel has
abused the Libeller with his villainous false Axiom, Fortiter calumniare,
aliquid saltem adhaerebit; for against a Man generally well spoken of, much
seen, and long tried, a subtle Whisper might chance to create unjust
Suspicions, but heavy loads of odious Calumnies flung at such a one will not
leave a Blemish. It is possible that a gaudy Atheist, or a scandalous Non-juror
might sometimes obtrude an unwelcome Visit on Archbishop Tillotson; but he
must have been a Man truly virtuous, and in all probability not meanly learned,
that could have an Intimacy with him: for tho his Grace was as easy of Access,
as Business, Civility, or Charity required him; yet he received none but the
best, the bravest, and most knowing into his Bosom. A just Defense of this
famous and incomparable Prelate, I wish well to, but have not the happy
Leisure, nor just Ability which the Work requires; yet that the Defamatory
Libeller may not triumph in his Iniquity, I will examine his Supplement further
than I intended. So then, before I do that Right, which was my first Intention,
to Sir R. H. I must reprove the Libeller for his unchristian and injurious
Treatment of Archbishop Tillotson: and that no just occasion of Offense may be
given to any sincere Christian, I must premise, that the Libeller has so
twisted his Objections against the Archbishop, with those against Mr. Blount,
that there is no avoiding some Defense of that unfortunate Gentleman; but as for
his Theistical, or Atheistical Notions, [if he has any such] God forbid that I
should offer the least word in Defense of them. If Mr. Blount meant through the
Heathen Sacrifices, to wound those of Moses, he is to be condemned for it; but
this thing he says well, that the Heathen Sacrifices ought no more to be
spared, for their Resemblance to the Sacrifice of Moses, than a Criminal ought
to be pardoned for wearing the same colored Garments as the Judge: I add, than
a treacherous Coward ought to be pardoned for his blew Coat, or a non-swearing
Parson pardoned his cursing the King for his cursing the Unitarians also, under
the invidious Name of Socinians. The Libeller affirms, that Mr. Blount builds
on the same Foundation as Dr. Tillotson in his Sermon of Sacrifices, etc. tho
he does not go the length of his Master Dr. Tillotson. Now what if Mr. Blount
does build on the same Foundation as Dr. Tillotson? I hope he is not to be
blamed for that, unless it can be proved, that the Doctor's Foundation is weak:
and if Mr. Blount goes not the same length as Dr. Tillotson, that is no Reproach
to the Doctor, unless it can be shown, that he went beyond the even measures of
just reasoning: and to suppose that both these do really look upon Sacrifice as
a Human Invention, can the Libeller produce a Divine Command instituting and
requiring the same? if he can, let him rail and spare not, otherwise it is
plain, he rails, because it is easier for a Man of his Parts and Principles, to
rail than argue. But that Dr. Tillotson speaks of revealed Religion, as a Human
Invention, that is a Devilish Invention of the Libeller.

There be Religions in the World, the greatest part of which is Human
Invention, and the Revelation pretended, a Pretense and no more; but that the
Revelations made to Moses, or those imparted to the World by the Ministry of
Jesus Christ, were Inventions of Men, this the Archbishop has not said, no,
nor so much as intimated: had the Libeller himself but imagined, that the
Archbishop had intimated so much, he would not have failed to point out the
place; but the Archbishop not giving him the occasion to belie him plausibly,
he does it roundly and boldly, not doubting but that a foolish Jacobite of no
Faith, will believe a lying Jacobite of no Conscience at any time.

But whereas the Libeller reviles the Archbishop for what he has taught, now
on this Article, now on that, without Order, or Art, after a desultory manner,
familiar to frantic Enthusiasts, as his Spirit moved him, and ill Language
came in his way; I think it more becoming for me to propose something of
Method, and so to consider, 1. What the Libeller in his Supplement objects
against the Archbishop, concerning the Original of Sacrifice. 2. Concerning
the Sacrifice of Christ. 3. Concerning future Punishments. On the first Topic,
the Archbishop is blamed for teaching, in his Sermon of the Sacrifice and
Satisfaction of Christ, That a very great part of the Jewish Religion which was
instituted by God himself, seems to have been a plain Condescension to the
general Apprehension of Mankind concerning the way of appeasing the offended
Deity with Sacrifices. This the Libeller pronounces a most irrational and
blasphemous Account of Christ's Sacrifice and Death; but, say I, it is no
Account at all of the Sacrifice and Death of Christ, being only a short
Digression from that Subject. They that hired this Fellow to write against the
Archbishop, hired him for the sake of his Impudence, not for any great Cunning
to varnish his Scandal, and give it the Air of Probability. The general
apprehension of Mankind concerning Sacrifice, and the Condescension of God to
the Jews might properly enough be used by way of Exordium to a Discourse
concerning the Sacrifice and Death of Christ, or brought in by way of
Similitude, as they are by the Archbishop; the Reader may peruse the whole
Paragraph, which begins thus, And indeed a very great part of the Jewish
Religion, etc. He that cannot distinguish the general Apprehension of Mankind,
and the Condescension of God to the Jews, from the particular Sacrifice and
Death of Christ, was never made to decide a controverted difficult Question,
but to be laughed at for meddling with that he does not understand, tho a
Malapert Ignoramus should not escape so neither; and therefore I shall give him
some farther Correction before he and I part.

In the Paragraph of the Archbishop, cited and reproved by the Libeller, there
are two things to be distinctly considered: 1. The general Apprehension of
Mankind concerning the appeasing God by Sacrifice. 2. God's Condescension to
the Jews, who were, with the rest of Mankind, possessed by that Apprehension.
1. The general Apprehension, etc. p. 9. the Archbishop calls it, a certain
Apprehension and Persuasion, which had very early and universally obtained
among Mankind; only he will not determine, p. 10. whether it had its rise from
Divine Revelation, or otherwise. But the Libeller, like that sort of Person,
whose way is to rage, and be confident, positively affirms, that there is
nothing more plain, than how the Heathen came to the Knowledge of Sacrifice,
viz. that Cain, tho he corrupted the true Religion, yet preserved the
Institution and derived the Worship of Sacrifices to his Posterity. So page 27.
and p. 5. in his Charge of Socinianism against the Archbishop considered, he
doubts not to affirm, that Sacrifice was commanded by God to Adam, and that all
the Christian World have hitherto believed, that God revealed to Adam his
Pleasure concerning that Worship. Of which two things, the former is at least
suspicious, but the latter is notoriously false, and he knows it. To take off
all Suspicion from the former, let the Libeller, if he can, produce one Text of
Scripture, where the least mention is made of any Law imposing the Worship of
Sacrifice given to Adam, Abel, or Cain, Noah, Abraham, his Patriarchal Progeny,
or any Man whatsoever, before the days of Moses: but instead of that, he gives
his suspicious Assertion all the Air of a presumptuous Boldness, not so much as
pretending an Argument, by way of Consequence remote, in favor of it: for it
is not enough for him, with the rest of Mankind, to be liable to Mistakes,
unless he also lets his Reader see, that he judges of Truth by his vicious
Interests, by his Passions and Affections, by his sick Prejudices, and
malicious Distaste; yet I will not take the advantage of his leaving his
Magisterial Sayings to shift for themselves, but fairly consider what Men of
better Temper, more Sense and greater Learning, who have happened erroneously
to say the same, were wont to plead in defense of their so doing. 1. They were
wont to cite Heb. 11.4. By Faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent
Sacrifice than Cain. And hence to plead thus; Divine Faith relies upon Divine
Revelation: if Abel by Faith offered, then he, or his Father had an immediate
Revelation from God, requiring that Service. But why that Consequence? for is
it not enough to raise the Gift of Abel to the Title of (...), a greater
Sacrifice, i. e. in the acceptance of God, than Cain's; if it proceeded from a
truly pious Affection, and a firm Persuasion that God would amply reward him,
for his testifying his Obedience, in such Instances, as he found himself
obliged to by his Reason. Reason was a Digest or Body of Laws, which we know
that God did give to Adam; but, that God gave him any other, that we do not
know. It is not unreasonable to think, that Natural Reason might lead Abel to
sacrifice, that Natural Reason might beget in Abel a Persuasion, how God would
graciously reward that pious Affection, which he sought to testify by
Sacrifice; such Persuasion is the same thing as Faith, tho not as Mosaical
Faith, nor Christian Faith. He that comes to God, must believe that he is, and
that he is a Rewarder: Indeed the Object of Faith grows wider, according to the
compass which Revelation gives it, but still it is Faith in God to believe that,
which Reason judges to be highly probable. But further, to show the Weakness of
the Consequence drawn from this Text, it may be considered, that in the same,
Abel's Sacrifices are called Gifts, which intimates, that they were voluntary
Offerings, which proceeded purely from his own Inclination and Choice, and not
from any express Law, any positive Command which required them at his Hands;
nor is it of small moment to note, that the Acceptance which Abel's Sacrifice
found with God in this Text, ascribed to the virtue of his Faith, is in 1 John
3.12. ascribed to his righteous Works. 2. That Sacrifices owe their Original to
a Divine Command, some would infer from Genesis 4.5. where it is said, that Cain's
Countenance fell, because God had no respect to his Offering. For they argue
thus; If Cain's Countenance fell, [which was a Token of his dejected Mind]
because his Offering was not respected, then it must follow, that the Offerer
offered in hopes of Reward, which hope of a Reward he could not reasonably
entertain, unless he offered in Obedience to a Divine Command, and not upon a
Presumption of his own Brain. But why might not the Sons of Adam hope for
Reward and Blessings from the Goodness of God, when they sought to propitiate
him according to the best of their Understandings, where they had no positive
Precept? I see not but they had all reason for hope in this case, especially if
they looked on their Creator, which they certainly did, as a just and merciful
Being. But the Argument drawn from this Text of Genesis, must needs appear of
no force, if a Man will but consider, that we find in Scripture, God has
accepted of Services paid, nay Services but intended to be paid, [witness
David's purpose to have built him a Temple] which he never particularly
expressly required. 3. Some think that Sacrifice must needs owe its Original to
positive Divine Command, because otherwise they know not how to excuse the
first Sacrificer from Will Worship, which they think is condemned by the
Apostle, Col. 2.23. Now I grant it is not for Man of himself to appoint how, or
with what, God shall be worshipped: But when Man, not having received a
positive Divine Command, follows the Conduct of his Reason in the Worship which
he pays to God, he of himself does not appoint the same, but God that endowed
him with the Principle of Reason: and tho the way which he chooses of
worshipping God, may not improperly be called Will Worship, because he chooses
it; yet, nor does it deserve to be condemned, nor does the Apostle condemn it.
The Voice of Reason is the Voice of God, as well as miraculous Divine
Revelation: we are farthest instructed by the latter, by the latter we are more
powerfully encouraged to our Duty; but our Obedience to the former, when we are
no farther instructed, nor encouraged, shall be, not only graciously accepted,
but also largely rewarded. That the Will Worship mentioned Col. 2.23. is not
condemned by the Apostle, I refer to Dr. Hammond, who has made that out beyond
Contradiction. Briefly, and plainly, where the Matter of Will Worship is
unlawful, there Will Worship is to be looked on as a Sin; but where the Matter
of it is perfectly lawful, and not forbidden, there Will Worship is not only no
Sin, but an Act of Religion, holy and well-pleasing unto God: which is very
evident, not only from the natural Reason of the thing, but also from the
Letter of Scripture, which bears honorable Testimony to the good purpose of
David's Heart, and to the voluntary Abstinences and Austerities of the
Rechabites; also the Practice of our Savior in observing a Feast instituted by
the Maccabees, does abundantly confirm the same. The chief Arguments that have
been offered by those modester mistaken Men, [who do not hold Opinions they
know not why] to persuade that Sacrifices were at first instituted by positive
Precept from God, I have now answered. Let the Libeller, if he can, answer
those Arguments, which [as it appears to me] do fully evince, that the first
Sacrificers sacrificed, moved thereunto by the sole Impulse of their own honest
reasoning Minds; and those Arguments I shall mention. 1. As a Preliminary, it
will go a great way, that neither in the Books of Moses, nor of any Sacred
Writers, is there the least mention of a Command from God for his being
worshipped with Sacrifice. But, 2. On the contrary, there are many Texts
scattered up and down, which declare the little or no Esteem that God sets upon
that Worship. God expostulates with the Sacrificers, and asks them to what
purpose were the multitude of their Sacrifices, and plainly tells them, that he
was satiated with them, that he had no pleasure in them, that he hated them,
etc. Psalm. 40.7. Isa. 1.11, 12, 13, 14. To evade these plain words, some are
contented to plead, that a weak but inveterate Opinion had possessed the Minds
of the stupid Jews concerning the intrinsic Excellence of Sacrifice, the great
Value of it, by it self, without Obedience, and that God did not intend
strictly to signify that Sacrifice was an Abomination to him, but to teach
those Jews to consider, which it was, Sacrifice or Obedience, that he esteemed
most: Sacrifice alone, Sacrifice without Righteousness, that God hated; but
when Sacrifice was offered up with clean Hands, he was pleased both with the
one and the other. Thus may the literal Sense of any Text be paraphrased away
to serve an Hypothesis, but I shall show, that God, who often renewed his Laws
and Commands of Righteousness, has disclaimed the having spoke unto the Jews,
and commanded them to sacrifice: this is a third Argument, and enough alone to
determine this Controversy; Jer. 7.22. For I spoke not unto your Fathers, nor
commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the Land of Egypt,
concerning Burnt-offerings or Sacrifices. That God might abate the great
Opinion which the Jews had entertained concerning Burnt-offerings and
Sacrifices, he professes he never commanded them in the day that he brought his
People out of Egypt. O! but for all that, say our Adversaries, God might have
commanded them in the early days of the World, soon after he created Man: but
this of all their Evasions is the most weak and senseless; for it were an
impertinent Argument, and not at all fitted to abate the extravagant Opinion
which the Jews had of Sacrifice, if God who did not command the same, when he
brought his People out of Egypt, should have commanded that Worship in the
beginning of the World: Had God commanded Sacrifices in the beginning of the
World, that early Command must have made them as sacred and necessary, as any
later could do. To abate the extravagant Opinion which the Jews had of
Sacrifice, nothing less could be pertinent, than letting the People know that
God never commanded it, nor in the days of Moses, nor in the days of the first
Men. The Prophet indeed brings in God professing with a seeming Restriction,
that he never commanded it, when he brought his People out of Egypt; but it is
accountable that he should so speak, tho he never commanded it before, because
we have no account that he did command it before; and if the Prophet by a
decent Prosopopeia, represents the All-wise God reasoning well, he did not. By
this time, I suppose, the Reader will grant me that the Libeller was
unreasonably angry at the Archbishop, for not determining whether Sacrifice
owed its Original to Revelation, or Natural Reason; and unreasonably confident
to determine the former; but when he affirms, that all the Christian World have
hitherto believed, that which he so confidently and unreasonably determines, he
says that which is notoriously, false; for, granting him to be the Ignoramus
which he seems to be, yet he must needs have read something: Some few must
needs have fallen under his notice, among a crowd of Writers, which declare
their Thoughts on our side, viz. that Natural Reason first taught Men to
sacrifice, which Service, when in process of Time, it became loaded with
Superstition and Fraud, it pleased God to separate from its grosser
Corruptions, and indulge to his People, with such Regulations as were proper to
distinguish them from the Heathen, and render that innocent, and in some
measure useful. Christian Fathers, and others, a good round Number are cited by
Dr. Spencer, de legibus Hebr. Ritualibus, and Dr. Outram, de Sacrificiis, who
all agree that no Command from God imposed the Rite of Sacrifice on the first
Sacrificers, but that they were led into it by their own Natural Reason,
judging it a good Testimony of their Gratitude to God, to present him with
something of that all which his Bounty had given them. What should tempt the
Libeller to affirm, that all the Christian World have been always persuaded of
the contrary, it is not easy to imagine; but of this I am convinced, that he
having belied an Archbishop of as great Knowledge and Virtue, as ever wore that
Dignity, is fitted to say any thing of any Man, to affirm the falsest, and deny
the most evident thing in the World.

The second remarkable thing in the abovementioned Paragraph of the
Archbishop, cited and reproved by the Libeller, is God's Condescension to the
Jews, who were possessed with the general Apprehension of Mankind, concerning
the way of appeasing him by Sacrifice. What the Archbishop has taught on this
Head, may be fairly and chiefly drawn up thus. When Religion ran to decay, and
there was no end of numerous Rites and Ceremonies, it pleased God for the
restoring that, for the reforming and regulating these, 1. Strictly to forbid
his People all Idolatry. 2. To admit no Rites whatsoever into his Service that
were immoral or dishonest; but then as for those borrowed from the Gentiles,
and by long use endeared to the Jews, which, tho little useful to the nobler
Purposes of Religion, were yet of an indifferent nature, and innocent in
themselves, those he adopted into the Ceremonial of his own Service by the
Ministry of his Servant Moses. But the Libeller, p. 2. of his Supplement,
represents the Archbishop, together with Mr. Blount, agreeing, that Sacrifice
was a Trick, and a barbarous Invention of wicked and foolish Men; also
teaching, that the Jewish Ritual was nothing but a Compliance of God with the
barbarous Wickedness of Men. (...). A little great Grecian, full of the Spirit
of his blind Father, bestowed this Stricture on the Accuser of his Brethren,
who has his Name from the business he goes about, viz. slandering and accusing:
I apply it not improperly to the Libeller; for, when the Devil slanderously
accused Job, it was not by falsely charging him with some vile Wickedness, which
his righteous Soul abhorred; but by slighting the high Character which God gave
of his upright Servant, and objecting, that his Piety, so much commended, was
not Affliction-proof. But this Libeller fears not to accuse a Man, little
inferior to Job, save that he had not his numbers of Children and Cattle, to
accuse him (I say) of blaspheming the Majesty of Heaven, and speaking ill of
the ways by which God was content to be worshipped. I see a Scholar may outdo
his Master, and even a Man, when he gives his Mind to it, (...), clearly put
down the Grand Accuser; but I will not wonder at it, for the Man that does
this, has the Conscience of a non-swearing Jacobite, and out-does his Master
only in Impudence not in Cunning. For this is very evident, that tho Sacrifice
most probably was invented by the untutored Reason of the first good and
grateful Men, yet when the Administration of it was restrained to peculiar
Persons, they quickly played Tricks with it, such as sensual and covetous Men
are always given to; but when they brought up Human Sacrifice, that surely was
a barbarous Invention, a mischievous Trick of the inhuman Sacrificer, to
gratify his own vindictive Spirit: For whom will Calchus nominate to appease
the Wrath of his Apollo, but some unhappy envied Sinon? With such Inventions
and Tricks as these, far is it from God that he should comply, and far from the
Archbishop was the imputing to God such a Compliance: But that God should
condescend to indulge the Jews some Heathenish Rites, not wicked nor immoral,
that is very agreeable to the Scripture-Accounts concerning Sacrifice, and very
probable from the Consequences of unstrain'd Reason. 1. It Is very agreeable to
Scripture-Accounts concerning Sacrifice: that the Rites and Ceremonies in use
among the Heathens, gave occasion to the Rites and Ceremonies among the Jews,
cannot perhaps be proved by plain, full and express words of Scripture; but
neither can the contrary be so proved, nay the contrary cannot be fairly
inferred thence, which this can, being not obscurely implied in several places,
and therefore I might well call it agreeable to Scripture; Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8. For
what Nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them as the Lord our
God is in all things, that we call upon him for? and what Nation is there so
great, that has Statutes and Jugdments so righteous as all this Law which I
set before you this day? This place Jonathan, and the Jerusalem Targum
paraphrase thus. It Is the Custom of the Nations to carry their Gods about on
their Shoulders, that they may seem near, tho they are far enough off, for they
hear not with their Ears, i. e. they have no Ears to hear; whereas the Word of
the Lord is seated high on his Throne above, and he hears our Prayers whenever
we pray before him, etc. Moses therefore, that he might engage the Minds of the
Jews to God, and the Ceremonial Ordinances which God had instituted by him,
seems in the Text to design this reasoning. I know that you desire a God, a God
not covered with a Cloud, and to be seen only by the Eyes of the Mind, not a
God so far as that is from you, but a God that illustriously manifests his
Presence, and by Prodigies, Oracles and symbolical Representations, does as it
were set himself before your Eyes plainly to be beheld: Well, I know that you
have a very great Opinion of the sacred Rites in use among the Gentiles, and
that nothing would please you more than Religion dressed up after their Modes,
with much busy Ceremony and Pomp, which you look on as Tokens of Divine
Presence. Now I would have you consider that God has graciously condescended to
your Desires, insomuch that I dare confidently appeal to you, what Nation has
their Gods so near, as the Lord you God is unto you? What Nation has so
glorious Testimonies of Divine Favor and Presence as you have? You that admire
the Rites of Strangers so much, tell me what Foreign Nation worships their Gods
with Rites so decent, and significant, so innocent, so grave and so becoming,
as you do: for you worship not the great and good God with that wild mixture of
Gentile Rites, some of which are very ridiculous, some very cruel, some impure
and abominable; no, the Rites which you have borrowed from Strangers, through the
Indulgence of your God, are corrected and separated from all their odious, vile
and base Pollutions, are so ordered and disposed, as to lead you to a right
knowledge of God, which brings him near to you, and you to him. If the Reader be
really free from all Prejudices and Prepossessions, I am much persuaded, that
he will grant me this Paraphrase is unforced and very natural. He may please to
consider further, that Moses in the Text compares the Rites of the Jews and
Gentiles together, to show the Jews how their Rites were preferrable to the
Rites of the Gentiles, which implies a similitude between them: and it is not
easy to think, that God of himself would fashion the Jews Rites to a Conformity
with the Rites of the Gentiles; but it is very reasonable to think that God
might indulge the Jews, as much as might be any ways made fitting to be
indulged. I have been so long on this Text, which I have in great measure
interpreted in the words of Dr. Spencer, that I shall but mention what others
are quoted for the same purpose, and refer the Reader to that learned Author,
who applies them with great Learning, Wit and Judgment, Acts 13.8. Exodus 20.25.
Levit. 1.2. Numb. 6.1. Gal. 4.3.

I pass over the Testimonies of Ancients and Moderns, Jews and Christians, who
have declared their Opinion fully with the Archbishop in this matter, viz.
that the Rites and Ceremonies in use among the Heathens gave occasion to the
Rites and Ceremonies among the Jews, which God indulged to his People, when he
had corrected, limited, ordered them so, as to prevent Idolatry, and take away
several unhappy occasions of Immorality; these I pass over, because,
notwithstanding what some sometimes pretend, I never knew a Man that cared two
straws for Authority when he saw that Authority was against him, and thought
that Reason was for him. Wherefore I proceed to show, that the Doctrine I am
treating of, appears probable from the Consequences of unstrain'd Reason.

1. Consider the Circumstances of the Mosaic Rites, they were not such as God
could take delight in, for any real Excellency in them, they were not
perfective of Human Nature, had no Tendency to make Men more just, merciful and
temperate. Now it is not reasonable to think that God would load his People
with such empty Rites, only to show his Power, only because he would do it; but
very suitable it is to the Notions which we have of God, to believe that he
might condescend to the Infirmities of his People, and indulge them Rites to
which they were addicted, when he had cleans'd them from Sin.

2. Consider the time when the Rites of the Jews were instituted, for 2000
Years the People of God were unacquainted with those Rites, which passed into
Law but in the days of Moses; we read nothing of them in Scripture before that
Lawgiver: What! was God's Nature changed, was he grown weary of the Purity and
Simplicity of the Worship which the best Men of the first Ages paid him? How
vain an Imagination were this! and how likely therefore [for new Manners we say
need new Laws] that God, having to do with a People grown refractory, and prone
to Idolatry, by their long Converse with the Egyptians, should, to prevent
their Idolatry, indulge them some use of Egyptian Rites purged from Egyptian
Abuse and Superstition?

3. The Multitude, the Pomp, the Splendour of the Jewish Rites speak them to be
of Heathen Original. Had God imposed the Jewish Rites, either merely to show
his Power, or to adumbrate something of the Gospel Dispensation, one is apt to
think they needed not to have been so numerous, nor so glorious; numerous and
glorious were the Rites of the Gentiles, and there is a reason for it. Idolatry
nakedly and in it self considered, has nothing to entice the Minds of Men,
therefore that stood in need of making use of those bewitching Rites, which
might strike upon the Senses, and tempt the vain Imaginations of Men, such as
sumptuous Priestly Robes, solemn Processions, pompous Spectacles, glorious
Temples, sweet Music, odoriferous Perfumes, joyful Dancings, Images shining
with Gold and Jewels. But true Religion which is acceptable to God on its own
account dwells in the Mind, exerts its self in Praises of, and Prayers to God,
in Acts of Temperance, Justice and Mercy, this needs not multitudes of pompous
Rites to recommend it: For to consider it well, is all that is requisite to
bring Men in love with it. Therefore when God gave the Jews Rites many and
pompous, it is most likely he did it, by way of Condescension to their
Infirmity, who were so strongly addicted to that, which of it self could not
profit.

5. The near Affinity and Resemblance between the Rites of the Jews and the
Gentiles, makes it highly probable, that the Rites of the former were borrowed
from the latter. But why not as well the Rites of the latter from the former? I
will assign the Reason.

The Egyptians long before the days of Moses were a People famed for their
Learning, and much taken notice of for the solemn Rites and Usages in Matters
Civil and Profane; whereas the Jews grew from an envied Family, to a numerous
hated People, whom the Egyptians, jealous of their Numbers, oppressed with the
hardest Slavery, and used with the most contemptuous Scorn, inventing Lies to
their Disgrace, and exacting Tasks above their Strength. Now a Man must be
stupidly senseless, that can imagine, or impudently partial, that dares affirm,
that so celebrated a Nation as the Egyptians, pompously and operosely
superstitious, threw off the bewitching Rites of their Ancestors which they had
been so long, so much in love with, to follow the strange Rites of their poor
miserable misused Slaves; he must be a very obstinate Man, that will not
acknowledge the Egyptians to have been as averse to the Rites as the Persons of
the Jews, for such is the general Disposition of Mankind, those they have the
least love for, their Manners they least imitate: but to give this Argument its
full Strength, let it be considered, that the Jews were held as a vile and base
People in the Eyes of other Nations besides the Egyptians; few Historians take
any notice of them, and they that do, mention them with Scorn and Indignation,
give them a Character much worse than they deserved, tho they deserved no good
one; and would the Egyptians borrow their Rites from such a People think you?
the Libeller's Faith cannot digest it, as for what his Tongue may say, I matter
not that, nor he neither. Again, as the Egyptians were famed for their
Learning, and Antiquity, so were they not meanly proud of these Advantages;
ancient Writers describe them very full of themselves, opiniative of their own
Ways, and Manners, and utterly averse, not only from all Communication with the
despicable Jews, but also with any other Neighbors; they studiously declined
Foreign Intercourse and Friendships, and that for this very reason, that they
might preserve their ancient Rites and Customs sacred and safe from Innovation
[I refer for Authorities to Dr. Spencer, from whom I borrow the most I say in
this matter:] if the Egyptians would have changed their Manners, the Jews
should have been the last whom they would have followed. I need add no more on
this Head, when I have noted that the most famous Grecian Philosophers are said
to have traveled into Egypt, as the famous School of the World for Knowledge
sacred and profane, thence they borrowed their Rites; and Plutarch one of the
many Authors who tells us so, does likewise affirm of the Jews in his Life of
Pythagoras, that they mixed many things borrowed from the Egyptians with their
own holy Rites.

I have said enough to justify what the Archbishop has taught concerning the
Original of Sacrifice; and who is there now, that will not be amazed at the
Impudence of the Libeller, who in his first Libel against the Archbishop, is
not ashamed to vomit up this ignorant, false and inconsistent Charge, p. 5.
This Author [meaning the Arch-bishop] would persuade us, that the Devil was the
Author and first Inventer of it [i. e. of Sacrifice] and that God came in but
at the second hand in imitation of the Devil, to graft upon his Stock? For, as
I have shown, the truth is, the Archbishop leaves it in doubt, whether
Sacrifice took its Original from Natural Reason, or Divine Revelation, and
might without any Injury to the Cause of Religion, have determined the former:
and he asserts but this, that when the sacrifical, and other ritual way of
Worship came to be grossly corrupted, God purged it from all its gross
Corruption; and because the Jews were incorrigibly fond of it, God having
purged it from all its gross Corruption, and ordered and disposed it wisely, he
then in pity to the Infirmity of his People, indulged it to them, but always
signified that he had no pleasure in Ritual Services for their own sakes, and
that what he most esteemed was Obedience to the Laws of Righteousness.
Generally base Men do either find or make some Umbrage for their Calumnies, but
never did wicked Wretch with Case-harden'd Conscience vouch such notorious
odious Lies, such broad and bare faced Calumnies as the Libeller. It Is plain to
me, if the Devil be a worse Creature, it is only because he has the greater
Power. It Is a Note of Varro's, which one would think could not but be true,
neque in bona segete nullam esse spicam nequam, neque in mala non aliquod
bonum, in the best Field of Corn some bad Ears, in the worst some good ones.
But the Libeller's Supplement is a Field which throws up plenty of wild
Fancies, gross Mistakes, malicious Reproaches, false Imputations; yet wherein
he quarrels the Archbishop, or Sir R. H. not one honest, probable or
pardonable Saying arises. How this comes to pass, is to me pure Amazement: if
it be Fate, the Libeller is doomed the most severely of all the Sons of Men; if
Free Will, none e're worse used his Liberty, no not the Traitor Judas; for,
it is true, he betrayed a better Man, but I do not read, he so belied him.

On two more Heads, viz. the Death of Christ, and the Eternity of
Hell-Punishments, great Outcries are raised against the Archbishop, but his
Grace's Reasonings are not considered, nor answered, that is not the Libeller's
way.

On the former, both the late Archbishop, and the present Bishop of Sarum
speak to this purpose, We know no reason but that God might, if it had pleased
him, have brought about the Salvation of Mankind by another way than the Death
of Christ, his Justice did not necessarily oblige him to redeem the World by
the Blood of his Son. I must confess, I think, that the Modern Unitarians have
more carefully, judiciously and exactly handled this Subject, than either of
these two very learned and good Bishops; but in Defense of what the latter
teaches, these things are plain and obvious. That Lord who punishes his Vassal
without a Cause, or more than the Cause offered does deserve, is unjust. That
Lord who exacts the utmost Penalty of the Breach of a just Law, is just; but he
is not obliged to exact it, because then he were obliged not to be merciful:
this Argument is close, plain, and must conclude the Dispute, unless Justice
[according to the Dream of John Calvin] be one thing with respect to Man, and
another with respect to God. I will prove that the Notion of the word Justice
is one and the same, let it be considered with respect to God or Man. We read
of no other measures of Justice in Scripture than never punishing beyond
Demerit; the Punisher, if a Supreme, always having the Power, not to punish so
far. Indeed Inferior Officers are absolutely bound to exact the utmost Penalty
of the Law transgressed, unless their Commission leaves some Cases to their
Discretion; but the supreme Governor of a Nation, and the great Governor of
the World, may if they please, forgive much, and be never the less just, they
may so for all that we read in Scripture, they may so for all that we can
discover by Reason. A constant unrelenting Execution of Justice leaves no room
for Mercy; but wise and gracious Acts of Mercy in proper time and place
dispensed are no Blemish at all to Justice. But if we suppose God to be just by
other measures of Justice than Scripture and Reason acquaint us with, we
mispend our time in talking about his Justice. Again, if we suppose Justice,
with respect to God, to be something which we cannot understand, or rather
something contrary to that which we do understand, and that it always requires
full Satisfactions for Sin, the Consequence of this will be, that God can
forgive no Sin; so that what the Libeller disputes for, is the eternal Misery
of Mankind. Let him dispute for his own Soul, as being unworthy of the Mercy
which he blasphemously reproaches, but it is an odd Opinion for one that calls
himself a true Son of the Church, that neither God, nor the King can be just,
while he is on this side Hell and the Grave. To urge Authority here is an
Argument little worth, that is, as to the Merits of the Cause, but it will sly
in the face of the Libeller, who vends his unintelligible Whimsies for received
Opinions; wherefore I will cite him one or two Ancients and Moderns of that
Class who might hope for his good word, if it be possible for any such to come
from his Lips. Athanasius, Tom. 1. Sermon. contra Arianos, p. 239. Edit. Commel.
Aug. l. 13. de Trin. c. 10. Calvin. Instit. l. 2. c. 12.. 1. Zanchius l. 11. de
Incarnatione, c. 3. quaest. 1: I spare the Reader the trouble of long
Transcriptions, and refer him to Grotius against Ravenspergerus in defense of
his Book De satisfactione Christi, who has collected many more Authorities for
the very same Doctrine which our two Bishops teach concerning the Death of
Christ.

When I have replied a few words in Vindication of the Archbishop's Sermon on
Matthew. 25.46. I shall leave the doing him farther Right to an abler Hand.

The Archbishop proposed to explain, how it can stand with the Justice and
Mercy of God, to punish Temporal Sins with Eternal Punishments. Rejecting the
common weak Solutions which passed in an Age less inquisitive and wicked than
ours, this is the chief thing on which the Archbishop insists. Tho he that
promises does thereby pass over a Right to another, and is obliged in Justice
and Faithfulness to make good his Promise, yet he that threatens keeps the
right of punishing in his own Hand, and is not obliged to execute what he has
threatened further than the Reason and the Ends of Government require. To the
same purpose the learned Bp Burnet teaches, That there is a Right of punishing
Sinners vested in God, which he may use, or not use, as he pleases. There is
not the least Syllable of what is here said by either of these worthy, learned
and pious Prelates, which the Libeller pretends to reason against; indeed their
words are plain and carry their Evidence with them: but the Libeller, well
knowing how impossible it was to disprove plain and evident Doctrines, conjures
up all the Powers of his old cankered Mind, the Spirit of Envy and of Malice,
of Impudence and of Falsehood, by the help of which, after he has told his
Reader that Mr. Blount argues against future Punishments, at least the Eternity
of them, he adds, -- Exact Dr. Tillotson's Notion in his Sermon upon Hell. And
he goes on thus: -- Mr. Blount disputes as Dr. Tillotson does, as if future
Punishments were inconsistent with the Goodness of God, when as it was the
Archbishop's formed Design, to show how Hell-Punishments did consist with the
Divine Justice, and Goodness, etc. and he has done it beyond reasonable
Objection. The only thing which can with any shadow of sober reasoning be
objected against the Archbishop, is, that if God has it in his Power to
forbear the executing of Eternal Vengeance on the wicked, yet it is not fit
that the People should be told so from the Pulpit, for thereby the Preacher
lessens the Discouragements of Sin, and very much weakens the strongest
Argument in the World to a holy and virtuous Life. Had the Libeller had but a
grain of quick Sense, (...) would have insisted on this Charge, but a Bigot
always sacrifices his Wit to his Zeal. Yet after all, the Defense of his Grace
would have been obvious to an equal Considerer: For, 1. Who is there that
observes not, how the many unaccountable Systems of Christianity, which are
impatiently contended for, and anathematically imposed by warm Professors, have
given occasion to Atheists to suspect the Grounds of all Religion, and to
Theists to question the Truth of our revealed.

Among the rest of Christian Articles generally received, which seem at first
sight not so very agreeeble to Natural Reason, that of Eternal Punishments is
one; hence arose a necessity of examining the Article, and explaining how much
was, and how much ought to be understood by it. 2. The sense of the words for
ever and everlastingly, not being always the same in Scripture, the Archbishop
found himself not obliged to account for the reasonableness of Punishments,
which could not but be of eternal Duration. 3. While the Archbishop supposes a
Power in God to remit of his Sentence, and not punish to the utmost extent of
his Threatenings, he does not in the least indulge the Sinner to think, but that
future Punishments shall certainly be of that Duration and Intenseness, that it
is infinitely more reasonable to prefer the Labors and Hardships of a virtuous
and godly Life, before the Liberties and Pleasures, of a sinful,

The odious Calumnies against the late Archbishop, which the Libeller threw in
my way, being thus removed, I return to the Justification of Sir R. H's
admirable History of Religion, which also I designed.

The Libeller in his Supplement marked p. 27. inveighing against the Censurers
of Priestcraft in general, has these words. Tho they have no account from the
Heathen how their Sacrifices began, yet these Gentlemen are very sure, they
were first introduced by Priestcraft. I will not deny, but that Mr. Blount
does suppose Sacrifice to have been an Heathenish Invention introduced by
Priestcraft; but for all that the Archbishop, or Sir R. H. has said,
Sacrifice may owe its first Original to the natural Reason of pious good Men in
the Infancy of the World; only they both were persuaded, that a great deal of
Priestcraft was early super-induc'd by the Sacerdotal Administrators, of which
Sir R. H. has taken but very sparing notice.

Upon King Charles his Restoration, a certain eminent Doctor appearing in the
Chapel at White Hall, a Noble Lord asked his Majesty, why he would suffer that
Person to appear there, who had decypher'd his Father's Letters taken at
Naseby; the King replied, Man! I ought to thank him for those he did not
decypher: And ought not the Libeller to have thanked Sir R. H. for the many
scandalous Instances of Priestcraft, which he has so obligingly past over in
silence. As to the Particular of Sacrifice [which tho the Priests did not
invent, yet they early made their Markets on't] we read even in the Old
Testament, that the Jewish Administrators of it, were not contented with that
share of Honor and Maintenance which was legally alloted them; and the
Votaries of the fair Sex, had something to complain of of another nature,
witness the Story of Hophni and Phineas: the Romish Priests have copied this
lewder Craft, and yet there is not a word concerning it in all the History of
Religion.

As to that Accusation, that Mr. Blount and Sir R. H. do not agree in the
Accounts which they give of the Original of Idolatry, I ask, will the Libeller
prove thence, that Sir R. H. took his History out of Mr. Blount's Diana, or
will he prove thence, that Idolatry is neither State-craft nor Priestcraft?
But how do Mr. Blount and Sir R. H. differ in the Accounts which they give of
the Original of Idolatry? Why, he says, that Mr. Blount makes Idolatry to be
the Invention of Kings, Sir R. H. of Priests. But, as his manner is, he belies
them both: Sir R. H's words, at most, come but to this, that Priests promoted
Idolatry, that they got by it, that it seems impossible it should enter into
the Minds of Men without some Direction and Design. Now for all that is here
affirmed, Men might be first cheated into the Opinion and Practice of Idolatry
by Kings, only to the Satisfaction of Priests, who found their account in
promoting it. What he quotes from Mr. Blount, is no more than that the
Primitive Institution of Idolatry received its Birth from Princes, at whose
Charge it was afterward educated by Ecclesiastics. Now the Invention of
Idolatry, is one thing, the Institution, and passing it into a Law, another; so
that, for all that is here affirmed, Men might be first cheated into the
Opinion by Priests, who studied to make their Court to Kings, at the expense of
the People.

The Libeller has one Line impertinent, and invidious above all the rest, it is
this. Malice to Kings and Priests commonly go together.

This joining Kings and Priests together is another Instance of Priestcraft,
for the omission of which, the Parties concerned ought to have been silently
thankful. As for Sir R. H. he has given sensible Testimonies of his Affection
and Reverence for Priests, Priests of like Sincerity and Virtue as that
excellent Prelate, of whose Sermons he makes honorable mention in his Preface,
and but with the last necessity was consenting to retire from that impatient
Tyranny, which for a while bore down all our Rights, Religious and Civil,
before it. But see the Craft of some Men, they flatter Kings, not for any love
they bear to a Crown, more than to the Rods and Axes of a Republic; but that
Kings raised to Heaven by them, may draw them up after; they make all to be Law
which comes from the Mouth of Kings, that Kings may make all that to be Gospel,
which comes from the Mouth of Priests. Let the Name of Kings in God's Name, be
for ever honored; but let Priests, that is, if they would deserve Esteem, know
their Distance, and their Duty: there is designing Sawciness in them, when they
join their Honor so nearly to that of Kings; from writing Kings and Priests,
they will rise to the vain Style of the Butcher's Son, Ego and Rex meus. Crafty
Priests, like Ivy, twist their clinging Arms around the Royal Oak, tenaciously
adhere, rob the Root of its nutritive Moisture, and if not timely torn away,
o're-top the tallest Branches, nay tear it all to pieces: every adhering part
still lives, and every creeping Fiber plots to steal into the decays of the
poor dying Trunk, and there a new Root infix; for it is all one to the Ivy, so
it have but a Supporter, whether it is a vigorous living, or a dull dead one.

Reflecting on Sir R. H. and others, the Libeller says, They make Religion to
be State-craft or Priestcraft, as it serves their Purpose. I answer for Sir R.
H. that he has sufficiently declared how true a sense he has of Religion in
that just and noble Character which he has given of the Archbishop's Sermons.
But if this Libeller would fain know distinctly what is State-craft, and what
Priestcraft, neither confounding the Terms, nor uniting the Sense, I will tell
him. When Kings make use of the learned Sophistry of obsequious Priests to
support their illegal Arbitrary Power, that Design in Kings is properly called
State-craft, or King-craft: bur when Priests preach up Passive Obedience, and
Non-resistance, their so doing is Priestcraft; for such crafty Priests as
those would not lavish a poor Prayer for ever a King of 'em all, if it was not
in prospect of a mighty Protection to bear them out in all their unwarrantable
Clerocatacurieuontisms; if this cramp word be too hard for the Reader, he may
pick the sense of it out of 1 Pet. 5.3.

The next Charge against Sir R. H. is this: He makes use of the Errors of the
Church of Rome to undermine Christianity. But sure a Man may reprove the Errors
of the Church of Rome without undermining Christianity, unless those Errors
belong to the Foundation, which God forbid it should be said; this I am sure,
Sir R. H. has not uttered, nor does the Libeller charge him to have uttered the
least word against Faith in Christ, Repentance, and good Works.

It is usual with Men to be fond of their own Conceptions, and confident that
every beloved Error of theirs belongs to the Foundation of Faith; but for one
that calls himself a true Son of the Church, to be so much concerned at the
Reproof of Romish Errors, argues that there is false fire in his Zeal, or but a
cold Indifference in his Protestant Profession, and that for his particular,
tho Priestcraft be the thing he chiefly studies, yet he is not his
Craft's-Master.

But further [says the Libeller] Sir R. H. spits his Venom against the Mosaical
Institution, and to prove this Charge he cites Hist. of Relig. p. 58. where Sir
R. H. has these words, Christ came to redeem us from the darkness of that
Condition we were in by strange and puzzling Methods of Religious Ceremonies
and Mysteries, various Rites of sacrificing, good for nothing but to confound
and distract the Minds of Men. Now if this be to spit Venom at the Mosaical
Institution, then the Penmen of the New Testament spit Venom at it most
outragiously; for they frequently speak of it in their Epistles, after the same
manner, as Sir R. H. in his History. Nay, St. Paul in one place, says all our
Fathers were under a Cloud, under a Vail; and if I be not much mistaken, he
calls their mysterious Rites and Ceremonies beggarly Elements.

But setting aside the Authority of the sacred Penmen, have not all the
Doctors which have labored in expounding the Mosaical Ceremonies, acknowledged
them to be very puzzling? The Calvinists are generally persuaded, that God
instituted the Ceremonial Digest, purely because he would do it; for no other
reason but to prove his People, whether they would obey his Laws, which had no
other Goodness in them, but what his Arbitrary Sanction gave them: but the
learned Spencer has satisfied me, that God designed in all those Laws to
distinguish his People from the Heathen, and wean them from Idolatry; but yet,
as Dr. Spencer confesses, it is not so very plain of every Ceremony, what was
the natural Tendency thereof to such good End. But as for Men's learning the
Duties of Morality from the Ceremonial Law, it was certainly dark as for
inclining them to Virtue, it was, without Contradiction, weak, and it were a
wonder if the Minds of Men should not be confounded and distracted by such
Methods.

But now for a dismal Charge! This Sir R. H. like a mere Infidel, not having
the Fear of God before his Eyes, borrows the Socinian Arms against Christianity.

To this I answer; 1. It is a silly Cavil. Such a one borrows Arms or Arguments
against this, or that; whereas the only thing worth noting, is, whether the
Borrower understands, and uses them with Skill.

2. Let it be examined whether the Libeller does not borrow his Reproaches;
indeed they are so gross and impudent they should be his own, yet were it worth
the while, I could show how he runs in debt for them to some of his craftier
Brethren, who have raised Slander to such a height, that it is not safe, no,
not for a Man of the greatest Integrity, to reprove any the most odious
Instances of Priestcraft.

3. But has Socinus wrote against Christianity?

The Downfall in Black-fryars upon Father Drury, and his Popish Conventicle, was
impudently published beyond Sea, by a bold turn of lying Priestcraft, as a sad
Judgment upon an Assembly of Heretics; this is the very Picture of the
Libeller's Charge: For, not to recount the Books which Socinus has wrote in
Confirmation of the Christian Religion, not to mention the honorable Testimony
which the Polonian Knight has bore to his Memory, even the Adversaries of that
famous Man will vindicate him from the Libeller's base Reproach. Mr. How, as
firm a Trinitarian as any Non-jurant Jacobite of 'em all, and much an honester
Man, fairly confesses concerning Socinus's Book de Deo, that it is wrote not
without Nerves, i. e. in plain English, it was wrote strongly and well; that,
and his other Books have been well worn by the best of our Preachers, and they
have mended their preaching by it. But perhaps they read with Judgment, and
left all the Antichristian Stuff to Sir R. H. no such matter, for they fought
against Christianity too with Socinian Arms, if the Libeller's word may be
taken. Time was [he says in his Postscript, page 24.] that Dr. Sherlock was a
rank Socinian in the Doctrine of Satisfaction, tho he grants, that that Doctor
has since made some Amends, and I think he is something altered, but whether
for the better or the worse, I will not take upon me to determine. But Sir R.
H. may comfort his Heart, for the better part of the Church-of- England-Clergy,
and some of the Dissenting Ministers, as appears by their Prints, are of the
Arminian Persuasion in the Quinquarticular Controversy; and he may well
remember how bitterly all those Doctrines were inveighed against, under the
Name of Socinianism. Now who knows but that Sir R. H's Socinianism may in time
come to be good Orthodox Doctrine? it is honest and plain, as much of it as he
is concerned in already.

And now I expect to be called rank Socinian, perhaps Atheist, mere Atheist at
least, but that from the Libeller will be no Disgrace; yet not to create
needless Envy to my self, nor bring unjust Suspicion on Sir R. H. I solemnly
profess, that I know no more of his Mind in these matters, than from his
History; and that I my self agree with Socinus no farther, than he agrees with
the plain and sound Doctrine of the Gospel; which I think he does not in some
Points, particularly in that Doctrine, that a Dignified and Creature-God is
capable of Divine Worship. The Trinitarians have undoubtedly the better of the
Socinians here; but then, to deal ingenuously on all Hands, the present
Unitarian Writers do not espouse that Error of Socinus.

4. What are the Doctrines of Christianity, against which Sir R. H. has fought
with borrowed Socinian Arms? they are reckoned up thus, the Trinity,
Incarnation, Divinity and Satisfaction of Christ, and every thing in which is
the least pretense of Mystery. But what says Sir R. H.? why, he allows the
Gospel to be a Mystery, a Mystery revealed: i. e. the way of Salvation declared
by Jesus Christ still retains the Name of Mystery, just as Men, who had
received their sight, are called blind, in that Expression of the Gospel, The
blind see. The revealed Mystery of the Gospel Sir R. H. believes and
reverences: then for unreveal'd Mysteries, he is not such an Enemy to them, as
the Libeller would persuade; for tho perhaps he does not believe them, because
he has no Idea of them, yet neither does he disbelieve them. Of things whereof
he has no Idea, neither does he affirm or deny any thing. If any one shall
object, that he declares against Transubstantiation, I grant it; but then that,
and some Doctrines akin to it, are falsely called unreveal'd, or not fully
revealed Mysteries; for they are plain and manifest Contradictions. But I
suspect that the Reader may desire I should speak home; what says Sir R. H. to
the Mysteries of the Trinity, Incarnation, Divinity and Satisfaction of Christ?
Why, he says nothing at all to them, he does not trouble his Head about them,
yet he may believe more of them than every body is aware on: for all him, the
Libeller, and every one else, may believe as much of them as they can; only he
would not have them who are good at believing, force others to believe more
than they can, in spite of their Senses.

The Imposition of difficult Speculations Sir R. H. has happened to censure,
perhaps when he was pleased with the Consideration of the plainness of our
Savior's Sermons; but he may defend himself with a Golden Axiom of Dr.
Sherlock's -- Nothing can be a greater Injury to the Christian Religion, than
to render it obscure and difficult. If that Doctor be not of the same Mind
still, Sir R. H. cannot help that. I know not how it came to pass, but so it is,
he has asserted, that Crafty, Heathenish and Romish Priests do not believe the
ridiculous things which they impose. But I hope that the Libeller will not make
Mysteries of ridiculous things, to prove that Sir R. H. ridicules Mysteries;
for ridiculous things will be ridiculous, let Sir R. H. or the Libeller either,
do what he can. Sir R. H. also seems to hint, that knowing Men may sometimes
submit their Practice to crafty Priests, tho they cannot their Understanding.
The Morocco Ambassador was contented to wear a wide Sleeve, tho he never
expected to catch the Moon in it: and some say King Charles the Second was a
Votary of our Lady, but he had not a word to say to that Ambassador, to save
the Honor of her flying Chapel, now happily resting [blessed be the
Angel-Carriers for it] at Loretto.

5. What mean these words, Sir R. H. levels directly at the Trinity,
Incarnation, Divinity and Satisfaction of Christ? I have heard much of the
Divinity, Incarnation and Satisfaction of Christ; but of the Trinity of Christ
I never heard before, I believe nor Sir R. H. neither. What new great Mystery's
this, that is come to Town,
So long kept silent, and so lately known?
I always thought there was an exuberant Foecundity in Mystery, but never
dreamed of such monstrous Superfoetations.

P. 28. l. 1. The Libeller would prove, that Religion ought to be mysterious,
because God is Incomprehensible. As if he should say, because God has not fully
revealed his own Nature; or, because we are not capable, fully to understand
his Nature, therefore we are not capable to understand those things which he
fully reveals, and which most concern us. -- Dii^te, Damasippe, Deaeque
Insanam ob sophiam donent tonsore.
Whether the Nature of God may be fully understood or not, affects not the
Question concerning the Nature of Religion: thus much we do know of God, that
he is Almighty, and All-wise; and from these two certain Notions, we learn that
his Dominion over us is absolute, and exercised in ways most agreeable to
Reason. It Is dishonorable to God to assert, that he proposes to our Belief
what we cannot understand: and it is impossible for Man to obey God, by
believing what he cannot understand; if there be any thing in Religion which is
contrary to, or above our Reason, we may be content to be ignonorant of it, for
it does not concern us. But I will set down an entire Period of the Libeller,
in answering of which, I shall answer the Substance of his reasoning for
Mystery.

Page 28. l. 3. There are Mysteries irreconcilable to them in their own
Natures, and in the Natures of every thing they see before them; yet they would
have every thing in a supernatural Religion revealed from Heaven, to be so
plain, that their Reason should be able to dive to the very bottom of it: which
if it were, it would be no Revelation, or perfectfectly to no purpose; for what
needed Revelation in things that are obvious, and plain without it?

Concerning the Understanding which we have of our own Nature, and the nature
of other things, I shall say nothing, because that Subject is now treated of,
with so clear and exact a fullness, as must needs surprise, satisfy, and please
impartial thinking Men.

The Author starts out into the World early and young, but with so vast a stock
of Learning, it would be looked on not without Admiration in the Chair of a
Venerable Professor. But whether we perfectly understand our own Composition,
whether we have adequate Conceptions of the nature of things, or no, what is
that to the nature of Religion? In Religion some Propositions are to be
believed, some Commands to be obeyed; and it is absolutely necessary that both
of them be so very plain, that an honest-minded Man may certainly understand
them: for tho it must be confessed, we do not pay so ready Obedience as we
ought to the plain Commands of our Almighty Lawgiver, yet were his Commands
wrote in mysterious words, hard to be understood, it would be impossible to
obey them at all: So in Propositions to be believed, tho our beloved Vices may
much retard our Assent, even after we understand the sense of them, and
perceive their Probability; yet if we do not both understand the Sense of them,
and perceive their Probability, it is impossible we should believe them, or
think them to be true, which is what is meant by believing. If any one should
object, that tho we understand the sense of the Article of the Resurrection,
yet we do not perceive the Probability, but nevertheless are obliged to believe
it: I reply, That we not only understand the Sense, but also perceive the
Probability of this fundamental Article. For, 1. It is confessed that the
Resurrection of the Dead does not imply a Contradiction. 2. We suppose it
possible only to the Power of God, who can do all things, not implying a
Contradiction. 3. We believe it will be, because we believe that that is a
faithful History, wherein it is recorded, that God who is true, as well as
Almighty, has promised to raise the Dead. So now I may venture to tell the
Libeller, who with plain dullness pleads not, but betrays the Cause of
mysterious Priestcraft, that if our Reason cannot dive to the bottom of an
Article in Religion, neither can our Belief dive to the bottom of it: if we
understand but in part, we believe but in part, and that part which puzzles our
Reason, exceeds our Belief. But why would the Libeller have us believe to the
bottom of an Article, when to the bottom we cannot dive? What is to be got by
believing more than we can understand? nothing, nothing to the poor Believer,
neither in this World, nor in that which is to come, but very much for the Man
that coins the Article, and imposes it under the Penalty of Hell and Damnation.
The Priest gains a sort of Divine Honor to himself by his mysterious Article;
and he that commands our Affections, will one way or other have a Finger in our
Purses.

The latter part of the Period above quoted carries this sense -- That part of
Supernatural Religion, to the bottom of which our Reason can dive, is no
Revelation, or revealed to no purpose, because Revelation is not needful in
things which are plain and obvious without it. The wildness and falseness of
this Assertion will be clearly seen by Instance. Our Reason can dive to the
bottom, that is, plainly understand the sense of this Article -- God has
appointed a day, wherein he will judge the World by the Man Christ Jesus; and
yet we could not have dived to the bottom of it, if God had not plainly
revealed it: for the virtuous Discourses of the Heathens were enforced but with
a conjectural and doubtful Supposition of a future Judgment, it was the Man
Christ Jesus who openly and assuredly proclaimed that Doctrine, and God
Almighty credited his Testimony with Signs and Wonders, above the ordinary
Power of Nature; nay as a satisfactory Earnest of the general Resurrection,
Christ in his Lifetime raised one or two from the dead, and together with
himself, many others also did arise from Death.

That we now know, there will be a Resurrection, and a Day of Judgment, does
not prove we could have known it without Revelation: but, that we could not
have known it without Revelation, plainly proves, that it was revealed to good
purpose; and tho Revelation be not necessary in things plain and obvious, yet
it was necessary in things not plain, to make them plain; and it is not the
part of a Minister of the Gospel to obscure the Doctrines and Notions which his
Master made plain and certain.

I did not think to have taken the Libeller to task, for any other of his wild
Talk about Mystery, because all the common Mistakes on that Topic are so
manifestly discovered by a very great Master, that I do not expect a Man of
Reputation will in haste venture a Defense against him. But one artificial
pleasant stroke I must not balk. A Mystery [says the Libeller, defining it like
a Logician] is not that whereof we know nothing at all. But I will dispute with
him this his Negative Definition, and prove, that if that, to which he gives
the Name of Mystery, be any thing, it is that, whereof we know nothing at all.
I prove it thus. If that which we do know, be not at all mysterious now we do
know it; then the Mystery, if such a thing there be, must consist in that,
whereof we know nothing at all: thus his Negative Definition is utterly ruined.

I will load his Affirmative with Inconvenience, A Mystery [says he] is that,
whereof we know something, tho not all. Then, say I, he himself is a Mystery;
for tho we know him for a Slanderer of the best of Men, a Libeller of our just
and legal Government under King William, yet this is but knowing him in part,
and viewing an imperfect Draught of a very ugly Picture; no Man living knows
how many worse Devils are harbored in his mysterious Heart.

I am in haste to take leave of this Topic; yet casting my Eye backward,
cannot forbear remembering him of one grave piece of dull false reasoning, it is
this. Is not Heaven a Mystery to us? Do we understand it perfectly? Can we
describe it? and is it not reasonable, is it not necessary, that the Methods of
fitting us for it, and of conveying us thither, should be very mysterious to us?

I reply, 1. This making Mysteries of the Holiness which God requires, and the
Happiness which he promises, is a treacherous giving up the Cause of Religion,
and a shameful Temptation to downright Atheism. A very mysterious Promise at
most is but a cold Enforcement of Duty, and a very mysterious Duty is in danger
to be ill performed even by the Man that is well disposed.

2. Heaven is in some measure described in the New Testament, and as far as it
is there described it may be understood, and as far as it is understood, it is
no Mystery* the Methods of fitting us for Heaven are also described in the New
Testament, fully described, and may be perfectly understood by any Person of
ordinary Capacity, that honestly applies his Mind to the Consideration of the
same; and if he pursues the Methods there set down, they will certainly convey
him to Heaven, for Heaven is plainly promised to so doing.

3. Tho the Author of the History of Religion thought it a matter of
Astonishment, that the Humor and Affectation of Mystery should continue, when
Religion and Faith were by our Savior's coming altered from their former
Darkness, yet to me the Reason is obvious and manifest. Crafty Priests pretend
that Heaven, and the way to it is very mysterious, that so honest and plain
People may be moved to take them for their Guides. Indeed a Man would be glad
of a good Guide, when the way that leads to the place where his Interest lies
is very mysterious, dark, and hard to be found; but how should a Priest know it
better than another Man, whose natural Endowments, and industrious Improvements
are as great as his, perhaps greater? so it often happens. I am sure 'twere a
hard case, that a Man of Honor and Honesty, Experience and Learning should be
led by the Nose by a Priest, who confesses that Himself understands but little
of the Doctrine which he preaches. It was a just Complaint which Cario moved
against Chremylus in Aristophanes, (...), etc. in English thus it founds -- He
has his Eyes in his Head, and follows the Steps of a blind Man; one that had
Brains as well as Eyes, would not do it. I have known a Dog that could see,
lend his Eyes to the blind; but this odd Master of mine santers with his Eyes
open after a blind Stroler; and because I am his Man, I must have no more Wit
than to bear him company.

4. But if a Man valued his eternal Interest no more, than to trust the
Libeller with directing him the Methods of going to Heaven, what Methods would
that Master of Mystery direct him? why he has set them down, p. 28, 29. I will
put his Methods in method for him, and give them mostly in his very words,
exactly according to his sense.

1. The Man that would go to Heaven, and* take the Libeller for his Guide, must
have a great care that he avoid the Scandal of good Morality; for which, tho
Sir R. H. has a high Esteem, and cannot forbear his strained Encomiums on that
late moral Preacher Archbishop Tillotson, yet it will never carry a Man to
Heaven, any more than his own natural Strength can lift him up to the Skies;
for Morality is not Religion, nothing is Religion but that which is revealed.
Morality is nothing but believing according to the Light of Nature; the
Adversaries of Priestcraft may suppose it to consist in living up to that
Light, tho they do not live up to it neither, nor indeed is there any thing to
be got by it.

2. The Man that will be conducted to Heaven by the Libeller, must be content
to put himself under the Discipline of Religion, revealed Religion; for
revealed Religion [which is a Complex of the Methods of conveying him thither]
differs infinitely from moral Religion, which is falsely so called, because
nothing is Religion, but that which is revealed [as was above noted]: for moral
Religion [to allow the Phrase a while] teaches only to believe according to the
Light of Nature; at most, but to practice according to that Light; whereas
revealed Religion puts Men under Discipline, and that managed by others, and
those others are Priests, and none but Priests, for without Priests there can
be no Religion; and to cry out against Priests, who have the Administration of
Religion, is the same thing as to decry Religion it self.

3. The Candidate of Heaven must take notice, according to the Libeller, that a
belief of those things which Religion teaches, is sufficient to entitle a Man
to a Sect, to be an Epicurean, or a Stoic; but there goes more to make a good
Christian than so: What more? good moral Practice? no, no, it is no matter for
that. But when a Man believes the Mysteries which Religion teaches, the next
thing he has to do, is to enter himself into a Society or Corporation, which is
called the Church; for Morality having no Promise, entitles Men to no
Privileges but what they have by Nature: but unconceiveable Privileges and
Promises are annexed to the Society or Corporation of the Church.

4. That the Candidate of Heaven may not mistake, and enter into a wrong
Society or Corporation, [which would be a damnable Mistake] he must be sure to
take notice, that the right Corporation is governed by Episcopal Officers, who
have power to expel out, and admit into their Society according to the Rules of
their Charter: and the Sentences which they pronounce, they say, Christ has
given his infallible Promise to ratify in Heaven.

5. That the Candidate of Heaven may not be tempted to dislike and scruple the
Methods abovementioned, the Libeller assures him, that if he does not submit
to these Methods, he sets himself out of all hopes of future Happiness, and
there is an end of him. The Sum and Substance of all in plain English comes to
this -- A Man need never trouble himself about leading a good Life, let him but
believe as his Priest would have him, and submit himself to the Discipline of
the Spiritual Corporation, and he need never fear going to Heaven. So then more
Athanasiano, Whosoever will be saved, before all things it is necessary, that
he makes use of the Methods abovesaid.

Father Poza, a Jesuit, is reported to assert, that an ill Interpretation may
be made of those words, I believe in God the Father Almighty: but I defy the
wittiest Jesuit breathing to make out a good Interpretation, nay to make out an
Interpretation not scandalous, of these the Libeller's Methods. But after all,
one thing I will say for him, viz. that I have reason to believe, that the
Methods which he commends to others, he himself religiously follows.

I am almost ashamed to argue seriously against this ignorant and scandalous
Libeller: but that none may say he is only ridiculed, and misrepresented, not
answered and refuted, I will reason with him on the chief Topic of all this
wild Stuff, of which he speaks in general Terms so extravagantly and falsely.
That chief Topic is, his distinction between Morality and Revealed Religion,
by the means of which he takes occasion to blaspheme God and good Men, and
tempts the weaker sort of People to have low Thoughts of true Piety and Virtue,
and build their hopes of Happiness on their Assent to they know not what
mysterious Propositions. Now I will show that Morality and Revealed Religion
are much the same, that they are diverse Names, under which the same things are
denoted.

Morality may be defined to be the Practice of all those things which Natural
Reason, free from Passion and Prejudice, approves as just and fitting to be
done. Monroe says, that believing according to the Light of Nature, is
Morality: but he minds not what he says, venting what comes uppermost, so that
in this Particular it is his chance to be wrong, as when he calumniates it is
his choice.

That which is usually called the Law of Nature, is nothing else but
Convenientia cum natura rationali, an Agreement with Rational Nature, or
Natural Reason; Morality is the actual Observance of that Law, the Practice of
all those Virtues that are agreeable to Natural Reason.

Natural Reason has been ingeniously compared to the changeable Luster of a
Dove's Neck, which appears of other Colors to me, than it does to him who
stands not in the same Light that I do: but Natural Reason, free from Passions
and Prejudices, is the proper Judge of every thing which can be made the Duty of
a Man.

Christianity, which is now the only true revealed Religion, is a perfect
System of all the Laws of Nature, of all those Virtues which Natural Reason,
free from Passions and Prejudices, approves; and all those Laws, all those
Virtues, by the general Consent of Men, fall under the Name of Morality.

The Gospel of Jesus Christ, is a moral Gospel; his Errand into the World, was
to re-establish the despised Authority of moral Goodness, to teach Men to set
aside their vicious Prejudices, and impartially consider the Reasonableness of
moral Goodness.

In short, the revealed Religion of Christ, is the old moral Religion, which
careless Neglects, hasty Passions, and evil Examples had almost banished out of
the World. But now it will be asked, why it is called Revealed Religion? that is
the next thing I have to show.

And here let it be considered, that tho there is not a virtuous Precept in the
whole Gospel, which was never heard of in the World before; yet Christ gave the
whole a new Sanction, and a more awful Authority, he established all the
Instances of good Morality upon stronger Foundations.

The Mosaical Religion, the Morality whereof was encumbred and darkened with a
heavy Burden of numerous strange Rites and Ceremonies, did exhibit only
Temporal Promises and Threats, to persuade the Jews to Obedience: Or if there
were any thing beyond this Life promised or threatened, 'twas in such obscure
Expressions, that 'twas uncertain, and not to be made out but by labored
Reasonings and long Deductions.

The wiser Heathens, who discoursed reasonably, and lived well, enforced their
wise Discourses, and good Examples, with but faint and doubtful Probabilities
of a Life to come, wherein successful Wickedness should be punished, and
injured Virtue rewarded; and when they could not demonstrate their Argument,
were fain to be content with this harmless Speculation, that Virtue was Reward
enough to it self, and a good Man happy, even when he was grievously tormented.

Our blessed Lord and Master Jesus Christ was the most consummate Doctor, the
most authoritative Lawgiver, that the World ever knew: It was He that brought
Life and Immortality to light, which were descri'd before by waving Flashes, by
sudden glances of Rays faint and weak: He revived languishing Morality by the
Revelation of a Resurrection, and a Judgment to come; and God gave Testimony to
the Revelation of his Son, by Signs and Wonders supernatural, and
uncontestable. The Reason of Man could not have attained to the certain
knowledge of these things, if God had not made them known by the Ministry of his
Son. In short; the Precepts of the Christian Religion, are Moral Precepts, and
obvious to Natural Reason; but the Sanction and Enforcement of them by future
Retributions, that is Divine, revealed from Heaven, and confirmed by Miracles.

Having given this account of the nature of Morality, and shown what that is
which gives it the Name of revealed Religion, I hope I may have leave to guess
why the Libeller undervalues Morality, and extols the Discipline [as he words
it] of Revealed Religion, perhaps the cause may be this; Morality is a dry,
lean business, a crafty Priest can make no Earnings of it, there is more by half
to be got by Discipline. Discipline! Discipline managed by others, by the
Administrators of Religion, by Priests, O it is a fine thing! for not only may
the Laity obtain Salvation by submitting to it, but they may be made to be
saved whether they will or no, tho not for nothing neither. What a sad thing is
it, that this Discipline should be relaxed now! how will the Gentlemen answer
it to God, and their Country, who have laid open the Enclosures of the
Corporation? I know not [said an Orator of no mean Craft in my hearing] which
is worse, that the People go astray, or that they may do it. This Age is as
unhappy by not being kept under Discipline, as the Ages before Moses; for they
living before revealed Religion, and nothing being Religion but revealed, could
have no Religion at all; and the present Age, tho living under revealed
Religion, yet not under Discipline, had even as good live under no Religion.
The Sum and Substance of Religion consists in Discipline; for, says Monroe,
there can be no Religion without Priests, and they are the Administrators of
Discipline. But what shall we do in this case? He that tells us there can be no
Religion without Priests, whereby he damns the first Ages of the World,
confesses there never were more Priests without Religion than now, so that it
must go hard with this present Age. The Author of the History of Religion had
more Honesty and Goodnature, more Wit and good Sense, than to talk at this
angry, decretory, censorious, scandalous rate: he meddles not with the numbers
of wicked Priests, only, for the Honor of Priests that are truly religious, he
taxes the Frauds of the crafty; and why that should be imputed to him as an
unpardonable Sin, the Libeller will never be able to say, who owns, that wicked
Priests are no where more severely reprehended than in Scripture. That Man must
have no regard to his own Credit, who finds fault with the History of Religion;
for the Author in celebrating the Fame of the late Archbishop Tillotson, has
sufficiently published to the World, that he has an high Esteem and Veneration
for Priests, Priests that are Men of Learning and Virtue, tho they follow their
late thrice excellent Metropolitan at a distance, and but as Ascanius followed
Aeneas, non passibus aequis.

The coming in of King William, was a Test upon all Orders of Men, and openly
discovered who had a true Zeal for the Interest of their Country, and the
Preservation of their Religion, and who were only jealous of a private and less
honorable Interest. The History of Religion, in like manner, is a Test upon
all its Readers, no Man can declare his dislike of that Book, but at the same
time he proclaims that he esteems the Substance of Religion to consist in that,
which is least to be understood, that he is all for Discipline, as the Libeller
phrases it, and if it were in his power, would treat all them that do not
believe as he does, very scurvily.

A great deal of dull, false, railing, idle Stuff, p. 29. and 30. being passed
over, I note, that he presses the Biddelite Socinians [as he calls them] in one
Point, with an unanswerable Objection: but those that consent with Mr. Biddle
are in no greater an Error than the Trinitarians, and the Unitarians have a
Charity for them both, while they live well, and lay not a persecuting weight
upon their beloved Error.

What the Socinians and present Unitarians hold, in what they agree, in what
they differ, the Libeller shows that he does not understand, and it is not worth
the while to lead him into a true sense of the Controversy: for when all is
done, his way is to curse, and not to argue; and they that differ from him, in
what Particulars soever, shall be sure to be branded with the vile Names of
Cursed Priests, and Latitudinarian Ministers of Satan.

One thing in him is very pleasant, he would fain persuade the World, that the
Differences between Dean Sherlock, and Dr. South in explaining the Trinity, are
not worth speaking of, but only such as may happen between any Men of the same
Faith. It is a wonder he did not tell us, that as notwithstanding some slight
Differences of Opinion, both those Doctors were still Orthodox in the Faith; so
notwithstanding an angry word or two by chance past between them, they are both
the most civil and good-natured Gentlemen, the most endearing, faithful, and
inseparable Friends that one shall meet with in a Summer's Day.

The Libeller advances a new Charge, never before heard of, p. 31.
Socinian-Latitudinarian Ministers wrap up the Mystery of their Iniquity in
Darkness lest it should be detected: How this can stand with his former Charge,
that they would have all things in Religion be so plain, that Reason may be
able to dive to the bottom of them, I cannot imagine: But I must confess these
contradictory Charges are two or three Pages asunder, and he may defend himself
by very great Authorities.

As for wrapping up -- something -- I know not what, in Darkness, the Libeller
out-does all his Brethren; for Instance, pap. 31. l. 4. col. 1. take these
words -- God dwells in Light inaccessible, in thick Clouds and Darkness, caused
by Light too strong for our weak Senses. Here he takes Light and Darkness for
one and the same thing, or Light to be the cause of Darkness, I cannot tell
which; and by the Epithets which he gives to Light and Darkness, he intimates
that the greater the Light is, the thicker must be the Darkness.

Ocyus Archigenem quaere, atque eme quod Mithridates
Composuit --
Page 96. of the History of Religion there occurs this word Innoscence, instead
of which the Libeller reads Innocence. Innoscence being but an uncouth word, I
am willing to suppose the Libeller has corrected a false Print, but then his
Reflections are unjust, for in that place Sir R. H. speaks of simple Error,
Error which proceeds from Ignorance, not faulty Ignorance, but Incapacity: and
such Error he deems innocent, because the erring Person could not help it; nor
has such Error of it self any noxious Influence upon other Men; therefore
wholly beside the matter is that Reflection of the Libeller's -- when Ignorance
is set up to countenance Infidelity and Irreligion, then it is all Innocence.
But this forgetful Calumniator having spit his Venom in this Column, licks it
up again in the next, professing [and so far agreeing with the Author of the
History] that he is far from thinking every Error criminal; and that no body is
more for persuasive Methods than he, as to Errors which proceed from Weakness,
and have not Malice in them. Tho but a few Lines before, to point a Calumny
which he was aiming against Men of Moderation, he determined, that Blasphemy,
Idolatry, and Treason were but Errors. His Contradictions are thicker sown now,
and truly I think the worthy Persons whom he traduces, would do well to forgive
him, because he falls out with himself in every other Line, to their sufficient
Vindication. Yet one thing I will not forgive him, that is, his blunt and
scurrilous Impudence, borrowed a veteris malevoli Poetae maledictis, when he
pretends to set down what Faults Ignorance cannot excuse. The first he notes,
are Affectation and Pride. But why this to the Author of the History of
Religion? who, if proud, has more in him to excuse the Fault than most
Gentlemen have, and many a Priest that I know, is proud of less.

But after all, he never arrived at that arrogant height of Positiveness, as to
determine thus -- Whosoever does not believe as I do, without doubt he shall
perish everlastingly: nor do I believe there are any the least Seeds of this
Ecclesiastical Positiveness growing in the Mind of that honorable Gentleman.

The second Sin which the Libeller notes, that Ignorance will not excuse, is
Ingratitude: his Note is just, but his Instance is a notorious, villainous and
treasonable Falsehood. So that an honest Pagan would say of him as Chrysalus of
Archidemides, -- Aedepol certe scio
Vulcanus, Sol, Luna, Dies, Dei quatuor
Scelestiorem nullum illuxere alterum.


The Author of the History's share in the Revolution, is so far from
blemishing, that it adds a new Luster to his bright Honor. He that could be
content in the prime vigorous Years of Life, to seek his Fortunes with an
unhappy dethroned Prince, has now evidently shown to all the World, that his
Soul is devoted to serve the Crown with his private Interest, or any thing
else, but the Extirpation of the Protestant Religion, and the utter Ruin of his
Country. -- But that the late King had laid such Obligations on the Author of
the History, as to do more for him than all the Friends he had in the World;
the Libeller rubbed his Forehead hard when he ventured on that Lie; for nothing
was more known through the whole Court, than that the late King numbered him,
and used him, as one that could not be brought to sacrifice the Religion and
Laws of his Country to the Arbitrary Lust of a Priest-ridden Tyrant.

This lewd Libeller seems to be of the mind of an old Barretter, who
instructing his Lawyer to load their Adversary with a very invidious and
scandalous Imputation; the Lawyer asked him, what Proof could be made of it? to
which the litigious Knave replied, Say it, say it, Man, and let them disprove
it. But this unconscionable Impudence takes away all Credit from a more
plausible Calumny.

The Libeller reckons in the last place, for Sins not to be excused by
Ignorance, Sins of Intrigue and Design: but it is manifest that here sua vineta
caedit, he cuts down the Hedges of his own Vineyard. The plainer the Doctrine,
sure the farther from Intrigue and Design; but between Intrigues and Mysteries,
there is a near and apparent Relation. The Author of the History of Religion
rightly and truly observed, that the whole Aim of our Savior in the Gospel,
was to use clearness: The Libeller does not love clearness, and yet one would
wonder he should not; for he is as ill made for the carrying on an Intrigue as
any dull Priest of 'em all, who makes such mean Fellows as my self, with a very
small stock of Learning, and a little better portion of Humanity, go off at a
great rate.

Page 31. Col. 1. The Libeller crowds into two or three Lines as much Folly and
Fury as he is able. For having charged the Author of the History, and such as
agree with him [and they are the most Men of good Sense and firm Integrity]
with blaspheming God, and ridiculing Religion, which their Souls abhor, he
notes, that God has pronounced that Crime to be Death, and then pronounces --
nor would these Sons of Belial have escaped it, had they lived in any Christian
Country. He that overflows with such audacious, shameless Eruptions of artless
Malice, over-does Machiavel's cursed Advice; for from so profligate and
careless a Writer, no Man will expect either Truth or Reason. But why Sons of
Belial? I fancy he had an Eye to Pasor's Descant on the word (...), nomen
origin Heb. latin sine jugo, h. e. impatiens jugi, i. e. disciplinae. To be
impatient of the Yoke of Discipline, Discipline in which consists the Substance
of Religion, Discipline exercised by Priests, by Priests without whom there is
no Religion, this, this is that which fires the Libeller so, that he terms it
Blasphemy and irreligious Jesting; this, this is Belialism, and to relax this
Discipline by Toleration, that is so unchristian an Act, it provoked him to
declare, p. 29. col. 1. That Kings and Parliaments have corrupted Religion, as
well as Priests, and Parliaments more than Priests. I find that even Kings are
upon their good Behavior with crafty Priests, but they make no reckoning at
all of Parliaments; their flattering Oratory is Mercenary, mere Craft, and
subtle bargaining. That Human Ordinance, which would be Divine, must execute
Temporal Wrath upon the Contemners of Spiritual Discipline: for the neglect of
this, both Kings and People fall under Interdict; and the Life of a Dissenter
from Discipline, is an uncontestable Argument, that there is no Christianity in
the Country. One word more; why is this Libeller angry, that Sir R. H. has
shown how Religion has been corrupted by Priestcraft, whenas he himself
confesses, that Priests have corrupted it, tho not so much as Parliaments? I
cannot imagine his meaning, unless it be, that he thinks none ought to corrupt
Religion, but Priests, and Priests may do what they please with it.

Let the Reader now be judge, whether what this lewd Libeller applies to two
most learned and pious Bishops, in p. 23. quoted from Hosea 9.7. does not fitly
agree to his own Person, [for I am told he is a Non-jurant Priest] The Prophet
is a Fool, the Spiritual Man is mad. In the same Section he quotes Jer. 23.10.
Because of swearing the Land mourns: the Reader may guess what swearing he,
that has not sworn Allegiance to King William, means; but the Prophet means
common swearing, and indeed it is that, together with the unquiet Machinations
of the Non-jurants, and the Unfaithfulness of them that took the Oaths only to
save their Places, which troubles the Land. He aims another Text, Jer. 5.31.
against the Bishop of Sarum, a Priest worthy of all Honor; but I will better
apply it, to crafty wicked persecuting Priests, such as the Libeller, The
Prophets prophesy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means; but the
People of England, wiser than the Jews, do not love to have it so, and I hope
there will be an end thereof. Amen.

POSTSCRIPT.
NO venerable injured Name in all the Catalogue of English Bishops better
deserves to be vindicated from the base Calumnies of audacious Libellers, than
the incomparable Dr. Tillotson, late Archbishop of Canterbury: sure it is the
awful sense which this Age has of the great Honor due to his thrice happy
Memory, which makes them who are best able, so slow to do him Justice.

There was published the other day indeed a Pamphlet, styled, Reflections upon a
Libel, entitled [The Charge of Socinianism against Dr. Tillotson considered,
etc.] but so sad and sorry a Story is that, so coldly does the Writer defend
his Grace's most useful and truly Christian Sermons, so perversely does he draw
that great Man into the favoring his private, scandalous, indefensible
Doctrines, that the Archbishop seems worse used by the Vindicator, than by any
his most spiteful Adversaries.

Who this Vindicator should be, does not plainly appear, but he has a mind to
be guessed at, and therefore I will oblige him. He must, at least, be a Friend
of the Dean of St. Paul's, because he tells us, p. 10. something, I know not
what, how that Dean happened to be an eminent Man, and he gives him the
honorable Appellations, which that Learned Person seldom forgets when he
speaks of himself; and toward the Conclusion, p. 61. as if he had resolved
openly to discover himself, he falls upon an honorable Gentleman with more
than Billingsgate Rudeness, charges him with ridiculing the Christian Religion,
proscribes him for an Atheist or Deist, which he says is all one, calls his
History of Religion an execrable Pamphlet.

The Design of the Author of the History of Religion [says this Nominal
Vindicator of the Archbishop, who has one word for him, and two for a Friend
behind the Curtain] is to ridicule the Christian Religion, without offering at
one reason, why it ought to be ridiculed. Such Impudence as this ought not to
be suffered to go off with flying Colors; therefore let it be noted,

1. That the Design of this Nominal Vindicator, is to calumniate an honorable
and honest Christian Gentleman; for he accuses him of ridiculing the Christian
Religion, without offering one Instance wherein he has ridiculed it.

2. That Gentleman is so far from ridiculing the Christian Religion in that
Book of his abovementioned, that I defy all Persons whatsoever, of Clergy or
Lay-Denomination, that have taken Offense at it, to assign any one Instance,
wherein he detracts from any of the Practical Duties of our holy Religion
required by Jesus Christ.

3. Tho that Gentleman is no Friend to Priestcraft, yet he is the most mild
and temperate Adversary, that ever opposed the pious Frauds of impious
Hypocrites: for he is content that all who please, all who can, believe all the
pretended Mysteries now in vogue, which puzzle the most thoughtful and
discerning Wits of the Age, and all that shall be devised at any time
hereafter, by Men that cannot employ themselves better; provided that they who
cannot believe them, may not be induced by persuasive Penalties to profess they
do.

4. Tho the Christian Religion is truly Divine, and of all things ought not to
be ridiculed, yet some Priests for twenty Reasons ought not to be spared; I
will pay down half the twenty now, this present, and the remainder upon demand.

(1.) Some ought not to be spared, because they themselves ridicule Religion by
the apish Modes in which they dress it; the most of these are Romanists.

(2.) Some, because they make a Gain of it, by superinduced false Doctrines.

(3.) Some, because they exact the Belief of they know not what.

(4.) Some, because they make the Life of Religion to consist in Discipline.

(5.) Some ought not to be spared, because they teach that there is no Religion
in Morality.

(6.) Some, because they teach that there can be no Religion without Priests.

(7.) Some, because they cannot dispute without bringing against one another
railing Accusations.

(8.) Some, because they make a very great show, of a very little Learning.

(9.) Some not to be spared, because they preach up one thing one day, and
another the next.

(10.) Some, because they indent with Kings, and give and take Divine Right
from them, as Offense is given to, or removed from themselves.

The Nominal Vindicator of the Archbishop, when he accuses the Author of the
History of Religion for an Atheist, or Deist; being in running haste, throws in
these words -- it matters not which: No? Is a Deist quite as bad as an Atheist?
What will become of his old Friend Socrates, and one or two more generous
Heathens, of whom he and many a truly honest, pious, Christian Priest have had
a very charitable Opinion? He that from his Heart sincerely believes there is a
God, and that he is a Rewarder, cannot be a very wicked Man, tho it is to be
confessed, he cannot be so good as a true Christian.

One word more with this Nominal Vindicator, Why is the History of Religion
such an Execrable Pamphlet? it does not diminish the Authority of the Sacred
Writings, it does not detract from any Precept which our Lord Christ has given
us, nor from the Revelations wherewith he has enforced his Precepts; it does
not prejudice any honest Priest in the faithful Discharge of his Function, no
nor in the Recovery of his Temporal Rights, due to him in such a Spiritual
Dignity, by English Law; it is only out of their way, who being devoid of true
Religion would make a trade of the outward Form. They are the Men, the only Men
who curse the History of Religion, and let them curse on, they will but curse
it into greater Credit; the Bookseller may venture on a second Edition, their
Curses will publish it so widely, he need not fear but that a numerous
Impression will go off. I beg one for my Advice; and I promise, seeing I cannot
set it in my Study where I would, because honest Mr. Johnson tells me the Book
of Homilies is the next best Book to the Bible, I will be sure to place it next
after the Book of Homilies.

FINIS.

