THE CARNALITY OF Religious Contention. IN TWO SERMONS PREACHED At the
Merchant's Lecture in Broadstreet. By JOHN HOW, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at
the Lower End of Cheap Side near Mercer's Chapel. 1693.

THE PREFACE TO THE READERS.
THis Title no body can think is meant to condemn all Contention about matters
of Religion as carnal; but since there is too much which is apparently so, it
only signifies it to be the Design of the following Discourse to show what
Contention that is, and when, or in what case, though it has Religion for it is
Object, it may not have it for it is Principle, but that very frequently, the
Lust of the Flesh hides it self under that specious Name. And to show wherein,
while it affects to hide, yet unawares it discovers it self in the management
of Affairs of that Sacred kind.

Thus it often really is; and then is that noble Cause as ignobly served, as
when (according to that Fathers Observation) a man proves to be unfaithful even
for the Faith, Cypr. de Simply. Prael.
and Sacrilegious for Religion.

When in one place (Jude 3.) Christians are exhorted to contend earnestly for
the Faith; and in another, (2 Timothy 2. 24.) we are told the Servant of the Lord
must not strive; it is plain there is a Contention for Religion, which is a
Duty, and there is a Contention, even concerning Religion too, which is a Sin.
And that Sin the Apostle in this Context, out of which our Discourse arises,
does deservedly expose by the Name of Flesh, and of the Lust, or of the Works
thereof; such as Wrath, Variance, Envy, Hatred, etc.

Whence it is easy to collect in what sense it is said in the mentioned
place, The Servant of the Lord must not strive, viz. As that striving excludes
the Gentleness, the aptness to instruct, and the Patience, which are in the
same place enjoined, where that striving is forbidden.

And from thence it is equally easy to collect too, in what sense we ought to
contend for the Faith earnestly, i. e. with all that earnestness which will
consist with these, not with such as excludes them. As earnestly as you will,
but with a sedate Mind, full of Charity, Candor, Kindness and Benignity
toward them we strive with.

We ought, we see (in the mentioned place) to be patient toward all Men.
Toward Fellow Christians there should certainly be a more peculiar
Brotherly-kindness.

The difference is very great, and most discernable in the Effects between the
Churches Contention against Enemies without it, and Contentions within it self.

The former unite it the more, increase it is strength and vigor. The latter
divide and enfeeble it.

As to those of this latter kind, nothing is more evident, or deserves to be
more considered, than that as the Christian Church has grown more carnal, it
has grown more contentious, and as more contentious, still more and more
carnal. The savor has been lost of the great things of the Gospel, which have
less matter in them of Dispute or Doubt, but which only did afford proper
Nutriment to the Life of Godliness, and it has diverted to lesser things, (or
invented such as were, otherwise, none at all) about which the contentious,
disputative Genius might employ, and wherewith it might entertain, feed and
satiate it self.

Thereby has it grown strong and vigorous, and acquired the Power to transform
the Church from a Spiritual Society, enlivened, acted and governed by the
Spirit of Christ, into a mere carnal thing, like the rest of the World.
Carnality has become, and long been in it a Governing Principle, and has torn
it into God-knows-how-many Fragments and Parties; each of which will now be the
Church, enclose it self within it is own peculiar Limits, exclusive of all the
rest, claim and appropriate to it self the Rights and Privileges which belong
to the Christian Church in common, yea, and even Christ himself, as if he were
to be so enclosed or confined: And hence is it said, Lo here is Christ, or
there he is, till he is scarce to be found any where; but as, through merciful
Indulgence, overlooking our sinful Eollies, he is pleased to afford some Tokens
of his Presence both here and there.

Yet also how manifest are the Tokens of his Displeasure and Retirement! And
how few will apprehend and consider the true Cause!

I will now adventure to offer these things to serious Consideration.

1. Whether for any Party of Christians to make unto it self other Limits of
Communion than Christ has made, and hedge up it self within those Limits,
excluding those whom Christ would admit, and admitting those whom he would
exclude, be not in it self a real sin?

When I say, [make to it self] this more peculiarly concerns those who form
their own Communions, having nothing herein imposed upon them by Civil
Authority. Let others censure themselves as they see cause.

They have an Holy Table among them, the Symbol of their Communion with one
another in the Lord. I would ask whose is this Table? Is it the Table of this
or that Man? or Party of Men? Or is it the Lord's Table? Then certainly it
ought to be free to his Guests, and appropriate to them. And who should dare to
invite others, or forbid these?

2. If it be a Sin, is it not an heinous one? This will best be understood by
considering what his Limits are. Nothing seems plainer than that it was his
mind Christianity it self should measure the Communion of Christians, as such:
Visible Christianity their visible Communion. It will here then be enquired,
(as in all reason it should) what Christianity is. And if it be, every one will
understand the Enquiry concerning that, as they would concerning any thing
else, what is it is Essence? Or what are it is Essentials, or wherein does it
consist? Not what are all the several Accidents it may admit of? As you would
do, if it were enquired, What is Humanity? Now here it will be readily
acknowledged that Christianity (as all things else that are of moral
Consideration) must be estimated more principally by it is End, and that it is
final reference is not to this World, but to the World to come, and to an happy
state there. And that, considering the miserable state wherein it finds the
Souls of Men here, and the greater misery they are hereafter liable to, it must
design their present recovery, and finally, their eternal Salvation.

That in order hereto it must propound to men some things necessary to be
believed, some things necessary to be done. And that both must intend the
making of them good in order to the making them happy, or the saving of them
from eternal misery. That both are sufficiently propounded by the kind and
great Author of this Constitution, Christ himself, in his Word or Gospel. Yhat
this Gospel, besides many incidental things, expressly represents some things as
of absolute necessity to Salvation, by which are settled the very Terms of Life
and Death, unto Sinners, and as a Principal, most comprehensive, and most
fundamental thing to all the rest, requires men's resigning and subjecting
themselves unto him; or putting themselves by Solemn Covenant into his Hands,
or under his Conduct, to be by him brought to God, and made finally happy in
him.

Whatsoever therefore is of absolute necessity to this end is essential to
Christianity. Christians then are a sort of Men tending to God and Blessedness
under the Conduct of Christ, to whom they have by Covenant devoted themselves,
and to God in him. Visible Christians are such as are in this visible Tendency,
with their Children, yet in Minority, and not capable of making an
Understanding Profession themselves.

Such as have arrived to that Capacity are no longer to be considered in their
Parents, but a part by themselves.

They that have been sufficiently instructed in the Principles of the Christian
Religion, that have devoted themselves to God in Christ, and live in their
general course conformably to his Holy Rules, are visible personal Covenanters.
It Is plainly the mind of Christ, that those be received into that plenary
Communion which belongs to the Christian state; and particularly, unto that
Sacred Rite which is the Communion of his Body and Blood, and wherein the New
Testament or Covenant has it is Solemn Obligation, and wherein as Foederati, or
Persons in Covenant, they have more express Communion with him, and one another.

They that are yet unacquainted with the most necessary things of Christian
Religion, are to he held as Cateohumens, under Instruction, if they be willing.
They that live licentiously in the state of Penitents, till they give that
Proof of their serious Repentance, as that their Profession thereof appear not
to be slight and ludicrous.

They that refuse to learn, or be reformed; that live in open Hostility against
the known Laws of Christ, are not Visible Christians, are not visibly in the
way of Salvation. Visible Subjection and visible Rebellion are Inconsistencies.

If therefore any Society of Men, professedly Christian, do make other Limits
of their Communion; admitting those that Christ's Rule excludes, excluding them
whom it would admit; especially, if the Alteration be, not only by the making
those things necessary which he has not revealed or enjoined as necessary, but
which he has not revealed or enjoined at all; and so is not only to add to
Christian Religion taken at large, but even to it is Essentials: This is
substantially to change the Evangelical Covenant, to make it another thing, to
break Christ's Constitution, and set up another. If they be little things only
that we add, we must know there is nihil minimum in Religion. What, if as
little as they are, many think them sinful, and are thereby thrown off from our
Communion! The less they are, the greater the Sin to make them necessary, to
hang so great things upon them! Break the Churches Peace and Unity by them, and
of them to make a new Gospel, new Terms of Life and Death, a new way to Heaven.
And is, as much as in us lies, to make things of highest Necessity, depend not
only upon things of no Necessity, but that are, in our Religion, perfect
Nullities, not having any place there at all. And thereupon is, in effect to
say, If you will not take Christianity with these Additions of ours, you shall
not be Christians; you shall have no Christian Ordinances, no Christian
Worship; we will as far as in us is, exclude you Heaven it self, and all means
of Salvation. And upon the same ground upon which they may be excluded one
Communion by such arbitrary, devised measures, they may be excluded another
also, and be received no where.

And if their measures differ, they all exclude one another; and hence, so many
Churches, so many Christendoms.

If this be sinful, it is Sin of the deepest Die. Whereas the Holy Scriptures
speak with such Severity as we know they do, of the altering of Man's
Landmarks, what may me think of altering God's! And the Sin is still the
greater, if the things of highest necessity are overlooked in the mean time as
Trisles, tything of Mint is stood upon, but Judgment, Faith, Mercy, and the
Love of God passed over, (as Matthew. 23. 23. Luke 11. 42.) Infidels poured in
upon the Church! Wolves and Bears under the name of Sheep, and the Lambs of
Christ, (which he requires to be fed) thrown out into the Wilderness!

3. But if we suppose it a Sin, and so heinous a one, how far does the guilt of
it spread! How few among the several sorts and Parties of Christians are
innocent, if the measures of their several Communions were brought under just
and severe Examination! How sew that lay their Communions open to visible
Christians as such, excluding none of whatsoever Denomination, nor receiving
any that by Christian rational Estimate cannot be judged such.

4. How few that consider this as the provoking Cause of Christ's being so much
a Stranger to the Christian Church! And how little is it to be hoped we shall
ever see good days till this wasting Evil be redressed! Or that our
glorious-Redeemer, who is Head of all things to the Church, should ever own it
by visible Favors, should protect, cherish, enlarge it, or make it spread in
the World, (and how little it is naturally in any probability of doing so) or
that he should treat it as his, while it is so little it' self, and so little
one.

In the present (most deplorable) state of things, private, (that is carnal)
Interest is the thing every where designed, by one Party, and another. And by
wishing the Prosperity of the Church, or endeavoring it, is only meant seeking
the Prosperity of our own Party. So that there can be no United Prayers, nor
joint Endeavors for any truly Common good; but what seems desirable to some,
is dreaded and deprecated by all the rest.

Thus for thirteen or fourteen hundred Years has the Church been gradually
growing a Multiform, mangled, shattered, and most deformed thing; broken and
parcell'd into no body knows how many several sorts of Communions. The Measures
whereof how strangely alien have they been from those which were genuine and
primitive, i. e. from substantial Christianity, and the things that must
concur to make up that.

Instead of sound Knowledge of the few, clear, and great things of Religion, a
great many doubtful Opinions; the taking one side in a disputed Point; the
determination of a Logical question, understanding, or saying one understands
(whether we do or no) a Metaphysical Nicety; and sometimes professing to
believe somewhat that Scripture never said, or shows it self never to have
meant, and that is most manifestly contrary to all reason and common sense.

Instead of reverent, decent, grave, Worship; affected, scenial, ludicrous
Formalities, uncouth gesticulations, disguised Countenances, with I know not
what empty shows of a forced and feigned Devotion; which things also were to
serve instead of orderly, unreprovable Conversation, of serving God, and of
doing good to other Men; and to expiate the Crimes of a very bad one, to make
amends, and atone for the lewdest, the most licentious, and most misehievous
Practices.

In sum; not only are things most alien from real Christianity added to it,
but substituted in the room of it, and preferred before it. Yea and things most
destructive of it, indulged and magnified in opposition to it.

This is too generally the state of the carnalized Christian Church. And never
were there more fervent Contentions among all sorts, whose Notions, Opinions,
Modes, and Forms are to be preferred.

The Word of God tells us that to be carnally minded is Death. These Contests
seem therefore to express great solicitude how most neatly to adorn a Carcass,
or at best how with greatest Art and Curiosity to trim, and apparel gorgeously,
a languishing Man, in the feared approaches of Death, instead of endeavoring
to save his Life.

But if any endeavor to that purpose were yet to be used; what should it be?
That any Man should go about to propose to the Christian Church, were both
presumptuous, and hopeless. We can only speak our Wishes, to Men, and offer
them in solemn Supplications to God. And it were an happy Omen, if good Men
could once agree what, in particular, to Pray for; it being out of question
that such Men, would not be guilty of so much Hypocrisy, as to their
uttermost, not seriously to endeavor, what they durst adventure, and thought
it necessary to make the Subject of their Prayers.

And one would think it should not be difficult to Men of sincere Minds, upon
serious Consideration of the present sad State of things, not only in general
to pray for the true spiritual Welfare of the Church of Christ in the World;
but so far to be particular, as to Pray in order thereto, that it may be more
entirely One. Ephesians. 4 4.
We are told there is one body, and one Spirit. That the Spirit, is but One, we
are sure is true in fact; and so we are that the Body animated by that Spirit,
as it is such, can be but One also. But the Apostles business in that place, is
not merely to assert such an Union, as there already was, but also to persuade
to such a one as there yet was not; i. e. that it might be more entire, and
complete than hitherto it was; and that such an Unity might be preserved in the
Bond of Peace; and this is order to its growth to the Measure of the Stature of
a perfect Man in Christ: Implying plainly enough that the less it was One, the
less it would grow. Which also is sufficiently evident in it self. For it is
first plain in the Nature of the thing, that by how much it is more divided and
multiform, it will appear the less considerable in the World, and so be less
apt to attract, and draw in others. Yea, and its appearance and aspect will not
only be less inviting and attractive; but it will be offensive, and create
prejudices in the minds of men against Christianity it self. Which appears the
plain meaning of that Petition of our Blessed Lord, when he was leaving the
World, John 17. 21. That they all might be one, as thou Father art in me, and I
in thee, that they also may be one in us, that the World may believe that thou
have sent me. Implying manifestly, that if they did not appear one, it would
strongly tempt the world to Infidelity. VVhereupon all good men have a mighty
Inducement to unite in this request; for more entire visible Oneness in the
Christian Church, not only from the Example of our Lord leading them in this
Request, but from the Reason also by which he enforces it, that otherwise the
rest of the World must be confirmed and obdured in their Infidelity. Who sees
not therefore that the Christian Interest is naturally obstructed in it is
extensive Growth by the Visible Disunion of the Christian Community? (for it
can scarce admit to be called a Society in it is present torn and shattered
state.)

And again, it is Divisions being (as they cannot be other, than) criminal, the
effect of indulged Carnality, and designed to serve the carnal Interest of this
or that Party, in opposition to the rest; they hereby not only offend and give
Scandal to the World, who thereupon discern nothing of peculiar Excellency in
the Christian Profession, when under it they see men driving but such low
Designs, as they themselves (more honestly) do without any such Vail; but they
offend the Spirit of Christ too, who, thereupon, in great degrees, withdraws it
self; not totally, which could not consist with the Promise, [I am with you
always, Mat. 28. 20.
unto the end of the world;] but unto such degrees as shall testify
Displeasure. And hence is the growth of the Church obstructed, not only
naturally, but penally too. Whence it is most evident, that they cannot with
Judgment pray for the Spiritual welfare of the Church of Christ, who pray not
for it is Union; nor with Sincerity, who to their uttermost endeavor it not
also.

Nor can there be true Seriousness, in so much, but the Consideration must
ensue, what course is most likely to serve so desirable an end. And since
necessary things are most plain, and less liable (...) dispute and doubt; and
it is matter of Fact, obvious to every observing Eye, that the Disceptations
and Divisions in the Christian Church, which are, and have been, from Age to
Age, do for the most part arise from the Addition of unnecessary things to it,
which belong not to it is Constitution; and which while some think lawful only,
and, at best, but an Ornament to it, others think sinful and a Deformity; it
cannot hence but appear a thing much to be desired, and endeavored, that these
occasions of Offense and Division might cease, and be removed. Which even they
that think such Additions, to be, for the matter of them lawful, might yet see
reason enough to desire and to endeavor should be taken away; yea, though they
apprehend them of some use; it being so manifest that the hurt which accrues by
them is unspeakably more. And besides, one would think it should not be
unapprehensible to any Man that allows himself the free use of his Thoughts,
that though he should continue of the Judgment, that such Additions were in the
matter of them lawful, yet the making them Additional Terms of Christian
Communion must be highly sinful, as being the Introduction of a new
Christianity. Christian Communion being of Christians as such.

But this Amputation is, according to the present posture of men's minds all
the Christian World over, a thing equally to be desired and despaired of. As a
general Union therefore is, in the mean time. We cannot unite with them who
insist upon Terms of Union that we judge unlawful, in those things. For those
that insist upon Terms that we think not simply unlawful, while yet they are
different, in several Christian Societies; we cannot, therein, unite with any;
but we must, for ought we know, divide from as many.

That only which the present state of things admits of, is, that we keep our
selves united in Mind and Spirit with all serious Christians, in the plain and
necessary things wherein they all agree: That we preserve in our own Spirits a
resolved unaddictedness to any Party, in the things wherein they differ.

That for actual and local Communion (which we cannot have with all the
Christians in the world, and can have comparatively but with a few) we join
with them that come nearest us, i. e. that we judge come nearest to our common
Rule. That (as some means hereto) we especially labor to center in some such
Scheme of Doctrinals, as for which all these profess to have a common
Reverence; that while our Union cannot as yet be so extensive as it ought, it
may be as extensive as we can; that the Gospel be not hindered, and that our
Ministry may be the more successful and profitable to the promoting of the
common Salvation, among those that attend upon it.

Such Schemes or Collections of Doctrines, reduced into an Order (as Gold
formed into a Vessel, whereas Truth, as it lies in the Holy Scriptures is as
Gold in the Mass) may be of use (as they have always been used in the Church in
all Ages) more distinctly to inform others concerning our Sentiments (though the
use is less, that after thorough search and enquiry they can be of to one self)
provided, they be avowed to be looked upon, but as a mensura mensurata,
reserving unto the Scriptures the Honor of being the only mensura mensurans;
and so that we only own them as agreeable to the Scriptures. And again, that we
declare we take them to be agreeable thereto in the main, or for substance,
without attributing a Sacredness to the very Words of a mere humane
Composition; which indeed we cannot attribute to the words used in the
Translation of the Bible it self. And that for the things we believe them with
a degree of Assent proportionable to their greater or less Evidence.

This, through the blessing of God, such as have used a sincere and ingenuous
freedom with one another, have found an effectual Expedient to deliver their
minds from mutual doubt, concerning each other, that because of some different
modes of expressing their Sentiments, they held very different Opinions, which
they have found to be a Mistake on one hand and the other; and have given and
received satisfaction, they intended nothing that ought to be reckoned into the
Account of Socinian, Pelagian, Popish, Arminian or Antinomian Errors. That
fraudulent and unjust way of making the Estimate, being justly exploded, that
whosoever shall in some things that touch not the main Points of difference,
say as some other of these do, must therefore be of their minds thorough-out.
Which Rule of Judging would make any Christian be taken for a Jew, a
Mohammedan, or a Pagan. There being no intelligent Christian, but must say many
things that they do.

But it is to be hoped this Engine of the Devil's is by the mercy of God
broken, so as that the People shall be no more frighted from attending to the
Ministry of such (be their Denomination what it will) as use apt and proper
methods to awaken, convince and save Souls, by being told they are Antinomians
or Arminians, etc. It being upon enquiry found, that persons so and so charged,
by the rash Folly of some that understand nothing of the difference, besides
the different sound of those odious Names, do really detest the Doctrines
imputed to them.

And that furthermore, while we look upon an Agreement therein as a sufficient
Character of one sound in the Faith, we do not profess to reckon every one of
the things therein contained (without distinguishing their Importance)
necessary to that purpose. And do never intend our Communion shall be limited
by other Bounds than only an Agreement in those things for Doctrinals, which we
take to be of such importance and necessity, as without the belief whereof a
man cannot be a sincere Christian. Which cercainly cannot but be a very few,
less-disputed things, among them that profess to believe the Divine Authority
of the Scriptures, and that will allow them to be interpreted according to the
ordinary ways of interpreting other Writings.

That for matters of Practice in the Worship of God, we be satisfied, not to be
obliged to do things, which we think unlawful our selves, without entertaining
the least Surmise, but that many good men may judge some things lawful that we
do not, and may practice accordingly.

That we always keep our selves in a prepared Temper of Spirit to receive
further Information about doubtful things. That we cherish in our Souls an
universal sincere Love to Christians as such; and to Men as Men. That we
stud^ously endeavor in our several Stations (...) doing the most general good
we can. And that our whole Design do termina^^ (...) what, so far as we can
succeed (...) it, must be acknowledged by all good men to be a real Service to
the Church of Christ, by gathering into it as many as we can, considering it as
made up of Persons that with Judgment, and in Practice own the very Substance
of Christian Religion.

With such Dispositions of Mind as these we shall, in this divided state of
the Christian Church, be innocent of the sinful Evil of its Divisions, and keep
as much as in us is, the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.

And do we yet entertain in our minds any hope that the Christian Religion
shall spread, and be more generally propagated through the world? Or do we
desire it should? Or do we dread that it should not, through our default? Let
us then look back to the years of ancient time, and consider what it was when
it grew and increased mightily; when without other advantages than it is own
self-recommending excellency, it every where made it is own way, subdued
Nations, proselyted Enemies, defied the most fervent Oppositions and
Persecutions; when the Professors and Preachers of it triumphed over
Martyrdoms, the Fierceness and Fury of Wild Beasts, and Flames, overcame by the
Blood of Jesus, and the Word of his Testimony, not loving their Lives unto the
Death. When as Pliny writing to Trajan in favor of the Christians, Plin.
Epist.
intimates to him, they were every where so increased both in Cities and
Countries, that the (Pagan) Temples had lain almost quite desolate, and that
there had scarce been any to buy off their Sacrifices. When (about an hundred
years after) Tertullian representing in Apology for them, their Peaceableness,
and how easy it were, otherwise, to them to relieve themselves of their
Sufferings, says they were become so numerous in the Empire, Apol. contra Gent.
that if it were possible to them to withdraw themselves into some remote,
obscure place, they who were left would even tremble at their own solitude.
Christianity was then all Life and Spirit. The Christian Church in those days
flourisht in purity, power, and vigor.

But when for the space of about three Hundred Years together it had enjoyed
the protection and benignity of Christian Emperors; and was hereby become
wanton, lost in carnality, not content with it self, and its own Native
Comeliness, but affected to shine in a borrowed Luster and Ornature, when (as
Harlots are wont) it began to paint, to be fond of gay Attire, and devise
things for Deckings to it self most alien from its Original State and
Constitution (and which afterward became the matter of bloody Contentions, and
Cruelties) when it grew ambitious of secular pomp, splendour, grandeur, and
power, then was it so far forsaken of God, and his Spirit, that within a very
few Years after Boniface the third had obtained of the Emperor Phocas the Title
of Universal Bishop, whereby Popish Tyranny and Superstition became more fully
regnant in the Church, (i. e. within less than twenty Years) began the
senseless Delusion of Mahometanism to spring up without the Church; and
assisted by the incredible accession of Force, and Arms, came at length to
prevail against it (now gradually sinking more and more into Vice and
Ignorance) unto that degree, that in process of time, what Christianity had
gained from Paganism, See in Brerewoods Enquiries.
it lost in a great Measure, unto Mahometanism; so that in several parts of
Christendom, where were reckoned thirty Christians for one Pagan, there came to
be thirty Mahometans for one Christian. And how next to Unchristian the
Christian World is, in the nearer Countries (very generally Protestant as well
as Popish) is too well known; Ludolphu^'s Aethiopick Hist. and diverse others.
and in the remoter diverse Writers inform us.

Let it now therefore be considered for how many sad Centuries of Years
Christianity has been at an amazing stand! got no ground upon the whole, but
rather lost much.

Is this the Religion which so early, by its own Native Light and Power
conquered so many Nations, and which we expect to be the Religion of the World!

Who that understands this, would not with deepest Concern, and anxiety of
Spirit, enquire into the Cause! And what Cause can be so obvious to our
enquiry, as a luxurious, and a contentious Carnality; which both go together,
and which have enfeebled, dispirited, and lost its self-diffusing life and
strength? What we cannot remedy, let us at least see, and lament!

And let us supplicate more earnestly for the effusions of that Holy Spirit,
which alone can give Remedy to our Distempers, and overcome the Lusts of the
Flesh, of whatsoever kind, and restore Christian Religion to it self, and make
the Christian Name great in the World.

For can it Content us that Christianity should appear, and be counted a mean,
a weak, and even a ludicrous thing? that the Son of God should have descended,
and come down into our World! have put on Man! have died upon a Cross! have
ascended that he might fill all things! diffuse spirit, light and life thorough
the World! have appointed Prophets, Apostles, Pastors and Teachers for the
Publishing his Everlasting Gospel; and at length leave Men, even where the
Christian Name and Profession does obtain, no better Men generally than he
found them! distinguished only from the rest of the World, by certain peculiar
Notions, and by some different Rites of Worship; otherwise as flagitious, as
sensual, as impious toward God, as full of wrath, hatred, malice and
mischievous design toward one another, as any Pagans or Infidels ever were!
and yet that they should expect to be saved, only because they are call
Christian! What a representation of Christian Religion is this?

And thus it will be reckoned of, 'till it come to be understood more
generally, and more openly avowed, that Christianity is not only a System of
Doctrines (and those reducible within a little compass) but of Precepts also,
not concerning the Modes of Worship only, but Men's ordinary Practice, and that
not only respect their external Actions, but which are designed to regulate and
reform their Minds and Spirits, and do lay their first Obligation there, must
subdue their inordinate Appetites and Passions, Phil. 2. 15, 16.
render them Holy and harmless, the Sons of God, shining as lights, holding
forth the Word of Life, etc. The whole frame of the Christian Institution being
animated by the Divine Spirit, into whose Name we are baptized (as well as into
that of the Father and the Son) and which will be given where he is sought for,
and not affronted.

Let this be taken for Christianity and avowed to be so, and seriously
endeavored to be propagated as such, and it will not always be put to vye (but
as upon equal Terms) with Mahometanism, Judaism, Paganism, mere Deism, or
whatsoever else shall exalt it self into a competition with it.

And let whatsoever comes not within this compass, or is not truly and
primitively Christian, be resected and cut off from it, and so it will appear
an entire self-agreeable thing; and the Christian Church be but One.

While it is not so, it will be the business and design of the most, only to
promote the Interest of this or that Party. And if their sense were put into
plain words, this it would be, I am for [my Church] or the Church whereof I am,
whatever becomes of the [Church of Christ.] And so will a zealous endeavor for
so narrow an Interest, as that of a divided Party engage and engross all the
Intention of their minds, and their Religion be summed up in Contention, and
such only as has its root in that Division which (on the one side at least,
and in great part too probably on both sides) chiefly proceeds from mere
Carnality. And what is it but Religious Contention, for the most part, that
has filled the Christian World with Blood and Ruins for many by past Ages?

Carnal Contention, under this most specious Pretense, as being conversant
about Spiritual or Religious Concernments, is the thing Animadverted on (though
in gentler instances, as later occasions did require) in the following Sermons.
It was little imagined when they were delivered from the Pulpit, they should
ever have been made more public.

I have in this Publication of them partly yielded to the Opinion of diverse,
who judged they might possibly be useful to more than those who heard them, and
to them farther upon review. But have more complied with a sort of Necessity
laid upon me, by being told if they were not published by me, the thing would
be done (as it could) from broken, mistaken, Notes, without me. My own
Memorials and Preparations were indeed imperfect enough, as it cannot but be in
the Case of one, so often in the Week, engaged in such Work.

I have, as I could, by my own Recollection, and by such help as I have
otherwise had, endeavored a full Account of what was spoken, and am very
confident nothing material is omitted. (Some Ingeminations or varied
Expressions of the same thing, that are pardonable, if not useful, to an
hearer, but not so grateful, and less needful to a Reader, I reckon not such.)

But diverse Passages (though not distinct Heads) that were intended, but through
want of Time omitted, I have inserted in the places to which they did belong.
Wherein none can think there is any wrong done. I am sensible the introductive
part should have been in some respects, otherwise methodiz'd. But I am content
to let it go as it is, though I find, by the Notes that were brought me, that
some things were somewhat transposed (otherwise than was intended) in the
delivery, from a Memory, not the most faithful.

If it do any good, it must be from the supply of the good Spirit of God, which
I admonish all you that read seriously to seek, and ask from him, who has
promised, thereupon, it shall be given. The very expectation whereof will
prevent reading with a vain mind, or ill design, and the consequent danger of
receiving hurt by what you read.

Your in our common Lord, J. H.

THE CARNALITY OF Religious Contention.
Gal. V. xvi. This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the
lust of the flesh.
THE last time I spoke to you from these Words, having largely opened before
the Import of [Walking in the Spirit,] I undertook to show you how the Flesh
here is to be understood, against the Lusts whereof such walking in the Spirit
is the prescribed Remedy. In the General you have been told, that Flesh is here
to be taken morally, and in that Latitude, as to signify all sorts of moral
Evil, or the general Depravedness of our Corrupt Nature: For though sometimes
in the moral Acceptance the Sense is limited (as has formerly been showed) to
grosser Sins, in contradistinction to more refined, as 2 Cor. 7. 1. and 1 John
2. 16. yet sometimes also it is so far extended, as to signify all Sins, as
Col. 2. 11. compared with Romans 6. 6. And in this Context it is plain the
Apostle comprehends Sins of both these sorts under this one Expression.

But what particular Evils he more especially intended here to censure and
caution these Galatian Christians against, under this one Name, cannot better
be understood than by consulting this Context it self; in which, though we cannot
say we have a full Enumeration; we have yet very many Instances, of the
Carnalities against which this Remedy is directed. Some of them more gross, (as
we have told you they might be distinguished) Adultery, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatory, Witchcraft, Murder, Drunkenness,
Revellings; and some other that may seem more refined, not as having less, but
only a more subtle Malignity in them; such as Hatred, Vartance, Emulation,
Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, etc. It may here be thought
strange, that such Sins as these should be animadverted upon in Christian
Churches, (as this Epistle is inscribed to such, the Churches of Galatia, Chap.
1. 2.) so soon after the Gospel was come among them, the Apostle himself
thought it strange; for you find him wondering at it, Chap. 1. 5. I marvel that
you are so soon removed from him that called you into the Grace of Christ, to
another Gospel. Yea, and after that, with the Gospel, they had received the
Spirit too. For it is said, Chap. 3. 2, 3. This only would I learn of you,
received ye the Spirit by the Works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? And
are you so foolish, having begun in the Spirit, do you think to be made perfect
by the Flesh?

We are therefore to consider wha^ sort of Persons and Doctrines they were that
had corrupted and depraved those Churches; and whereby it will be the more
apprehensible by what kind of Insinuations they so far prevailed: And we may
collect, in very great part, what they were, from diverse Passages of this
Epistle it self; and indeed, from this very Context. Some would have us think
the Persons were of that Sect called Gnostics, from their pretended and highly
boasted Knowledge. We have no Evidence that this Sect was so early known by
this Name; but it is very likely they were that sort of Men that were
afterward so called: The Characters here given them in this and the other
Apostolical Epistles do much agree with what diverse of the more Ancient
Christian Writers, and one Pagan one, (Plotinus) say of that Sect: Which Pagan,
an Interpreter, and great Admirer of his Marsil. Ficinus.
would sain have pass for a Christian, because living in a time when the
Controversy between Christianity and Paganism was at the height, he says
nothing against Christianity it self, but speaks very much against these
Pseudo-Christians, whom though that Author mentions not by that Name, this his
Interpreter often does it for him, inserting [The Gnosticks] even when he is
but translating, into the Body of the Work it self.

But this less concerns us: It is, however, out of question, that this sort of
Men very anciently called Gnostics, did highly vaunt their great Knowledge. A
very tempting specious Pretense! Though their sublimer Notions, (about the Aeons,
etc.) were Imaginations only: Fancy and not Knowledge, or (...), Knowledge
misnamed, or falsely so called, (as we may borrow the Apostles Expression, 1 Timothy 6. 20. though those Inventions were later) and could only serve to fill the
Minds of their Pros^lytes with Wind and Vanity.

But their Doctrines upon which the Apostle animadverts in this Epistle, we may
collect from the manifest Scope and Design of it; and that was to assert
Justification by Faith without the works of the Law, which they greatly
perverted; and Sanctification by the Spirit of Christ, or the Doctrine of the
New Creature, which they even quite subverted.

With which false Doctrines they conjoined a most impurely vicious Life and
Practice; falling in much with the Jews in their corrupt Doctrines, and with
the Pagans in their Licentious Practice. Which must be equally tempting to
carnal Minds.

And this may make it appear less strange, that all these sorts of Carnality,
that are here mentioned in this Context from ver. 15 to the 21st. should, in
reference to the same sort of Men, be so put together.

For it is evident they were partly a Judaizing, and partly a Paganizing sort
of Christians; as (for ends of their own) they affected to call themselves.
They held it lawful for Christians to join with Pagans in their Solemnities of
Worship, which they were wont to Celebrate in the Temples of their Idols. It is
notorious how gross Impurities and Immoralities were in those days incorporated
into the Paganish Worship; such as made it sufficiently reasonable that
Idolatry should have in conjunction with it Fornication, and Adultery,
Uncleanness and Lasciviousn^ss. And for the addition of Witchcraft, it was not
unaccountable, there being also Sorceries, Magical Rites and Diabolical
Incantations observed to have been intermingled with the Sacra of the Pagans.
And for which these (misnamed) Christians might have the greater kindness also,
for the sake of Simon Magus, the Father of their Sect, by whom the Affectation
thereof was transmitted to some of his noted Followers, that thought it a
glorious thing to vie with their Predecess^r in this sort of Excell^nc^.

Nor is it alien from this purpose to take notice, that those Diabolical Rites
are said to have obtained among the Paganish Idolaters of drinking the warm
Blood of their Sacrifices, and of eating things strangled with the Blood in
them, upon the Imagination that in their so doing, they did partake of the very
Spirit of their Gods whom they worshipped; and it is not altogether unsupposable
that the Devil might, in some unusual manner, enter into them at those times,
more violently agitating their Blood and other Humors; in the higher Ferments
whereof, if by the directer Influence of the great Enemy of Mankind Quarrels
and Murders (as was not unlikely) should also sometimes ensue, it could not but
heighten the Sport and Triumphs of Hell.

And that the Decree of the Apostles and Elders, Acts 15. might have such a
Reference, prohibiting these things conjunctly, Idolatry, and Fornication, and
things strangled, and Blood; that they should by no means mingle with the
Pagans in these Horrid Rites, a learned Modern Writer of our own has rendered
very probable Dr. Spencer de Ritibus Hebraeorum.
. And hereto those vehement Dehortations of the Apostle must answerably be
understood to refer, 1 Cor. 10. 11. remonstrating to them, that they could not
have fellowship with the Lord's Table, and the Table of Devils. And I would
not, says he, that you should have fellowship with Devils. For though he did not
judge it unlawful to eat of the Idolytha, i. e. things offered to Idols, being
sold in the Shambles, he yet most earnestly protests against their presuming to
mingle and partake in the horrid Diabolical Rites, and impure Practices that
were wont to be used at their Festivals in the Idols Temples.

All thoughts of being by their Christianity obliged and enabled unto strict
Purity and Holiness of Heart and Life, were out of Doors with these Seducers,
and endeavored to be extinguished in such as they could work to a compliance
with them: Whereof the Apostle seemed deeply apprehensive, when he so earnestly
inculcates, that in Christ Jesus (or in the Christian state) neither
Circumcision nor Uncircumcision were of any avail, but a new Creature, and
Faith working by love.

But it must seem of all things the most unaccountable and incongruous, that
Men of so profligate Sentiments and Practices, should be for introducing a
Justification by the works of the Law, in opposition to that by the Faith of
Christ. It Is manifest they hated the holy Design of Christian Religion, which
they professed; and professed it, that they might have better opportunity to
undermine it. Hereupon (not opening at once all the Arcana of their way) they
carry answerably to persons and oc^^sions as they occurred; and as the Apostle
was all things to all, that he might save some, so were they, that they might
pervert and destroy. To the Christian Jews one thing, to the Christian Gentiles
another. In this their Doctrine they did most plausibly Judaize, in their
impure Practices they verged more to Paganism. Pretending to Christian Converts
from among them, that Christ never intended to tie them to strict Severities,
or hold them under an uneasy Bondage; whereto the Apostle seems to refer,
Chap. 5. 13. Ye have been called (he grants) to liberty, but use not (says he)
your liberty for an occasion to the flesh.

Thus we must suppose that they differently applied themselves to such as they
designed to make their Proselytes, endeavoring to accommodate themselves in
the one of these to one sort of Men, and to another sort in the other. In
dealing with the Jewish Christians they not only denied the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith, (opposing thereto that of Justification by the works of
the Law) but calumniated it too, as if it tended to infer a liberty to sin, and
make Christianity subservient to wickedness, whereof they knew their own to be
more guilty. A piece of monstrous Impudence (but usual with Men of such
Foreheads) to endeavor the averting that Charge from themselves, to which they
were most manifestly liable, by first charging it on the Innocent.

Hereto the Apostle has manifest reference, when having first asserted against
them Justification by Faith only, Gal. 2. 16. Knowing that a man is not
justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, even we
have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of
Christ, and not by the works of the Law; for by the works of the Law shall no
flesh be justified. He then vindicates the Assertion against their Imputation,
that it made Christ a Patron to Men's Sins; If (says he) while we seek to be
justified by Christ, we our selves also are found sinners. Is Christ therefore
the minister of sin? God forbid. For if I build again the things that I
destroyed, I make my self a Transgressor: For I through the Law am dead to the
Law, that I might live unto God. I am crucified with Christ, and am in and with
him dead unto all Sin, so as not to be under the Dominion of any; and Death
never more had Dominion over him, when he had once died. And whereas they thus
objecting against the Doctrine of Justification by Faith in Christ, that it
ministered unto sin, or made Christ a Minister thereunto, were liable to have
the Objection retorted upon them, being a sort of Men themselves so very
infamously wicked; for this they had a double Salvo, both of which the Apostle
does industriously resute. That is, from the two parts of the Law given by
Moses, and the two sorts of the Works of the Law enjoined thereby, that is the
Moral, and the Ritual or Ceremonial part. In reference to the former, they fall
in with those Jewish Conceits of the Merit of their good Works, done from the
Principle of Free Will: And that in order to their Justification this Merit was
to be measured by the Preponderation of their good works to their bad See at
large to this purpose Smith's Select Discourses upon this Subject.
; and that it was possible that one good Work in some cases might turn the
Scale: That is, if they were equal before. Now this the Apostle occurs to, by
showing that they that were under the Law were under a Curse: For that if they
continued not in all things written in the Law to do them, All they did was
nothing, as you may see, Chap. 3. of this Epistle, ver. 10.

And then as to the Ritual or Ceremonial part, because their Sacrifices were in
great part expiatory of Sin, and diverse of their other Performances carried a
great show of Sanctity and Piety in them: Which their Expiatory Sacrifices
could only be, as they were representative of the One Propitiation; and their
other Observances were nothing to their Sanctity, if the thing they were
designed to signify, did not accompany the Sign. They imagined they were not
to signify it is Presence, but to supply it is Absence. This Notion did obtain
even with the stricter sort of them, the Pharisees themselves, who thereupon
made very light of the weightier matters of the Law, reckoning that though they
were guilty of many Immoralilies in Practice, their exact observance of the
Rites and Ceremonies enjoined by Moses, would go far to make an amends; and
that their Praying Tithe of Mint, Annis and Cummin, would serve in stead of
Judgment, Faith, Mercy, and the love of God, which they are said to pass over
as very light and small matters. See Matthew. 23. 23. compared with Luke 11. 42.
And herein the Apostle Contests with these Galatian Christians, not only with
Vehemence, but with some kind of Wonder, that when Gospel Light had come among
them, and that having known God, or rather been known of him, as Chap. 4. 9.
they should attribute any thing to so beggarly Rudiments as these were; that
is, being circumcised, and keeping Days, and Months, and Years, etc. the things
whereon they laid so great stress. And because they did so, he tells them in
that 4th Chapter, That he was afraid that he had bestowed labor in vain among
them.

In Sum therefore, he makes it his business to evidence to them, that both
their Justification and their Sanctification must be conjoined and arise
together out of one and the same Root, Christ himself, and by Faith in him
(without the Works of the Law) as that which must vitally unite them with him,
and that thereby they should become actually interested in all his Fullness;
that Fullness of Righteousness which was to be found only in him, and no where
but in him; and withal, in that fullness of Spirit and Life, and holy
Influence, which also was only in him; so as that the Soul being united by this
Faith with Christ, must presently die to Sin and love to God, Chap. 2. 19, 20.
And at the same time when he delivered a Man from the Law as dead to it, he
became to him a continual living Spring of all the Duty, which God did by his
Holy Rule require and call for, and render the whole Life of such a Man a Life
of Devotedness to God.

And it is here by the way worth the while to observe how the Apostle himself
expounds that Phrase of being dead to the Law by being delivered from it, Romans
7. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And no man can be said to be delivered from any thing, as
it is a good, or an advantage to him, but as it is an evil, and does him hurt.
And the Law hurts no man as a Rule of life. But as to one stated under the full
Power of it, it is a Bar against that great Blessing of the Spirit, Chap. 3.
13, 14. which by it is yet abiding Curse it keeps off from him, hereby
occasioning his continuance in sin, and then condemning him for it. Whereupon
how clear is the Current of the Discourse in these Words, viz. By the Law I am
dead to the Law, that I might live to God; I am crucified with Christ, yet I
live, q. d. The Law it self has slain me, and killed all my Hopes and
Expectations from it: The same Law that slew Christ, has slain me. I am
crucified with him; which supposes his being in him by that Faith by which he
was to live ever after. In this Faith stood his Marriage to Christ, who
succeeds into the room of the Law, as the case is stated, Romans 7. 1, 2, 3, etc.
They that were settled, in reference to each other, in the Conjugal state, as
the Law and the Sinner were; upon the death of the one (which soever it be) the
Relation ceases, and so the Obligation which depended upon that Relation. And
thereupon, says he, The Law it self having given me my deaths wound, and killed
me as to it, in the Article of Dying, I join my self to Christ, and yield to be
crucified with him, but therein acquire with him a New Life. Nevertheless I
live; And how? Not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life that I live in the
flesh, is by Faith in the Son of God, who has loved me, and given himself for
me. And this Life I now thus live, is a Life of pure and absolute devotedness
to God; terminated upon his Interest and Glory as the End of it, governed by
his declared Will, as the Rule of it. i. e. In sum, it is an holy Life, or (as
before) it is a living to God. Whereupon he so copiously distinguishes, Chapter 3.
between Jews and Jews, those that were born after the Flesh, and those born of
the Spirit, the Sons of the Bondwoman, and of the Free, (as he allegorically
speaks,) signifying the latter only born into this new State of life.

By all which he shows the connection to be most necessary and inviolable,
between being justified by Faith in Christ, and a life of Holiness; So little
opposite were these to one another, that one and the same Faith was to infer
both.

But now that the large extent of this Holiness of Life, might more fully
appear, the Apostle signifies, that it must not only exclude those grosser
lusts and works of the flesh, but also such, as because they might seem
somewhat more refined, might be reckoned by some less Criminal, he therefore
inserts diverse of this other kind also: And the state of the Case did equally
require it. For it appears (as it might well be supposed) that so far as any
were tainted with the false Notions, and with inclinations to the impure
practices before mentioned, they were filled with animosities, with wrath,
envyings and hatred toward them that had not received the taint; and they
might have too much place with these back again toward them. Whereupon there
could not but be very great and high Ferments in these Churches. Nothing
therefore could be more requisite, or seasonable, than that several Instances
of this sort of Carnality, should be put into this Catalogue, viz. hatred,
variance, emulations, wrath, strise, etc. For they were not to be thought (as
was said) more refined, as having less, but a more subtle Energy, or
penetrative power of malignity in them. Nor indeed has Christianity, and the
Christian Church suffered more by any sort of Evils, than by those of this
sort. Others destroy particular Persons: These, besides their doing so, do more
directly hurt the Community, and tend to wast and destroy the Church.

Now as to those grosser Carnalities mentioned in this Context, I did formerly
say somewhat briefly, and so I did as to that which seems the central one among
those of this latter sort, viz. that of Heresy: Which I considered according
to what it does import in it self, and did design also to consider it in this
its Concomitancy, viz. of the things here mentioned in so ^ear conjunction, and
that are of nearer affinity with it, hatred. envyings, and the like. I have
indeed been since in some suspense whether I should pursue that intention or
no; But upon serious consideration, and solemn looking up to Heaven for
direction, I have determined not to let this sort of Carnality pass without
just Animadversion. For I consider that I speak to a Christian Assembly, who
must be understood all to profess equal, and impartial reverence to the Word of
God, as to a Revelation come down from Heaven, for our Direction and Conduct
thither: And therefore none dare, upon serious thoughts, allow in themselves
any kind of regret or disgust, as to so material and important a part of this
holy Wo^d. We are assured the Words of God will do good to them that walk
uprightly, that is, to upright-hearted ones, who it must therefore he supposed
will walk or deal uprightly in their attendance thereunto. And I cannot but
hope that God will graciously help us to speak, ^^d hear with that Uprightness
and Integrity of Heart that this word of his may do good to some, without doing
hurt to any.

In speaking therefore to this sort of Carnality, (for we must mention it by
such a Term as the Holy Ghost has thought fit to be put upon it) I shall First
note to you some previous things more generally. Then shall, Secondly, let you
see what Appearances there may be of it in such a Case as the Apostles present
Discourse has reference unto.

First, It will be of use to us, more generally, to note these few things:

1. That the several Expressions of it which we find in this Context, in closer
Connection with Heresy, as it were guarding it before and behind, viz. Hatred,
Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Envyings, do all note but one
radical Evil, and do all agree in one root: Whereupon it will be the less
needful to insist upon them severally, or to give you the Criticism of each
Word by it self; which it were a great deal more easy to do, than it will be
useful, or of any avail to us. What I shall say therefore will be more general;
but will however give you the occasion of casting your Eye upon the
Particulars, whereby you will have the more distinct account of that Carnality,
which is here referred to by the Apostle.

2. This is needful to be noted too, that this Precept of the Apostle
considered as a prescription against fulfilling the lusts of the Flesh, has
more immediate and direct reference to this sort of Carnality. This is plain,
if you will but again peruse the Words as they lie in their closest connection.
For when he had said in the 14th Verse, That all the Law is fulfilled in this
one word, even in this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, (most of
all, no doubt, ones Christian Neighbor) he adds, But if you bite and devour
one another, take heed ye be not devoured one of another. Then immediately come
in the Words of the Text, This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and you shall
not fulfill the lusts of the Flesh: q. d. The Lust of the Flesh will be working
this way, putting you upon biting and devouring one another. According as
Sentiments begin to differ, and Minds are divided, Inclinations will carry one
this way, and another that; and then you will be too prone to be at biting, and
be ready to fall to devouring one another: Now I have no better Remedy to
prescribe you against both than this, Walk in the Spirit, and you shall not
fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh. I should have been a very unfaithful
Interpreter of this Context to you, if I had not taken notice of this so
immediate Connection.

3. This is further to be noted, That this sort of Carnality that lies in
Strifes, in Emulations, in Envyings, in Hatred, etc. may come to have it is
occasion of being exercised, of working, lusting, and exerting it is self about
the Doctrines of the Gospel: Than which nothing is more evident, in that you
find that these things are put in Connection with Heresies, which must be
understood to be a Corruption of Gospel-Doctrine. Very true indeed it is, that
that Word Heresy, among the more ancient Philosophers, was used in a more
gentle, and no way infamous Sense, signifying only this or that S^ct of
Philosophers: But the Word coming to be borrowed and transferred by Sacred
Writers into the Holy Scriptures, there it is mostly taken in a very ill Sense,
(though not always) as signifying Error or Corruption in Doctrine, of a very high
and destructive Nature, as Tit. 3. 10, 11. 2 Pet. 2. 1. For though all Heresy be
Error, or carry Error in it. yet all Error is not Heresy; that must be such
Error as strikes at the Root, and is conjunct with Heart disaffection and
Malignity, (as was noted the last time) standing in opposition to Faith, which
is not a merely Mental thing, but lies very principally in the Heart. Doctrinal
matters are however here referred unto, even in the very Notion of Heresy, and
therefore about those matters these Carnalities may have place. For when the
several Passions here mentioned are raised, and do tumultuate in the Breasts of
this and that particular Person, they soon and easily spread and propagate
themselves to others, so as to insect the Community. And then it comes to the
forming of it into Parties, or dividing it into two sides, as the Word (...),
(which we translate Seditions) signifies; the one stated and posited as in an
hostile Posture against the other, till at length the matter arrive to that
height and pitch of contumacious and fixed Obstinacy, as in matters so
important as the Apostles Discourse reflects upon, will complete the Notion of
Heresies, viz. on one side, at least; not, perhaps, without great Faultiness on
the other, which comes next to be noted.

4. As such Carnalitie may have place and exercise about Gospel-Doctrine, so it
is very possible it may show it is self on both sides, even on their part who
have the Truth with them, as well as on theirs who oppose it, and make it their
business to propagate the contrary Error or false Doctrine: The very Defense of
Truth it self may be accompanied with such Carnalities, such Strife, Wrath,
Malice, Envy, as divides the Guilt between the divided Parties, and leaves
neither side innocent.

I am, you know, by mere Providence, in the Series and Tract of a Discourse
long continued upon this Context, led to say what I now do; and I have
therefore the more hope, that, through the Blessing of God, it may be of some
use to us. But this comes most directly under our notice; and let it be noted,
that whereas in such Contests both sides are wont to be confident they are in
the right; neither the one nor the other may be over-confident or careless of
not being in the wrong, in what may be of equal or greater importance than the
matters themselves, disputed among them that agree in the Substantials of
Religion, (or that hold the Head) can be. Let us I say, deeply consider it,
that such sinful Carnality may have place, and exercise not only about
Religious Concernments, but even on that side, where the Truth lies; which is
from hence evident, that the Apostle immediately before the Text, as I have
noted, says, If you bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not
bitten and consumed one of another. A great aptitude he therefore observed
there was, to be biting on both sides, even where the Truth lay, and where it
lay not.

For we are here further to observe, that whereas our Apostle sadly considered
that many among these Christians of Galatia were lapsed, and fallen from the
Purity and Sincerity of Religion; he apprehended too, that they who were not so
fallen, took not the best course for the recovery of them that were. Which that
Admonition of his must mean, Chap. 6. 1, 2. Brethren, if a man be overtaken
with a fault, ye which are Spiritual, restore such an one in the Spirit of
meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another
Burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

It seems he reckoned that the sounder part among them, and that ought (and
it is like thought themselves) to be more Spiritual, while they showed not more
of a Spirit of Meekness toward the lapsed, were not so Spiritual as they
should be, and discovered more Carnality than became them, more Wrath and
Bitterness of Spirit than could comport with the Law of Christ. They will be
little awed by this, and be apt for all this to indulge their own furious
Passions, that think he has no Law. But though one were never so sure he has
the Truth on his side, it is in it self a dreadful thing, to whosoever shall
allow himself the liberty seriously to think of it: For what must we conceive
of such Truth, that is to be defended in some cases, I say, that in some cases
ought to be so? We must surely conceive of it as a Divine, a Sacred thing, an
Heaven-born thing, a thing of Heavenly descent, part of a Revelation
immediately come forth from the very Bosom of God; so is the whole
Gospel-revelation to be looked upon. Now here is Carnality that lusts; such a
kind of Carnality as the Context speaks of, Wrath, Strife, Hatred, etc. Here is
such Carnality, lusting, actually lusting, seeking Prey, ravening for Food: And
what does it feed upon? No meaner thing than Divine Truth! Evangelical
Doctrines! Monstrous Thought! Consider, I beseech you, my Friends, what this
comes to? The feeding an impure Lust upon Sacred things, or upon that which is
Divine! I must have my Lust satisfied, says the proud, contentious Spirit:
Wrath burns, Anger boils; Sacred things are not spared, but fallen upon, as the
prepared Food of Lust. It will be fed, they are not forborne. All Reverence of
God is forgotten, Heaven is ravaged, the most Sacred Mysteries of God's own
Kingdom are violated, and torn this way, and that (O horrid thing!) by Harpies,
Vultures, by most fierce and furious Lusts. And if a Man would know, recognize,
take knowledge of the most deeply inward Sensations and Intention of his own
Heart, thus it is, I must now apply my Thoughts, bend my Mind, to consider a
Revelation come from Heaven; what? for the end for which it was given, to
enlighten, purify, quicken my Soul toward God, renew and form* it for God, to
serve and enjoy him? no, but on purpose to feed, to gratify a Lust! We can
(too often) make neither better nor worse of it, but just so it is.

These things being premised, I would now go on a little more particularly to
show you wherein Carnality may appear exerting it self, even about such things,
or what will be manifest Indications of such a Carnality, as is here referred
unto, acting about, or in reference to the things of God, the most sacred and
important Truths and Doctrines of his Gospel.

1. First, When in comparison of some less things, wherein we find occasion or
pretense to differ, little Account is made of the incomparably greater things,
wherein all serious Christians are agreed, and wherein they really cannot but
be agreed. Let it be considered whether pains be not taken to devise some
matter or other to contend about: (that shows a great Disposition!) And then
having found out some minuter things about which to differ, our Differences, as
little as they are, quite swallow up our Agreements: The whole Gospel signifies
nothing, (though full of the most glorious Wonders) in comparison of some
Punctilio's, either that we have invented, or that it may be doubted whether
there be any thing in them or nothing. Here is some Mystery in all this! A Lust
is to be gratified; an Appetite to contend. This winds and wriggles, this way
and that, loath to appear but under some specious Disguise of Zeal for Truth,
Indignation against False Doctrine, or the like; but it bewrays it self, and
unawares, shows it is ugly Serpentine Head. For if the thing chosen out to be
the matter of Contest be thought worth so much, when it is manifestly either in
comparison, little, or nothing but a Figment, Why are not the things on all
hands most confessedly great, and most evident, more highly esteemed, loved,
relished, and with Gust and Delight fed upon? Why do not the greater things
signify more to unite us in Love and Communion with all that agree with us in
them, than the lesser things to divide us, about which we disagree? Indeed the
Disagreements were in themselves vastly great between the Untainted Christians
of these Galatian Churches, and that horrid S^ct that the Aopstles Discourse
has manifest reference unto. Blessed be God there are not such Disagreements
amongst us. But while there is less Taint of Error in our Minds, (as to these
things) are we nor concerned to take heed there be not as great a Taint of this
vicious Carnality in our Hearts? It speaks too much of it; when having devised
a difference, we are prone to overlook and make little account of the great
things wherein we are entirely and most professedly agreed.

If we consider the things which the Doctrinal part of this Epistle does more
expressly refer to, as I have noted already, how great things in reference
hereto are we fully agreed in? We are all agreed, that a Sinner, an Apostale
lapsed Creature, can never be saved and brought to a blessed state, but he must
be justified, and he must be sanctified: He must be justified, to make his
state safe; He must be sanctified, to make the Temper of his Spirit good,
capable of Communion with God in this World, and of final eternal Blessedness
with him in the other. We are agreed, that such Justification and such
Sanctification are both the effects: of most absolutely free and Sovereign
Grace, that none could be ever justified, but by freest Grace; that none can
ever be sanctified but by freest Grace, most absolutely and most Soveraignly
free. We are agreed, That the highest Perfection of Sanctification that can
ever possibly be attained unto, signifies nothing at all to deserve, to procure
by Merit our Justification. We are agreed, that both, at they are from the most
free and sovereign Grace, so do come through the Mediation of Jesus Christ, the
alone Mediator between God and Man: That the Righteousness is entirely and only
Christ's, by which we are justified: That the Spirit is most entirely and only
Christ's, by which we are sanctified; according to that in 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11.
Such as are mentioned there were before the grossest and vilest of Sinners,
Fornicators, Adulterers, Idolaters, etc. And such (says the Apostle) were some
of you^ But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified; but ye are justified in the
Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. You cannot but be in all
these agreed. We are agreed, that whoever does sincerely, Evangelically believe
in God through Christ, receive Christ, is united with him, or is in him; who
does by serious Repentance turn to God, whose Heart is won to love him in Truth
as his highest and best Good, who is conformed to the Image of his Son; and who
having been made willing in the day of his Power, does now render a sincere
Obedience to him; every such one is in a safe state, accepted with God, has
found Grace in his Eyes.

For no Words of Scripture can be plainer, than that they that believe on
Christ shall not perish, but have everlasting Life, John 3. 16. Yea, that they
have it, ver. 36. That Life is begun with them, which is never to end, or which
is in the sure way to be continued till it become everlasting. That they that
repent, and turn from all their transgressions, their Iniquities shall not be
their ruin, Ezekiel. 18. 30. That God has prepared the things which Eye has not
seen -- for them that love him, and will give them the Crown of Life according
to his own Promise, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Jam. 1. 12. That Christ does become the Author
of eternal Salvation to them that obey them, Heb. 5. 9. That there is no
Condemnation to them that are in Christ, that walk not after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit, Romans 8. 1. That it must turn wholly to the praise of the
glory of his Grace, that God makes them accepted in the beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. We
do all agree, That they that do never believe, they that never repent, they
that never love God, they that are never brought to obey him, that live in
Enmity and Rebellion against him to the last breath, must needs be in a lost
state, are never justified, never accepted with God, are liable unto coming,
and abiding Wrath, and remain under Condemnation, John 3. 16, 36. Luke 13. 3.
Col. 3. 6. We agree, That such Faith, such Repentance, such Love to God, such
Obedience, even in the most entire Sincerity, are not to be considered at all,
as any cause of such a Persons Acceptance with God: They do characterize the
accepted person, but they cause it not, they deserve nothing; nay, they could
not, if they were perfect. No internal Work of the Holy Ghost, though in this our
present state, it were most absolutely perfect, so as to exclude every thing of
sin, could be any part of that righteousness that must justify us before God.
To suppose that it could, would be manifestly to confound the Offices of the
Redeemer, and of the Holy Ghost. It was Christ that was to merit for us; the
Holy Ghost was never to merit for us. It was not the Holy Ghost that died for
us, nor can his Operations or Productions in us have any causative Influence to
the meriting the justified and accepted state of any Person before God. They
were never meant for that purpose, nor have any aptitude or accommodateness
thereunto. They cannot make us never to have sinned; nor can at one for our
having done so. We cannot but be agreed in this, for it is plain, and carries
it is own Evidence in it self: i. e. Suppose we a Person, as soon as he is
converted, made perfectly free from Sin, that very moment, by some
extraordinary powerful Work of the Holy Ghost on his Soul, how shall that
expiate for his having been a Sinner? Now where there are so great things
wherein we agree, and we make little of them; things that should raise up our
Souls, and awaken all our Powers unto highest Acts of Love, Gratitude and
Praise to God and our Redeemer, and fill us with wonder and pleasure as often as
we think of them; an Indisposition of Mind to take notice of, and consider such
things, so as to improve and use them to the great purposes of the Christian
Life, as Incentives to the love of God, an entire devoting of our selves to
him, vigorous and diligent serving of him, and walking holily and comfortably
with him in our daily course; through a greater Disposition to contend about we
well know not what besides, too plainly shows much of that carnal Disaffection,
which the Apostle does here animadvert upon. There are other things belonging
to this same purpose that I find I cannot reach to at this time.

SERMON II.
Gal. V. xvi. This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the
lust of the flesh.
I Have begun to show you by what Indications much Carnality may appear, and
show it self in and about Spiritual matters. As, (for instance) in the
controverting, yea, even in the defending the Truths of the Gospel, and intend
now to proceed. You have heard

It does so, 1. When Christians, who are very far agreed in the most important
things, make little of the things wherein they are agreed, though never so great;
in comparison of the much less things wherein they differ, As all serious
Christians must be understood to agree in far greater things than it is
possible for them to differ in. I lately mentioned to you sundry great
Agreements that I cannot doubt to be very common with serious and intelligent
Christians; which I shall not now stay to repeat, but add,

2. Such Carnality shows it is self, when there is too much aptness to lay
greater stress than is needful upon some unscriptural Words in delivering
Scripture-doctrine. Here we may take Carnality as the Apostle does, 1 Cor. 3.
3. While there are divisions among you, are you not carnal, and walk (or act)
as Men? There is more of the Man in it than of the Christian. When we can make
a shift to divide about a Word, and that (in the present Use of it) devised
only by Man. When Words that are merely of Humane Stamp, and used in no such
Sense, or to no such purpose in Scripture; however they may be significant, yet
too great a stress and weight is laid upon them, either by too stiffly adhering
to them on the one hand, or too vehemently decrying them on the other hand;
while (perhaps, and it is a certain and a known case) the meaning may be the
same on both sides, and would be so, or would appear to be so, if such and such
Words were waved, and others more understood, were chosen and used in the room
of them. It Is true, we are not to think (and no Man of Sense can) that we are
obliged never to use other Words in such matters, but such as the Translators
of the Bible have hit on in their Version of it, as if that must consecrate
those Words, and leave all other under a Profane Character: But if it appear
that any Word of a doubtful signification, is misunderstood by many, creates
offense, and through some fixed, immovable Prejudice, or Prepossession that
some other Notion of it has obtained in the minds of many, it will always be
otherwise understood by them than we intend, let it rather go for a Nehushtan,
than that the Peace of the Church should be broken, and Men's minds be
disturbed and disquieted by it. This is the Case, when any such Words that
might be arbitrarily used or laid aside, are made so necessary, or so
destructive, as if all Religion were saved or lost by them. When one so cries
up such a Word, as if he would say, The Heavens must fall if I have not my
Word. And another decries it as much, as if he said, They must fall if it be
admitted, or if I have not mine. Sure there must be in this Case that forbidden
(...), of which the Apostle speaks in that 1 Timothy 6. 4. which they are usually
most apt to be guilty of, that are also guilty of what is put in Conjunction
therewith, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds; with these falls in
this strife of words: Whether that be to be understood objectively, or
instrumentally, Strife about words, or wordy strifes, I shall not here
determine. But that whole Context is worth our considering, ver. 3, 4, 5. If
any man teach otherwise, do (...), teach other, or alien things, or after
another or alien manner, and consent not to the words of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the Doctrine which is according to Godliness: 4. He is proud, knowing
nothing, but doting about Questions, and strife of Words, whereof comes Envy,
Strife, Railings, Evil Surmisings: 5. Perverse Disputings of men of corrupt
Minds, and destitute of the Truth, supposing that Gain is Godliness; from such
withdraw thy self.

And therewith agrees what we find also mentioned, with the Charge of avoiding
them, 2 Timothy 2. 23. Foolish and unlearned Questions that gender strifes. Some
may fancy they make themselves considerable for Learning by such Altercations:
But the Apostle slurrs that Conceit, calling them unlearned. So I remember De
Brev. Vita.
Seneca says of the Greeks, (calling it their Disease) that they made much ado
with certain idle Questions, (as, How many Rowers belonged to the Vessel that
carried Ulysses? and such like, that he there mentions) whereby (says he) they
did not appear more learned, but only more troublesome.

3. When we consider with too little Indulgence one another mistakes and
misapplications, in the use even of Scripture words, placing them as some may
do, upon things to which they do not properly belong, when yet they agree about
the things themselves. There are Words in the Scripture-revelation, that it may
be the one or the other of disagreeing Persons may apply to one thing, when the
other (perhaps truly) thinks they belong more properly to another. There is an
Inconvenience in this, the Case is much; as if one should have an Idea of all
the Streets of London in his Mind as they lie, but he mistakes the Names, and
transposes them: As for Instance, calls Cheap side Cornhill, or Cornhill
Cheap Side: He does not speak so intelligibly to another, but at the same time
may have the same Idea in his Mind of London that another has. And this
however, when it occurs in Religious Disceptations, ought to be considered
(though there be an Inconvenience in it) with Indulgence, as knowing we are all
liable to mistakes in greater matters. And as it is possible there may be
somewhat of Carnality, some Perverseness, some Cloud arising from infirm Flesh
that darkens the Mind, and occasions it so to mistake; so it is much greater,
not to be able to bear in another such a mistake.

4. When there is an agreement about the main and principal things that the
Scripture-Revelation contains and carries in it; but there is not that
agreement about their mutual respects and references unto one another. This is
a matter indeed of greater Importance; there can be no true Scheme given of
Gospel Truths and Doctrines, if such their references and respects to one
another be not rightly understood: But an entire true Scheme of Christian
Doctrines will not enter into all minds; and for the most part they are
particular Passages, or particular Truths, that strike Hearts, and that God
makes use of to do Souls good by. And if so entire a Scheme will not enter into
the minds of many, whether through their Darkness or Ignorance, or whether
through any thing of Prejudice, that was as it were forelaid in their Minds;
nothing remains but to be patient of it, and to do them what good we can, even
upon their own Terms, and in the way wherein they are capable of it. There was
such an Obstruction in Minds among these Corinthians, even upon this very
account of their Carnality, as we we see in that 3d. of the 1st. Epistle, That
the Apostle tells them, I could not speak to you as Spiritual, (it must be
understood comparatively) but as unto Carnal; and therefore as a wise
Instructor, thought it needful to keep back, to withold some things from them
that he reckoned might be Meat to them, solid Meat, strong Meat, because they
had been hitherto unable to bear it, nor were yet able. It is in that case
needful rather somewhat to (...), to withold some things, or suspend, than by
a continued and too urgent Inculcation to frustrate ones own design; and while
we would have all enter into less capable Minds, to have nothing enter. It may
sometimes be, that when too much is endeavored at once to be born in upon them
against an invincible Obstruction, we only engage them to fortify the more
strongly, and shut out all; and so we defeat our selves: They gain nothing, and
our whole Design is frustrated and lost. In all our Applications to the Souls
of Men, there must be patient waiting, and very gradual Endeavors used,
without force and furious striving; yea, in our having to do with such as are
yet the very Vassals and Captives of the Devil. So the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy
2. 24. The Servant of the Lord should not strive, but be patient toward (even
all) men, and wait (even in reference to them that are hitherto altogether
impenitent) when God will give them repentance, that they may recover
themselves out of the snare of the Devil, that are led Captive by him at his
will. Much more are such Methods to be used toward them, who call on the Name
of our Lord out of a pure Heart, as he speaks a little above in the same
Context, ver. 23. And consider the Extent and Endearingness of this Character.
It Is to be deplored that it extends not further: But so far as it does extend,
God forbid it should not have a most persuasive Efficacy and Power upon our
Spirits, to make us follow Righteousness, Faith, Charity, Peace, even with all
them that bear that Character, i. e. That call on the Lord with a pure Heart.
Their Lord (as it is elsewhere) as well as ours; be they of what Party, or
Denomination, soever.

5. Much of this Carnality appears about such matters, when we are overintent
to mould and square Gospel Truths and Doctrines by humane measures and models,
and too earnestly strive to make them correspond: That is, when we aim, beyond
what things can admit, to stretch (or rather to shrink and contract) God's
Transactions with Men, unto the Scheme and Model of our own abstract Notions
and Definitions, or of merely Humane, Civil or Political, Occonomies,
Administrations and Transactions; such I mean as obtain among Men toward one
another. And so labor to have the same measures take place throughout in
reference to Divine things, as do in Humane. Whereby more than is needful,
useful, (or indeed so much as possible to agree and quadrate) of Logic,
Metaphysics; and of Civil and other Law is introduced into Theology.
Illustrations indeed may be taken thence, but not Strict Measures. It is
impossible sometimes they should be so. Diverse things are taken among Men in
such Notions, as, in delivering the Doctrine of the Gospel cannot have a full
and adequate place: They often will not exactly agree or correspond. As if in
speaking of God's pardoning and justifying a Sinner, we should take our
measures of Pardon and Justification strictly from what obtains amongst Men, we
shall find a great difference and disagreement: For plain it is, that,
according to Humane measures, the same Person cannot be both pardoned and
justified. He that is pardoned cannot be justified, and he that is justified
cannot be pardoned: But according to Divine and Gospel-measures both are truly
said of the same Person: In the one case there is an Inconsistency, in the
other a fair Agreement of the same things. He that is at an Humane Bar a
justified Person, needs no Pardon, his Case admits of none: If he were
justified, Pardon were absurdly talked of: And so if he were pardoned, that
does plainly imply that he was not justified. It is quite otherwise if you
bring these things to the Gospel, and God's dealing with Sinners. I cannot now
spend time in showing you distinctly how these things do lie, and are very
capable of being accommodated in the Sinners case; some resemblance will
appear, not an exact or entire Correspondency. The Instance however serves our
present purpose, to show that God's procedure and methods in his Dispensations
toward men, will not in all things square with Humane measures.

Again, If we speak of the Doctrine of God's Covenant in Jesus Christ, we
cannot take our measures from Humane Covenants that pass between Man and Man,
especially one private Man and another: For there the Persons are under no
Obligation before their mutual Consent. It is not so between God and Man, God's
Covenants are Laws as well as Covenants; and so a Man is, before he consents,
obliged to consent. Therefore here again it appears Gospel-Doctrines are not to
be exactly measured by Humane Models. Nor should this be too earnestly
endeavored, we should not too much set our Minds upon it; it is to offer at a
thing in it is own nature not practicable, and there is too much of Man in it.

6. When there is a discernable Proneness to oppose the great things of the
Gospel to one another, and to exalt or magnify one, above or against another.
It is too plain this may more commonly come under Observation, than it does
under that reprehension which it deserves. For instance, those two great things
that I mentioned at first, Justification and Sanctification, both very great
things, of most apparent and confessed necessity to the Salvation and
Blessedness of the Souls of Men: Justification, that a man's state may be good;
Sanctification, that the temper of his Soul may become so. But is it not too
common to magnify one of these above or against the other? To contend and
dispute with great Fervor concerning the higher Value and Excellency, the
Dignity or Precedence of this or that, and to which the Preference belongs; to
be so much taken up about the one, as seldom to think of the other; and it may
be not well to savor and relish the mention of it? Some are so taken up about
the business of Justification, (that admirable vouchsafement of Grace to
Sinners!) that they care not to hear of Sanctification; and so all their
Religion is Foreign to them, or lies in somewhat without them, or in a mere
relative thing, that alters not their Spirits. A strange Religion! that makes a
man nothing the better man. Or notwithstanding which he is in the habitual
frame of his Soul, as bad as ever, vain, terrene, worldly-minded, proud,
passionate, wrathful, malicious, vindictive, false, deceitful, perhaps (for
that is not worse than the rest) very impurely sensual. But (no Man can tell
why, nor to be sure he himself) he takes himself to be a justified person: And
perhaps his Imagination of it raises in him a sort of rapturous, unaccountable
Joy, without ground or root, and which will not only wither, but turn (without
a seasonable and merciful change) into endless horror, weeping, wailing, and
gnashing of teeth! A fearful and most surprising Issue and Disappointment of an
high and unmisgiving Confidence, and expectation to be saved! With others,
whose Temper, Circumstances or Temptations have less inclined them to
rejoicing, their Religion is made up of tormenting Anxieties and Fears, and
consists in the daily revolving of perpetual endless Doubts, whether they are
justified or no; without any direct, formed design of being or doing good; by
which they might in due time, come to have more truly comfortable apprehensions
of the goodness of their state. They more care to be pardoned for being bad,
than to become good!

Again, on the other hand, there may be some so wholly taken up about what they
are in themselves to be and do, and in the earnest, but too abstract, or less
Evangelical (and therefore less fruitful) endeavor after higher pitches of
Sanctity, without due reference to the Grace, Spirit, and Blood of a Redeemer,
that they neglect, and look not afer their Justification, and acceptance with
God in him; nor do relish and savor as they ought, the Doctrine of the Gospel
herein. Do more incline to a Philosophical (and scarcely Christian)
Christianity; forgetting Christ to be their Redeemer, their Lord, and Vital
Head, and that they are (or ought to be) under his Conduct, and through his
Mediation, daily tending to God and Blessedness.

But now upon the whole, when there appears an aptness or disposition to
separate these two, Justification and Sanctification from one another, or
either of them from abiding in Christ, or to oppose them to one another, or
contend about the Priority of the one or the other (when no doubt they go
together) and about the Preference or Excellency of the one above the other,
which is the more considerable thing: Herein appears much Carnality of Mind, an
unsound, injudicious distempered Spirit. And it is a like case, as if a
Malefactor at the same time is under Sentence, by which he is condemned to die,
and under a most dangerous Disease, that appears very probably mortal to him:
He has a compassionate Prince, willing to save his Life, and he at once
vouchsafes him his Pardon, and provides a very skilful and able Physician for
the curing of his Disease: The wretched Creature hearing of this, falls a
disputing which of these is the greater Favor, to have my Disease cured, or,
to have my Crime pardoned; and in the heat of the Dispute he neglects both,
looks after neither. This is indeed less supposeable, in the instanced case;
but how great a Distemper does it show, that it should be so, in this, which is
of so unexpressibly greater importance!

And now further it is agreed on all hands, that Faith in a Redeemer is
necessary to Salvation, with those that are Adult, and capable of attending to
the Gospel Revelation: But here, what Disputes are there raised? With what
Fervor are they managed, concerning the place of it, or the kind of that
necessity which this Faith is of, in order to the safe state of a Sinner? A
like Case again, as if such a Condemned Malefactor is told of his Princes
professed, gracious Intendments toward him, but he doubts the Sincerity of his
Professions. He gives him all desirable Assurances, and tells him, Do but trust
me, and all shall be well. But he presently falls a disputing, Yea, but how am
I to consider this trust? (We suppose it only such a Trust as may be fitly
enough placed upon a Man) Which way is it to contribute toward my Safety or
Welfare? Is it to be an Instrument or a Condition? How absurd an Abuse were
this of the Clemency of a Propitious Prince? If there were a public
Proclamation of Pardon to many Offenders at once concerned together, and they
all agree only to disagree, to vie with one another their skill in criticizing
upon the Words, or in disputing the Method, contending about the Order and
Coherence of Parts, and make it their business not thankfully to accept, but
cavil at, to tear and mangle and pluck in pieces the Proclamation, and defeat
the kind Design and gracious Tender of their Prince? What Clemency would not
this provoke to the highest Resentment and Indignation? And what now can be
stranger, or more perverse, than that a Revelation from Heaven of so much good
will to men, in the substance so plain, and that so directly concerns the
Salvation of Souls, should be so torn and mangled? Considered for no purpose
less than that for which it was vouchsafed, and that the very end it self
should be in so great part eluded, that was so kindly designed in it? Though yet
the Endeavor of salving Difficulties that occur, by earnest Prayer, diligent
Study, and by amicable and placid Collation, among Brethren, or comparing of
Sentiments, sincerely designed for a clearer understanding the Frame of the
Gospel Truth, or how it may be with most advantage represented to Men for the
promoting of the Common Salvation, can be liable to no just Reprehension, being
managed with that Reverence that so Sacred things challenge, and with a due
sense of our own Ignorance and Imperfection. That only which is blamable in
this case, and whereof I reckon no Account can be given, or Defense made, is
that when, for the substance, the Gospel propounds and lays before us so plain
a way wherein men are to endeavor the saving of their Souls, as wherein the
wayfaring man, though a Fool, needs not err, i. e. That there must be Repentance
toward God, Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, a renewed Heart, an Holy Life. One
comes and pretends to show that Order of these things one way, so as to compose
a Scheme of them that is represented as most necessary to be observed and held
to. No, says another, I Will give you a righter Scheme of Salvation, another
way, and mightily presses the Necessity of that, and the dangerous mistakes of
the other: And thus they cover a plain way with Thorns and Briars, do not
instruct, but perplex and distract whom they should direct, create Distinctions
and Oppositions of Scheme to Scheme, not only without necessity, but almost
without a difference, and yet insist with Vehemence, and lay Men's Salvation
upon their understanding the matter so or so, when it is hoped thousands have
been saved, that never heard of the one Scheme or the other, as they are
distinguished and opposed to each other. Who can justify this? Again in the 7.
Place: When any do with great Zeal contend for this or that Opinion or Notion,
as very Sacred and highly Spiritual, (as they account) with no other Design,
than that under that pretense they may indulge their own carnal Inclination
with the greater liberty. It was the very Genius of this sort of men against
whom this Epistle was meant, whether they were then called Gnostics it matters
not. The Name well agreed to them, and they were known by it afterward. They
were Men of much preten^e to Knowledge and sublime Notions, (as they counted
them.) And herein lay their Religion; and under this pretense, they indulged
themselves in all manner of Licentiousness. When any do take up with mere
Notions, which they are zealous for, accounting them very highly Spiritual; and
under pretext of these, they indulge the Carnality of their Hearts, if not of
their Lives and Practices too: And their sine Notion, (as they account it)
which they (more uncertainly) father upon the Spirit of Truth, must be
substituted in the room of all that Love, Meekness, Humility, Heavenliness,
Self-denial, which are the most certain and undoubted Fruits of this blessed
Spirit: When under the Pretense of being Notional Men, and of knowing a great
deal more than most others do, any neglect their own Spirits, and suffer Pride,
Avarice, Ambition, Vindictiveness and Falsehood, to shelter themselves under
the thin Cobweb of a few sinespun Notions; and they can now hereupon live at
random, with more case to their own Minds, and they think, with better
Reputation as to other Men.

Here is a glittering show only of an aerie, imagined, pretended Spirituality,
drawn over (but which does not hide) corrupt, rotten, putrid Flesh. Have you
never known such a case, when it might be said there goes a proud, ambitious
M^n, a covetous Man, a false Man, a malicious Man; but he is a Man of rare and
singular Notions, knows a great deal more than most others do; and this must
atone for all his Crimes with God and Man, and both quiet his Conscience, and
salve his Credit together! And who can doubt but this man must be very fond of
his own Opinions, and zealously contend and dispute for them upon any occasion,
(though he never so ineptly make it) when they are to do him so great Service,
and to stand him in so much stead, i. e. to supply the room for him of all real
Religion and Morality. And if he have happened upon such Notions as are really
true, and revealed by God himself, by how much the more certainly Divine they
be, so much the greater is the Wickedness, so basely to prostitute Sacred
things, Truths that are the very Offspring of Heaven, unto so vile purposes.
It were Fault enough to make them serve different or other purposes than they
are capable of, i. e. to supply the room of Religion and real goodness. What an
Indignity is that to Religion, to suppose an empty, spiritless Opinion can fill
up it is place! A thing that does a man no good, for which his Mind and Spirit
is nothing the better! Much more, that shelters what is so very bad? Can this
serve for Religion? That Religion that consists with being proud, with being
deceitful, with being malicious, with being revengeful, learn, learn, to
despise such a Religion! Much more that is taken up to vail over these, and
exclude all real goodness! Again,

8. When, in the maintaining any Doctrine of the Gospel in opposition to
others, we industriously set our selves to pervert their meaning, and impute
things to them that they never say. Or again, If we charge their Opinions whom
we oppose with Consequences which they disclaim, professing, it may be, rather
to disclaim their former Opinion, and change their Judgment, than admit such
Consequences, if they could discern any Connection between the one and the
other. This surely argues a mighty Disposition to contend, when we will quarrel
with one that is really of our own Mind; for herein he appears to be virtually
already of the same mind in a greater matter, at least, than he differs with us
about; because no man charges another's Opinion with a Consequence, designing
thereby to oblige him to change his Opinion; but as supposing it to be an
agreed thing between them both, that the Consequence is worse than the Opinion.
When therefore the Consequence I charge is disclaimed by him whom I oppose,
either it is justly charged, or it is not. If it be not, his Opinion may be
true, notwithstanding what I herein say to the contrary, and I am certainly so
far in an Error. But if it be justly charged, being yet disclaimed, we are
formally agreed concerning the Consequence, and are vertually agreed concerning
the disputed Point too, because he professedly disavows it upon supposition
such a Consequence would follow, which yet perhaps he sees not; and so the
Agreement must be much greater than the Difference. And yet commonly this
signifies nothing in order to Peace: That is, it is not enough, that I see the
same things that you do, unless I also see it too with your Eyes.

9. When sucb Disputes do arise at length to Wrath, to angry Strife, yea, and
even to fixed Enmity. What dreadful Carnality is here! Most deservedly so
called, if you only consider Flesh or Carnality as an unreasonable, a brutal
thing. For what can be more unreasonable or unaccountable than to fall out with
another man, because he thinks not as I do, or receives not my Sentiments, as I
also do not receive his. Is it not to be considered, that he no further differs
from me than I do from him? If there be cause of Anger, upon this account, on
one side, there is the same cause on the other too; and then whether shall this
grow? And how little can this avail upon a rational Estimate? Can any good come
of it? Does it tend to the clearning of Truth? Shall we see the better thorough
the Clouds and Dust we raised? Is a good Cause served by it? Or do we think it
possible the Wrath of Man should ever-work the Righteousness of God? And when
such Carnalities as these do exert themselves, and the hot Steams and Fumes
arise, which the Apostle here calls the Lusts of the Flesh, the Flesh lusting
to Envy, lusting to Wrath: What is the Product, (or even the productive Cause)
but that sort of Fire which is without Light? And you know what Fire that
resembles! And if a Man once find any Fervor of this kind stir, or kindle in
his Breast, if he aright consider, he would no more cherish it, than one would
do a Brand thrown into his Bosom from the Infernal Fire. One would think in
this case, What have I stirring within me? Something a kin to Hell! Can this
conduce to the Service of Divine and Heavenly Truth? And let it be sadly
considered; our being, upon such accounts angry with one another, is a dismal
token of God's being angry with us all, and a provoking Cause of it too.
Methinks that should be a qualmy Thought! and strike our Souls with a strange
Damp! Shall I indulge that in my self, that is a mark upon me of Divine
Displeasure; and upon all in whom it is found? To have his Holy Spirit retire,
that blessed Spirit of Love, and of a sound mind, and to leave us under the
Power of rebellious lusting Flesh! Can this be grateful, or not be a dismaying,
frightful thing? And whereas a right Scheme of Gospel-Doctrine is the thing
pretended to be striven for, I beseech you consider: The more entirely, and the
more deeply, the true Scheme of Gospel-Doctrine is inlaid in a man's Soul, the
more certainly it must form it into all Meekness, Humility, Gentleness, Love,
Kindness and Benignity toward Fellow-Christian of whatsoever Denomination; not
confined, not limited, (as that of the Pharisees) unto their own Party; but
diffusing and spreading it self to all that bear the Charaster and Cognizance
of Christ. The Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ is a Spirit of greater
amplitude; extends and diffuses it self through the whole Body of Christ.

Nor can any Man more effectually disgrace his own Cause, or make sure to worst
himself in it, than by defending it wrathfully. For admit that he err whom I
oppose, a thousand to one but that my Wrath is worse than his Error, probably
thousand times worse. I go about therefore to take away a Moat from his Eye,
having a Beam in my own* or am more concerned for a misplaced Hair upon his
Head, than I am for a Fiery Ulcer in my own Breast. We are not, it is true, to
be so Stoical to condemn the Natural Passion of Anger, as such for sinful. But
if it exceeds it is Cause, and sets not with the Sun, it becomes strange,
unhallowed, Fire. But again in the*

10th place, There is still a further appearance of great Carnality in such
cases, when any do adventure to judge of the Consciences and States of them
whom they oppose, or from whom they differ. When they ascend the Tribunal,
usurp the Throne, pass Sentence upon them, as Men of no Conscience, or of no
Sincerity, or Vprightness of Heart with God. As if theirs were to be the
Universal Conscience* the measure of all Consciences; and he that cannot be
governed by their Conscience must have none at all: Or he be stark blind
toward Truth, toward God, and toward himself, that sees not every thing they
see, or fancy themselves to see.

Thi^ ^s a most high Usurpation upon Divine Prerogative; and how can any
insensibly slide into such an Evil as this, in the Face of so plain and so
awful a Text of Scripture, that so severely animadverts upon it? That 14th
Romans, in sundry Verses of it. With what Reverence and Dread should it strike
a Man's Soul in such a case! When we have the Rights of the Redeemer asserted
in those whom he has bought with his Blood? And are told that for this end
Christ both died and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the Dead
and Living, ver. 9. And it is thereupon further said to us, Who art thou that
judge another Servant, as ver. 10. Why do thou judge thy Brother, or set
at naught thy Brother? We must all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ. We
are all of us his, he both died, and revived, and rose again, that he might be
Lord of all, as Acts 10. 36. And here of dead and living, i. e. That he might
be Owner of all, which is the first Notion of Dominus or Lord, and in both
Worlds, the Visible and the Invisible, that into which many are dead; and
deceased from hence, and so to us become invisible; and many that, yet
surviving, are still visible to us. So ample is his Dominion! And because the
Jus* Imperii, the night of Government, of which Judgment is the last,
conclusive Act, has for it is Foundation the Jus Dominii; it is therefore
asserted to him as the Coronis and Complement, the very Summity of his acquired
Rights, that he is to finish all things by the last Judgment, which must pass
upon both the already dead, and the yet living. Thus is the ground of the
Expostulation laid. Who art thou who presumest to justle him out of this his
Supreme and most Sacred right? Perhaps the matter disputed about may be
doubtful, but there is no doubt concerning this incommunicable Authority of our
Lord Christ, or concerning his Law against such Judging, Matthew. 7. 1. and to
run into certain sin in a furious chasing of uncertain Error! What
Consideration? What Tenderness of offending, of affronting him, and of
hazarding our own Souls is there in all this?

To judge other Men's Consciences, is of so near affinity with governing them,
that they that can allow themselves to do the former, want only Power, not Will
or Inclination, to offer at the other too. Which puts the matter out of doubt,
that when Men of this Temper complain of such Usurpation, it is not that they
think it an Offense in it is self, but against them only; and that no
Consciences ought to be free, but their own. The Proof of an honest and equal
Mind herein is, when we judge this to be Evil, not being hurt by it; or abhor
to hurt others in this kind, when we have Power to do it. Upon which account
that Passage is memorable of the Emperor Maximilian II. to a certain Prelate,
that there was no Sin, no Tyranny more grievous than to affect Dominion over
men's Consciences; and that they who do so, go about to invade the Tower of
Heaven. A considerable Saying from so great a Prince, that lived and died in
the Roman Communion. What shall be thought of any such Protestants, that
without any color or shadow of a ground, besides differing from them in some
very disputable and unimportant Opinions, shall presume to judge of other Men's
Consciences, (and consequently of their States Godward) which such a one as he
thought it so presumptuous Wickedness to attempt to overruled or govern?

11. When we over-magnifie our own Understandings, and assume too much to our
selves. That is, do expect that our Minds be taken for Standards to all Minds:
As if We, of all Mankind, were exempt from Error, or the possibility of being
mistaken. A certain sort of (...), or (...) an excess of love and admiration of
our selves, or over-pleasedness with our selves, too much Self-complacency, is
the true (though very deep and most hidden) Root of our common mischief in such
cases. We wrap up our selves within our selves, and then we are all the World.
Do only compare our selves with our selves, never letting it enter into our
Minds, that others have their Sentiments too, perhaps wiser than ours; but
abound in our own sense; and while (as the Apostle in that case says) we are
not wise, and perhaps are the only Persons that think our selves so, we yet
take upon us, as if we were fit to dictate to the World, to all Christians, and
to all Mankind; or as if we only were the Men, and Wisdom must die with us.

This is a sort of Evil, than which there is none more common, and none less
observed; none wherewith the guilty are so little apt to charge themselves, or
admit Conviction of it. For, I pray, do but consider; All the several differing
Parties amongst us do with one voice pretend to be for Peace; but how, and upon
what Terms? Why, that all the rest are presently to be of their Mind; and that
is all the Peace that most are for. For where (scarce any where) is the Man to
be found? Or how great a Rarity is he! that entertains the Thought that there
may, for ought I know, be much to be redressed and corrected in my
Apprehensions of things, to make me capable of falling in with that Truth which
ought to be common to all. There is an Expectation with many, of a good time,
and state of things, before this world end, when all shall be of one mind and
Judgment: But the most think it must be by all men's becoming of their mind and
Judgment. And of this Self-conceit it is usually a harder thing to fasten
Conviction upon Men, than of most other Evils. We have more hope in speaking
against Drunkenness, Murder, or any the grossest kind of Wickedness: For there
the Conscience of the guilty falls in, and takes part with the Reprover. But we
can more easily and more frequently do (though not frequently enough) observe the
Faults of the Inferior Faculties, or of our External Actions, than of the
Faculty it self which should observe. Our Mind, which is naturally like our
Eye, is, in this, too like, i. e. That it can see every thing but it self. It
does not, by using it, preserve it is peculiar, self-reflecting Power. Is blind
toward it is self, beyond what naturally belongs to it. An Object may be too
near our Bodily Eye to be seen. Our Mind is herein too bodily, too much
carnaliz'd, sunk too deep into Flesh. It is the next thing to it self; and
here, not by it is Primitive Nature, (by which as an intellectual Sun it could
revert it is Beams, and turn them inward upon it self) but by Depravation, it
for the most part sees nothing; or does worse, thinks it self to see what is
not to be seen, certain imaginary Excellencies, which make the Man his own
Idol; an Object of a sort of Adoration to himself; and of Scorn and Derision
(most probably) to every one else. In this case every Man is, however, most
commonly innocent in his own Eyes, or still thinks he is in the right, amidst
the so vast a variety of Apprehensions and Sentiments no one suspects himself
to be in the wrong. All are for the Truth, and they are all for Peace and
Union. By which some indeed, more gently, mean, they hope all will quit their
former mistaken Opinions and ways (as in great kindness to themselves they take
for granted all Men's are but their own) and come wholly over to them. Others
that have not Breasts capable of even so much Charity as this, not only are as
much Lovers and Admirers of themselves, but so vehement Haters of all that
presume to differ from them, that they think them not fit to live in the World
that durst adventure to do so. The meaning therefore of their being for Peace,
is, that they would have all destroyed that are not of their minds: And then
(as the Roman Historian speaks) Quando solitudinem fecere appellant pacem. When
they have made a Desolation, so that they themselves are left alone in the
World, that they will call Peace.

But you will say, What is to be done? Or what would I persw^de in this case of
differing Apprehensions and ways still remaining among Christians? I answer,
Not presently to unbelieve all that ever a man has believed before; or to
abandon on the sudden his former Sentiments, or to find fault with himself for
having thought them right. For it is a Contradiction to be of any Opinion, and
not then to think it right. Nor (therefore) is it Skepticism, by any means,
that I would advise to; as if there were nothing to be thought certain. But
this: That whereas the greatest and most necessary things in Religion are most
plain, that is, either most plain in themselves, or most expressly revealed in
the Word of God. Here let us be steadfast our selves, without being severe
toward other men. Other things, that are more matter of doubt and dispute, by
how much the less plain they are, we should count so much the less necessary.
In reference therefore to these loss momentous things, about which there is
with us most of Jangling, there ought always to be great modesty, and distrust
of our own Understandings, and a continued readiness to receive Information,
with constant looking up to the Father of Lights for further Illumination, and
a Resolution, wherein we, with others, have attained to walk by the same Rule,
minding the same (agreed) things, hoping God will reveal his Mind to the
otherwise minded in his own time, as the Apostle, in 3 Phil. 16, 17, But to
hasten to a Close, I further add in the

Last place, Such Carnality greatly shows it is self in an Affectation and
Desire of having such Disputes still kept a-foot, and the Contests continued
without either Limit, or rational Design. This shows a deep Tincture; and is a
plain Indication of a Mind to a very great degree carnaliz'd, when a mighty
pleasure is taken to see the Saw drawn, and the Ball kept up. And if the
Question be asked, Pray how long? So little of reasonable Answer can be given,
that it might as well be said in plain terms, Till all Words be spent, till
Speech or Language fail, till Elias come, or Doomsday come. So that if there
were never so much reason to commend the having said somewhat in defense of
this or* that disputed Point, we might yet say as Seneca did of Cicero's so
much overpraising his own Consulship, I blame him not for praising it without
Cause, but for doing it without End; or that he could never give over, or tell
when he had said enough. Upon the same Terms upon which it is now so much
desired such Disputes should be continued, when what is truly enough is already
said, they might as well wish they always should. Which signifies that when we
say, we would have Men contend for Truth, we wish it not so much for Truth's
sake, as for the Contention's sake. By all means, say they, strive for the
Truth: Not that they care so much for Truth, as for the Strife. For in some
Circumstances there is not an End in view, that is rationally to be designed or
served by it on this side the End of all things. Nor consequently any good
Principle that is to be exercised or gratified thereby. What is needful to be
said in the matters already referred to, for the informing and satisfying of
tractable Minds, sincerely willing to understand the Truth, lies within a
little Compass. And when, in Controversy, that is once said which truly
belongs to the very Point in question, the rest is commonly trifling and
reflection, or the perplexing of the matter more, and darkning Counsel by words
without knowledge. If Love to Truth be alleged for the Principle that prompts
Men to covet so continual Altercations about it, I would say this shows more
want of love to it. For hereby they are diverted from that which renders it
most of all amiable, and for which it ought chiefly to be loved. As it is the
Truth according to Godliness, and by which we are to be sanctified, and
begotten more and more (as of an Immortal Seed) into the Divine Likeness.
Experience shows how little Disputes better Men's Spirits. If we love Divine
Truth, why do we not feed and live upon it, and enjoy it is pleasant Relishes?
But relish Gravel more, or Chaff and Bran. For thither the Agitation of
continued Controversies about it does soon sift it, the Grain or Flower (the
Kidney of the wheat) being passed away, and gone from us. Can none remember
when the Disputative Humor had even eaten out the Power and Spirit of
Practical Religion and Godliness? Thither things are again tending, if either
by Severity or Mercy, (one may say rather than not otherwise, by merciful
Severity) God do not prevent and repress that Tendency. As yet I fear the
Humor is violent, when the Fervor of Men's Spirits is such, as to carry them
over all Scripture directions, and Animadversions, that they signify nothing
with them: Only make it their business each one to animate the more vogued
Champions of their own Party into the highest Ferments, and cry, Dispute,
Dispute, Write, Write; Preach, Preach one against another; let not the business
go over so, do not keep silence. Thus are many, as the Apostle speaks, puffed up*
for one against another, 1 Cor. 4. 6. And what, has such a Text of Scripture as
that no Edge? no Point? by which to lance, to pierce such a Tumor? No, when
the Humor is once up, and has inwrapt Men's Hearts, is settled there, and has
obdur'd them to a brawny hardness: Such Texts of Scripture, though so mighty
pat and apposite, are esteemed by them but as Leviathan esteems Spears and
Swords, like Straw and rotten wood, they do not enter into Men's Hears. A
strange kind of Obduration!

And how supposeable is it, that they who are so puffed up for others, may also,
through the known Corruption of Nature even in the best, do herein not a little
to the puffing up of them too. The Apostle's concluding of this Chapter with
those Cautions, Let us not be desirous of Vain glory, provoking one another,
envying one another, immediately upon his renewing of the Precept, ver. 25. Of
walking in the Spirit: And immediately before those Words, Chap. 6. 1. If a man
be over ^^en with a fault, ye which are Spiritual, restore such a one in the
Spirit of meekness, shows how he understood the Case to be with these Galatian
Christians, that as to Doctrinals were yet sound and unfall'n. That there was
yet such Carnality working in their continued Contests, (though for the Truth)
such Pride, such affectation of Vainglory, such wrathfulness, as showed it was
not mere love to Truth that kept up the Contest, but some such worse
Principles. Nothing is plainer than that Principles and Ends measure one
another. And when that is done, or coveted to be done, that serves no good End;
or is so done, as not to serve but destroy, or hinder any end that is truly
good; the Principle must be very bad, that moves the Wheel. Disorderly
Eccentrick Motions bewray their Principle and End together. When the Carriage
and Conduct of an Affair that carries with it the appearance of serving the
Truth, is impetuous, eager, precipitant; when there is no good End in view of
the present so modified Endeavor; when enough is agreed already to serve the
most important Ends, Unity among Brethren, the Salvation of Souls, and yet
things are further insisted on, unnecessary to either, yea, prejudscial to
both, and upon which the weight and stress of either of these cannot be laid
without sin; it too plainly appears Vainglory to ones self, or the slurring of
a (designed) Adversary is the End; and then the Principle is proportionable.
Yet even in the Light, and when matters are thus open and in view, Oppositions
are pushed on, and Men's Spirits rise to that pitch, as to bear down whatever
is proposed, only with design to make their Career a little slower: Yea, and
they are apt, rather than hearken, to put opprobious Names and Characters upon
them that are not altogether so furious as themselves.

Nor have they themselves the Patience to consider Consequences, and whether
these things tend; that is, that God is provoked, that the Souls of Men are
endangered, greatly endangered. I have found in my own Conversation, that some
even in Distress, in Agonies, have said, Lord, be merciful to us, I know not
which way to go; one preaches one thing, another reaches the quite contrary. I
know they mistake; we do generally in substance preach the same Gospel. Thanks
be to God his Gospel is not confined to a few Men, or to this or that Party of
Men. But in the mean time, it is a thing of very ill consequence to lay
Stumbling Blocks before the blind, Bars and Obstructions in the way of the
weak and the lame, whereby they may be turned out of the way, who should rather
be strengthened.

It is not considered, that where the danger is less of an utter Ruin to the
Souls of Men, there is however occasioned a great Languor and Enfeeblement.
They should be considered, and treated, not only as being weak, but lest they
should be made so. When they are diverted from the proper means of Improvement
and Growth, and their Minds are alienated from those means being otherwise
engaged, an ill Habit is contracted; and when the Distemper has seized some,
it spreads, and soon infects more. Nutriment is dispensed, from the Head
through the Body, by the Cooperation of the several parts, as those Texts,
Ephesians. 4. 16. Col. 2. 19. do with great Emphasis and Elegancy speak. Understand
it so, that how far soever there is, or ought to be actual Communion, every
Limb and Joint contributes something to the strength and vigor of the rest. So
is Nourishment ministered, and spreads it is self in the Body to it is edifying
it is self in love: Which Love if it fail, an universal Languor cannot but
ensue, the free Circulation of Vital Spirits being obstructed and stopped. And
those that are most sensible, if they be not so much otherwise damnified,
cannot, when they observe it, but be grieved, and take it bitterly to Heart;
when the Tokens appear to their View of a general Decay. The living Members of
any Body are pained, when the Body is wasted and rent; dead or stupify'd and
benumbed Members feel it not, are unapprehensive. But above all, it ought to be
considered, (and how little is it?) that the Holy Spirit is grieved, and does
(as we may fear it will more) sensibly retire. The Gospel in which it is wont
to breathe is trifled with: The glorious Gospel! The Gospel of the Grace of
God! (Can Men find nothing else to play with?) by which that blessed Spirit
has begotten many a Soul to God, and nourished them unto Life Eternal. That
precious thing designed for so great, and sacred purposes, (as pampered, wanton
Children do with their Food) they dally with, or quarrel about it, or squander
and throw it away. How can this but offend? The self-procur'd Distempers which
did precede, and those that ensue, increase the Offense. When it is said, Ephesians.
4. 30. Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God -- and presently subjoyned, ver. 31.
Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil-speaking be put
away. Is it not less to us to collect, that these things do more peculiarly
grieve the Spirit? That Spirit of Grace, of all Love, Goodness, Sweetness and
Benignity. There is but one Body, and one Spirit, a Spirit that spreads vital
Influence in the Body. What can you think of that Spirit that feels every
where? That is in the Body an universal Sentient? How can that Spirit but be
grieved! Passion it is not capable of, hut just and sedate Displicency, that
matters should be so. How should any of us like it, to have our living Body
torn Limb from Limb, and part from part! Though with him real Commotion, and
Disturbance can have no place. Intellectual Resentment is infinitely greater
and deeper than we can either feel or conceive.

But where this angry, tumify'd Proud Flesh is the governing thing, none of
these tremendous Consequences or Considerations, while it is so, take any
place. The litigious quarrelsom Genius (...) throw off all, will find no
leisure or (...) for a calm Thought: But though the course in which we are
engaged should be ready to set on fire the whole ^^^rse of Nature, will be
still for casting abroad Firebrands, and Arrows, and Death; and make us think
this fine sport!

If indeed there were room for any cooler Thoughts, one would think such as
these should not lie remote.

How little any of us know, or are capable of knowing in this our present
state! That they that think they know most, or are most conceited of their own
Knowledge, know nothing as they ought to know. That they that are most apt to
contend, do most of all sight in the dark. That it is too possible there may be
much Knowledge without Love. How little such Knowledge is worth! That it
profits nothing. That it hurts, puffs up, when Love edifies. That the Devils
know more than any of us, while their want of Love, or their Hellish Malignity
makes them Devils. That as by Pride comes Contention, so Humility would
contribute more to Peace, (and to the discerning of Truth too) than the most
fervent Disceptation. That there is no hope of proselyting the World to my
Opinion or way. That if I cannot be quiet till I have made such and such of my
Mind, I shall still be unquiet while others are not of it, i. e. always. That
if some ones Judgment must be a Standard to the World, there are Thousands
sitter for it than mine. That they that in their angry Contests think to shame
their Adversary, do commonly most of all shame themselves.

But to close all, I pray let us consider, We are, professedly, going to
Heaven, that Region of Light, and Life, and Purity, and Love: It well indeed
becomes them that are upon the way thither, modestly to enquire after Truth.
Humble, serious, diligent Endeavors to increase in Divine Knowledge, are very
suitable to our present state of Darkness and Imperfection. The Product of such
Enquiries we shall carry to Heaven with us, with whatsoever is most a kin
thereto, (besides their Usefulness in the way thither.) We shall carry Truth,
and the Knowledge of God to Heaven with us; we shall carry Purity thither,
Devotedness, of Soul to God and our Redeemer, Divine Love and Joy, if we have
their Beginnings here, with whatsoever else of real permanent Excellency, that
has a settled, sixed Seat and Place in our Souls now; and shall there have them
in perfection. But do we think we shall carry Strife to Heaven? Shall we carry
Anger to Heaven? Envyings, Heart-burnings, An^^^sities, Enimities, Hatred of
our Brethren and Fellow Christians, shall we carry these to Heaven with us?

Let us labor to divest our selves, and strike off from our Spirits, every
thing that shall not go with us to Heaven, or is equally unsuitable to our End
and Way, that there may be nothing to obstruct and hinder our abundant Entrance
at length into the everasting Kingdom.

FINIS.
These Books Written by the same Reverend Author Mr. John How, are sold by
Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheap Side.
1. THE Blessedness of the Righteous: The Vanity of this Mortal Life. On Psalm.
17. ver. 15. and Psalm. 89. 47.

2. Of Thoughtfulness for the Morrow. With an Appendix concerning the
immoderate Desire of fore-knowing things to come.

3. The Redeemers Tears wept over lost Souls, in a Treatise on Luke 19. 41, 42.
With an Appendix wherein some what is occasionally discoursed concerning the
Sin against the Holy Ghost, and how God is said to Will the Salvation of them
that perish.

4. Of Charity in reference to other Men's Sins.

5. Self-dedication discoursed in the Anniversary Thanksgiving of a Person of
Honor for a great Deliverance.

6. A Sermon directing what we are to do after a strict Enquiry whether or no
we truly love God.

7. A Funeral Sermon for that Faithful and Laborious Servant of Christ, Mr.
Richard Fairclough, (who deceased July 4. 1682. in the Sixty First year of his
Age.)

8. A Funeral Sermon for Mrs. Esther Sampson, the late Wife of Henry Sampson,
Dr. of Physic, who died Nov. 24. 1689.

Books lately Printed for Tho. Parkhurst.
A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen at Whitehall, the Fifth of
November, 1692. By Richard, Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.

A brief Tract of the Fourth Commandment: Wherein is discovered the Cause of
all our Controversies about the Sabbath Day, and the means of reconciling them.
Recommended by the Reverend Dr. Bates, and Mr. John How.

An Epistolatory Discourse on the great Assistances to a Christian Faith, and
for a more Entire Rest and Assurance in the highest Trials and Adventures
thereof. With a Second Part, upon the Present Times, and these rare
Vicissitudes of Providence in the Public State of Britain in this Age. To
which an Appendix is added in the Close. By R. Fleming, Minister of the Gospel
at Roterdam; the Author of the Fulfilling of Scripture.

A short Story of the Rise, Reign and Ruin of the Antinomians, Familists, and
Libertines that infected the Churches of New England: And how they were
confuted by the Assembly of Ministers there: As also of the Magistrates
Proceedings in Court against them. Together with God's strange Remarkable
Judgments from Heaven upon some of the chief Fomenters of these Opinions; and
the lamentable Death of Mrs. Hutchison. Very fit for these Times; here being
the same Errors amongst us, and acted by the same Spirit. Published at the
instant Request of sundry, by one that was an Eye and Ear-witness of the
Carriage of Matters there.

Satan Sifting: Or, the Oil of Joy for the Spirit of Heaviness.

A Body of Practical Divinity, consisting of above One Hundred Seventy Six
Sermons on the Lesser Catechism, composed by the Reverend Assembly of Divines
at VVestminter: With a Supplement of some Sermons on several Texts of
Scripture. By Thomas Watson, formerly Minister at St. Stephen's VValbrook,
London. Recommended by several Ministers to Masters of Families and others.

A Discourse of the Saving Grace of God: By David Clarkson Minister of the
Gospel.

The Conversion of the Soul. To which is added, A Warning to Sinners to prepare
for Judgment. By Not. Vincent Minister of the Gospel.

A Discourse of Old Age, tending to the Instruction, Caution and Comfort of
Aged Persons.

FINIS.

