THE CASE OF THE Protestant Dissenters, REPRESENTED and ARGUED.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

THEY are under one common Obligation with the rest of Mankind, by the
universal Law of Nature, to Worship God in Assemblies.

Men of all sorts of Religions that have ever obtained in the World, Jews,
Pagans, Mahometans, Christians, have in their Practice acknowledged this
Obligation. Nor can it be understood how such a Practice should be so
Universal, otherwise than from the Dictate and Impression of the Universal Law.

Whereas the Religion professed in England, is that of Reformed Christianity;
some things are annexed to the allowed Public Worship, which are acknowledged
to be no parts thereof, nor in themselves necessary; but which the Dissenters
judge to be in some part Sinful.

They cannot therefore with good Conscience toward God, attend wholly and
solely upon the Public Worship, which the Laws do appoint.

The same Laws do strictly forbid their assembling to Worship God otherwise.

Which is in effect the same thing, as if they who made, or shall continue such
Laws, should plainly say, If you will not consent with us in our superadded
Rites, and Modes, against your Consciences, you shall not Worship God: Or if
you will not accept of our Additions to the Christian Religion, you shall not
be Christians; and manifestly tends to reduce to Paganism a great Part of a
Christian Nation.

They have been wont therefore to meet however in distinct Assemblies, and to
worship God in a way which their Consciences could approve; and have many years
continued so to do, otherwise than as they have been hindered by Violence.

It is therefore upon the whole fit to enquire,

Q. 1. Whether the Dissenters are to be blamed for their holding distinct
Meetings for the worship of God?
For answer to this, It cannot be expected that all the Controversies should be
here determined, which have been agi^ated about the Lawfulness of each of those
things which have been added to the Christian Religion and Worship, by the
present Constitution of the Church of England.

But supposing they were none of them simply unlawful, while yet the
misinformed Minds of the Dissenters could not judge them lawful, tho they have
made it much their Business to enquire and search; being urged also by very
severe Sufferings, which thorough a long Tract of time they have undergone, Not
to refuse any means that might tend to their Satisfaction; they could have
nothing else left them to do, than to Meet, and worship distinctly as they have.

For they could not but esteem the Obligation of the Universal, Natural, Divine
Law, by which they were bound solemnly to worship God, less questionable than
that of a Law, which was only Positive, Topical, and Humane, requiring such and
such Additaments to their worship, and prohibiting their worship without them.

The Church of England (as that part affects to be called) distinguished from
the rest by those additionals to Christian Religion, (pretended to be
indifferent, and so, confessed unnecessary) has not only sought to Engross to it
self the Ordinances of Divine Worship, but all Civil Power. So that the
Privileges that belong either to Christian or Humane Society, are enclosed,
and made peculiar to such, as are distinguished by things that in themselves can
signify nothing to the making of Persons either better Christians, or better
Men.

Q. 2. Whether the Laws enjoining such Additions to our Religion, as the
exclusive Terms of Christian worship and Communion, ought to have been made;
when it is acknowledged on all hands, the things to be added, were before not
necessary; and when it is known, a great number judge them Sinful, and must
thereby be restrained from worshipping the True and Living God?

A. The Question to any of common Sense, answers it self. For it is not put
concerning such as dissent from any Part of the Substance of Worship which God
has commanded; but concerning such Additions as he never commanded. And there
are sufficient Tests to distinguish such Dissenters, from those that deny any
substantial Part of Religion, or assert any thing contrary thereto. Wherefore
to forbid such to worship that God that made them, because they cannot receive
your devised Additions, is to exclude that which is necessary, for the mere
want of that which is unnecessary.

And where is that Man that will adventure to stand forth, and avow the
hindering of such Persons from paying their Homage to the God that made them?
If we thus expostulate the matter on Gods behalf, and their own; will you cut
off from God his Right in the Creatures he has made? Will you cut off from
them the means of their Salvation, upon these terms? What reply can the matter
admit?

It Is commonly alleged, That great deference is to be paid to the Laws; and
that we ought to have forborne our Assemblies, till the public Authority
recalled the Laws against them. And we will say the same thing, when it is well
proved, that they who made such Laws, made the world too.

And by whose Authority were such Laws made? Is there any, that is not from
God? And has God given any Men authority to make Laws against himself, and to
deprive him of his just Rights from his own Creatures?

N^r if the matter be well searched into, could there be so much as a pretense
of Authority derived for such purposes from the People, whom every one now
acknowledges the first Receptacle of derived governing Power. God can, it is
true, lay indisputable Obligation by his known Laws, upon every Consci^nce of
Man about Religion, or any thing else. And such as represent any People, can
according to the Constitution of the Government, make Laws for them about the
things they entrust them with. But if the People of England be asked Man by Man,
will they say, they did entrust to their Representatives, their Religion, and
their Consciences, to do with them what they please? When it is your own turn
to be represented by others, is this part of the Trust you commit? What Dr.
Sherlock worthily says, concerning a Bishop, he might (and particularly, after,
does) say, concerning every other Man, He can be no more represented in a
Council, than at the Day of Judgment; every Vindication of some Protestant
Principles, etc. p. 52.
Man's Soul and Conscience must be in his own keeping, and can be represented
by no Man.

It ought to be considered, That Christianity, wherein it superadds to the Law
of Nature, is all matter of Revelation. And it is well known, that even among
Pagans, in the settling Rites and Institutes of Religion As by Numa, from his
Egeria. And their Priests to whom the Regulation of such matters was left, were
generally believed to be inspired.
, Revelation was pretended at least, upon an impli'd Principle, that in such
matters humane Power could not oblige the Peoples Consciences.

We must be excused therefore, if we have in our Practice expressed less
Reverence for Laws made by no Authority received either from God or Man.

We are therefore injuriously reflected on, when it is imputed to us, That we
have by the use of our Liberty, acknowledged an Illegal Dispensing Power. We
have done no other thing herein, than we did when no Dispensation was given or
pretended, in Conscience of Duty to him that gave us Breath. Nor did therefore
Practice otherwise, because we thought those Laws dispensed with, but because
we thought them not Laws.

Whereupon little need remains of enquiring further,

Q. 3. Whether such Laws should be continued?
Against which, besides what may be collected from that which has been said,
it is to be considered, that what is most principally grievous to us, was
enacted by that Parliament, that as we have too much reason to believe,
suffered it self to be dealt with, to enslave the Nation in other Respects, as
well as this; and which (to his immortal Honor) the Noble Earl of Danby
procured to be Dissolved, as the first Step toward our National Deliverance.

And let the Tenor be considered of that horrid Law, by which our Magna Charta
was torn in Pieces; the worst and most infamous of Mankind, at our own Expense,
hired to accuse us; multitudes of Perjuries committed; Convictions made without
a Jury, and without any Hearing of the Persons accused; Penalties inflicted;
Goods rifled; Estates seized and imbezel'd; Houses broken up; Families
disturbed, often at most unseasonable Hours of the Night, without any Cause, or
Shadow of a Cause, if only a malicious Villain would pretend to suspect a
Meeting there. No Law in any other Case like this; as if to worship God without
those Additions, which were confessed unnecessary, were a greater Crime than
Theft, Felony, Murder, or Treason! Is it for our Reputation to Posterity, that
the Memory of such a Law should be continued?

And are we not yet awakened, and our Eyes opened enough, to see, that the
making and Execution of the Laws, by which we have suffered so deeply for many
bypast years, was only, That Protestants might destroy Protestants, and the
easier work be made for the Introduction of the Popery that was to destroy the
Residue.

Nor can any Malice deny, or Ignorance of observing Englishmen overlook this
plain matter of Fact: After the Dissolution of that beforementioned Parliament,
Dissenters were much caressed, and endeavored to be drawn into a Subserviency
to the Court-designs, especially in the Election of after Parliaments.
Notwithstanding which, they every where so entirely and unanimously fell in
with the sober Part of the Nation in the Choice of such Persons for the three
Parliaments that next succeeded (two held at Westminster, and that at Oxford)
as it was known would, and who did most generously Assert the Liberties of the
Nation, and the Protestant Religion. Which alone (and not our mere dissent
from the Church of England in Matters of Religion, wherein Charles II. was
sufficiently known to be a Prince of great indifferency) drew upon us, soon
after the Dissolution of the last of those Parliaments, that dreadful Storm of
Persecution that destroyed not a small Number of Lives in Goals, and ruined
Multitudes of Families.

Let English Freemen remember, what they cannot but know, That it was for our
firm adherence to the Civil Interests of the Nation (not for our different
Modes of Religion from the Legal way, tho the Laws gave that advantage against
us, which they did not against others) that we endured the Calamities of so
many years.

When, by the late King, some relaxation was given us, what arts and
insinuations have been used with us, to draw us into a concurrence to designs
tending to the prejudice of the Nation? And with how little effect upon the
generality of us, it must be great ignorance not to know, and great injustice
to deny.

But he that knows all things, knows, that tho, in such circumstances, there
was no opportunity for our receiving public and authorized promises, when we
were all under the eye of watchful jealousy; yet as great assurances as were
possible, were given us by some that we hope will now remember it, of a future
established security from our former pressures. We were told over and over, when
the excellent Here Fag^ll's Letter came to be privately communicated from hand
to hand, how easily better things would be had for us, than that encouraged
Papists to expect, if ever that happy Change should be brought about, which
none have now beheld with greater joy than we.

We are loath to injure those who have made us hope for better, by admitting a
suspicion that we shall now be disappointed and deceived (as we have formerly
been, and we know by whom) or that we shall suffer from them a Religious
slavery, for whose sakes we have suffered so grievous things, rather than do
the least thing that might tend to the bringing upon them a Civil slavery.

We cannot but expect from Englishmen, that they be just and true. We hope not
to be the only instances, whereby the Anglica fides, and the Punica, shall be
thought all one.

But if we who have constantly desired, and, as we have had opportunity,
endeavored the saving of the Nation, must however be ruined, not to greaten
(one hair) the Wealth and Dignity, but only to gratify the humor of them who
would yet destroy it; we, who are competently inured to sufferings, shall
through God's Mercy be again enabled to endure. But he that sits in the Heavens
will, in his own time, judge our Cause, and we will wait his Pleasure; and, we
hope, suffer all that can be inflicted, rather than betray the Cause of
Reformed Christianity in the World.

But our Affairs are in the hands of Men of Worth and Honor, who apprehend how
little grateful a Name they should leave to posterity, or obtain now with good
men of any persuasion, if under a pretense of kindness to us, they should now
repeat the Arts of ill men in an ill time. Great minds will think it beneath
them, to sport themselves with their own cunning in deceiving other men, which
were really in the present case too thin not to be seen through, and may be the
easy attainment of any Man, that has enough of opportunity, and integrity
little enough for such purposes. And it is as much too gross to endeavor to
abuse the Authority of a Nation, by going about to make that stoop to so mean a
thing, as to make a show of intending what they resolve to their uttermost
shall never be.

But some may think, by Concessions to us, the Church of England will be
ruined, and a great advantage be given to the bringing in of Popery.

To which we say, The generality of the Dissenters differ from the Church of
England in no Substantials of Doctrine, or Worship, no, nor of Government,
provided it be so managed, as to attain its true acknowledged end. The
favoring of us will therefore as much ruin the Church, as its enlargement,
and additional strength will signify to its ruin.

And does not the World know, that wherein we differ from them, we differ from
the Papists too? And that, for the most part, wherein they differ from us, they
seem to agree with them?

We acknowledge their strong, brave, and prosperous opposition to Popery: But
they have opposed it by the things wherein they agree with us. Their
differences from us are no more a fence against Popery, than an enclosure of
Straw is against a flame of fire.

But it is wont to be said, we agree not among our selves, and know not what we
would have.

And do all that go under the name of the Church of England agree among
themselves? We can show more considerable disagreements among them, than any
can between the most of us and a very considerable part of them. They all
agree, it is true, in Conformity; and we all agree in Nonconformity. And is not
this mere Accidental to Christianity and Protestantism? And herein is it not
well known, that far the greater part of Reformed Christendom do more agree
with us?

An arbitrary line of Uniformity in some little Accidents, severs a small part
of the Christian world from all the rest: How unreasonably is it expected, that
therefore all the rest must in every thing else agree among themselves? Suppose
any imaginary line to cut off a little segment from any part of the Terrestrial
Globe, it is as justly expected, that all the rest of the world should be of one
mind. If one part of England be Tailors, they might as well expect, that all
the people besides should agree to be of one Profession.

Perhaps some imagine it dishonorable to such as have gone before them in the
same Ecclesiastical Stations and Dignities, if now any thing should be altered,
which their judgments did before approve and think fit.

But we hope that temptation will not prove Invincible, viz. of so excessive a
modesty, as to be afraid of seeming wiser, or better natured, or of a more
Christian temper than their Predecessors.

But the most of us do agree not only with one another, but in the great things
above mentioned, with the Church of England too: And in short, that that
Reproach may cease for ever with those that count it one; They will find with
us, when they please to try, a very extensive agreement on the terms of King
Charles the Second's Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs, An. 1660.

Q. 4. Whether it be reasonable to exclude, all that in every thing conform not
to the Church of England, from any part or share of the Civil Power?
The difference, or Nonconformity of many is so minute, that it would be as
reasonable, to exclude all whose hair is not of this or that color.

And what if we should make a distermination, by the decision this way or that
of any other disputed question that may be of as small concernment to Religion?
Suppose it be that of eating Blood; for the decision whereof, one way, there is
more pretense from God's Word, than for any point of the disputed Conformity.
Would it not be a wise Constitution, that whosoever thinks it lawful to eat
Black-Pudding, shall be capable of no Office, etc?

But we tremble to think of the exclusive Sacramental Test, brought down as low
as to the keeper of an Alehouse! Are all fit to approach that sacred Table,
whom the fear of ruin, or hope of gain may bring thither? We cannot but often
remember with horror, what happened three or four years ago: A Man that led an
ill life, but frequented the Church, was observed not to come to the Sacrament,
and pressed by the Officers to come; he yet declined, knowing himself unfit; at
length, being threatened and terrified, came: But said to some present at the
time of the solemn action, That he came only to avoid being undone; and took
them to witness, that what he there received, he took only as common Bread and
Wine, not daring to receive them as the Body and Blood of Christ. It Is
amazing, that among Christians, so venerable an Institution should be
prostituted to the serving of so mean purposes, and so foreign to its true end!
And that doing it after the manner of the Church of England must be the
qualification! as if England were another Christendom; or it were a greater
thing to conform in every punctilio to the Rules of this Church, than of Christ
himself!

But we would fain know whose is that Holy Table? Is it the Table of this or
that Party, or the Lord's Table? If the Lord's; are not persons to be admitted,
or excluded upon his terms? Never can there be Union or Peace in the Christian
world, till we take down our arbitrary Enclosures, and content our selves with
those which our common Lord has set. If he falls under a Curse that alters
Men's Landmarks, to alter God's is not likely to infer a Blessing.

The matter is clear as the light of the Sun, that as many persons of excellent
worth, sobriety, and godliness, are entirely in the Communion of the Church of
England; so that there are too many of a worse Character that are of it too;
and diverse prudent, pious, and sober-minded persons that are not of it. Let
common Reason be consulted in this case; Suppose the Tables turned, and that
the Rule were to be made the contrary way, viz. That to do this thing, but not
by any means after the manner of the Church of England, were to be the
qualification; and now suppose one of meaner endowments as a Man and a
Christian, do what is required, and not in the way of the Church of England;
another, that is of much better, do the same thing, in that way; Were it
suitable to Prudence or Justice, that because it is done after the way of the
Church of England, a fitter Man should be reckoned unqualified? and one of less
value be taken for qualified, because he does it a different way? Then is all
that solid weight of Wisdom, Diligence, Sobriety and Goodness, to be weighed
down by a Feather.

It must surely be thought the Prudence of any Government, to comprehend as
many useful persons as it can, and no more to deprive it self of the Service of
such, for any thing less considerable than those qualifications are by which
they are useful, than a Man would tear off from himself the Limbs of his Body
for a Spot upon the Skin.

And really, if in our circumstances, we thus narrow our Interest, all the rest
of the world will say, That they who would destroy us, do yet find a way to be
our instructors, and our common Enemies do teach us our Politics.

POSTSCRIPT.
THE Names of Mr. Hale of Eaton College, and of a later most renowned Bishop of
the Church of England, who asserted this Principle [That if things be imposed
under the notion of indifferent, which many think sinful, and a Schism follow
thereupon, the Imposers are the Schismatics.] will be great in England, as
long as their Writings shall live, and good sense can be understood in it.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed in the Year, MDCLXXXIX.


