THE Living Temple, OR, A DESIGNED IMPROVEMENT Of that NOTION, THAT A GOOD MAN
IS THE TEMPLE of GOD.

By JOHN HOW, M. A. Sometime Fellow of M. C. Oxon.

LONDON: Printed for John Starkey at the Miter in Fleetstreet, near Temple Bar,
MDCLXXV.

(...) this Discourse; that being the Atheism most in fashion.

Nor is any thing more pertinent to the design of the discourse intended
concerning Gods Temple; which importing worship to be done to him, requires
first a steady belief that he is.

And surely the [(...)] inscribed of old, as Plutarch tells us, on the Delphick
Temple; signifying (as, after diverse other conjectures, be concludes it to do)
Thou do exist, is an inscription, much more fitly set in view, at our
entrance into the Temple of the Living God, whose name is I AM.

Amidst the pleasant entertainments of which Temple (made more intimate to you
than humane discourse can make it) may you spend many happy days in this world,
as a preparative, and introduction to an happier eternity in the other. Whereto
he is under many and deep obligations, by any means, to contribute to his
uttermost, who must (especially in the offices relating to this Temple) profess
himself,

My Honored Lord, Your Lordships most humbly Devoted Servant John How.

THE LIVING TEMPLE, Or the Notion Improved, That a Good Man is the Temple of
God.
PART I.
CHAP. I.
This Notion Common. Authorities needless. Insignificant with the Atheistical.
Who have made it more necessary to defend Religion, and a Temple in general
than this or that. Better defended against them by Practice and Use than
Argument. Whereof they are incapable. Often Disputes of its Principles not
necessary to the Practice of Religion. Some consideration of those supposed in
the general Notion of a Temple, pertinent (however) to this Discourse.

IT is so well known that this Notion has I.
long obtained in the world, that we need not quote sayings to avouch it;
wherewith not the sacred Writings only, but others, even of Pagans themselves,
would plentifully furnish us.

But as Authorities are, in a plain case, needless to unprejudiced minds; so
will they be useless to the prejudiced, be the case never so plain. Nor is any
prejudice deeper, or less vincible than that of profane minds against Religion.
With such, it would, in the present argument, signify little to tell them what
has been said or thought before by any others. Not because it is their general
course to be so very circumspect and wary, as never to approve or assent to any
thing, unless upon the clearest and most convincing demonstration: but from
their peculiar dislike of those things only, that are of this special import
and tendency. Discourse to them what you will of a Temple, and it will be
nauseous and unsavory: not as being cross to their reason (which they are as
little curious to gratify as any other sort of men) but to their ill humor,
and the disaffected temper of their mind; whence also (though they cannot soon
or easily get that mastery over their understandings herein, yet because they
would fain have it so) they do what they can to believe Religion nothing else
but the effect of timorous fancy, and a Temple, consequently, one of the most
idle impertinencies in the world.

To these, the discussion of the notion we have proposed to consider, will be
thought a beating the air, an endeavor to give consistency to a shadow: And if
their reason and power could as well serve their purpose as their anger and
scorn, they would soon tear up the holy ground on which a Temple is set, and
wholly subvert the Sacred Frame.

I speak of such as deny the existence of the ever blessed Deity; or (if they
are not arrived to that express and formed mis-belief) whose hearts are
inclined, and ready to determine, even against their mis-giving and more
suspicious minds, there is no God. Who, if they cannot as yet believe, do wish
there were none: And so strongly as in a great degree to prepare them for that
belief. That would fain banish him not only out of all their thoughts, but the
world too. And to whom it is so far from being a grateful sound, That the
Tabernacle of God is with men on earth, that they grudge to allow him a place
in heaven. At least if they are willing to admit the existence of any God at
all, do say to him, Depart from us; and would have him so confined to heaven,
that he and they may have nothing to do with one another. And do therefore rack
their impious wits to serve their hypothesis either way; that under its
protection they may securely indulge themselves in a course upon which they
find the apprehension of a God interesting himself in humane affairs, would
have a very unfavourable and threatening aspect.

They are therefore constrained to take great pains with themselves, to
discipline and chastise their minds and understandings to that tameness and
patience, as contentedly to suffer the razing out of their most natural
impressions and sentiments. And they reckon they have arrived to a very
Heroical perfection, when they can pass a scoff upon any thing that carries the
least signification with it of the fear of God; and can be able to laugh at the
weak and squeamish folly of those softer and effeminate minds, that will
trouble themselves with any thoughts or cares how to please and propitiate a
Deity: And doubt not but they have made all safe, and effectually done their
business when they have learned to put the ignominious titles of frenzy and
folly upon devotion in whatsoever dress, or garb; to cry canting to any serious
mention of the name of God, and break a bold adventurous jest upon any the
most sacred Mysteries, or decent and awful solemnities of Religion.

These content not themselves to encounter II.
this or that Sect, but Mankind; and reckon it too mean and inglorious an
achievement to overturn one sort of Temple or another; but would down with
them all even to the ground.

And they are in reason and justice to pardon the emulation which they provoke
of vying with them as to the universality of their design; and not regret it if
they find there be any that think it their duty to wave a while serving the
Temple of this or that party, as less considerable, to defend that one wherein
all men have a common interest and concernment.

Since matters are brought to that exigency and hazard, that it seems less
necessary to contend about this or that mode of Religion, as whether there
ought to be any at all. What was said of a former age could never better agree
to any than our own, that none was ever more fruitful of Religions and barren
of Religion or true Piety. It concerns us to consider whether the fertility of
those many does not as well cause as accompany a barrenness in this one. And
(since the iniquity of the world has made that too suitable, which were
otherwise unseemly in it self, to speak of a Temple as a fortified place, whose
own sacredness ought ever to have been its sufficient fortification) it is time
to be aware, lest our forgetful heat and zeal in the defense of this or that
outwork, do expose (not to say betray) the main fortress to assault and danger.
Whilst it has long been by this means, a neglected forsaken thing; and is more
decayed by vacancy and disuse, than it could ever have been by the most
forcible battery; so as even to promise the rude assailant an easy victory.
Who fears to insult over an empty dispirited dead Religion! which alive and
shining in its native glory (as that Temple does which is compacted of lively
stones united to the living corner stone) bears with it a magnificence and
state that would check a profane look, and dazzle the presumptuous eye that
durst venture to glance at it obliquely, or with disrespect. The Temple of the
living God, manifestly animated by his vital presence, would not only dismay
opposition, but command Veneration also: and be its own both Ornament and
defense. Nor can it be destitute of that Presence, if we our selves render it
not inhospitable, and make not its proper inhabitant become a stranger at home.
If we preserve in our selves a capacity of the Divine Presence, and keep the
Temple of God in a posture fit to receive him; he would then no more forsake
it, than the soul, a sound, and healthy body, not violated in any vital part:
But if he forsake it once, it then becomes an exposed and despised thing. And
as the most impotent inconsiderable enemy can securely trample on the dead body
of the greatest Hero, that alive carried awfulness and terror in his looks: so
is the weak spirited Atheist become as bold now as he was willing, before, to
make rude attempts upon the Temple of God, when He has been provoked to leave
it, who is its life, strength, and glory.

Therefore as they who will not be treacherous to the interest of God and man,
must own III.
an obligation and necessity to apply themselves to the serious endeavor of
restoring the life and honor of Religion. So will the case it self be sound to
point out to us the proper course in order hereto. That is, that it must rather
be endeavored by practice than by disputation. By contending, every one with
himself, to excite the love of God in his own breast; rather than with the
profane adversary to kindle his anger; more aiming to foment and cherish the
domestic continual fire of God's Temple and Altar, than transmit a flame into
the enemies Camp. For what can this signify? and it seldom fails to be the
event of disputing against prejudice (especially of disputing for the sum of
Religion at once against the pre-possession of a sensual profane temper, and a
violent inclination and resolvedness to be wicked) to beget more wrath than
conviction, and sooner to incense the impatient wretch than enlighten him. And
by how much the more cogent and enforcing reasonings are used, and the less is
left the confounded bafled creature to say, on behalf of a cause so equally
deplorate and vile: The more he finds himself concerned to fortify his
obstinate will, and supply his want of reason with resolution. To find out the
most expedite ways of diverting from what he has no mind to consider. To
entertain himself with the most stupifying pleasures (that must serve the same
turn that opium is wont to do in the case of broken unquiet sleep) or
whatsoever may most effectually serve to mortify any Divine Principle, and
destroy all sense of God out of his Soul.

And how grateful herein, and meritorious often are the assistent railleries of
servile (and it may be mercenary) wits? How highly shall he oblige them, that
can furnish out a Libel against Religion, and help them with more artificial
spite to blaspheme what they cannot disprove. And now shall the scurrilous
Pasquil, and a few Bottles, work a more effectual confutation of Religion, than
all the reason and argument in the world shall be able to countervail. This
proves too often the unhappy issue of mis-applying what is most excellent in
its own kind and place to improper and incapable Subjects.

And who sees not this to be the case with the modern Atheist, who has been
pursued IV.
with that strength and vigor of argument even in our own days, that would
have baffled persons, of any other temper than their own, into shame and
silence? And so as no other support has been left to Irreligion, than a
senseless stupidity, an obstinate resolvedness not to consider, a faculty to
stifle an argument with a jest, to charm their reason by sensual softnesses
into a dead sleep; with a strict and circumspect care that it may never a wake
into any exercise above the condition of doz'd and halfwitted persons; or if it
do, by the next debauch presently to lay it fast again. So that the very
Principle fails in this sort of men, whereto in reasoning we should appeal and
apply our selves. And it were almost the same thing to offer arguments to the
senseless images or forsaken carcasses of men. It belongs to the Grandeur of
Religion to neglect the impotent assaults of these men: as it is a piece of
glory, and bespeaks a worthy persons right understanding and just value of
himself, to disdain the combat with an incompetent or a foiled enemy. It is
becoming and seemly that the grand ancient and received Truth which tends to,
and is the reason of the godly life, do sometimes keep state; and no more
descend to perpetual repeated janglings with every scurrilous and impertinent
trifler, than a great and redoubted Prince would think it fit to dispute the
Rights of his Crown with a drunken distracted Fool or a Madman.

Men of Atheistical Persuasions having abandoned their reason, need what will
more powerfully strike their sense: Storms and Whirlwinds, Flames and
Thunderbolts; things not so apt immediately to work upon their understanding as
their fear, and that will astonish that they may convince: That the great God
make himself known by the Judgments which he executes. Stripes are for the back
of fools (as they are justly styled that say in their hearts There is no God:)
But if it may be hoped any gentler method may prove effectual with any of them,
we are rather to expect the good effect, from the steady uniform course of
their Actions and Conversation, who profess reverence and devotedness to an
eternal Being: And the correspondence of their way to their avowed Principle,
that acts them on agreeably to it self, and may also incur the sense of the
beholder, and gradually invite and draw his observation; than from the most
severe and necessitating argumentation, that exacts a sudden assent.

At least in a matter of so clear and commanding evidence, reasoning many times
looks V.
like trifling; and out of an hearty concernedness and jealousy for the honor
of Religion, one would rather it should march on, with an Heroical neglect of
bold and malapert cavillers: and only demonstrate and recommend it self, by its
own vigorous, comely, coherent course, than make it self cheap by discussing at
every turn its Principles. As that Philosopher who thought it the fittest way
to confute the sophisms against motion, only by walking.

But we have nothing so considerable objected against practical Religion as
well as to deserve the name of a Sophism: (at least no sophism so perplexing in
the case of Religious as of natural motion) Jeers and Sarcasms are the most
weighty convincing arguments. And let the deplorate crew mock on: There are
those in the world that will think they have, however, reason enough to persist
in the way of godliness: and that have already laid the foundation of that
reverence which they bear to a Deity, more strongly, than to be shaken, and
beaten off from it by a jest.

And therefore will not think it necessary to have the Principles of their
Religion vindicated afresh every time they are called to the practice of it.
For surely they would be religious upon very uncertain terms, that will think
themselves concerned to suspend or discontinue their conrse, as often as they are
encountered in it, with a wry mouth, or a distorted look; or that are apt to be
put out of conceit with their Religion by the laughter of a fool: Or by their
cavils and taunts against the Rules and Principles of it, whom only their own
sensual temper, and impatience of serious thoughts have made willing to have
them false. That any indeed should commence Religious, and persist with blind
Zeal in this or that discriminating Profession without ever considering why
they should do so; is unmanly and absurd: especially when a gross ignorance of
the true reasons and grounds of Religion shall be shadowed over with a
pretended awe and scrupulousness to enquire about things so sacred. And an
inquisitive temper shall have an ill character put upon it, as if rational and
profane were words of the same signification. Or as if reason and judgment were
utterly execrated, and an unaccountable enthusiastic fury baptized and
hallowed the only Principle of Religion. But when the matter has undergone
already a severe inquisition, and been searched to the bottom; principles
havebeen examined, the strength and firmness has been tried of its deepest and
most fundamental grounds, and an approving judgment been past in the case, and
a resolution thereupon taken up of a suitable and correspondent practice. After
all this it were a vain and unwarrantable curiosity, to be perpetually
perplexing ones easy path, with new and suspicious researches into the most
acknowledged things. Nor were this course a little prejudicial to the design
and end of Religion (if we will allow it any at all) the refining of our minds,
and the fitting us for an happy eternity: For when shall that building be
finished, the foundations whereof must be every day torn up anew, upon pretense
of further caution, and for more diligent search? Or when will he reach his
journeys end that is continually vexed (and often occasioned to go back from
whence he came) by causless anxieties about his way; and whether ever he began
a right course yea or no?

Many go securely on in a course most ignominiously wicked and vile, without
ever debating the matter with themselves, or enquiring if there be any rational
principle to justify or bear them out. Much more may they with a cheerful
confidence persist in their wellchosen way; that have once settled their
resolutions about it, upon firm and assured grounds and principles, without
running over the same course of reasonings with themselves, in reference to
each single devotional act; or thinking it necessary every time they are to
pray, to have it proved to them there is a God.

And because yet many of these do need excitation, and though they are not
destitute of pious sentiments and inclinations, and have somewhat in them of
the ancient foundations and frame of a Temple, have yet by neglect suffered it
to grow into decay: It is therefore the principal intendment of this discourse,
not to assert the Principles of Religion against those with whom they have no
place, but to propound what may some way tend to reinforce and strengthen them
where they visibly languish; and awaken such as profess a devotedness to God to
the speedy and vigorous endeavor of repairing the ruins of his Temple in
their own Breasts. That they may thence hold forth a visible representation of
an in-dwelling Deity, in effects and actions of life worthy of such a Presence,
and render his enshrined glory transparent to the view and conviction of the
irreligious and profane. Which has more of hope in it, and is likely to be to
better purpose, than disputing with them that more know how to jest than
reason; and better understand the relishes of meat and drink, than the strength
of an argument.

But though it would be both an ungrateful VI.
and insignificant labor, and as talking to the wind, to discourse of Religion
with persons that have abjured all seriousness, and that cannot endure to
think: And would be like fighting with a storm, to contend against the
blasphemy and outrage of insolent mockers at whatever is Sacred and Divine; and
were too much a debasing of Religion to retort Sarcasms, with men not capable
of being talked with in any other than such (that is, their own) language. Yet
it wants neither its use nor pleasure, to the most composed minds, and that are
most exempt from wavering herein, to view the frame of their Religion, as it
aptly, and even naturally, rises and grows up from its very foundations. To
contemplate its first Principles, which they may in the mean time find no
present cause or inclination to dispute. They will know how to consider its
most fundamental grounds, not with doubt or suspicion, but with admiration and
delight; and can with a calm and silent pleasure, enjoy the repose and rest of
a quiet and well-assured mind. Rejoicing and contented to know to themselves
(when others refuse to partake with them in this joy) and feel all firm and
stable under them, whereupon either the practice or the hopes of their Religion
do depend.

And there may be also many others of good and pious inclinations, that have
never yet applied themselves to consider the principal and most fundamental
grounds of Religion, so as to be able to give or discern any tolerable reason
of them. For either the sluggishness of their own temper may have indisposed
them to any more painful and laborious exercise of their minds, and made them
be content with the easier course of taking every thing upon trust, and
imitating the example of others; or they have been unhappily misinformed that
it consists not with the reverence due to Religion to search into the grounds
of it. Yea and may have laid this for one of its main grounds that no exercise
of Reason may have any place about it. Or perhaps having never tried, they
apprehend a greater difficulty in coming to a clear and certain resolution
herein, than indeed there is. Now such need to be excited to set their own
thoughts a work this way, and to be assisted herein. They should therefore
consider who gave them the understandings which they fear to use? And can they
use them to better purpose or with more gratitude to him who made them
intelligent, and not brute Creatures, than in laboring to know, that they may
also by a reasonable service, worship and adore their Maker? Are they not to
use their very senses about the matters of Religion? For the invisible things
of God, even his eternal power and Godhead are clearly seen, etc. And their
Faith comes by hearing. But what? are these more Sacred and Divine, and more
akin to Religion than their Reason and Judgment: Without which also their sense
can he of no use to them herein? Or is it the best way of making use of what
God has revealed of himself, by whatsoever means, not to understand what he
has revealed? It is most true indeed, that when we once come clearly to be
informed that God has revealed this on that thing, we are then readily to
subject (and not oppose) our feeble reasonings to his plain revelation. And it
were a most insolent and uncreaturely arrogance, to contend or not yield him
the cause, though things have to us seemed otherwise. But it were as
inexcusable negligence, not to make use of our understandings to the best
advantage; that we may both know that such a Revelation is Divine, and what it
signifies after we know whence it is. And any one that considers, will soon see
it were very unseasonable, at least, to allege the written Divine Revelation,
as the ground of his Religion, till he have gone lower, and foreknown some
things (by and by to be insisted on) as preparatory and fundamental to the
knowledge of this,

And because it is obvious to suppose how great an increase of strength and
vigor, pious minds may receive hence, how much it may animate them to the
service of the Temple, and contribute to their more cheerful progress in a
religious course: It will therefore not be besides our present purpose, but
very pursuant to it, to consider a while, not in the contentious way of
brawling and captious disputation (the noise whereof is as unsuitable to the
Temple as that of axes and hammers) but of calm and sober discourse; the more
principal and lowermost grounds upon which the frame of Religion rests, and to
the supposal whereof the notion and use of any such thing as a Temple in the
world, do owe themselves.

CHAP. II.
The two more principal grounds which a Temple supposes. 1. The existence of
God. 2. His Conversableness with men: Both argued from common consent. The
former doubtful if ever wholly denied in former days. The latter also implied
in the known general practice of some or other Religion. Evidenced, in that
some, no strangers to the world, have thought it the difference of man. The
immodesty and rashness of the persons from whom any opposition can be expected.
These two grounds proposed to be more strictly considered apart. And first the
existence of God. Where first the notion of God is assigned. The parts whereof
are proposed to be evinced severally of some existent Being. 1. Eternity. 2.
Self-origination. 3. Independency. 4. Necessity of existence. 5. Self-activity.
The impossibility this world should be this necessary self-active Being. The
inconsistency of necessary alterable matter, more largely deduced in a marginal
digression. 6. Life. 7. Vast and mighty power. A Corollary.

NOW the grounds more necessary to be laid down, and which are supposed 1.
in the most general notion of a Temple, are especially these two;

The existence of God, and His conversableness with men,
For no notion of a Temple can more easily occur to any ones thoughts, or is
more agreeable to common acceptance; than that it is an habitation wherein God
is pleased to dwell among men.

Therefore to the designation and use of it, or (which is all one) to the
intention and exercise of Religion, the belief or persuasion is necessary of
those two things (the same which we find made necessary on the same account)
That God is, and that he is a rewarder of them Heb. 11. 6.
that diligently seek him; as will appear when the manner and design of that
his abode with men shall be considered.

These are the grounds upon which the sacred frame of a Temple ought to stand,
and without which it must be acknowledged an unsupported, airy fabric. And
since it were vain to discourse what a Temple is, or whereto the notion of it
may be applied; unless it be well resolved that there is, or ought to be any
such thing. The strength and firmness of this its double ground should be tried
and searched, and of its pretensions thereto.

And though it be not necessary in a matter that is so plain, and wherein so
much is to be II.
said otherwise; yet it will not be impertinent to consider, First, what
Prescription (which in clearing of titles is not wont to signify nothing) will
signify in the present case. And,

First, For the existence of God, we need not labor much to show how
constantly and generally it has been acknowledged through the whole world; it
being so difficult to produce an uncontroverted instance of any that ever
denied it in more ancient times. For as for them whose names have been infamous
amongst men heretofore upon that account, there Parker Tentam.
has been that said that, at least, wants not probability for the clearing
them of so foul an imputation: That is, that they were maliciously represented
as having denied the existence of a Deity, because they impugned and derided
the vulgar conceits, and poetical fictions of those days concerning the
multitude, and the ridiculous attributes of their imaginary Deities. Of which
sort Cicero mentions not a few; De natura Deorum, lib. 1.
Their being inflamed with Anger, and mad with Lust, their Wars, Fights,
Wounds, their Hatreds, Discords, their Births and Deaths, etc. Who though he
speak less favorably of some Protag. Abderites.
of these men, and mentions one as doubting whether there were any Gods or no;
(for which cause his Book in the beginning whereof he had intimated that doubt,
(as Cotta is brought in, informing us) was publicly burnt at Athens, and
himself banished his Country) and two others Diagoras and Theodoras Cyrenaicus
(who as Diogenes Laertius in Aristip. reports) was surnamed (...), afterward
(...).
as expressly denying them; yet the more generally decried Epicurus, whom also
his own Epistle to Menaceus in Diogen s Laertius acquits of Atheism, but not of
Irreligion; as hereafter may be observed.
Patron of Atheism (as he has been accounted) he makes Velleius highly
vindicate from this imputation, and say of him that he was the first that took
notice that even nature it self had impressed the notion of God upon the minds
of all men: who also gives us these as his words, What Nation is there or sort
of men that has not without teaching, a certain anticipation of the Gods,
which he calls a prolepsis, a certain preventive, or fore-conceived information
of a thing in the mind, without which nothing can be understood, or sought, or
disputed of. Unto which purpose the same Author (as is commonly observed)
elsewhere speaks; That there is no Nation so barbarous, no one of all men so
savage, Cicero Tuscul. Quest. l.
as that some apprehension of the Gods has not tinctured his mind. That many
do think indeed corruptly of them, which is (says he) the effect of vicious
custom. But all do believe there is a Divine Power and Nature. Nor (as he there
proceeds) has men's talking and agreeing together effected this. It is not an
opinion settled in men's minds by public constitutions and sanctions. But in
every matter the consent of all Nations is to be reckoned a law of Nature.

And whatever the apprehensions of those few (and some others that are wont to
be mentioned under the same vile character) were in this matter, yet so
inconsiderable has the dissent been; that, as another most ingenious Pagan
Author writes, In so great a contention Maxim. Tyr. diss. 1.
and variety of opinions (that is concerning what God is) herein you shall see
the law and reason of every Country to be harmonious and one. That there is one
God the (...).
King and Father of all -- That the many are but the servants and co-rulers
unto God. That herein the Greek and the Barbarian (...).
says the same thing, The Islander and the Inhabitant of the Continent, The
Wise and the foolish: Go to the utmost bounds of the Ocean, and you find God
there. But if (...), etc.
(says he) in all time there have been two or three, an atheistical, vile,
senseless sort of persons, whose own eyes and ears deceive them, and who are
maimed in their very soul, an irrational and sterile sort, as monstrous
creatures, as a Lion without courage, an Ox without horns, or a bird without
wings. Yet out of those you shall understand somewhat of God. For they know and
confess him whether they will or no. 3. Yea, and III.
the use of a Temple, and the exercise of Religion (which suppose the second
ground also as well as the first) have been so very common (though not
altogether equally common with the former, that it is the observation of that
famed moralist, That if one travel the world, Plutarch. adversus Colotem.
it is possible to find Cities without Walls, without Letters, without Kings,
without Wealth, without Coin, without Schools and Theaters. But a City without
a Temple, or that uses no Worship, Prayers, etc. no one ever saw. And he
believes a City may more easily be built without a foundation (or ground to set
it on) than any community of men have or keep a consistency (...).
without Religion.

4. And it is no mean argument of the IV.
commonness of Religion, that there have been some in the world (and those no
Idiots neither) that have accounted it the most constituent and distinguishing
thing in humane nature. So that Platonic Jew judges in vocation of God with
hope toward him to be, if we Philo. libr. de eo quod Deterius potiori insid.
(...), p. 180.
will speak the truth, the only genuine property of Man, and says that only he
who is acted by such an hope is a man, and he that is destitute of this hope is
no man, preferring this account to the common definition (which he says is only
of the concrete of man) that he is a reasonable and mortal living creature. And
yet he extends not reason further, that is, to the inferior creatures, for he
had expressly said above That they who have no hope toward God, have no part or
share in the rational nature.

And a noble person of our own says, That Herbert de verit.
upon accurate search, Religion and Faith appear the only ultimate differences
of man; whereof neither Divine perfection is capable, nor brutal imperfection.
Reason in his account descending low among the inferior creatures. But these
agreeing more peculiarly to man, and so universally that he affirms, There is
no man well, and entirely in his wits that does not worship some Deity.

Who therefore accounted it a less absurdity to admit such a thing as a
rational Beast, than an irreligious man. Now if these have taken notice of any
instances that seemed to claim an exemption from this notion of Man; they have
rather thought fit to let them pass as an anomalous sort of creatures,
reducible to no certain rank or order in the Creation; than that any should be
admitted into the account, or be acknowledged of the Society of Men, that were
found destitute of an inclination to worship the common Author of our beings.
And according to this opinion; By whatsoever steps any should advance in the
denial of a Deity; they should proceed by the same, to the abandoning their own
humanity; and by saying there is no God, should proclaim themselves no men.

However it discovers (which is all that is at present intended by it) the
commonness, not to say absolute universality, of Religion, in the observation
of these Persons, whom we must suppose no strangers to the world in their own
and former times. And if it afford any less ground for such an observation in
our present time, we only see as the world grows older it grows worse, and
sinks into a deeper oblivion of its original, as it recedes further from it.

And (notwithstanding) this so common a consent is yet not without its weight
and signicancy to our present purpose. If we consider

How impossible it is to give or imagine any tolerable account of its original,
if we do not confess it natural, and refer it to that common Author of all
nature whom we are enquiring about: (of which so much is said by See Cicero in
sundry places. Grotius de veritate Christianae Relig. D^ Pless. same subject
and title Calvin. Instit. Episcopius his Instu. Theol. who has written
nervously on this subject, with many more. But especially Dr. Stillingfleet in
his Orig. Sac.
diverse others, that nothing more needs here to be said about it. 5. And at
least so much is gained by it to a Temple, that unless some very plain and
ungainsayable demonstration be brought against the grounds of it (which will be
time enough to consider when we see it pretended to) no opposition, fit to be
regarded, can ever be made to it. That is, none at all can possibly be made;
but what shall proceed from the most immodest and rash confidence, animated and
born up only by a design of being most licentiously wicked, and of making the
world become so. Immodest confidence it must be, for it is not a Man, or a
Nation, or an Age that such have to oppose, but Mankind; upon which they shall
cast, not some lighter reflection, but the vilest and most opprobrious
contumely, and scorn that can be imagined. That is the imputation of so
egregious folly and doatage, as all this while to have worshipped a shadow as
the Author of their being; and a figment for their common parent. And this not
the ruder only, and uninquisitive vulgar, but the wisest and most considering
persons in all times. Surely less than clear and pregnant demonstration (at
least not wild incoherent self-confounding suppositions and surmises, of which
more hereafter) will ever be thought sufficient to justify the boldness of an
attempt that shall carry this signification with it. And it will be a
confidence equally rash as immodest. For what can be the undertakers hope,
either of success or reward? Do they think it an easy enterprise? and that a
few quirks of malapert wit will serve the turn to baffle the Deity into
nothing? and unteach the world Religion? and raze out impressions renewed and
transmitted through so many ages? and persuade the race of men to descend a peg
lower, and believe they ought to live and shall die like the perishing beast.
Or do they expect to find men indifferent in a matter that concerns their
common Practice and Hope? and wherein their zeal has been wont to be such as
that it has obtained to be proverbial, to strive as for the very Altars. And
what should their reward be, when the natural tendency of their undertaking is
to exclude themselves from the expectation of any in another world? And what
will they expect in this from them whose Temples and Altars they go about to
subvert? Besides, that if they be not hurried by a blind impetuous rashness,
they would consider their danger, and apprehend themselves concerned to strike
very sure: For if there remain but the least possibility that the matter is
otherwise, and that the being does exist whose honor and worship they contend
against, they must understand his favor to be of some concernment to them;
which they take but an ill course to entitle themselves unto. Much more have
they reason to be solicitous, when their horrid cause not only wants evidence;
nor has hitherto pretended to more than a bare possibility of truth on their
side; but has so clear (and as yet altogether unrefuted) evidence lying
against it; that quite takes away that very possibility, and all ground for
that miserable languishing hope, that it could ever have afforded them.
Therefore is it left also wholly unimaginable, what principle can animate their
design, other than a sensual humor, impatient of restraints, or of any
obligation to be sober, just and honest, beyond what their own inclination, and
(much mistaken) interest, or convenience would lead them to.

By all which we have a sufficient measure of the persons from whom any
opposition unto Religion can be expected, and how much their authority, their
example or their scorn ought to signify with us. And that a more valuable
opposition can never be made; our experience, both that hitherto it has not
been, and that it would have been if it could, might render us tolerably
secure. For surely it may well be supposed, that in a world so many ages lost
in wickedness, all imaginable trials would have been made to disburthen it of
Religion; and somewhat that had been specious, at least, to that purpose, had
been hit upon; if the matter had been any way possible. And the more wicked the
world has been, a so directly contrary, and so continually assaulted
principle, not yet vanquished, appears the more plainly invincible: And that
the assaults have been from the lusts of men, rather than their reason, shows
the more evidently, that their reason has only wanted a ground to work upon;
which if it could have been found, their lusts had certainly pressed it to their
service in this warfare; and not have endured rather, the molestation of
continual checks and rebukes from it.

Nor need we yet to let our minds hang in suspense, or be in a dubious
expectation, that possibly some or other great Wit may arise that shall perform
some great thing in this matter, and discover the groundlesness and folly of
Religion by plain and undeniable reasons, that have not as yet been thought on:
But betake our selves to a stricter and closer consideration of our own
grounds, which if we can once find to be certainly true, we may be sure they
are of eternal truth, and no possible contrivance or device can ever make them
false.

Having therefore seen what common consent may contribute to the establishing
of them VI.
jointly; we may now apply our selves to consider and search into each of them
(so far as they are capable of a distinct consideration) severally and apart.
Having still this mark in our eye, our own confirmation and excitation in
reference to what is the proper work and business of a Temple, Religion and
conversation with God: How little soever any endeavor in this kind may be apt
to signify with the otherwise minded.

And, first for the existence of God; that VII.
we may regularly and with evidence make it out to our selves, that he is, or
does exist, and may withal see what the belief of his existence will contribute
toward the evincing of the reasonableness of erecting a Temple to him. It is
requisite that we first settle a true notion of him in our minds; or be at an
agreement with our selves, what is that we mean, or would have to be signified
by the name of God: otherwise we know not what we seek, nor when we have found
him,

And though we must beforehand professedly avow that we take him to be such a
one as we can never comprehend in our thoughts. That this knowledge is too
excellent for us, or he is more excellent than that we can perfectly know him;
yet it will be sufficient to guide us in our search after his existence, if we
can give such a description, or assign such certain characters of his being as
will severally or together distinguish him from all things else. For then we
shall be able to call him by his own name, and say this is God. Whatever his
being may contain more; or whatsoever other properties may belong to it beyond
what we can as yet compass in our present thoughts of him.

And such an account we shall have VIII.
of what we are enquiring after; if we have the conception in our minds of an
eternal uncaused, independent, necessary Being that has active power, life,
wisdom, goodness, and whatsoever other supposable excellency, in the highest
perfection originally, in and of it self.

Such a Being we would with common consent express by the name of God. Even
they that would profess to deny or doubt of his existence, yet must acknowledge
this to be the notion of that which they deny or doubt of. Or if they should
say this is not it, or (which is all one) that they do not deny or doubt of the
existence of such a Being as this; they on the other hand that would argue for
his existence, may conclude the cause is yielded them. This being that which
they designed to contend for.

It must indeed be acknowledged, that some things belonging to the notion of
God might have been more expressly named: But it was not necessary they should,
being sufficiently included here, as will afterward appear. Nor perhaps so
convenient; some things, the express mention whereof is omitted, being such as
more captious persons might be apt at first to startle at; which yet may,
possibly as they are insinuated under other expressions become by degrees more
inclinable to receive them afterward. And however if this be not a full and
adequate notion (as who can ever tell when we have an express, distinct
particular notion of God, which we are sure is adequate and full?) it may
however suffice, that it is a true one, as far as it goes, and such as cannot
be mistaken for the notion of any thing else. And it will be more especially
sufficient to our present purpose; if enough be comprehended in it to recommend
him to us as a fit and worthy object of Religion; and whereto a Templea ought
to be designed. As it will appear there is, when also we shall have added what
is intended concerning his conversableness with men. The ground whereof is also
in great part included in this account of him; so that the consideration of it
cannot be wholly severed from that of his existence: as has been intimated
above. That is, that if such a Being exist, unto which this notion belongs; it
will sufficiently appear, he is such as that he can converse with men; though
it does not thence certainly follow that he will. For it were a rash and bold
adventure to say he could not be God, if he did not condescend to such terms of
reconciliation and converse with apostate creatures. Whereof therefore more is
to be said than the mere manifesting his existence in its own place.

And as to this, that we may proceed gradually, and in the most familiar and
intelligible way that we can; we may

1. Be most assured, that there has been somewhat or other from all eternity,
or that IX.
looking backward, somewhat of real being must be confessed eternal. Let such,
as have not been used to think of any thing more than what they could see with
their eyes; and to whom reasoning only seems difficult, because they have not
tried what they can do in it; but use their thoughts a little, and by moving
them a few easy steps, they will soon find themselves as sure of this, as that
they see or hear, or understand, or are any thing.

For being sure that something now is (that you see, for instance, or are
something.) You must then acknowledge that certainly either something always
was, and has ever been, or been from all eternity; or else you must say, that
sometime nothing was; or that all being once was not. And so, since you find
that something now is, that there was a time when any thing of being did begin
to be, that is, that till that time there was nothing; But now at that time
somewhat first began to be. For what can be plainer than that, if all being
sometime was not, and now some being is, every thing of being had a beginning?
And thence it would follow that some being, that is, the first that ever began
to be, did of it self start up out of nothing, or made it self to be, when
before, nothing was.

But now do you not plainly see that it is altogether impossible any thing
should do so; that is, when it was as yet nothing, and when nothing at all as
yet was, that it should make it self, or come into being of it self? For sure,
making it self is doing something. But can that which is nothing do any thing?
unto all doing there must be some doer. Wherefore a thing must be before it can
do any thing; and therefore it would follow that it was before it was; or was
and was not, was some thing and nothing at the same time. Yea, and it was
diverse from it self. For a cause must be a distinct thing from that which is
caused by it. Wherefore it is most apparent that some being has ever been, or
did never begin to be. Whence further,

2. It is also evident, that some being was uncaused, or was ever of it self,
without any X.
cause. For what never was from another had never any cause, since nothing
could be its own cause. And somewhat, as appears from what has been said,
never was from another. Or it may be plainly argued thus; That either some
being was uncaused, or all being was caused. But if all being were caused, then
some one at least was the cause of it self: which has been already shown
impossible. Therefore the expression commonly used concerning the first Being
that it was of it self, is only to be taken negatively, that is, that it was
not of another, not positively, as if it did sometime make it self. Or, what
there is positive, signified by that form of speech, is only to be taken thus,
that it was a being of that nature, as that it was impossible it should ever
not have been. Not that it did ever of it self step out of not being into
Being: Of which more hereafter.

3. And now it is hence further evident that some being is independent upon any
other, XI.
that is, whereas it already appears that some being did never depend on any
other, as a productive cause. Or was not beholden to any other, that it might
come into Being. It is thereupon equally evident that it is simply independent,
or cannot be beholden to any for for its continued being. For what did never
need a productive cause, does as little need a sustaining or conserving cause.
And, to make this more plain, either some being is independent, or all being is
dependent. But there is nothing without the compass of all being, whereon it
may depend. Wherefore to say, that all being does depend, is to say it depends
on nothing, that is, that it depends not. For to depend on nothing is not to
depend.

It is therefore a manifest contradiction to say that all being does depend:
against which it is no relief to say, that all beings do circularly depend on
one another. For so, however the whole circle or sphere of being, should depend
on nothing, or one at last depend on it self; which negatively taken, as
before, is truc, and the thing we contend for; that one, the common support of
all the rest depends not on any thing without it self. Whence also it is
plainly consequent.

That 4. Such a Being is necessary, or does XII.
necessarily exist: that is, that it is of such a nature as that it could not,
or cannot but be. For what is in being neither by its own choice, or any
others, is necessarily. But what was not made by it self (which has been shown
impossible that any thing should) nor by any other (as it has been proved,
something was not.) It is manifest it neither depended on its own choice, nor
any others that it is. And therefore its existence is not owing to choice at
all, but to the necessity of its own nature. Wherefore it is always by a
simple, absolute, natural necessity; being of such a nature, to which it is
altogether repugnant, and impossible ever not to have been, or ever to cease
from being. And now having gone thus far, and being assured that hitherto we
feel the ground firm under us; that is, having gained a full certainty that
there is an eternal, uncaused, independent necessary Being, and therefore
actually, and everlastingly existing; we may advance one step further, and with
equal assurance, add,

5. That this eternal, independent uncaused XIII.
Being, is self-active, that is, (which is at present meant) not such as acts
upon it self, but that has the power of acting upon other things in and of it
self, without deriving it from any other. Or at least that there is such a
Being as is eternal, uncaused, etc. having the power of action in and of it
self.

For either such a Being as has been already evinced is of it self active or
unactive, or either has the power of action of it self or not. If we will say
the latter, let it be considered what we say, and to what purpose we say it.
First, we are to weigh what it is we affirm, when we speak of an eternal,
uncaused, independent, necessary Being, that is of it self totally unactive, or
destitute of any active power. If we will say there is some such thing, we will
confess when we have called it something, it is a very silly, despicable, idle
something, and a something, (if we look upon it alone) as good as nothing. For
there is but little odds between being nothing, and being able to do nothing.
We will again confess, eternity, self-origination, independency, necessity of
existence, to be very great and highly dignifying We will acknowledge an
Impropriety in this word, and its conjugate Self-Originate, sometimes hereafter
used, which yet is recompensed by their convenience; as they may perhaps find
who shall make trial how to express the sense intended by them in other words.
And they are used without suspicion, that it can be thought they are meant to
signify as if ever God gave original to himself; but in the negative sense
that he never received it from any other; yea, and that he is, what is more
than equivalent to his Being, self-caused, viz. a Being of himself so excellent
as not to need or be capable to admit any cause. Vid. c. 4. Sect. 3. And with
the expectation of the same allowance which has been given to (...), or other
like words. We also take it for granted (which it may suffice to hint here once
for all) that when we use here the word Self-subsistent, it will be understood
we intend by it (without Logical or Metaphysical nicety) not the mere exclusion
of dependence on a subject, but on a cause.
attributes; and that import a most unconceivable excellency. For what higher
glory can we ascribe to any being, than to acknowledge it to have been from
eternity of it self; without being beholden to any other, and to be such as
that it can be, and cannot but be in the same state, self-subsisting, and
self-sufficient to all eternity? And what unconceivable myriads of little
senseless Deities must we upon that supposition admit (as would appear if it
were fit to trouble the Reader with an explication of the nature and true
notion of matter, which the being now supposed, must be found to be!) But what
can our reason either direct, or endure, that we should so uncongruously
misplace so magnificent attributes as these? and ascribe the prime glory of the
most excellent Being, unto that which is next to nothing? What might further be
said to demonstrate the impossibility of a self-subsisting, and self-original,
unactive being, will be here unseasonable, and pre-occupying. But if any in the
mean time will be so sullen as to say such a thing,

Let it 2. be considered to what purpose they say it. Is it to exclude a
necessary self-active being? But it can signify nothing to that purpose. For
such a Being they will be forced to acknowledge, let them do what they can
(besides putting out their own eyes) notwithstanding. For why will they
acknowledge any necessary Being at all, that was ever of it self? Is it not
because they cannot otherwise for their hearts tell how it was ever possible
that any thing at all could come into being? But finding that something is,
they are compelled to acknowledge that something has ever been, necessarily,
and of it self. No other account could be given how other things came to be.
But what? does it signify any thing toward the giving an account of the
original of all other things, to suppose only an eternal, self-subsisting,
unactive Being? Did that cause other things to be? Will not their own breath
choke them if they attempt to utter the self-contradicting words, an unactive
cause, (i. e. Efficient or Author) of any thing. And do they not see they are
as far from their mark, or do no more toward the assigning the original of all
other things, by supposing an eternal, unactive Being only, than if they
supposed none at all. That what can do nothing, can no more be the productive
cause of another, than that which is nothing? Wherefore by the same Reason that
has constrained us to acknowledge an eternal, uncaused, independent, necessary
Being, we are also unavoidably led to acknowledge this Being to be self-active,
or such as has the power of action in and of it self. Or that there is
certainly such a Being, that is the cause of all the things which our sense
tells us are besides existent in the world.

For what else is left us to say or think? will XIV.
we think fit to say that all things we behold were as they are necessarily
existent from all eternity? That were to speak against our own eyes, which
continually behold the rise and fall of living things, of whatsoever sort or
kind, that can come under their notice. And it were to speak against the thing
it self that we say, and to say and unsay the same thing in the same breath.
For all the things we behold are in some respect or other (internal, or
external) continually changing, and therefore could never long be beheld as
they are. And to say then, they have been continually changing from eternity,
and yet have been necessarily, is unintelligible, and flat nonsense. For what
is necessarily, is always the same; and what is in this or that posture
necessarily (that is by an intrinsic simple and absolute necessity, which must
be here meant) must be ever so. Wherefore to suppose the world in this or that
state necessarily; and yet that such a state is changeable, is an impossible,
and self-contradicting supposition. And whether by the way this will not afford
us (though that be none of our present business) plain evidence that there can
be no such thing as necessary alterable matter, may be examined by such as
think fit to give themselves the diversion. For let it be considered, if every
part and particle that makes up the matter of this universe, were it self a
necessary being, and of it self from all eternity, it must have not only its
simple being, but its being such or such, of it self necessarily, or rather
every thing of it, or any way belonging to it, must be its very simple being it
self. For whence should it receive any accession to it self when it is supposed
equally independent upon its fellows, as any of them upon it? Suppose then only
their various intercurrent motion among themselves, requisite to prepare them
to, and unite them in the composition of particular bodies, and no other change
of any other individual particle needful thereto, but only of their figure,
place, and situation, till they shall come aptly to be disposed in the now
attempted composition. How is even this change possible) For suppose one of
these particles from eternity of such or such a figure, as triangular, hooked,
etc. How can it lose any thing from it self, or suffer any alteration of its
figure which essentially and necessarily belonged to it from eternity? That to
which it is necessary to be such, it is impossible to it not to be such. Or
suppose no alteration of figure (which Epicurus admits not) were necessary; but
of situation and motion till it become conveniently situate. Even this change
also will be simply impossible. Because you can frame no imagination of the
existence of this or that particle, but you must suppose it in some or other
ubi, or point of space, and if it be necessarily, it is here necessarily; for
what is simply no where is nothing. But if it be here necessarily (that is in
this or that point of space, for in some or other it must be, and it cannot be
here and there at once) it must be here eternally, and can never not be here.
Therefore we can have no notion of necessary alterable or movable matter, which
is not inconsistent and repugnant to it self. Therefore also motion must
proceed from an immovable mover, as has been (though upon another ground)
concluded of old. But how action ad extra stands with the immutability of the
Deity must be fetched from the consideration of other perfections belonging
thereto. Of which Metaphysicians and Schoolmen may be consulted, discoursing at
large: See Suarez: Ledesma de divina perfectione, with many more at leisure.
Whatsoever difficulty we may apprehend in this case. Or if we cannot so easily
conceive how an eternal mind, foreseeing perfectly all futurity, together with
an eternal efficacious determition of will concerning the existence of such and
such things to such an instant or point of time, can suffice to their
production without a super-added efflux of power at that instant: which would
seem to infer somewhat of mutation; yet as the former of these cannot be
demonstrated insufficient (nor shall we ever reckon our selves pincht in this
matter till we see that plainly and fully done.) So they are very obstinately
blind that cannot see upon the addition of the latter the vast difference of
these two cases, viz. the facile silent egress of a sufficient power in
pursuance to a calm, complacential, eternal purpose; for the production of this
creation, by which the Agent acts not upon it self, but upon its own creature
made by its own action; and the eternal blind ungoverned action of matter upon
it self, by which it is perpetually changing it self, while yet it is supposed
necessarily what it was before: And how much more easily conceivable that is
than this. How also liberty of action consists with necessity of existence,
diverse have shown: to which purpose somewhat not inconsiderable may be seen,
Fioin. lib. 2. cap. 12. de immortal etc. But in this there can be little
pretense to imagine a difficulty. For our own being, though not simply, yet as
to us is necessary, i. e. it is imposed upon us; for we come not into being by
our own choice; and yet are conscious to our selves of no prejudice hereby to
our liberty of acting. Yea and not only does the former consist with this
latter, but is inferred by it. Of which see Gibbeuf de libert. Dei, and creat.


And to say any thing is changing from eternity, signifies it is always
undergoing a change which is never past over, that is, that it is eternally
unchanged, and is ever the same. For the least imaginable degree of change, is
some change. What is in any the least respect changed, is not in every respect
the same, suppose then any thing in this present state or posture, and that it
is eternally changing in it; either a new state and posture is acquired, or
not. If it be, the former was temporary, and has an end; and therefore the
just and adequate measure of it was not eternity, which has no end; much less
of the change of it, or the transition from the one state to the other. But if
no new state or posture be acquired (which any the least gradual alteration
would make) then it is eternally unchanged in any the least degree. Therefore
eternal changing is a manifest contradiction.

But if it be said though eternity be not the measure of one change; it may be
of infinite changes endlesly succeeding one another. Even this also will be
found contradictions and impossible. For (not to trouble the Reader with the
more intricate controversy of the possibility or impossibility of infinite or
eternal succession, about which they who have a mind may consult others. Parker
Tentam. Physico. Theolog. Derodon. Philos. cont. Dr. More 's Enchirid. Metaphys.


If this signify any thing to the present purpose, it must mean the infinite
or eternal changes of a necessary being. And how these very terms do clash with
one another, methinks any sound mind might apprehend at the first mention of
them; And how manifestly repugnant the things are, may be collected from what
has been said; and especially from what was thought more fit to be annexed in
the Margin.

But now since we find that the present state of things is changeable, and
actually changing, and that what is changable is not necessarily, and of it
self.

And since it is evident that there is some necessary Being, otherwise nothing
could ever have been, and that without action nothing could be from it. Since
also all change imports somewhat of passion, and all passion supposes action,
and all action, active power, and active power an original seat or subject,
that is selfactive, or that has the power of action in and of it self. For
there could be no derivation of it from that which has it not, and no
firstderivation, but from that which has it originally of it self. And a first
derivation there must be, since all things that are or ever have been furnished
with it, and not of themselves must either mediately or immediately have
derived it from that which had it of it self. It is therefore manifest, that
there is a necessary selfactive Being, The cause and Author of this perpetually
variable state and frame of things. And hence,

6. Since we can frame no notion of life which self-active power does not, at
least, comprehend XV.
(as upon trial we shall find that we cannot) it is consequent that this Being
is also originally vital, and the root of all vitality, such as has life in or
of it self, and from whence it is propagated to every other living thing. Which
will also prove it to be a Spirit; unto which order of Beings essential
vitality, or that life be essential to them, seems as distinguishing a property
between it and a body, as any other we can fasten upon, that is, that though a
body may be truly said to live; yet it lives by a life that is accidental, and
separable from it. So as that it may cease to live, and yet be a body still;
whereas a Spirit lives by its own essence; so that it can no more cease to live
than to be. And as, where that essence is borrowed and derived only, as it is
with all created Spirits, so its life must needs be therewithal. So the eternal
self-subsisting Spirit, lives necessarily, and of it self, according as,
necessarily and of it self, it is, or has its being.

Which is only annoted, with a design not to trouble this discourse with any
disquisition concerning the nature and other properties of a spiritual Being.
Of which enough has been, with great evidence, said, by the incomparable Dr.
More.




And so as we plainly see that this sensible world did sometime begin to be,
it is also evident it took its beginning from a Being essentially vital, and
active, that had it self no beginning. Nor can we make a difficulty to conclude
that this Being, (which now we have shown, is active, and all action implies
some power) is

7. Of vast and mighty Power (we will not XVI.
say infinite, lest we should step too far at once; not minding now to discuss
whether creation require infinite power) when we consider and contemplate the
vastness of the work performed by it. Unto which (if we were to make our
estimate by nothing else) we must, at least, judge this power to be
proportionable. For when our eyes behold an effect exceeding the power of any
cause which they can behold, our mind must step in and supply the defect of our
feebler sense; so as to make a judgment there is a cause we see not, equal to
this effect. As when we behold a great and magnificent fabric, and entering in
we see not the master or any living thing (which was Cicero's Observation De
natura Deorum.
in reference to this present purpose) besides Mice or Weasles, we will not
think that Mice or Weasels built it. Nor need we, in a matter so obvious,
insist further. But only when our severer Reason has made us confess, our
further contemplation should make us admire a power which is at once both so
apparent, and so stupendous.

Corollary. And now from what has been hitherto discoursed, it seems a plain
and necessary consectary, That this world had a cause diverse from the matter
whereof it is composed.

For otherwise matter that has been more generally taken to be of it self
altogether unactive, must be stated the only cause and fountain of all the
action and motion that is now to be found in the whole Universe. Which is a
conceit wild and absurd enough; not only as it opposes the common judgment of
such as have with the greatest diligence enquired into things of this nature,
But as being in it self manifestly impossible to be true.

As would easily appear if it were needful to press farther Dr. More's
reasonings Both in his Immortality of the Soul: and Enchirid. Metaphys.
to this purpose; which he has done sufficiently for himself.

And also that otherwise all the great and undeniable changes which continually
happen in it must proceed from its own constant and eternal action upon it
self, while it is yet feigned to be a necessary being; with the notion whereof
they are notoriously inconsistent. Which therefore we taking to be most clear,
may now the more securely proceed to what follows.

CHAP. III.
Wisdom asserted to belong to this Being. The production of this world by a
mighty Agent destitute of Wisdom impossible. On consideration of, 1. What would
be adverse to this production. 2. What would be wanting some effects to which a
designing cause will, on all hands, be confessed necessary, as having manifest
characters of skill and design upon them. Absurd here to except the works of
nature. Wherein at least equal characters of Wisdom and design to be seen, as
in any the most confessed pieces of Art, Instanced in the frame and Motion of
heavenly bodies. A mean, unphilosophical temper to be more taken with novelties
than common things of greater importance. Further instance in the composition
of the bodies of Animals. Two contrary causes of men's not acknowledging the
Wisdom of their Maker herein. Progress is made from the consideration of the
parts and frame, to powers and functions of Terrestrial Creatures. Growth,
Nutrition, Propagation of kind. Spontaneous motion, Sensation. The pretense
considered, that the bodies of Animals are machines. 1. How improbable it is.
2. How little to the purpose. The powers of the humane soul. It appears,
notwithstanding them, it had a cause; By them, a wise and intelligent cause. It
is not matter. That not capable of Reason. They not here reflected on who think
reasonable souls made of refined matter by the Creator. Not being matter, nor
arising from thence it must have a Cause that is intelligent. 9. Goodness also
belonging to this Being.

WE therefore add, That this being is I.
Wise and Intelligent as well as powerful; upon the very view of this world it
will appear so vast power was guided by equal wisdom in the framing of it;
Though this is wont to be the principal labor in evincing the existence of a
Deity, viz. the proving that this universe owes its rise to a wise and
designing cause; as may be seen in Cicero's excellent performance in this kind,
and in diverse later Writers. Yet the placing so much of their endeavor herein,
seems in great part to have proceeded hence, that this has been chosen for the
great medium to prove that it had a cause diverse from it self. But if that once
be done a shorter way, and it fully appear that this world is not it self a
necessary Being, having the power of all the action and motion to be found in
it, of it self; (which already seems plain enough.) And it do most evidently
thence also appear to have had a cause foreign to, or distinct from it self;
though we shall not therefore the more carelessly consider this subject; yet no
place of doubt seems to remain, but that this was an Intelligent cause, and
that this world was the product of wisdom and counsel, and not of mere power
alone. For what imagination can be more grossly absurd, than to suppose this
orderly frame of things to have been the result of so mighty power, not
accompanied or guided by wisdom and counsel? that is (as the case must now
unavoidably be understood) that there is some being necessarily existent, of an
essentially active nature, of unconceivably vast and mighty power and vigor,
destitute of all understanding and knowledge, and consequently of any
self-moderating-principle, but acting always by the necessity of its own
nature, and therefore to its very uttermost, that raised up all the alterable
matter of the universe (to whose nature it is plainly repugnant to be of it
self, or exist necessarily) out of nothing; and by the utmost exertion of that
ungoverned power, put all the parts and particles of that matter into a wild
hurry of impetuous motion, by which they have been compacted and digested into
particular beings in that variety and order which we now behold. And surely to
give this account of the worlds original, is, as Cicero, speaks, not to
consider, but to cast lots what to say. And were as mad a supposition, As if
one should suppose the one and twenty Letters, formed (as the same Author
elsewhere speaks) in great numbers, of Gold, or what you please else, and cast
of any careless fashion together, and that of these loosely shaken out upon the
ground, Ennius his Annals should result, so as to be distinctly legible, as now
we see them. Nay it were the supposition of a thing a thousand fold more
manifestly impossible.

2. For before we consider the gross absurdity of such a supposed production,
that is, that II.
a thing should be brought to pass by so mere a casualty, that so evidently
requires an exquisitely formed, and continued design, even though there were
nothing positively to resist or hinder it. Let it be considered what there will
be that cannot but most certainly hinder any such production. To this purpose
we are to consider, That it is a vast power which so generally moves the
diffused matter of the Universe.

Hereof make an estimate by considering what is requisite to the continual
whirling about of such huge bulks as this whole massy globe of earth
(according to some.) Or, which is much more strange, the Sun (according to
others) with that unconceiveably swift motion which this supposition makes
necessary, together with the other Planets, and the innumerable heavenly Bodies
besides, that are subject to the laws of a continual motion. Adding hereto how
mighty power it is which must be sufficient to all the productions, motions,
and actions of all other things.

Again, consider that all this motion, and motive power must have some source
and fountain diverse from the dull and sluggish matter moved thereby, unto
which it already has appeared impossible it should originally and essentially
belong.

Next that the mighty active being which has been proved necessarily existent,
and whereto it must first belong, if we suppose it destitute of the
self-moderating principle of Wisdom and Counsel, cannot but be always exerting
its motive power, invariably and to the same degree: that is, to its very
utmost, and can never cease or fail to do so. For its act knows no limit but
that of its power (if this can have any) and its power is essential to it, and
its essence is necessary.

Further that the motion impressed upon the matter of the universe must hereupon
necessarily have received a continual increase, ever since it came into being.

That supposing this motive power to have been exerted from eternity, it must
have been increased long ago to an infinite excess.

That hence the coalition of the particles of matter for the forming of any
thing had been altogether impossible. For let us suppose this exerted motive
power to have been any instant, but barely sufficient for such a formation,
because that could not be dispatched in an instant, it would by its continual
momently increase, be grown so over-sufficient as in the next instant to
dissipate the particles, but now beginning to unite.

At least it would be most apparent, that if ever such a frame of things as we
now behold could have been produced; that motive power, increased to so
infinite an excess, must have shattered the whole frame in pieces many an age
ago; or rather never have permitted that such a thing as we call an age, could
possibly have been.

Our experience gives us not to observe any so destructive or remarkable
changes in the course of nature. And this (as was long ago foretold) is the
great argument of the Atheistical scoffers in these latter days, that things
are as they were from the beginning of the Creation to this day. But let it be
soberly weighed how it is possible the general consistency which we observe
things are at throughout the universe, and their steady orderly posture can
stand with this momently increase of motion.

And that such an increase could not (upon the supposition we are now opposing)
but have been, is most evident. For, not to insist that nothing of impressed
motion is ever lost, but only imparted to other things (which they that suppose
it do not therefore suppose, as if they thought being once impressed it could
continue of it self, but that there is a constant equal supply from the first
mover) we will admit that there is a continual decrease or loss, but never to
the degree of its continual increase. For we see when we throw a stone out of
our hand, whatever of the impressed force it do impart to the air through which
it makes its way, it yet retains apart a considerable time, that carries it all
the length of its journey, and all does not vanish and die away on the sudden.
Therefore when we here consider the continual momently renewal of the same
force, always necessarily going forth from the same mighty Agent without any
moderation or restraint, every following impetus does so immediately overtake
the former, that whatever we can suppose lost, is yet so abundantly
over-supplyed, that upon the whole it cannot fail to be ever growing, and to
have grown to that all-destroying excess beforementioned. Whence therefore
that famed restorer, and improver of some principles of the ancient Philosophy,
has seen a necessity to acknowledge it, as a manifest thing, That God himself
is the universal and primary cause of all the motions that are in the D. Carts
Princip. Philosoph. part 2.
world, who in the beginning created matter, together with motion and rest; and
does now by his ordinary concourse only, continue so much of motion and rest in
it as he first put into it. -- For (says he) we understand it as a perfection
in God, not only that he is unchangeable in himself, but that he works after a
most constant and unchangeable manner. So that, excepting those changes, which
either evident Experience, or Divine Revelation renders certain, and which we
know or believe to be without change in the Creator, we ought to suppose none
in his Works, lest thereby any inconstancy should be argued in himself.
Whereupon he grounds the laws and rules concerning motion which he afterward
lays down, whereof we referred to one a little above.

It is therefore evident, that as without the supposition of a self-active
Being there could be no such thing as motion. So without the supposition of an
Intelligent Being (that is, that the same Being be both self-active and
intelligent) there could be no regular motion, such as is absolutely necessary
to the forming and continuing of any the compacted bodily substances which our
eyes behold every day: Yea, or of any whatsoever, suppose we their figures or
shapes to be as rude, deformed, and useless, as we can imagine; much less such
as the exquisite compositions, and the exact order of things in the Universe do
evidently require, and discover.

And if there were no such thing carried in this supposition, as is positively
adverse to the III:
thing supposed, so as most certainly to hinder it (as we see plainly there is)
yet the mere want of what is necessary to such a production is enough to render
it impossible, and the supposition of it absurd. For it is not only absurd to
suppose a production, which somewhat shall certainly resist and hinder, but
which wants a cause to effect it: And it is not less absurd to suppose it
effected by a manifestly insufficient and unproportionable cause, than by none
at all For as nothing can be produced without a cause, so no cause can work
above or beyond its own capacity, and natural aptitude. Whatsoever therefore is
ascribed to any cause, above and beyond its ability, all that surplusage is
ascribed to no cause at all. And so an effect, in that part at least, were
supposed without a cause. And if then it follow when an effect is produced that
it had a cause; why does it not equally follow, when an effect is produced,
having manifest characters of wisdom and design upon it, that it had a wise and
designing cause? If it be said, there be some fortuitous or casual (at least
undesigned) productions that look like the effects of wisdom and contrivance,
but indeed are not, as the Birds so orderly and seasonable making their Nests,
the Bees their Comb, and the Spider its Web, which are capable of no design.
That exception needs to be well proved before it be admitted; and that it be
plainly demonstrated both that these creatures are not capable of design; and
that there is not an universal designing cause, from whose directive as well as
operative influence no imaginable effect or event can be exempted; (In which
case it will no more be necessary that every creature that is observed steadily
to work toward an end should it self design and know it, than that an
Artificers tools should know what he is doing with them, but if they do not,
it is plain he must.) And surely it lies upon them who so except, to prove in
this case what they say, and not be so precarious as to beg, or think us so
easy as to grant so much, only because they have thought fit to say it, or
would fain have it so. That is, that this or that strange event happened,
without any designing cause.

But however I would demand of such as make this exception, whether they think
there IV.
be any effect at all, to which a designing cause was necessary? or which they
will judge impossible to have been otherwise produced than by the direction and
contrivance of wisdom and counsel? I little doubt but there are thousands of
things, labored and wrought by the hand of man, concerning which they would
presently, upon first sight, pronounce, they were the effects of skill, and not
of chance: yea, if they only considered their frame and shape, though they yet
understood not their use and end. They would surely think (at least) some
effects or other sufficient to argue to us a designing cause. And would they
but soberly consider and resolve, what characters or footsteps of wisdom, and
design might be reckoned sufficient to put us out of doubt, would they not,
upon comparing, be brought to acknowledge; there are no where any, more
conspicuous and manifest; than in the things daily in view, that go ordinarily
with us under the name of the works of nature? whence it is plainly consequent,
that what men commonly call universal Nature, if they would be content no
longer to lurk in the darkness of an obscure and uninterpreted word, they must
confess is nothing else but common Providence, that is the universal power
which is every where active in the world, in conjunction with the unerring
wisdom, which guides and moderates all its exertions and operations; or the
wisdom which directs and governs that power. Otherwise when they see cause to
acknowledge that such an exact order and disposition of parts, in very neat and
elegant compositions, does plainly argue wisdom and skill in the contrivance;
only they will distinguish and say, it is so in the effects of art, but not of
nature. What is this but to deny in particular what they granted in general? to
make what they have said signify nothing, more than if they had said, such
exquisite order of parts is the effect of wisdom, where it is the effect of
wisdom, but it is not the effect of wisdom, where it is not the effect of
wisdom? and to trifle instead of giving a reason why things are so and so? And
whence take they their advantage for this trifling, or do hope to hide their
folly in it; but that they think while what is meant by art is known, what is
meant by nature cannot be known? But if it be not known, how can they tell but
their distinguishing members are co-incident, and run into one? yea, and if
they would allow the thing it self to speak, and the effect to confess, and
dictate the name of its own cause; how plain is it that they do run into one,
and that the expression imports no impropriety which we somewhere find in
Cicero, The art of Nature, or rather that nature is nothing else but Divine
Art, at least in as near an analogy as there can be, between any things Divine
and Humane? For, that this matter (even the thing it self, waving for the
present the consideration of names) may be a little more narrowly discussed,
and searched into: Let some curious piece of workmanship be offered to such a
Sceptick's view, the making whereof he did not see, nor of any thing like it,
and we will suppose him not told that this was made by the hand of any man, nor
that he has any thing to guide his judgment about the way of its becoming what
it is; but only his own view of the thing it self; and yet he shall presently
without hesitation pronounce, This was the effect of much skill. I would here
enquire why do you so pronounce? or what is the reason of this your judgment?
surely he would not say he has no reason at all, for this so confident, and
unwavering determination. For then he would not be determined, but speak by
chance, and be indifferent to say that or any thing else. Somewhat or other
there must be that when he is asked, is this the effect of skill? shall so
suddenly, and irresistibly captivate him into an assent that it is, that he
cannot think otherwise. Nay, if a thousand men were asked the same question,
they would as undoubtingly say the same thing? and then since there is a reason
for this judgment, what can be devised to be the reason, but that there are so
manifest characters and evidences of skill in the composure, as are not
attributeable to any thing else? Now here I would further demand, is there any
thing in this reason yea or no? Does it signify any thing, or is it of any
value to the purpose for which it is alleged? surely it is of very great, in
as much as when it is considered, it leaves it not in a man's power to think any
thing else; and what can be said more potently and efficaciously to
demonstrate? But now if this reason signify any thing, it signifies thus much;
that wheresoever there are equal characters and evidences of skill (at least
where there are equal) a skilful Agent must be acknowledged. And so it will (in
spite of cavil) conclude universally (and abstractly from what we can suppose
distinctly signified by the terms of Art and Nature) that whatsoever effect
has such or equal characters of skill upon it, did proceed from a skilful
cause. That is, that if this effect be said to be from a skilful cause, as
such, (viz. as having manifest characters of skill upon it) then, every such
effect (viz. that has equally manifest characters of skill upon it) must be
with equal reason concluded to be from a skilful cause.

We will acknowledge skill to act, and wit to contrive, very distinguishable
things, and in reference to some works (as the making some curious automaton or
self-moving Engine) are commonly lodged in diverse subjects, that is the
contrivance exercises the wit and invention of one, and the making, the manual
dexterity and skill of others. But the manifest characters of both will be seen
in the effect. That is the curious elaborateness of each several part shows the
later, and the order and dependence of parts, and their conspiracy to one
common end, the former. Each betokens design (or at least the Smith or
Carpenter must be understood to design his own part, that is, to do, as he was
directed.) Both together do plainly bespeak an Agent that knew what he did. And
that the thing was not done by chance, or was not the casual product, of only
being busy at random, or making a careless stir without aiming at any thing.
And this no man that is in his wits would upon sight of the whole frame, more
doubt to assent unto, than that two and two make four. And he would certainly
be thought mad, that should profess to think that only by some one's making a
blustering stir among several small fragments of brass, iron, and wood, these
parts happened to be thus curiously formed, and came together into this frame
of their own accord.

Or lest this should be thought to intimate too rude a representation of their
conceit, who think this world to have fallen into this frame and order wherein
it is by the agitation of the moving parts or particles of matter without the
direction of a wise mover; and that we may also make the case as plain as is
possible to the most ordinary capacity. We will suppose (for instance) that one
who had never before seen a watch, or any thing of that sort, has now this
little engine first offered to his view; can we doubt, but he would upon the
mere sight of its figure, structure, and the very curious workmanship which we
will suppose appearing in it, presently acknowledge the Artificers hand? But if
he were also made to understand the use and purpose for which it serves; and it
were distinctly shown him, how each thing contributes, and all things in this
little fabric, concur to this purpose, the exact measuring and dividing of
time, by minutes, hours, and months, he would certainly both confess and praise
the great ingenuity of the first inventer. But now if a by-stander, beholding
him in this admiration, would undertake to show a profounder reach and strain
of wit, and should say, Sir, you are mistaken concerning the composition of
this so much admired piece; it was not made or designed by the hand or skill of
any one; there were only an innumerable company of little atoms, or very small
bodies, much too small to be perceived by your sense, that were busily frisking
and plying to and fro about the place of its nativity; and by a strange chance
(or a stranger fate, and the necessary laws of that motion which they were
unavoidably put into, by a certain boisterous, undesigning mover) they fell
together into this small bulk, so as to compose it into this very shape and
figure, and with this same number and order of parts, which you now behold. One
squadron of these busy particles (little thinking what they were about)
agreeing to make up one wheel, and another, some other, in that proportion
which you see. Others of them also falling and becoming fixed in so happy a
posture and situation as to describe the several figures by which the little
moving fingers, point out the hour of the day, and day of the month. And all
conspired to fall together, each into its own place, in so lucky a juncture, as
that the regular motion failed not to ensue, which we see is now observed in
it. What man is either so wise or so foolish (for it is hard to determine
whether the excess or defect should best qualify him to be of this faith) as
to be capable of being made believe this piece of natural history? And if one
should give this account of the production of such a trifle, would he not be
thought in jest? But if he persist and solemnly profess that thus he takes it
to have been, would he not be thought in good earnest mad? And let but any
sober reason judge whether we have not unspeakably more manifest madness to
contend against in such as suppose this world, and the bodies of living
creatures to have fallen into this frame and orderly disposition of parts
wherein they are, without the direction of a wise and designing cause? And
whether there be not an incomparably greater number of most wild and arbitrary
suppositions, in their fiction, than in this? Besides the innumerable supposed
repetitions of the same strange chances all the world over; even as numberless,
not only as productions, but as the changes that continually happen to all the
things produced. And if the concourse of atoms could make this world, why not
(for it is but little to mention such a thing as this) a Porch, or a Temple, or
an House, or a City, (as Tully speaks in the before recited place) which were
less operous and much more easy performances?

It is not to be supposed that all should be V.
Astronomers, Anatomists, or natural Philosophers that shall read these lines.
And therefore it is intended not to insist upon particulars, and to make as
little use as is possible of terms, that would only be agreeable to that
supposition. But surely such general easy reflections on the frame of the
universe, and the order of parts in the bodies of all sorts of living
creatures, as the meanest ordinary understanding is capable of, would soon
discover incomparably greater evidence of wisdom, and design in the contrivance
of these, than in that of a watch or a clock. And if there were any whose
understandings are but of that size and measure, as to suppose that the whole
frame of the heavens serves to no other purpose than to be of some such use as
that to us mortals here on earth; if they would but allow themselves leisure to
think and consider, might discern the most convincing and amazing discoveries
of wise contrivance and design (as well as of vastest might and power) in
disposing things into so apt a subserviency to that meaner end. And that so
exact a knowledge is had thereby of times and seasons, days and years, as that
the simplest Idiot in a Country may be able to tell you, when the light of the
Sun is withdrawn from his eyes, at what time it will return, and when it will
look in at such a window, and when at the other. And by what degrees his days
and nights shall either increase, or be diminished. And what proportion of time
he shall have for his labors in this season of the year, and what in that;
without the least suspicion or fear that it shall ever fall out, otherwise.

But that some in later days whose more enlarged minds have by diligent search,
and artificial helps got clearer notices (even then most of the more learned of
former times) concerning the true frame and vastness of the Universe, the
matter, nature, and condition of the heavenly bodies, their situation, order,
and laws of motion; and the great probability of their serving to nobler
purposes than the greater part of learned men have ever dreamt of before; That
I say any of these should have chosen it for the employment of their great
intellects, to devise ways of excluding intellectual power from the contrivance
of this frame of things, having so great advantages beyond the most of mankind
besides, to contemplate and adore the great Author and Lord of all; is one of
the greatest wonders that comes under our notice. And might tempt even a sober
mind to prefer vulgar and popular ignorance before their learned philosophical
deliration.

Though yet, indeed, not their Philosophy, by which they would be distinguished
from the VI.
common sort, but what they have in common with them ought in justice to bear
the blame. For it is not evident, how much soever they reckon themselves
exalted above the vulgar sort; that their miserable shifting in this matter
proceeds only from what is most meanly so, i. e. their laboring under the most
vulgar and meanest diseases of the mind, disregard of what is common, and an
aptness to place more in the strangeness of new, unexpected, and surprising
events, than in things unspeakably more considerable, that are of every days
observation? Than which nothing argues a more abject, unphilosophical temper.

For let us but suppose (what no man can pretend is more impossible, and what
any man must confess is less considerable, than what our eyes daily see) that
in some part of the air, near this earth, and within such limits as that the
whole Scene might be conveniently beheld at one view, there should suddenly
appear a little globe of pure flaming light resembling that of the Sun, and
suppose it fixed as a center to another body, or moving about that other, as its
center (as this or that hypothesis best pleases us) which we could plainly
perceive to be a proportionably-little earth, beautified with little Trees and
Woods, flowery Fields, and flowing rivulets; with larger lakes into which these
discharge themselves, And suppose we the other Planets all of proportionable
bigness to the narrow limits assigned them, placed at their due distances, and
playing about this supposed earth or Sun, so as to measure their shorter, and
soon absolved days, months, and years, or two, twelve, or thirty years,
according to their supposed lesser circuits. Would they not presently, and with
great amazement, confess an intelligent contriver and maker of this whole
frame, above a Posidonius, or any mortal? And have we not in the present frame
of things, a demonstration of Wisdom and Counsel, as far exceeding that which
is now supposed, as the making some toy or bauble to please a child, is less an
argument of wisdom, than the contrivance of somewhat that is of apparent and
universal use? Or, if we could suppose this present state of things to have but
newly begun, and our selves preexistent, so that we could take notice of the
very passing of things out of horrid confusion into the comely order they are
now in, would not this put the matter out of doubt? (And that this state had
once a beginning needs not be proved over again.) But might, what would
yesterday have been the effect of wisdom, better have been brought about by
chance five or six thousand years, or any longer time ago? It speaks not want
of evidence in the thing, but want of consideration, and of exercising our
understandings, if what were new would not only convince but astonish, and what
is old, of the same importance, does not so much as convince.

And let them that understand any thing of VII.
the composition of an humane body (or indeed of any living creature) but
bethink themselves whether there be not equal contrivance, at least, appearing
in the composure of that admirable fabric, as of any the most admired machine
or engine devised and made by humane wit and skill. If we pitch upon any thing
of known and common use, as suppose again a Clock or Watch, which is no sooner
seen than it is acknowledged (as has been said) the effect of a designing
cause; will we not confess as much of the body of a man? Yea, what comparison
is there when in the structure of some one single member, as an hand, a foot,
an eye, or ear, there appears, upon a diligent search, unspeakably greater
curiosity, whether we consider the variety of parts, their exquisite
figuration, or their apt disposition to the distinct uses and ends these
members serve for, than is to be seen in any Clock or Watch? Concerning which
uses of the several parts in man's body, Galen so largely discoursing in
seventeen Books inserts on the by, this Epiphonema, Lib. 3. De usu part. ex
Lacun. Epit.
upon the mention of one particular instance of our most wise Makers provident
care; Unto whom (says he) I compose these Commentaries (meaning his present
work of unfolding the useful figuration of the humane body) as certain Hymns
(or Songs of praise) esteeming true Piety more to consist in this, that I first
may know, and then declare to others, his Wisdom, Power, Providence and
Goodness, than in sacrificing to him many Hecatombs. -- And in the ignorance
whereof there is greatest impiety, rather than in ababstaining from Sacrifice.
Nor (as he adds in Sub fin. l. 17.
the close of that excellent work) is the most perfect natural Artifice to be
seen in man only, but you may find the like industrious design and wisdom of
the Author, in any living creature which you shall please to dissect. And by
how much the less it is, so much the greater admiration shall it raise in you,
which those Artists show that describe some great thing (contractedly) in a
very small space: As that person (says he) who lately engraved Phaeton
carried, in his Chariot, with his four horses, upon a little Ring. A most
incredible sight! But there is nothing in matters of this nature, more strange
than in the structure of the leg of a Flea? (How much more might it be said of
all its inward parts?) Therefore (as he adds) The greatest commodity of such a
work, accrues not to Physicians, but to them who are studious of nature, viz.
the knowledge of our Makers perfection, and that (as he had said a little
above) it establishes the principle of the most perfect Theology; which
Theology (says he) is much more excellent than all Medicine.

It were too great an undertaking, and beyond the designed limits of this
discourse (though it would be to excellent purpose, if it could be done without
amusing terms, and in that easy, familiar way as to be capable of common use)
to pursue, and trace distinctly the prints and footsteps of the admirable
Wisdom, which appears in the structure and frame of this outer Temple. (For
even our bodies 1 Cor. 6. 19.
themselves are said to be the Temples of the Holy Ghost.) And to dwell, a
while, in the contemplation, and discovery of those numerous instances of most
apparent, ungainsayable sagacity and providence which offer themselves to view
in every part and particle of this fabric. How most commodiously all things
are ordered in it? with how strangely cautious circumspection, and foresight,
not only destructive, but even (perpetually) vexatious and afflicting
incongruities are avoided and provided against? To pose our selves upon the
sundry obvious questions that might be put for the evincing of such provident
foresight. As for instance, how comes it to pass that the several parts which
we find to be double in our bodies, are not single only? is this altogether by
chance? That there are two eyes, ears, nostrils, hands, feet, etc. what a
miserable shiftless creature had man been, if there had only been allowed him
one foot? a seeing, hearing, talking, unmoving statue! That the hand is divided
into fingers? those so conveniently situate, one in so fitly opposite a posture
to the rest?

And what if some one pair or other of these parts had been universally
wanting? The hands, the feet, the eyes, the ears. How great a misery had it
inferred upon mankind? and is it only a casualty that it is not so? That the
back Bone is composed of so many joints (twenty four, besides those of that
which is the basis and sustainer of the whole) and is not all of a piece, by
which stooping, or any motion of the head or neck, diverse from that of the
whole body, had been altogether impossible? That there is such variety and
curiosity in the ways of joining the bones together in that and other parts of
the body? That in some parts they are joined by mere adherence of one to
another, Bartholin, Riolanus.
either with or without an intervening medium, and both these ways so diversely.
That others are fastened together by proper joynting, so as to suit, and be
accompanied with motion, either more obscure, or more manifest. And this,
either by a deeper, or more superficial insertion of one bone into another, or
by a mutual insertion, and that so different ways. And that all these should be
so exactly accommodated to the several parts and uses to which they belong and
serve. Was all this without design? who that views the curious and apt texture
of the eye, can think it was not made on purpose to see with, How foolish to
think that art intended an end in making a window to see through, and that
nature intended none in making an eye to see with; as Campanella in that
rapturous discourse of his. Atheismus triumphatus.
and the ear, upon the like view, for hearing? when so many things must concur
that these actions might be performed by these organs, and are found to do so?
Or who can think that the sundry little engines belonging to the eye were not
made with design to move it upwards, downwards, to this side, or that, or
whirle it about, as there should be occasion; without which instruments, and
their appendages, no such motion could have been? who, that is not stupidly
perverse, can think that the sundry inward parts (which it would require a
volume distinctly to speak of, and but to mention them and their uses would too
unproportionably swell this part of this Discourse) were not made, purposely,
by a designing Agent, for the ends they so aptly and constantly serve for; the
want of some one among diverse whereof, or but a little misplacing, or if things
had been but a little otherwise than they are, had inferred an impossibility,
that such a creature as man could have subsisted, or been propagated upon the
face of the earth. As what if there had not been such a receptacle prepared as
the stomach is, and so formed, and placed as it is, to receive and digest
necessary nutriment? Had not the whole frame of man Non prodest cibus neque
corpori accedit, qui statim sumptus emittitur. Seneca (on another occasion.)
besides been in vain? Or what if the passage from it downward, had not been
made somewhat, a little way, ascending, so as to detain a convenient time what
is received, but that what was taken in were suddenly transmitted? it is
evident the whole structure had been ruined as soon as made. What (to instance
in what seems so small a matter) if that little cover had been wanting at the
entrance of that passage through which we breath? (the depression whereof by
the weight of what we eat or drink shuts it, and prevents meat and drink from
going down that way) had not unavoidable suffocation ensued? And who can number
the instances that might be given besides? Now when there is a concurrence of
so many things absolutely necessary (concerning which the common saying is as
applicable, more frequently wont to be applied to matters of morality, Goodness
is from the concurrence of all causes, evil from any defect) each so aptly and
opportunely serving its own proper use, and all, one common end: Certainly to
say that so manifold, so regular, and stated a subserviency to that end, and
the end it self were undesigned, and things casually fell out thus, is to say
we know or care not what.

We will only before we close this consideration, concerning the mere frame of
an humane body (which has been so hastily and superficially proposed) offer a
supposition which is no more strange (excluding the vulgar notion by which
nothing is strange, but what is not common) than the thing it self as it
actually is, viz. That the whole more external covering of the body of a man
were made, instead of skin, and flesh, of some very transparent substance,
flexible, but clear as very Crystal; through which and the other more inward
(and as transparent) integuments or unfoldings, we could plainly perceive the
situation and order of all the internal parts, and how they each of them
perform their distinct offices. If we could discern the continual motion of the
blood, how it is conveyed by its proper conduits from its first source and
fountain, partly downwards to the lower intrails (if rather it ascend not from
thence, as at least what afterward becomes blood does) partly upwards, to its
admirable elaboratory, the heart: where it is refined and furnished with fresh
vital spirits, and so transmitted thence by the distinct vessels prepared for
this purpose; could we perceive the curious contrivance of those little doors
by which it is let in and out, on this side and on that; the order and course
of its circulation, its most commodious distribution, by two social channels, or
conduit-pipes that every where accompany one another throughout the body. Could
we discern the curious artifice of the brain its ways of purgation; and were it
possible to pry into the secret chambers and receptacles of the less or more
pure spirits there; perceive their manifold conveyances, and the rare texture
of that net commonly called the wonderful one. Could we behold the veins,
arteries, and nerves, all of them arising from their proper and distinct
originals; and their orderly dispersion for the most part by pairs and
conjugations on this side and that, from the middle of the back, with the
curiously wrought branches, which supposing these to appear duly diversified,
as so many more duskish strokes in this transparent frame, they would be found
to make throughout the whole of it, were every smaller fiber thus made at once
discernable; especially those innumerable threads into which the spinal marrow
is distributed at the bottom of the back: and could we through the same medium
perceive those numerous little machines made to serve unto voluntary motions
(which in the whole body are computed by some to the number Riolanus.
of four hundred and thirty, or thereabouts, or so many of them as according to
the present supposition could possibly come in view) and discern their
composition; their various and elegant figures, round, square, long,
triangular, etc. and behold them do their offices, and see how they ply to and
fro, and work in their respective places, as any motion is to be performed by
them. Were all these things, I say, thus made liable to an easy and distinct
view; who would not admiringly cry out, how fearfully and wonderfully am I
made? And sure there is no man sober, who would not upon such a sight pronounce
that man mad that should suppose such a production to have been a mere
undesigned casualty. At least if there be any thing in the world, that may be
thought to carry sufficiently convincing evidences in it of its having been
made industriously, and on purpose, not by chance, would not this composition,
thus offered to view, be esteemed to do so much more? Yea, and if it it did
only bear upon it characters equally evidential of wisdom and design, with what
does certainly so, though in the lowest degree, it were sufficient to evince
our present purpose. For if one such instance as this would bring the matter no
higher than to a bare equality, that would at least argue a maker of man's
body, as wise, and as properly designing as the Artificer of any such slighter
piece of workmanship, that may yet, certainly, be concluded the effect of skill
and design. And then enough might be said from other instances to manifest him
unspeakably superior. And that the matter would be brought, at least, to an
equality upon the supposition now made, there can be no doubt, if any one be
judge that has not abjured his understanding and his eyes together. And what
then, if we Jay aside that supposition (which only somewhat gratifies fancy and
imagination) does that alter the case? or is there the less of wisdom and
contrivance expressed in this work of forming man's body, only for that it is
not so easily and suddenly obvious to our sight? Then we might with the same
reason say concerning some curious piece of carved work, that is thought fit to
be kept locked up in a Cabinet, when we see it, that there was admirable
workmanship shown in doing it; but as soon as it is again shut up in its
repository, that there was none at all. Inasmuch as we speak of the objective
characters of wisdom and design that are in the thing it self (though they must
some way or other come under our notice, otherwise we can be capable of arguing
nothing from them, yet) since we have sufficient assurance, that there really
are svch characters in the structure of the body of man, as have been
mentioned, and a thousand more than have been thought necessary to be mentioned
here: It is plain that the greater or less facility of finding them out; so
that we be at a certainty that they are, (Whether by the slower and more
gradual search of our own eyes; or by relying upon the testimony of such as
have purchased themselves that satisfaction, by their own labor and diligence)
is merely accidental to the thing it self we are discoursing of: And neither
adds to, nor detracts from the rational evidence of the present argument. Or if
it do either, the more abstruse paths of Divine Wisdom in this (as in other
things) do rather recommend it the more to our adoration and reverence, than if
every thing were obvious, and lay open to the first glance of a more careless
eye. The things which we are sure (or may be, if we do not shut our eyes) the
wise Maker of this world has done, do sufficiently serve to assure us that he
could have done this also, that is, have made everything in the frame and shape
of our bodies conspicuous in the way but now supposed, if he had thought it
fit. He has done greater things. And since he has not thought that fit, we
may be bold to say the doing of it would signify more trifling, and less
design. It gives us a more amiable and comely representation of the Being we
are treating of, that his works are less for oftentation than use. And that his
Wisdom and other Attributes appear in them rather to the instruction of sober,
than the gratification of vain minds.

We may therefore confidently conclude that the figuration of the humane body
carries with it, as manifest unquestionable evidences of design, as any piece
of humane artifice, that most confessedly in the judgment of any man does so.
And therefore, had, as certainly, a designing cause. We may challenge the world
to show a disparity; unless it be that the advantage is unconceivably great on
our side. For would not any one that has not abandoned at once both his reason
and his modesty, be ashamed to confess and admire the skill that is shown in
making a Statue, or the picture of a man, that (as one ingeniously says) is but
the shadow of his skin, and deny the wisdom that Parker Tentam. Physico-Theolog.
appears in the composure of his body it self, that contains so numerous and so
various engines and instruments for sundry purposes in it, as that it is become
an art, and a very laudable one, but to discover and find out the art and skill
that is shown in the contrivance and formation of them.

It is in the mean time strange to consider from how different and contrary
causes it proceeds, VIII.
that the wise contriver of this fabric has not his due acknowledgments on
the account of it. For with some it proceeds from their supine and drowsy
ignorance, and that they little know or think what prints and footsteps of a
Deity they carry about them, in their bone and flesh, in every part and vein
and limb. With others (as if too much learning had made them mad, or an excess
of light had struck them into a mopish blindness) these things are* so well
known, and seem so common and obvious that they are the less regarded. And
because they can give a very punctual account that things are so, they think
it, now, not worth the considering how they come to be so. They can trace all
these hidden paths and footsteps, and therefore all seems very easy; and they
give over wondering. As they that would detract from Columbus's acquist of
glory by the discovery he had made of America; by pretending the achievement
was easy; whom Archbishop Abbot's Geograph.
he ingeniously rebuked, by challenging them to make an egg stand erect, alone,
upon a plain table; which when none of them could do, he only by a gentle
bruising of one end of it, makes it stand on the table without other support,
and then tells them this was more easy than his Voyage into America, now they
had seen it done; before, they knew not how to go about it. Some may think the
contrivance of the body of a man, or other animal, easy, now they know it; but
had they been to project such a model without a pattern, or any thing leading
thereto; how miserable a loss had they been at? How easy a confession had been
drawn from them of the finger of God; and how silent a submission to his just
triumph over their, and all humane wit! when as the most admired performances
in this kind by any mortal have been only faint and infinitely distant
imitations of the works of God. As is to be seen in the so much celebrated
exploits of Posidonius, Regiomontanus, and others of this sort.

And now if any should be either so incurably IX.
blind as not to perceive, or so perversely wilful as not to acknowledge an
appearance of Wisdom in the frame and figuration of the body of an animal
(peculiarly of man) more than equal to what appears in any the most exquisite
piece of humane artifice, and which no wit of man can ever fully imitate;
although as has been said an acknowledged equality would suffice to evince a
wise maker thereof; yet because it is the existence of God we are now speaking
of; and that it is therefore not enough to evince, but to magnify the wisdom
we would ascribe to him: we shall pass from the parts and frame to the
consideration of the more principal powers and functions of terrestrial
creatures; ascending from such as agree to the less perfect orders of these, to
those of the more perfect, viz. of man himself. And surely to have been the
Author of faculties that shall enable to such functions, will evidence a wisdom
that defies our imitation, and will dismay the attempt of it.

We begin with that of growth. Many sorts of rare engines we acknowledge
contrived by the wit of man, but who has ever made one that could grow? or
that had in it a self-improving power? A tree, an herb, a pile of grass may
upon this account challenge all the world to make such a thing. That is to
implant the power of growing into any thing to which it does not natively
belong, or to make a thing to which it does.

By what art would they make a seed? and which way would they inspire it with a
seminal form? And they that think this whole globe of the earth was compacted
by the casual (or fatal) coalition of particles of matter, by what magic would
they conjure so many to come together as should make one clod? we vainly hunt
with a lingering mind after Miracles, if we did not (more vainly) mean by them
nothing else but novelties, we are compassed about with such. And the greatest
miracle is, that we see them not. You with whom the daily productions of nature
(as you call it) are so cheap, see if you can do the like. Try your skill upon
a Rose. Yea, but you must have pre-existent matter? But can you ever prove the
Maker of the world had so? or even defend the possibility of uncreated matter?
And suppose they had the free grant of all the matter between the crown of
their head and the Moon, could they tell what to do with it? or how to manage
it, so as to make it yield them one single flower, that they might glory in as
their own production?

And what mortal man that has reason enough about him to be serious, and to
think a while, would not even be amazed at the Miracle of Nutrition? or that
there are things in the world capable of nourishment, or who would attempt an
imitation here? or not despair to perform any thing like it. That is to make
any nourishable thing? Are we not here infinitely outdone? Do not we see our
selves compassed about with wonders, and are we not cur selves such, in that we
see, and are creatures from all whose parts there is a continual defluxion, and
yet that receive a constant gradual supply and renovation by which they are
continued in the same state! As the Bush burning, but not consumed. It Is easy
to give an artificial frame to a thing that shall gradually decay and wast,
till it quite be gone and disappear. You can raise a structure of Snow that
would soon do that. But can your manual skill compose a thing that like our
bodies shall be continually melting away, and be continually repaired through
so long a tract of time? Nay, but you can tell how it is done, you know in what
method, and by what instruments food is received, concocted, separated, and so
much as must serve for nourishment turned into chyle, and that into blood,
first grosser, and then more refined, and that distributed into all parts for
this purpose. Yea, and what then? therefore you are as wise as your Maker?
could you have made such a thing as the stomach, a liver, an heart, a vein, an
artery? or are you so very sure what the digestive quality is? or if you are,
and know what things best serve to maintain, to repair, or strengthen it, who
implanted that quality? both where it is so immediately useful, or in the other
things you would use for the service of that? or how, if such things had not
been prepared to your hand, would you have devised to persuade the particles of
matter into so useful and happy a conjuncture, as that such a quality might
result? or (to speak more suteably to the most) How, if you had not been shown
the way, would you have thought it were to be done, or which way would you have
gone to work, to turn meat and drink into flesh and blood?

Nor is propagation of their own kind by the creatures that have that faculty
implanted in them, less admirable, or more possible to be imitated by any
humane device. Such productions stay in their first descent. Who can by his own
contrivance find out a way of making any thing that can produce-another like it
self. What machine did ever man invent that had this power? And the ways and
means by which it is done, are such (though he that can do all things well knew
how to compass his ends by them) as do exceed not our understanding only, but
our wonder.

And what shall we say of spontaneous motion wherewith we find also creatures
endowed that are so mean and despicable in our eyes (as well as our selves)
that is, that so silly a thing as a fly, a gnat, etc. should have a power in it
to move it self, or stop its own motion, at its own pleasure! How far have all
attempted imitations in this kind fallen short of this perfection? and how much
more excellent a thing is the smallest and most contemptible insect, than the
most admired machine we ever heard or read of (as Archytas Tarintinus his Dove
so anciently celebrated, or more lately Regiomontanus his Fly, or his Eagle, or
any the like.) Not only as having this peculiar power above any thing of this
sort, but as having the sundry other powers besides meeting in it, whereof
these are wholly destitute.

And should we go on to instance further in the several powers of sensation,
both external and internal, the various instincts, appetitions, passions,
sympathies, antipathies, the powers of memory, and (we might add) of speech,
that we find the inferior orders of creatures, either necessarily furnished
with, or some of them as to this last disposed unto. How should we even over-do
the present business? and too needlessly insult over humane wit (which we must
suppose to have already yielded the cause) in challenging it to produce and
offer to view, an hearing, seeing-engine, that can imagine, talk, is capable of
hunger, thirst, of desire, anger, fear, grief, etc. as its own creature,
concerning which it may glory and say, I have done this?

Is it so admirable a performance, and so ungainsayable an evidence of skill
and wisdom, with much labor and long travel of mind, a busy, restless,
agitation of working thoughts, the often renewal of frustrated attempts, the
varying of defeated trials; this way and that, at length to hit upon, and by
much pains, and with a slow gradual progress, by the use of who can tell how
many sundry sorts of instruments or tools, managed by more (possibly) than a
few hands, by long hewing, hammering, turning, filing, to compose one only
single machine of such a frame and structure, as that by the frequent
re-inforcement of a skilful hand, it may be capable of some (and that,
otherwise, but a very short-lived) motion: And is it no argument, or effect of
wisdom so easily and certainly, without labor, error, or disappointment to
frame both so infinite a variety of kinds, and so innumerable individuals of
every such kind of living creatures, that cannot only with the greatest
facility move themselves with so many sorts of motion, downwards, upwards (many
of them) to, and fro, this way or that, with a progressive, or circular, a
swifter or a slower motion at their own pleasure, but can also grow, propagate,
see, hear, desire, joy, etc. Is this no work of wisdom, but only blind either,
fate or chance? of how strangely perverse and odd a complexion is that
understanding (if yet it may be called an understanding) that can make this
judgment!

And they think they have found out a rare knack, and that gives a great relief
to their X.
diseased minds, who have learned to call the bodies of living creatures (even
the humane not excepted) by way of diminution machines or engines too.

But how little cause there is to hug or be fond of this fancy would plainly
appear,

If first, we would allow our selves leisure to examine with how small pretense
this appellation is so placed, and applied. And next if it be applied rightly,
to how little purpose it is alleged, or that it signifies nothing to the
exclusion of divine wisdom from the formation of them.

And for the first, because we know not a better, let it be considered how
defective and unsatisfying the account is, which the great and (justly admired)
master in this faculty, D. Carts de passionibus animae. part. 1. atque alibi.
gives, how diverse of those things which he would have to be so, are performed
only in the mechanical way.

For though his ingenuity must be acknowledged in his modest exception of some
nobler operations belonging to our selves from coming under those rigid
necessitating laws, yet certainly to the severe enquiry of one not partially
addicted to the sentiments of so great a wit because they were his, it would
appear there are great defects, and many things yet wanting, in the account
which is given us of some of the meaner of those functions which he would
attribute only to organized matter, or (to use his own expression) to the
conformation of the members of the body, and the course of the spirits excited
by the heat of the heart, etc.

For howsoever accurately he describes the instruments and the way, his account
seems very little satisfying of the principle, either of spontaneous motion, or
of sensation.

As to the former, though it be very apparent that the muscles seated in that
opposite posture wherein they are mostly found paired throughout the body, the
nerves, and the animal spirits in the brain, and (suppose we) that glandule
seated in the inmost parts of it, are the instruments of the motion of the
limbs, and the whole body; yet what are all these to the prime causation or
much more, to the spontaneity of this motion? And whereas, with us (who are
acknowledged to have such a faculty independent on the body) an act of will
does so manifestly contribute, so that, when we will our body is moved with so
admirable facility, and we feel not the cumbersome weight of an arm to be lift
up, or of our whole corporeal bulk to be moved this way or that, by a slower or
swifter motion. Yea, and when as also, if we will, we can on the sudden in a
very instant start up out of the most composed sedentary posture, and put our
selves, upon occasion, into the most violent course of motion or action. But if
we have no such will, though we have the same agile spirits about us, we find
no difficulty to keep in a posture of rest; and are, for the most part, not
sensible of any endeavor or urgency of those active particles, as if they were
hardly to be restrained from putting us into motion; and against a reluctant
act of our will, we are not moved but with great difficulty to them that will
give themselves and us the trouble. This being, I say, the case with us; and it
being also obvious to our observation, that it is so very much alike in these
mentioned respects, with brute creatures, how unconceivable is it that the
directive principle of their motions and ours should be so vastly, and
altogether unlike? (whatsoever greater perfection is required with us, as to
those more noble and perfect functions and operations which are found to belong
to us,) That is, that in us, an act of will should signify so very much, and
be for the most part necessary to the beginning, the continuing, the stopping,
or the varying of our motions; and in them, nothing like it, nor any thing
else, besides only that corporal principle, De Passion. part. 1. art. 8.
which he assigns as common to them and us, the continual heat in the heart
(which he calls a sort of fire) nourished by the blood of the veins; the
instruments of motion, already mentioned, and the various representations and
impressions of external objects as there and elsewhere he expresses himself!
upon Princip. Philosoph. Dioptric. c. 4. Disertat. de method.
which last (though much is undoubtedly to be attributed to it) that so main a
stress should be laid as to the diversifying of motion seems strange; when we
may observe so various motions of some silly creatures, as of a fly in our
window, while we cannot perceive, and can scarce imagine any change in external
objects about them: yea, a swarm of flies, so variously frisking, and plying to
and fro, some this way, others that; with a thousand diversities and
interferings in their motion: and some resting while things are in the same
state externally to them all. So that what should cause or cease, or so
strangely vary such motions, is, from thence, or any thing else he has said,
left unimaginable. As it is much more, how, in creatures of much strength, as a
Bear or a Lion, a paw should be moved sometimes so gently, and sometimes with
so mighty force, only by mere mechanism, without any directive principle that
is not altogether corporal. But most of all how the strange regularity of
motion in some creatures, as of the Spider in making its web, and the like
should be owing to no other than such causes as he has assigned of the motions
in general of brute creatures. And what though some motions of our own seem
wholly involuntary (as that of our eyelids, in the case which he supposes)
does it therefore follow De Pass. art. 13.
they must proceed from a principle only corporal? as if our soul had no other
act belonging to it, but that of willing? which he does not downright say; but
that it is its only, or its chief act; and if it be its chief act only, what
hinders but that such a motion may proceed from an act that is not chief? or
that it may have a power that may sometimes step forth into act (and in greater
matters than that) without any formal deliberated command or direction of our
will. So little reason is there to conclude that all our motions common to us
with beasts, or even their motions themselves depend on nothing else than As
art. 16.
the conformation of the members, and the course which the spirits, excited by
the heat of the heart, do naturally follow, in the brain, the nerves, and the
muscles, after the same manner with the motion of an automation, etc.

But as to the matter of sensation, his account seems much more defective and
unintelligible, that is, how it should be performed (as he supposes every thing
common to us with beasts may be) without a soul. For, admit that it be (as who
doubts but it is) by the instruments which he assigns, we are still to seek
what is the sentient, or what uses these instruments, and does sentire, or
exercise sense by them? That is, suppose it be performed in the brain, and that
(as he says) by the help of the nerves, Princip. Philosoph. Sect. 189.
which from thence like small strings are stretched forth unto all the other
members; suppose we have the three things to consider in the nerves which he
recites; Their interior De Passion. art. 11.
substance, which extends it self like very slender threads from the brain to
the extremities of all the other members into which they are knit. The very
thin little skins which enclose these, and which being continued with those
that inwrap the brain do compose the little pipes which contain these threads;
and lastly, the animal spirits which are conveyed down from the brain through
these pipes. Yet which of these is most subservient unto sense? That he
undertakes elsewhere to declare, viz. that we Dioptr. c. 4. s. 4, 5.
are not to think (which we also suppose) some nerves to serve for sense,
others for motion only, as some have thought, but that the enclosed spirits
serve for the motion of the members, and those little threads (also enclosed)
for sense. Are we yet any nearer our purpose? Do these small threads sentire?
are these the things that ultimately receive and discern the various
impressions of objects? And since they are all of one sort of substance, how
comes it to pass that some of them are seeing threads, others hearing threads,
others tasting, etc. Is it from the diverse and commodious figuration of the
organs unto which these descend from the brain? But though we acknowledge and
admire the curious and exquisite formation of those organs, and their most apt
usefulness (as organs or instruments) to the purposes for which they are
designed; yet what do they signify without a proportionably apt and able agent
to use them, or percipient to entertain and judge of the several notices which
by them are only transmitted from external things? That is, suppose we a drop
of never so pure and transparent liquor, or let it be three, diversely tinctured
or colored, and (lest they mingle) kept asunder by their distinct enfolding
coats, let these encompass one the other, and, together, compose one little
shining globe: are we satisfied that now this curious pretty ball can see? nay,
suppose we it never so conveniently situate, suppose we the forementioned
strings fastened to it, and these, being hollow, well replenisht with as pure
air, or wind, or gentle flame as you can imagine; yea, and all the before
described little threads to boot, can it yet do the feat? nay, suppose we all
things else to concur, that we can suppose, except a living principle (call
that by what name you will) and is it not still as incapable of the act of
seeing, as a ball of clay, or a pebble stone? or can the substance of the brain
it self perform that or any other act of sense (for it is superfluous to speak
distinctly of the rest) any more than the pulp of an apple, or a dish of curds?
So that trace this matter whither you will within the compass of your assigned
limits, and you are still at the same loss, range through the whole body and
what can you find but flesh, and bones, marrow, and blood, strings and threads,
humor and vapor; and which of these is capable of sense? These are your
materials and such like, order them as you will, put them into what method you
can devise, and except you can make it live, you cannot make it so much as
feel, much less perform all other acts of sense besides, unto which these tools
alone seem as unproportionable as a plough-share to the most curious sculpture,
or a pair of tongs to the most melodious music.

But how much more unconceivable it is that the figuration and concurrence of
the forementioned organs can alone suffice to produce the several passions of
love, fear, anger, etc. whereof we find so evident indications in brute
creatures, it is enough but to hint. And (but that all persons do not read the
same Books) it were altogether unnecessary to have said so much; after so plain
demonstration already extant that matter, howsoever modified, is incapable of
sense. In Doctor More's Immortality of the Soul.


Nor would it seem necessary to attempt any thing in this kind, in particular
and direct opposition to the very peculiar sentiments of this most ingenious
Author (as he will undoubtedly be reckoned in all succeeding time) who when he
undertakes to show what sense is, and how it is performed, makes it the proper
business of the Soul, comprehends it under the name of Cogitation, naming
himself a thinking Princip. Phil. part: 4. s. 189.
thing, adds by way of question, what is that? and answers, a thing doubting,
understanding, affirming, denying, willing, nilling, and also imagining, and
exercising sense, says expressly it is evident to all that it is the Soul that
exercises Medit. 2.
sense, not the body, in as direct words as Dioptr. c. 4.
the so much celebrated Poet of old. The only wonder is that under this general
name of Cogitation he denies it unto Brutes; under which name he may be thought
less fitly to have included it, than to have affirmed them incapable of any
thing to which that name ought to be applied, as he does not only affirm, but
esteems himself by most firm reasons to have proved. Resp. sextae. Dissert. De
Method. c. 5.


And yet that particular reason seems a great deal more pious, than it is
cogent; which he gives for his choosing this particular way of differencing
brutes from humane creatures, viz. lest any prejudice should be done to the
doctrine of the humane souls immortality: There being nothing, as he truly
says, that does more easily turn off weak minds from the path of virtue, than
if they should think the souls of brutes to be of the same nature with our own;
and therefore that nothing remains to be hoped or feared after this life, more
by us than by flies or pismires. For, sure there were other ways of providing
against that danger; besides that of denying them so much as sense (other than
merely organical as he somewhere alleviates the harshness of that position, but
Resp. sextae.
without telling us what use's these organs) and the making them nothing else
but well formed machines.

But yet if we should admit the propriety of this appellation, and acknowledge
(the thing it self intended to be signified by it) that all the powers
belonging to mere brutal nature are purely mechanical and no more; To what
purpose is it here alleged? or what can it be understood to signify? what is
lost from our cause by it? And what have Atheists whereof to glory? For was the
contrivance of these machines theirs? were they the Authors of this rare
invention, or of any thing like it? or can they show any product of humane
device and wit, that shall be capable of vying with the strange powers of those
machines? or can they imagine what so highly exceeds all humane skill to have
fallen by chance, and without any contrivance or design at all, into a frame
capable of such powers and operations?

If they be machines they are (as that freespirited Author speaks) to be
considered as a sort of machine made by the hand of God, which is by infinite
degrees better ordered, and Dissert. de Method. Sect. 5.
has in it more admirable motions, than any that could ever have been formed
by the art of man. Yea, and we might add, so little disadvantage would accrue
to the present cause (what ever might to some other) by this concession, that
rather (if it were not a wrong to the cause which justly disdains we should
allege any thing false or uncertain for its support) this would add much, we
will not say to its victory, but to its triumph, that we did acknowledge them
nothing else than mere mechanical contrivances. For, since they must certainly
either be such, or have each of them a soul to animate and enable them to their
several functions; it seems a much more easy performance, and is more
conceivable, and within the nearer reach of humane apprehension that they
should be furnished with such a one, than be made capable of so admirable
operations without it; and the former (though it were not a surer) were a more
amazing, unsearchable, and less comprehensible discovery of the most
transcendent wisdom, than the latter.

But because whatsoever comes under the XI.
name of cogitation is assigned to some higher cause than mechanism; and that
there are operations belonging to man which lay claim to a reasonable soul as
the immediate principle and author of them, we have yet this further step to
advance; that is to consider the most apparent evidence we have of a wise
designing Agent, in the powers and nature of this more excellent, and (among
things more obvious to our notice) the noblest of his productions.

And were it not for the slothful neglect of the most to study themselves; we
should not here need to recount, unto men, the common and well-known abilities
and excellencies, which peculiarly belong to their own nature; They might take
notice without being told, that first as to their intellectual faculty, they
have somewhat about them that can think, understand, frame notions of things,
that can rectify or supply the false or defective representations which are
made to them by their external senses, and fancies, that can conceive of things
far above the reach, and sphere of sense, the moral good or evil of actions or
inclinations, what there is in them of rectitude or pravity; whereby they can
animadvert and cast their eye inward upon themselves. Observe the good or evil
acts or inclinations, the knowledge, ignorance, dullness, vigor, tranquillity,
trouble, and generally, the perfections or imperfections of their own minds.
That can apprehend the general natures of things, the future existence of what
yet is not, with the future appearance of that to us which as yet appears not.

Of which last sort of power, the confident assertion no man can have a
conception of the Hobbs's Humane Nature.
future, needs not, against our experience, make us doubt; especially being
enforced by no better than that pleasant reason there subjoyned, for, the
future is not yet; that is to say, because it is future; and so (which is all
this reason amounts to) we cannot conceive it, because we cannot. For though
our conceptions of former things guide us in forming notions of what is future,
yet sure our conception of any thing as future, is much another sort of
conception, from what we have of the same thing as past, as appears from its
different effects; for if an object be apprehended good, we conceive of it as
past with sorrow, as future with hope and joy. If evil, with joy as past, with
fear and sorrow, as future.

And (which above all the rest discovers and magnifies the intellectual power
of the humane soul) that they can form a conception (howsoever imperfect) of
this absolute perfect Being, whereof we are discoursing. Which even they that
acknowledge not its existence cannot deny, except they will profess themselves
blindly and at a venture to deny they know not what? or what they have not so
much as thought of?

They may take notice of their power of comparing things, of discerning and
making a judgment of their agreements and disagreements, their proportions and
disproportions to one another. Of affirming, or denying this or that concerning
such or such things; and of pronouncing with more or less confidence concerning
the truth or falsehood of such affirmations or negations.

And moreover of their power of arguing and inferring one thing from another,
so as from one plain and evident principle to draw forth a long chain of
consequences that may be discerned to be linked therewith.

They have withal to consider the liberty and the large capacity of the humane
will; which, when it is its self, rejects the dominion of any other than the
supreme Lord; and refuses satisfaction in any other than the supreme and most
comprehensive good.

And upon, even, so hasty, and transient a view, of a thing furnished with such
powers and faculties; we have sufficient occasion to bethink our selves; How
came such a thing as this into being? whence did it spring, or to what original
does it owe it self?

More particularly we have here two things to be discoursed:

First, that notwithstanding so high excellencies, the soul of man does yet
appear to be a caused being, that sometime had a beginning.

Secondly, That by them, it is sufficiently evident that it owes it self to a
wise and intelligent cause.

As to the former of these we need say the less, because that sort of Atheists
with whom we have chiefly now to do, deny not humane souls to have had a
beginning, as supposing them to be produced by the bodies they animate by the
same generation, and that such generation did sometimes begin. That only rude
and wildly moving matter was from eternity, and that by infinite alterations
and commixtures in that eternity, it fell at last into this orderly frame and
state wherein things now are, and became prolifick, so as to give beginning to
the several sorts of living things, which do now continue to propagate
themselves. The mad folly of which random fancy we have been so largely
contending against hitherto. The other sort who were for an eternal succession
of generations have been sufficiently refuted by diverse others, and partly by
what has been already said in this discourse; and we may further meet with
them ere it be long. We in the mean time find not any professing Atheism to
make humane souls as such necessary and self-original beings.

Yet it is requisite to consider not only what persons of Atheistical
persuasions have said, but what also they, possibly, may say. And moreover some
that have been remote from Atheism have been prone upon the contemplation of
the excellencies of the humane soul to over-magnifie, yea and even no less than
deifie it. It Is therefore needful to say somewhat in this matter. For if
nothing of direct and downright Atheism had been: The rash hyperboles (as we
will charitably call them) and unwarrantable rhetorications of these latter,
should they obtain to be looked upon and received as severe and strict
assertions of Truth, were equally destructive of Religion, as the other more
strangely bold and avowed opposition to it.

Such, I mean, as have spoken of the Souls Sen. Ep. 92. Hor. Sermon. M. Anton.
(...).
of men, as parts of God, one thing with him; a particle of Divine breath; an
extract, or derivation of himself. That have not feared to apply to them his
most peculiar attributes, or The Pythagoreans concerning whom it is said they
were wont to admonish one another to take heed lest they should rent God in
themselves. (...). Jamblicb. de vit. Pythag. Pla'o, who undertakes to prove the
immortafity of the Soul by such arguments as if they did conclude any thing,
would conclude it to be God. That it is the fountain, the principie [(...)] of
motion; and adds that the principle is unbegotten, etc. in Phaedro. Makes it
the cause of all things, and the ruler of all, De Leg. l. 10. though his words
there seem meant of the soul of the world. Concerning which soul afterward
enquiring whether all ought not to account it God? He answers, Yes certainly,
except any one be come to extreme madness. And whether an identity were not
imagined of our souls with that of the world, or with God is too much left in
doubt; both as to him, and some of his followers. To say nothing of modern
Enthusiasts.
say that of them which is most appropriate, and incommunicably belonging to
him alone. Nay, to give them his very name, and say in plain words they were
God.

Now it would render a Temple alike insignificant to suppose no worshipper, as
to suppose none who should be worshipped. And what should be the worshiper when
our souls are thought the same thing with what should be the object of our
worship?

But methinks when we consider their necessitous indigent state, their wants
and cravings, their pressures and groans, their grievances and complaints, we
should find enough to convince us they are not the self-originate or
selfsufficient being. And might even despair any thing should be plain and
easy to them with whom it is a difficulty to distinguish themselves from God.
Why are they in a state which they dislike? wherefore are they not full and
satisfied? why do they wish, and complain, is this God-like? But if any have a
doubt hanging in their minds concerning the unity of souls with one another, or
with the soul of the world, let them read what is already extant. And supposing
them thereupon, distinct Beings; Dr. More's Poem. Antimonopsuchia.

His Immortality of the Soul. Mr. Baxter's Appendix to the Reasons of Christian
Religion, etc.


there needs no more to prove them not to be necessary, independent, uncaused
ones, than their subjection to so frequent changes; their ignorance, doubts,
irresolution, and gradual progress to knowledge, certainty, and stability in
their purposes; their very being united with these bodies in which they have
been but a little while, as we all know; whereby they undergo no small change
(admitting them, to have been, pre-existent) and wherein they experience so
many. Yea, whether those changes import any immutation of their very essence or
no; the repugnancy being so plainly manifest of the very terms, necessary and
changeable. And inasmuch as it is so evident that a necessary being can receive
no accession to it self; than it must always have or keep it self, after the
same manner, and in the same state; that if it be necessarily such, or such,
(as we cannot conceive it to be, but we must, in our own thoughts, affix to it
some determinate state or other) it must be eternally such, and ever in that
particular unchanged state.

Therefore be the perfection of our souls as great as our most certain
knowledge of them can possibly allow us to suppose it, it is not yet so great,
but that we must be constrained to confess them no necessary self-criginate
Beings, and by consequence, dependent ones, that owe themselves to some cause.

Nor yet (that we may pass over to the other XII.
strangely distant extreme) is the perfection of our souls so little, as to
require less than an intelligent cause, endowed with the wisdom which we assert
and challenge unto the truly necessary uncaused Being.

Which, because he has no other rival or competitor for the glory of this
production, than only the fortuitous jumble of the blindly moving particles of
matter, our enquiry here will only be whose image the thing produced bears; or
which it more resembles, stupid, senseless unactive matter (or at the best only
supposed moving, though no man upon the Atheists terms, can imagine how it came
to be so) or the active intelligent Being, whom we affirm the cause of all
things, and who has peculiarly entitled himself the Father of Spirits.

That is, we are to consider whether the powers and operations belonging to the
Reasonable Soul do not plainly argue,

1. That it neither rises from nor is mere matter; whence it will be consequent
it must have an efficient diverse from matter?

2. That it owes it self to an intelligent efficient.

As to the former, we need not deal distinctly and severally concerning their
original and their nature. For if they are not mere matter, it will be evident
enough they do not arise from thence.

So that here all will be summed up in this enquiry, whether Reason can agree
to matter? We shall therefore wave the consideration of their conceits,
concerning the manner of the first origination of men, as that their whole
being was only a production of the earth. Whereof the Philosophical account
deserves as much laughter, instead of confutation, as any the most fabulously
Poetical. That is, how they were formed (as also the other animals) in certain
little bags or wombs of the earth, out of which, when they grew ripe, they
broke forth, Gassend. Epicur. Syntag.
etc.

And only consider what is said of the constitution As may be seen in the same
Syntag. and in Epicurus's Epist. to Herodot. in Laert. (...), etc.
and nature of the humane soul it self, Which is said to be composed of very
well polished, the smoothest and the roundest atoms; and which are of the
neatest fashion, and every way, you must suppose, the best conditioned the
whole Country could afford; of a more excellent make, as there is added, than
those of the fire it self. And these are the things you must know, which think,
study, contemplate, frame syllogisms, make Theorems, lay plots, contrive
business, act the Philosopher, the Logician, the Mathematician, Statesman, and
every thing else (only you may except the Priest, for of him there was no need.)

This therefore is our present theme, whether such things as these be capable
of such, or any acts of reason yea or no?

And if such a matter may admit of serious discourse; in this way it may be
convenient to proceed, viz. either any such small particle, or atom (for our
business is not now with Des Carts but Epicurus) alone, is rational, or a good
convenient number of them assembled, and most happily met together. It is much
to be feared the former way will not do. For we have nothing to consider in any
of these atoms, in its solitary condition, besides its magnitude, its figure,
and its weight, and you may add also its motion (if you could devise how it
should come by it.)

And now because it is not to be thought that all atoms are rational (for then
the stump of a tree, or a bundle of straw might serve to make a soul of, for
ought we know, as good as the best) it is to be considered by which of those
properties, an atom shall be entitled to the privilege of being rational, and
the rational atoms be distinguished from the rest. Is it their peculiar
magnitude or size that so far ennobles them? Epicurus would here have us
believe that the least are the fittest for this turn. Now if you consider how
little we must suppose them generally to be, according to his account of them;
That is, that looking upon any of those little motes a stream whereof you may
perceive when the Sun shines in at a window, and he doubts not but many Myriads
of even ordinary atoms go to the composition of any one of these scarcely
discernable motes; how sportful a contemplation were it, to suppose one of
those furnished with all the powers, of a reasonable soul (though its likely
they would not laugh at the jest that think thousands of souls might be
conveniently placed upon the point of a needle.) And yet, which makes the
matter more admirable, that very few, except they be very carefully picked and
chosen, can be found among those many myriads, but will be too big to be
capable of rationality. Here sure the fate is very hard, of those that come
nearest the size, but only, by a very little too much corpulency, happen to be
excluded, as unworthy to be counted among the rational atoms. But sure if all
sober reason be not utterly lost and squandered away among these little
entities, it must needs be judged altogether imcomprehensible, why, if, upon
the account of mere littleness, any atom should be capable of reason, all
should not be so. (And then we could not but have a very rational world.) At
least, the difference, in this point, being so very small among them; and they
being all so very little, methinks they should all be capable of some reason,
and have only less or more of it, according as they are bigger and less. But
there is little doubt that single property, of less magnitude, will not be
stood upon as the characteristical difference of rational and irrational Atoms;
and because their more or less gravity is reckoned necessarily (and so
immediately) to depend on that (for those Atoms cannot be thought porous, but
very closely compacted each one within it self) this, it is likely, will as
little be depended on Where yet it falls out somewhat crosly that the least
(and consequently the lightest) should be thought fitter to be the matter of
the rational soul, because they are aptest for motion, when yet no other cause
is assigned of their motion besides their gravity, which cannot but be more as
they are bigger (for no doubt if you should try them in a pair of scales, the
biggest would be found to outweigh) whence also it should seem to follow, that
the heaviest having most in them of that which is the cause of motion, should
be the most moveable, and so by consequence the biggest.
. And so their peculiar figure must be the more trusted to, as the differencing
thing. And because there is in this respect so great a variety among this
little sort of people, or Nation as this Author somewhere calls them, whereof
he gives so punctual an account, That they are round, oblong, oval, plain,
hooked, rough, smooth, bunch-back'd, etc.
as if he had been the Generalissimo of all their Armies, and were wont to view
them at their Rendzevous, to form them into Regiments and Squadrons, and
appoint them to the distinct services he found them aptest for. No doubt it was
a difficulty to determine which sort of figure was to be pitched on to make up
the rational regiment. But since this power was absolute, and there was none to
gainsay or contradict, the round figure was judged best, and most deserving
this honor. Otherwise a reason might have been asked (and it might have been a
greater difficulty to have given a good one) why some other figure might not
have done as well; unless respect were had to fellow-Atoms, and that it was
thought, they of this figure could better associate for the present purpose;
and that we shall consider of by and by; we now proceed on the supposition
that, possibly, a single Atom by the advantage of this figure, might be judged
capable of this high achievement. And in that case, it would not be
impertinent to enquire, whether if an Atom were perfectly round, and so, very
rational; but by an unexpected misadventure, it comes to have one little corner
somewhere clapped on, it be hereby quite spoiled of its rationality? And again,
whether one that comes somewhat near that figure, only it has some little
protuberancies upon it, might not by a little filing, or the friendly rubs of
other Atoms become rational? And yet, now we think on it, of this improvement he
leaves no hope, because he tells us, though they have parts, yet they are so
solidly compacted that they are by no force capable of dissolution. And so
whatever their fate is in this particular, they must abide it without
expectation of change. And yet, though we cannot really alter it for the better
with any of them, yet we may think as favorably of the matter as we please;
and for any thing that yet appears, whatever peculiar claim the round ones lay
to rationality, we may judge as well (and shall not easily be disproved) of any
of the rest.

Upon the whole matter no one of these properties hitherto alone is likely to
make a rational Atom: what they will all do meeting together may yet seem a
doubt. That is, supposing we could hit upon one single Atom, that is at once of
a very little size, and consequently very light and nimble, and most perfectly
and unexceptionably round (and possibly there may be found a good many such)
will not this do the business? May we not now hope to have a rational sort of
people among them, that is, those of the peculiar family or tribe? And yet
still the matter will be found to go very hard; for if we cannot imagine or
devise how any one of these properties should contribute anything (as upon our
utmost disquisition we certainly cannot) toward the power of reasoning, it is
left us altogether unimaginable how all together should make a rational Atom.
There is only one relief remaining, that is, what if we add to these other
properties some peculiarly-brisk sort of actual motion: For to be barely
movable will not serve, inasmuch as all are so; But will not actual motion
(added to its being irreprehensibly little, light, and round) especially if it
be a very freakish one, and made up of many odd unexpected windings and turns
effect the business? Possibly it might do something to actual reasoning,
supposing the power were there before; for who can tell but the little thing
was fallen asleep, and by this means its power might be awakened into some
exercise? But that it should give the power it self, is above all
comprehension. And there is nothing else to give it. These that have been
mentioned being all the prime qualities that are assigned to Atoms singly
considered. All other that can be supposed, belonging to concrete bodies, that
are composed of many of them meeting together.

And therefore hither in the next place our enquiry must be directed, whether
any number of Atoms (definite or indefinite) being in themselves severally
irrational, can become rational by association, or compose and make up a
rational soul?

Hitherto it must be acknowledged we have not fought with any adversary; not
having met with any that have asserted the rationality of single corporeal
Atoms; yet because we know not what time may produce, and whither the distress
and exigency of a desperate cause may drive the maintainers of it; 'twas not
therefore fit to say nothing to that (supposable or possible) assertion (I mean
possible to be asserted, howsoever impossible it is to be true.) Nor yet could
it well admit of any thing to be said to it, but in that ludicrous and sportful
way. If we will suppose any to be so foolish, they are to be dealt with
according to their folly.

But now as to this other conceit, that Atoms (provided they be of the right
stamp or kind) may, a competent number of them, assembled together, compose a
reasonable soul is an express Article of the Epicurean Creed. And therefore
here we are to deal more cautiously; not that this is any whit a wiser fancy
than the other; but that the Truth in this matter is surer to meet with
opposition in the minds of some persons already formed unto that wild
apprehension and tinctured with it.

Wherefore such must be desired to consider in the first place, if they will be
true Disciples of Epicurus throughout, what he affirms of all Atoms
universally, that they must be simple uncompounded bodies (or if you will
corpuscles) not capable of division or section, by no force dissoluble, and
therefore immutable, or in themselves void of any mutation.

Hereupon let it be next considered, if there were in them (those that are of
the right size, shape, and weight) severally, some certain sparks or seeds of
reason (that we may make the supposition as advantageous as we can) or
dispositions thereto, yet how shall it be possible to them to communicate? or
have that communion with one another, as together, to constitute an actually
and completely rational, or thinking thing. If every one could bring somewhat
to a common stock, that might be serviceable to that purpose; how shall each
ones proportion or share be imparted? They can none of them emit any thing,
there can possibly be no such thing as an effluvium from any of them, inasmuch
as they are incapable of diminution; and are themselves each of them as little
as the least imaginable effluvium that we would suppose to proceed from this or
that particular Atom. They can at the most but touch one another, penetrate, or
get into one another they cannot. Insomuch as if any one have a treasure in it,
which is in readiness for the making up an intellective faculty or power among
them, that should be common to them all; yet each one remains so locked up
within it self, and is so reserved and incommunicative, that no other, much
less the whole body of them, can be any jot the wiser. So that this is like to
be a very dull assembly.

But then, if there be nothing of reason to be communicated, we are yet at a
greater loss. For, if it be said having nothing else to communicate, they
communicate themselves, but what is that self? is it a rational self? or is
every single Atom, that enters this composition, reason? or is it a principle
of reason? is it a seed? or is it a part? is it a thought? what shall we
suppose? or what is there in the properties assigned to this sort of Atoms that
can bespeak it any of these? And if none of these can be supposed; what does
their association signify toward ratiocination? They are little, what does
that contribute? therefore there may need the more of them to make a good large
soul; but why must a little thing, devoid of reason, contribute more toward it
than another somewhat bigger? They are light, does that mend the matter? they
are the sooner blown away, they can the less co-here, or keep together; they
are the more easily capable of dissipation, the less of keeping their places in
solemn counsel. They are round, and exactly smooth. But why do they the more
conveniently associate upon that account for this purpose? They cannot
therefore come so close together as they might have done, had they been of
various figures. They cannot, indeed, give or receive so rude touches. This
signifies somewhat toward the keeping of state, but what does it to the
exercise of reason? Their being so perfectly and smoothly round makes them the
more incapable of keeping a steady station, they are the more in Janger of
rolling away from one another, they can upon this account lay no hold of each
other. Their counsels and resolves are likely to be the more lubricous, and
liable to an uncertain volubility. It is not to be imagined what a collection
of individuals only thus qualified can do when they are come together, an
assembly thus constituted. Are we hence to expect Oracles, philosophical
Determinations? Maxims of State? And since they are supposed to be so much
alike, how are the Mathematical Atoms to be distinguished from the Moral? those
from the Political? the Contemplative from the Active? or when the assembly
thinks fit to entertain it self with matters of this or that kind, what must be
its different composure or posture? into what mold or figure must it cast it
self for one purpose? and into what for another? It Is hard to imagine that
these little globular bodies, that we may well suppose to be as like as one egg
can be to another, should by the mere alteration of their situation in respect
of one another (and no alteration besides can be so much as imagined among
them) make so great a change in the complexion of this assembly; so that now it
shall be disposed to seriousness, and by some transposition of the spherical
particles, to mirth, now to business, and by and by to pleasure: And seeing all
humane souls are supposed made of the same sort of material, how are the Atoms
modeled in one man, and how in another? what Atoms are there to dispose to this
sect more, and what to another? or if a good reason can be assigned for their
difference, what shall be given for their agreement? Whence it is that there
are so unquestionable common notions every where received? why are not all
things transposed in some minds, when such a posture of the Atoms as might
infer it, is as supposable as any other? Yea, and since men are found not
always to be of one mind, with themselves, it is strange and incomprehensible
that such a situation of these Atoms that constitute his soul should dispose
him to be of one opinion, and another of another. How are they to be ranged
when for the affirmative? how for the negative? And yet a great deal more
strange, that since their situation is so soon changed, and so continually
changing (the very substance of the soul being supposed nothing else than a
thing very like, but a little finer than a busy and continually moving flame
of fire) any man should ever continue to be of the same opinion with himself
one quarter of an hour together; that all notions are not confounded and
jumbled; that the same thing is not thought and unthought, resolved and
unresolved a thousand times in a day. That is, if any thing could be thought or
resolved at all. Or if this were a subject capable of framing or receiving any
sort of notion.

But still that is the greatest difficulty, how there can'be such a thing as
thinking, or forming of notions. The case is plain of such notions as have no
relation to matter, or dependence upon external sense (as what does that
contribute to my contemplation of my own mind, and its acts and powers to my
animadversion, or knowing that I think or will this or that?)

But besides, and more generally what proportion is there between a thought,
and the motion of an Atom? Will we appeal to our faculties, to our reason it
self? and whither else will we? Is there any cognation or kindred between the
Idaea's we have of these things, the casual agitation of a small particle of
matter (be it as little or as round as we please to imagine) and an act of
intellection or judgment? And what if there be diverse of them together? what
can they do more toward the composing an intelligent thing, than many ciphers
to the Arithmetical composition of a number. It would be as rational to suppose
an heap of dust by long lying together might at last become rational. Yes,
these are things that have (some way or other) the power of motion; and what
can they effect by that? they can frisk about, and ply to and fro, and
interfere among themselves, and hit, and justle and tumble over one another,
and that will contribute a great deal; about as much, we may suppose, as the
shaking of such dust well in a bag, by which means it might possibly become
finer and smaller something; and by continuing that action, at length rational!

No; but these Atoms, of which the soul is made, have a great advantage by
their being disposed into a so well-contriv'd and fitly-organiz'd receptacle as
the body is. It is indeed true and admirable that the body is (as has been
before observed) so fitly framed for the purposes whereto the whole of it, and
its several parts are designed. But how unfitly is that commodious structure of
it, so much as mentioned by such as will not allow themselves to own and adore
the wisdom and power of its great Architect.

And what if the composure of the body be so apt and useful, so excellent in
its own kind; Is it so in every kind, or to all imaginable purposes? or what
purpose can we possibly imagine more remote, or foreign to the composition of
the body, than that the power of ratiocination should be derived thence? It
might as well be said it was so made, to whirle about the Sun, or to govern the
motions of the Moon and Stars; as to confer the power of reason, or enable the
soul to think, to understand, to deliberate, to will, etc. Yea, its organs,
some of them, are much more proportionable to those actions, than any of them
unto these. Which though a well habited body (while the soul remains in this
imprisoned state) do less hinder, yet how does it help? and that it might
perform these acts without bodily organs, is much more apprehensible than how
they can properly be said to be performed by them. And that, though they are
done in the body, they would be done much better out of it.

But shall it be granted that these soul-constituting Atoms till they be (or
otherwise than as they are) united with a duly organized body, are utterly
destitute of any reasoning or intelligent power? or are they, by themselves,
apart from this grosser body irrational? If this be not granted, the thing we
intend must be argued out. Either then they are, or they are not. If the latter
be said, Then they have it of themselves, without dependence on the organized
body; and so we are fairly agreed to quit that pretense, without more ado, of
their partaking reason from thence. And are only left to weigh over again what
has been already said to evince the contrary, that is, how manifestly absurd
it is, to imagine that particles of matter by their peculiar size, or weight,
or shape, or motion, or all of these together, and that whether single or
associated, should be capable of reasoning. If the former be the thing which is
resolved to be stuck to, that is, that they are of themselves irrational, but
they become reasonable by their being united in such a prepared and organized
body. This requires to be a little further considered: And to this purpose it
is necessary to obviate a pitiful shift that it is possible some may think fit
to use for the avoiding the force of this dilemma, and may rely upon as a
ground why they may judge this choice the more secure; that is, that they say
they are rational by dependence on the body they animate; because they are only
found so united with one another there; that there, they have the first
coalition; there, they are severed from such as serve not this turn; there,
they are pent in and held together as long as its due temperament lasts; which
when it fails they are dissipated, and so lose their great advantage for the
acts of reason which they had in such a body. What pleasure soever this may
yield, it will soon appear it does them little service.

For it only implies that they have their rationality of themselves, so be it
that they were together; and not immediately from the body, or any otherwise
than that they are somewhat beholding to it, for a fair occasion of being
together; as if it were else an unlawful assembly; or that they knew not
otherwise how to meet and hold together. They will not say that the body gives
them being, for they are eternal, and self-subsisting, as they will have it.
Yea and of themselves (though the case be otherwise with the Cartesian
particles) undiminishable as to their size, and, as to their figure and weight,
unalterable. So that they have neither their littleness, their roundness, nor
their lightness from the body, but only their so happy meeting. Admit this, and
only suppose them to be met out of the body. And why may not this be thought
supposable? If they be not rational till they be met, they cannot have wit
enough to scruple meeting, at least, somewhere else than in the body. And who
knows but such a chance may happen; As great as this are by these persons
supposed to have happened before the world could have come to this pass it is
now at, who can tell but such a number of the same sort of Atoms (it being
natural for things so much of a complexion and temper to associate and find out
another) might ignorantly, and thinking no harm come together? And having done
so, why might they not keep together? Do they need to be pent in? How are they
pent in whilst in the body? If they be disposed, they have ways enough to get
out. And if they must needs be inclined to scatter when the crasis of the body
fails, surely a way might be found to hem them in, if that be all; at the time
of expiration more tightly and closely than they could be in the body. And what
reason can be devised why being become rational by their having been assembled
in the body, they may not agree to hold together, and do so in spite of fate,
or maugre all ordinary accidents, when they find it convenient to leave it. And
then upon these no-way impossible suppositions (according to their principles,
so far as can be understood, with whom we have to do) will they now be rational
out of the body? Being still endowed (as they cannot but be) with the same high
privileges of being little, round, and light, and being still also together;
and somewhat more, it may be, at liberty, to roll and tumble, and mingle with
one another, than in the body? If it be now affirmed they will in this case be
rational, at least as long as they hold together, then we are but where we
were. And this shift has but diverted us a little, but so as it was easy to
bring the matter, again, about, to the same point we were at before. Wherefore
the shelter of the body being thus quite again forsaken, this poor expulsed
crew, of dislodging Atoms are exposed to fight, in the open air, for their
rationality, against all that was said before.

But if this refuge and sanctuary of the body be not merely pretended to, but
really and plainly trusted in and stuck to. Then are we sincerely and honestly
to consider what a body so variously organized can do, to make such a party of
Atoms (that of themselves are not so, singly, nor together) become rational.
And surely if the cause were not saved before, it is now deplorate and lost
without remedy. For what do they find here that can thus beyond all expectation
improve them to so high an excellency? Is it flesh, or blood, or bones that
puts this stamp upon them? Think, what is the substance of the nobler parts,
the liver, or heart, or brain, that they should turn these, before, rational
Atoms, when they fall into them, into irrational, any more than if they were
well soaked in a quagmire, or did insinuate themselves into a piece of soft
dough? But here they meet with a benign and kindly heat and warmth which
comfortably fosters and cherishes them, till at length it has hatched them
into rational. But methinks they should be warm enough of themselves, since
they are supposed so much to resemble fire. And however, wherein do we find a
flame of fire more rational than a piece of ice? Yea, but here they find a due
temper of moisture as well as heat. And that surely does not signify much; for
if the common maxim be true, that the dry soul is the wisest, they might have
been much wiser if they had kept themselves out of the body. And since its
necessary the soul should consist of that peculiar sort of Atoms before
described; and the organical body (which must be said for distinction sake, the
soul being all this while supposed a body also) consists of Atoms too, that are
of a much courser alloy, methinks a mixture should not be necessary, but an
hinderance and great debasement rather to this rational composition, Besides
that it cannot be understood, if it were necessary these Atoms should receive
any tincture from the body in order to their being rational, what they can
receive, or how they can receive any thing. They have not pores that can admit
an adventitious moisture though it were of the divinest nectar, and the body
could never so plentifully furnish them with it. Wherein then lies the great
advantage these Atoms have by being in the body to their commencing rational?
If there be such advantage, why can it not be understood? why is it not
assigned? why should we further spend our guesses what may possibly be said?
But yet, may not much be attributed to the convenient and well fenced cavity of
the brains receptacle, or the more secret chambers within that? where the
studious Atoms may be very private and free from disturbance? Yet sure it is
hard to say, why they that are wont to do it here, might not as well
philosophize in some wellchosen cavern or hole of a Rock; nor were it
impossible to provide them there, of as soft a bed. And yet would it not be
some relief to speak of the fine slender pipes, winding to and fro, wherein
they may be conveyed, so conveniently, from place to place; that if they do not
fall into a reasoning humor in one place, they may in another? why what can
this do? It seems somewhat like Balaam's project to get into a vein of
incantation by changing stations. And transplace them as you will, it requires
more magic than ever he was master of, to make those innocent harmless things
masters of reason.

For do but consider, what if you had a large phial capable of as great a
quantity as you can think needful, of very fine particles, and, replenished
with them, closely stopped, and well luted; suppose these as pure and fit for the
purpose as you can imagine, only not yet rational; will their faring to and fro
through very close and stanch tubes from one such receptacle to another, make
them at last become so? It seems then, do what you will with them, toss and
tumble them hither and thither, rack them from vessel to vessel, try what
methods you can devise of sublimation or improvement, every thing looks like a
vain and hopeless essay. For indeed, do what you please or can think of, they
are such immutable entities, you can never make them less or finer than they
originally were: And rational they were not before their meeting in the body;
wherefore it were a strange wonder if that should so far alter the case with
them, that they should become rational by it.

And now, I must, upon the whole profess XII.
not to be well pleased with the strain of this discourse; not that I think it
unsuitable to its subject (for I see not how it is fitly to be dealt with in a
more serious way) but that I dislike the subject. And were it not that it is
too obvious how prone the minds of some are to run themselves into any the
grossest absurdities rather than admit the plain and easy sentiments of
Religion: It were miserable trifling to talk at this rate, and a loss of time
not to be endured. But when an unaccountable aversion to the acknowledgement
and adoration of the ever-blessed Deity hurries away men, affrighted and
offended at the luster of his so manifest appearances, to take a bad, but the
only, shelter the case can admit, under the wings of any the most silly foolish
figment; though the ill temper and dangerous state of the persons is to be
thought on with much pity; yet the things which they pretend being in
themselves ridiculous, if we will entertain them into our thoughts at all, can
not fitly be entertained but with derision. Nor does it more unbecome a serious
person to laugh at what is ridiculous, than gravely to weigh and ponder what is
weighty and considerable. Provided he do not seek occasions of that former
sort, on purpose to gratify a vain humor; but only allow himself to discourse
sutably to them, when they occurr. And their dotage who would fain serve
themselves of so wildly extravagant and impossible suppositions; for the
fostering their horrid misbelief, that they have no God to worship, would
certainly justify as sharp ironies, as the Prophet Elijah bestows upon them
who worshipped Baal, instead of the true God.

Nor is any thing here said intended as a reflection on such as being
unfurnished with a XIII.
notion of created intelligent spirits that might distinguish them from the
most subtle matter, have therefore thought them capable of being involved in
the same common notion therewith, thinking them material; and yet, in the mean
time doubted not their immortality, much less the existence of a Deity, the
Author and Former of them and all things. For they are no way guilty of that
blasphemous nonsense, to make them consist of necessary selfsubsistent matter,
every minute particle whereof is judged eternal and immutable, and in
themselves, for ought we can find asserted, destitute of reason, and which yet
acquire it by no one knows what coalition, without the help of a wise efficient
that shall direct and and order it to so unimaginable an improvement. The
persons do only think more refined matter capable of that impression and stamp;
or of having such a power put into it by the Creators all-disposing hand,
Wherein, to do them right, though they should impose somewhat hardly upon
themselves if they will make this estimate of the natural capacity of matter;
or if they think the acts and power of reason in man altogether unnatural to
him. Yet they do in effect the more befriend the cause we are pleading for (as
much as it can be befriended by a mis-apprehension; which yet is a thing of
that untoward genius, and does so ill consort with truth, that it is never
admitted as a friend in any one in respect, but it repays it with a mischievous
revenge in some other, as might many ways be shown in this instance, if it were
within the compass of our present design.) It being evident that if any portion
of matter shall indeed be certainly found the actual subject of such powers,
and to have such operations belonging to it, there is the plainer and more
undeniable necessity and demonstration of his power and wisdom, who can make
any thing of any thing, and who shall then have done that which is so
altogether impossible, except to him to whom all things are possible. There is
the more manifest need of his hand to heighten dull matter to a qualifiedness
for performances so much above its nature; To make the loose and independent
parts of so fluid matter cohere and hold together, that, if it were once made
capable of knowledge, and the actual subject of it; whatsoever notions were
impressed thereon, might not be in a moment confounded and lost. As indeed they
could not but be if the particles of matter were the immediate seat of reason;
and so steady a hand did not hold them in a settled composure, that they be not
disordered, and men have, thence, the necessity of beginning afresh to know any
thing every hour of the day. Though yet it seems a great deal more reasonable
to suppose the souls of men to be of a substance in it self more consistent;
and more agreeable to our experience, who find a continual ebbing and flowing
of spirits, without being sensible of any so notable and sudden changes in our
knowledge, as we could not but thereupon observe in our selves, if they, or any
as fluid finer matter, were the immediate subjects of it.

It is therefore however sufficiently evident, and out of question that the
humane soul (be its own substance what it will) must have an efficient diverse
from matter, which it was our present intendment to evince. And so our way is
clear to proceed to.

The second enquiry whether it be not also manifest from the powers and
operations which XIV.
belong to it as it is reasonable, that it must have had an intelligent
efficient? That is since we find and are assured that there is a sort of Being
in the world (yea somewhat of our selves, and that has best right of any thing
else about us to be called our selves) that can think, understand, deliberate,
argue, etc. And which we can most certainly assure our selves (whether it were
pre-existent in any former state or no) is not an independent or uncaused
Being; and has therefore been the effect of some cause, whether it be not
apparently the effect of a wise Cause.

And this upon supposition of what has been before proved seems not liable to
any the least rational doubt. For it is already apparent that it is not it self
matter; and if it were, it is however the more apparent, that its cause is not
matter. Inasmuch as if it be it self matter, its powers and operations are so
much above the natural capacity of matter, as that it must have had a cause so
much more noble, and of a more perfect nature than that, as to be able to raise
and improve it beyond the natural capacity of matter: which it was impossible
for that it self, to do. Whence it is plain, it must have a cause diverse from
matter.

Wherefore this its immaterial cause must either be wise and intelligent, or
not so. But is it possible any man should ever be guilty of a greater absurdity
than to acknowledge, some certain immaterial Agent destitute of Wisdom, the
only cause and fountain of all that wisdom, that is, or has ever been in the
whole race of mankind. That is as much as to say that all the wisdom of mankind
has been caused without a cause. For it is the same thing after we have
acknowledged any thing to be caused, to say it was caused by no cause, as to
say it was caused by such a cause as has nothing of that in it, whereof we
find somewhat to be in the effect. Nor can it avail any thing, to speak of the
disproportion or superior excellency in some effects to their second, or to
their only partial causes. As that there are sometimes learned children of
unlearned parents. For who did ever, in that case, say the parents were the
productive causes of that learning? or of them as they were learned? Sure that
learning comes from some other cause. But shall it then be said the souls of
men have received their being from some such immaterial Agent destitute of
wisdom; and afterward their wisdom and intellectual ability came some other
way; by their own observation, or by institution and precept from others?
whence then came their capacity of observing, or of receiving such instruction?
Can any thing naturally destitute even of seminal reason (as we may call it) or
of any aptitude or capacity tending thereto, ever be able to make observations,
or receive instructions, whereby at length it may become rational? And is not
that capacity of the soul of man a real something? or is there no difference
between being capable of reason and incapable? what then, did this real
something proceed from nothing? or was the soul it self caused, and this its
capacity uncaused? or was its cause only capable of intellectual perfection,
but not actually furnished therewith? But if it were only capable, surely its
advantages for the actual attainment thereof have been much greater than ours.
Whence it were strange if that capacity should never have come into act. And
more strange that we should know or have any ground to pretend that it has
not. But that there was an actual exercise of wisdom in the production of the
reasonable soul is most evident. For is it a necessary being? that we have
proved it is not. It is therefore a contingent, and its being depended on a
free cause, into whose pleasure, only, it was resolvable, that it should be or
not be. And which therefore had a dominion over its own acts. If this bespeak
not an intelligent Agent, what does?

And though this might also be said concerning every thing else which is not
necessarily; and so might yield a more general argument to evince a free
designing cause; yet it concludes with greater evidence concerning the
reasonable soul; whose powers and operations it is so manifestly impossible
should have proceeded from matter. And therefore even that vain (and refuted)
pretense it self, that other things might, by the necessary laws of its motion,
become what they are, can have less place here. Whence it is more apparent that
the reasonable soul must have had a free and intelligent cause that used
liberty and counsel in determining that it should be, and especially that it
should be such a sort of thing as we find it is. For when we see how aptly its
powers and faculties serve for their proper and peculiar operations, who that
is not besides himself can think that such a thing was made by one that knew
not what he was doing? or that such powers were not given on purpose for such
operations? And what is the capacity but a power that should sometime be
reduced into act, and arrive to the exercise of reason it self?

Now was it possible any thing should give that power that had it not any way?
that is in the same kind, or in some more excellent and noble kind? For we
contend not that this Agent whereof we speak is in the strict and proper sense
rational, taking that term to import an ability or faculty of inferring what is
less known from what is more. For we suppose all things equally known to him
(which so far as is requisite to our present design that is the representing
him the proper object of Religion, or of that honor which the dedication of a
Temple to him imports, we may in due time come more expressly to assert.) And
that the knowledge, which is, with us, the end of reasoning, is in him, in its
highest perfection without being at all beholden to that means; that all the
connection of things with one another lie open to one comprehensive view; and
are known to be connected; but not because they are so. We say, is it
conceivable that man's knowing power should proceed from a cause that has it
not, in the same, or this more perfect kind? And may use those words to this
purpose, not for their authority (which we expect not should be here
significant) but the convincing evidence they carry with them, He that teaches
man knowledge, shall not he know? That we may derive this matter to an issue,
it is evident, the soul of man is not a necessary self-originate thing: And had
therefore some cause. We find it to have knowledge, or the power of knowing
belonging to it. Therefore we say, so had its cause. We rely not here upon the
credit of vulgar maxims (whereof diverse might be mentioned) but the reason of
them; or of the thing it self we allege. And do now speak of the whole entire
cause of this being, the humane soul, or of whatsoever is causal of it; or of
any perfection naturally appertaining to it. It is of an intelligent nature.
Did this intelligent nature proceed from an unintelligent, as the whole and
only cause of it? That were to speak against our own eyes, and most natural
common sentiments. And were the same thing as to say that something came of
nothing. For it is all one to say so, and to say that any thing communicated
what it had not to communicate. Or (which is alike madly absurd) to say that
the same thing was such and not such, intelligent and not intelligent, able to
communicate an intelligent nature (for sure what it does it is able to do) and
not able (for it is not able to communicate what it has not) at the same time.

It is hardly here, worth the while to spend time in countermining that
contemptible Refuge (which is as incapable of offending us, as of being
defended) that humane souls may perhaps only have proceeded in the ordinary
course of Generation from one another. For that none have ever said any thing
to that purpose, deserving a confutation except that some sober and pious
persons, for the avoiding of some other difficulties, have thought it more safe
to assert the traduction of humane souls; who yet were far enough from
imagining that they could be total, or first causes to one another: And doubted
not but they had the constant necessary assistance of that same Being we are
pleading for, acting in his own sphere as the first cause in all such (as well
as any other) productions. Wherein they nothing oppose the main design of this
discourse. And therefore it is not in our way to offer at any opposition unto
them.

But if any have a mind to indulge themselves the liberty of so much dotage as
to say the souls of men were first and only causes to one another. Either they
must suppose them to be material beings. And then we refer them to what has
been already said, showing that their powers and operations cannot belong to
matter, nor arise from it. Or immaterial, and then, they cannot produce one
another in the way of generation. For of what pre-existent substance are they
made? Theirs who beget them? of that they can part with nothing, separability,
at least, of parts being a most confessed property of matter. Or some other?
where will they find that other spiritual subsubstance, that belonged not
inseparably to some individual being before. And besides, if it were
pre-existent, as it must be if a soul be generated out of it, then they were
not the first and only causes of this production.

And in another way than that of generation, how will any go about to make a
soul? Let experience and the making of trial convince the undertakers. By what
power, or by what art will they make a reasonable soul spring up out of nothing?

It might be hoped that thus, without disputing the possibility of an eternal
successive production of souls, this shift may appear vain. But if any will
persist and say that how or in what way soever they are produced; It Is strange
if they need any nobler cause than themselves; for may not any living thing
well enough be thought capable of producing another of the same kind? or no
more than equal perfection with it self? To this we say, besides that no one
living thing is the only cause of another such. Yet if that were admitted
possible what will it avail? For has every soul that has ever existed or been
in being been produced in this way by another? This it were ridiculous to say;
for if every one were so produced, there was then some one before every one.
Inasmuch as that which produces must surely have been before that which is
produced by it. But how can every one have one before it? A manifest
contradiction in the very terms! For then there will be one without the compass
of every one, And how is it then said to be every one? There is then it seems
one, besides or more than all. And so all is not all. And if this be thought a
sophism, let the matter be soberly considered thus. The soul of man is either a
thing of that nature universally (and consequently every individual soul) as
that it does exist of it self necessarily and independently, or not? If it be.
Then we have however a wise intelligent being necessarily existing. The thing
we have been proving all this while. Yet this concession we will not accept,
for though it is most certain there is such a being, we have also proved the
humane soul is not it. Whence it is evidently a dependent being in its own
nature that could never have been of it self, had it not been put into being by
somewhat else. And being so in its own nature, it must be thus with every one
that partakes of this nature. And consequently it must be somewhat of another
nature that did put the souls of men into being. Otherwise the whole stock and
lineage of humane souls is said to have been dependent on a productive cause,
and yet had nothing whereon to depend, And so is both caused by another, and
not caused. And therefore since it is hereby evident it was somewhat else, and
of another nature, than an humane soul by which all humane souls were produced
into being. We again say, that distinct Being either was a dependent caused
Being, or not. If not, it being proved that the soul of man cannot but have had
an intelligent or wise cause, we have now what we seek. An independent
necessary intelligent Being. If it do depend, or any will be so idle to say so.
That however will infallibly and very speedily lead us to the same mark. For
though some have been pleased to dream of an infinite succession of individuals
of this or that kind; I suppose we have no dream as yet ready formed to come
under confutation of infinite kinds or orders of beings gradually superior,
one above another; the inferior still depending on the superior, and all upon
nothing.

And therefore I conceive we may fairly take leave of this argument from the
humane soul, as having gained from it sufficient evidence of the existence of a
necessary Being that is intelligent and designingly active, being guided by
wisdom and counsel in what it does.

We might also, if it were needful further argue the same thing from a power or
ability manifestly superior to, and that exceeds the utmost perfection of
humane nature, viz. that of Prophecy, or the prediction of future
contingencies; yea, and from another that exceeds the whole sphere of all
created nature, and which crosses and countermands the known and stated laws
thereof, viz. that of working miracles; both of them exercised with manifest
design; as might evidently be made appear, by manifold instances, to as many,
as can believe any thing to be true; more than what they have seen with their
own eyes. And that do not take present sense (yea and their own only) to be the
alone measure of all reality. But it is not necessary we insist upon every
thing that may be said; so that enough be said to serve our present purpose.

And that our purpose may yet be more fully served; and such a Being evidenced
to exist as XV.
we may with satisfaction esteem to merit a Temple with us, and the Religion of
it; it is necessary that we add somewhat concerning

9. The Divine Goodness; for unto that eternal Being, whose existence we have
hitherto asserted, Goodness also cannot but appertain together with those his
other Attributes we have spoken of.

It is not needful here to be curious about the usual scholastical notions of
Goodness, or what it imports, as it is wont to be attributed to Being in the
general, what, as it belongs, in a peculiar sense, to intellectual Beings, or
what more special import it may have in reference to this.

That which we at present chiefly intend by it is a propension to do good with
delight; or most freely without other inducement, than the agreeableness of it
to his nature who does it; and a certain delectation and complacency, which,
hence, is taken in so doing. The name of Goodness (though thus it more
peculiarly signify the particular virtue of liberality) is of a significancy
large enough, even in the moral acceptance, to comprehend all other
perfections or virtues, that belong to, or may any way commend the will of a
free Agent. These therefore we exclude not; and particularly whatsoever is wont
to be signified (as attributable unto God) by the names of Holiness [as a
steady inclination unto what is intellectually pure, and comely, with an
aversion to the contrary] Justice as that signifies [an inclination to deal
equally] which is included in the former, yet as more expressly denoting what is
more proper to a Governor over others, viz. [a resolution not to let the
transgression of laws made for the preservation of common order, pass without
due animadversion and punishment:] Truth, whose signification also may be
wholly contained under those former more general terms, but more directly
contains [sincerity, unaptness to deceive, and constancy to ones word.] For
these may properly be styled good things in a moral sense. As many other things
might in another notion of goodness, which it belongs not to our present design
to make mention of. But these are mentioned as more directly tending to
represent to us an amiable object of Religion. And are referred hither, as they
fitly enough may, out of an unwillingness to multiply without necessity,
particular heads or subjects of discourse.

In the mean time, as was said, what we principally intend, is, That the Being
whose existence we have been endeavoring to evince is good, as that imports a
ready inclination of will to communicate unto others what may be good to them;
creating first its own object, and then issuing forth to it in acts of free
beneficence, suitable to the nature of every thing created by it. Which though
it be the primary or first thing carried in the notion of this goodness. Yet
because that inclination is not otherwise good, than as it consists with
holiness, justice and Truth; These therefore may be esteemed secondarily, at
least, to belong to it, as inseparable qualifications thereof.

Wherefore it is not a merely natural, and necessary emanation we here intend,
that prevents any act or exercise of counsel or design; which would no way
consist with the liberty of the Divine will: And would make the Deity as well a
necessary Agent, as a necessary Being; Yea, and would therefore make all the
creatures merely natural and necessary emanations; and so destroy the
distinction of necessary and contingent Beings. And, by consequence, bid fair
to the making all things God. It would infer not only the eternity of the
world, but would seem to infer either the absolute infinity of it, or the
perfection of it, and of every creature in it, to that degree, as that nothing
could be more perfect in its own kind than it is; or would infer the finiteness
of the Divine Being. For it would make what he has done the adequate measure
of what he can do. And would make all his administrations necessary, yea, and
all the actions of men, and consequently take away all Law and Government out
of the world, and all measures of right and wrong, and make all punitive
justice barbarous cruelty. And consequently give us a notion of goodness at
length plainly inconsistent with it self.

All this is provided against by our having first asserted the Wisdom of that
Being, whereunto we also attribute goodness. Which guides all the issues of it
according to those measures or rules which the essential rectitude of the
Divine will gives, or rather is, unto it. Whereby also a foundation is laid of
answering such cavils against the Divine Goodness, as they are apt to raise to
themselves, who are wont to magnify this attribute to the suppression of
others. Which is indeed, in the end, to magnify it to nothing.

And such goodness needs no other demonstration than the visible instances and
effects we have of it, in the creation and conservation of this world; and
particularly, in his large munificent bounty and kindness toward man, whereof
his designing him for his Temple, and residence, will be a full and manifest
proof.

And of all this, his own self-sufficient fullness leaves it impossible to us to
imagine another reason, than the delight he takes in dispensing his own free
and large communications. Besides, that when we see some semblances and
imitations of this goodness* in the natures of some men, which we are sure are
not nothing, they must needs proceed from something, and have some fountain and
original, which can be no other than the common cause and Author of all things.
In whom, therefore, this goodness does firstly and most perfectly reside.

CHAP. IV.
Generally all supposable perfection, asserted of this Being, where, First, a
Being absolutely perfect, is endeavored to be evinced from the (already
proved) necessary Being. Which is shown to import, in the general, The utmost
fullness of Being. Also diverse things, in particular that tend to evince that
general. As that it is, at the remotest distance from no Being. Most purely
actual. Most abstracted Being. The productive and conserving cause of all
things else. Undiminishable. Incapable of addition. Secondly, hence is more
expressly deduced the infiniteness of this Being. An enquiry whether it be
possible the Creature can be actually infinite? Difficulties concerning the
absolute fullness, and Infiniteness of God considered. 2. The onliness of his
Being. The Trinity not thereby excluded.

SOme account has been thus far given of 1.
that Being, whereunto we have been designing to assert the honor of a Temple.
Each of the particulars having been severally insisted on, that concur to make
up that notion of this Being, which was at first laid down. And more largely,
what has been more opposed, by persons of an atheistical or irreligious
temper. But, because in that forementioned account of God, there was added to
the particulars there enumerated (out of a just consciousness of humane
inability to comprehend every thing that may possibly belong to him) this
general suppliment.

[That all other supposable excellencies whatsoever do in the highest
perfection appertain also originally, unto this Being] It is requisite that
somewhat be said concerning this addition. Especially in as much as it
comprehends in it, or may infer, somethings (not yet expressly mentioned) which
may be thought necessary to the evincing the reasonableness of Religion, or our
self-dedication as a Temple to him.

For instance, it may possibly be alleged, that, if it were admitted there is
somewhat that is eternal, uncaused, independent, necessarily existent, that is
self-active, living, powerful, wise, and good. Yet all this will not infer upon
us an universal obligation to Religion, unless it can also be evinced.

1. That this Being is every way sufficient to supply and satisfy all our real
wants and just desires.

2. And that this Being is but one, and so that all be at a certainty where
their Religion ought to terminate. And that the worship of every Temple must
concenter and meet in the same object.

Now the eviction of an absolutely perfect Being would include each of these;
and answer both the purposes which may seem hitherto not so fully satisfied. It
is therefore requisite that we endeavor

First, to show that the Being hitherto described is absolutely or every way
perfect.

Secondly, To deduce, from the same grounds, the absolute infinity, and the
unity (or the onliness) thereof.

And for the former part of this undertaking, II.
It must be acknowledged absolute or universal perfection, cannot be pretended
to have been expressed in any or in all the works of God together. Neither in
number, for ought we know (for as we cannot conceive, nor consequently speak of
Divine perfections, but under the notion of many, whatsoever their real
identity may be, so we do not know, but that within the compass of universal
perfection, there may be some particular ones of which there is no footstep in
the creation, and whereof we have never formed any thought.) Nor (more
certainly) in degree; For surely the world, and the particular creatures in it,
are not so perfect in correspondence to those attributes of its great Architect
which we have mentioned, viz. his Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, as he might have
made them, if he had pleased. And indeed, to say the world were absolutely and
universally perfect, were to make that God.

Wherefore it must also be acknowledged that an absolutely perfect Being cannot
be immediately demonstrated from its effects, as whereto they neither do, nor
is it within the capacity of created nature that they can, adequately,
correspond. Whence therefore, all that can be done for the evincing of the
absolute and universal perfection of God, must be in some other way or method
of discourse.

And though it be acknowledged that it cannot be immediately evidenced from the
Creation, yet it is to be hoped that mediately it may. For from thence (as we
have seen) a necessary self-originate Being, such as has been described, is
with the greatest certainty to be concluded; and, from thence, if we
attentively consider, we shall be led to an absolutely perfect one. That is,
since we have the same certainty of such a necessary self-originate Being as we
have that there is any thing existent at all. If we seriously weigh what kind
of Being this must needs be, or what its notion must import, above what has
been already evinced: We shall not be found, in this way, much to fall short of
our present aim (though we have also other evidence that may be produced in its
own fitter place.)

Here therefore let us a while make a stand, and more distinctly consider how
far we are already advanced, that we may, with the better order and advantage,
make our further progress.

These two things then are already evident.

[First, That there is a necessary Being that has been eternally of it self,
without dependence upon any thing, either as a productive or conserving cause.
And of it self full of activity and vital energy, so as to be a productive and
sustaining cause to other things.]

Of this any the most confused and indistinct view of this world, or a mere
taking notice, that there is any thing in Being, that lives and moves, and
withal that alters and changes, (which it is impossible the necessary Being it
self should do) cannot but put us out of doubt.

Secondly,] That this necessary self-originate, vital, active Being has very
vast Power, admirable Wisdom, and most free and large goodness belonging to
it.] And of this, our nearer and more deliberate view and contemplation of the
world do equally ascertain us. For of these things we find the manifest prints
and footsteps in it. Yea, we find the (derived) things themselves [Power,
Wisdom, Goodness] in the creatures. And we are most assured they have not
sprung from nothing; nor from any thing that had them not. And that which
originally had them, or was their first fountain must have them necessarily,
and essentially (together with whatsoever else belongs to its Being) in and of
it self. So that the asserting of any other necessary being that is in it self
destitute of these things, signifies no more toward the giving any account how
these things came to be in the world, than if no Being, necessarily existing,
were asserted at all. We are therefore, by the exigency of the case it self,
constrained to acknowledge, not only that there is a necessary Being, but that
there is such a one, as could be, and was the fountain and cause of all those
several kinds and degrees of being and perfection that we take notice of in the
world besides. Another sort of necessary Being should not only be asserted to
no purpose, there being nothing to be gained by it, no imaginable use to be
made of it, as a principle that can serve any valuable end. (For suppose such a
thing as necessary matter, it will as has been shown be unalterable; and
therefore another sort of matter must be supposed besides it, that may be the
matter of the universe, raised up out of nothing for that purpose, unto which
this so unwieldy and unmanagable an entity can never serve.) But also it will
be impossible to be proved. No man can be taken with any plausible thew of
reason to make it out. Yea, and much may be said (I conceive with convincing
evidence) against it. As may perhaps be seen in the sequel of this discourse.

In the mean time, that there is, however, a necessary Being, unto which all
the perfections, whereof we have any footsteps or resemblances in the
Creation, do originally and essentially belong, is undeniably evident.

Now, that we may proceed, what can felfessentiate, underived, Power, Wisdom,
Goodness be, but most perfect Power, Wisdom, Goodness? Or such as than which
there can never be more perfect?

For, since there can be no Wisdom, Power, or Goodness, which is not either
original and self-essentiate, or derived and participated from thence? Who sees
not that the former must be the more perfect. Yea; and that it comprehended all
the other (as what was from it) in it self. And consequently that it is simply
the most perfect? And the reason will be the same, concerning any other
perfection, the stamps and characters whereof we find signed upon the creatures.

But that the Being unto which these belong is absolutely and universally
perfect in every kind, must be further evidenced by considering more at large
the notion and import of such a self-originate necessary Being.

Some indeed, both more anciently, So that whatever there is of strength in
that way of arguing, the glory of it cannot be without injury appropriated to
the present age, much less to any particular person therein: It having, since
Anselm, been ventilated by diverse others heretofore D. Scot. Did. 2. Q. 2. Th.
Aquin. P. 1. Q. 2 art 1. contra Gentil. l. 1. c. 10. Bradwarden, l. 1. c. 1.
And by diverse of late, as is sufficiently known, some rejecting, others much
confiding in it, both of these former, and of modern Writers.)
and of late have inverted this course; and from the supposition of absolute
perfection have gone about to infer necessity of existence, as being contained
in the Idaea of the former. But of this latter we are otherwise assured, upon
clearer and less exceptionable terms. And being so, are to consider what
improvement may be made of it to our present purpose.

And in the general, this seems manifestly imported in the notion of the
necessary Being we have already evinced, that it have in it (some way or other,
in what way there will be occasion to consider hereafter) the entire sum and
utmost fullness of Being, beyond which or without the compass whereof, no
perfection is conceivable, or indeed (which is of the same import) nothing.

Let it be observed that we pretend not to argue this from the bare terms
necessary Being, only, but from hence, that it is such, as we have found it.
Though indeed, these very terms import not a little to this purpose. For that
which is necessarily, of it self, without being beholden to any thing, seems as
good as all things, and to contain in it self an immense fullness; being
indigent of nothing. Nor by indigence is here meant cravingness, or a sense of
want only, in opposition whereto, every good and virtuous man has or may
attain, a sort of (...) or self-fulness and be satisfied from himself (which
yet is a stamp of Divinity, and a part of the image of God, or such a
participation of the Divine Nature, as is agreeable to the state and condition
of a creature,) But we understand by it (what is naturally before that) want it
self really, and not in opinion (as the covetous is said to be poor.) On the
other hand we here intend not a merely rational (much less an imaginary) but a
real self-fulness. And so we say, what is of that nature, that it is, and
subsists wholly, and only of it self, without depending on any other, must owe
this absoluteness, to so peculiar an excellency of its own nature, as we cannot
well conceive to be less, than whereby it comprehends in it self, the most
boundless and unlimited fullness of Being, life, power, or whatsoever can be
conceived under the name of a perfection. For taking notice of the existence of
any thing whatsoever, some reason must be assignable, whence it is that this
particular Being does exist? and has such and such powers and properties
belonging to it, as do occur to our notice therein? when we can now resolve its
existence into some cause, that put it into Being, and made it what it is; we
cease so much to admire the thing, how excellent soever it be, and turn our
admiration upon its cause, concluding that to have all the perfection in it
which we discern in the effect, whatsoever unknown perfection (which we may
suppose is very great) it may have besides. And upon this ground we are led,
when we behold the manifold excellencies that lie dispersed among particular
Beings, in this universe, with the glory of the whole, resulting thence, to
resolve their existence into a common cause, which we design by the name of
God. And now considering him as a wise Agent, (which has been proved) and
consequently a free one, that acted not from any necessity of nature, but his
mere good pleasure herein, we will not only conclude him to have all that
perfection and excellency in him, which we find him to have displayed in so
vast and glorious a work; but will readily believe him (supposing we have
admitted a conviction concerning what has been discoursed before) to have a
most unconceivable treasure of hidden excellency and perfection in him, that is
not represented to our view in this work of his. And account, that, he who
could do all this which we see is done, could do unspeakably more. For though,
speaking of natural and necessitated Agents, which always act to their
uttermost, it would be absurd to argue from their having done some lesser
thing, to their power of doing somewhat that is much greater. Yet as to free
Agents, that can choose their own act, and guide themselves by wisdom and
judgment therein, the matter is not so: As when some great Prince bestows a
rich largess upon some mean person, especially that deserved nothing from him,
or was recommended by nothing to his royal favor, besides his poverty and
misery; we justly take it for a very significant demonstration of that princely
munificence, and bounty, which would incline him to do much greater things,
when he should see a proportionable cause.

But now, if taking notice of the excellencies that appear in caused Beings,
and enquiring how they come to exist and be what they are, we resolve all into
their cause; which, considering as perfectly free and arbitrary in all his
communications; We do thence rationally conclude, that if he had thought fit,
he could have made a much more pompous display of himself; and that there is in
him, besides what appears, a vast and most abundant store of undiscovered
perfection.

When next, we turn our enquiry and contemplation, more entirely, upon the
cause. And bethink our selves: But how came he to exist and be what he is?
Finding this cannot be refunded upon any superior cause; And our utmost
enquiry can admit of no other result, but this, that he is of himself what he
is. We will surely say then, he is all in all. And that perfection, which
before we judged vastly great, we will now conclude altogether absolute, and
such beyond which no greater can be thought.

Adding I say to what pre-conceptions we had of his greatness, from the works
which we see have been done by him (for why should we lose any ground we might
esteem our selves to have gained before?) the consideration of of this
necessary self-subsistence: And that no other reason is assignable of his being
what he is, but the peculiar and incommunicable excellency of his own nature.
Whereby he was not only able to make such a world, but did possess eternally
and invariably in himself all that he is and has: We cannot conceive that all
to be less than absolutely universal, and comprehensive of whatsoever can lie
within the whole compass of Being.

For when we find that among all other Beings (which is most certainly true not
only of actual, but all possible Beings also) how perfect soever they are or
may be in their own kinds; none of them, nor all of them together, are, erver
can be, of that perfection, as to be of themselves, without dependence on
somewhat else, as their productive, yea and sustaining cause; we see, besides
that their cause has all the perfection, some way, in it that is to be found
in them all: There is also that appropriate perfection belonging thereto, that
it could be; and eternally is (yea and could not but be) only of it self, by
the underived and incommunicable excellency of its own Being. And surely, what
includes in it all the perfection of all actual and possible Beings, besides
its own (for there is nothing possible which some cause, yea and even this,
cannot produce) and unconceivably more; must needs be absolutely and every way
perfect. Of all which perfections this is the radical one, that belongs to this
common Cause and Author of all things, that he is necessarily, and only
self-subsisting. For if this high Prerogative in point of Being had been
wanting, nothing at all had ever been. Therefore we attribute to God the
greatest thing that can be said or thought, (and not what is wholly diverse from
all other perfection, but which contains all others in it) when we affirm of
him that he is necessarily of himself. For, though when we have bewildered and
lost our selves (as we soon may) in the contemplation of this amazing subject,
we readily indulge our wearied minds the case and liberty of resolving this
high excellency of self or necessary existence in a mere negation, and say that
we mean by it nothing else, than that he was not from another: Yet surely if we
would take some pains with our selves, and keep our slothful shifting thoughts
to some exercise in this matter; though we can never comprehend that vast
fullness of perfection which is imported in it (for it were not what we plead
for, if we could comprehend it.) Yet we should soon see and confess, that it
contains unspeakably more than a negation, even some great thing that is so
much beyond our thoughts, that we shall reckon we have said but a little in
saying we cannot conceive it. And that, when we have stretched our
understandings to the utmost of their line and measure, though we may suppose
our selves to have conceived a great deal, there is infinitely more that we
conceive not.

Wherefore that is a sober and most important truth which is occasionally drawn
forth (as is supposed) from the so admired D. Carts, by the urgent objections
of this very acute (friendly) adversary, That the inexhaustible Ad ob. in Med.
resp. quartae.
power of God is the reason for which he needed no cause; And that since that
unexhausted power, or the immensity of his essence is most highly positive,
therefore he may be said to be of himself positively, i. e. not as if he did
ever by any positive efficiency cause himself (which is most manifestly
impossible) but that the positive excellency of his own being was such, as
could never need, nor admit of being caused.

And that seems highly eternal (which is so Of the Essence and Attributes of
God.
largely insisted on by Doctor Jackson and diverse others) that what is without
cause must also be without limit of being. Because all limitation proceeds from
the cause of a thing, which imparted to it so much and no more; which argument,
though it seem neglected by Des Carts, and is opposed by his Antagonist: Yet I
cannot but judge that the longer one meditates the less he shall understand,
how any thing can be limited ad intra or from it self, etc. As the Author of
the Tentam. Phys. Theol. speaks.

But that we may entertain our selves with some more particular considerations
of this necessary Being; which may evince that general assertion of its
absolute plenitude or fullness of essence. It appears to be such

As is, first, at the greatest imaginable distance from nonentity. For what
can be at a IV.
greater, than that which is necessarily? which signifies as much as whereto
not to be is utterly impossible. Now an utter impossibility not to be, or the
uttermost distance from no Being, seems plainly to imply the absolute plenitude
of all Being. And, if here it be said that, to be necessarily, and of it self,
needs be understood to import no more than a firm possession of that being
which a thing has, be it never so scant or minute a portion of being. I
answer, without insisting upon the ambiguity of the words to be it seems,
indeed so; If we measure the signification of this expression by its first and
more obvious appearance. But if you consider the matter more narrowly, you will
find here is also signified the nature and kind of the Being possessed, as well
as the manner of possession, viz. that it is a Being of so excellent and noble
a kind, as that it can subsist alone without being beholden: which is so great
an excellency as that it manifestly comprehends all other, or is the foundation
of all that can be conceived besides. Which they that fondly dream of necessary
matter, not considering, unwarily make one single atom a more excellent thing,
than the whole frame of heaven and earth. That being supposed simply necessary,
this the meerest piece of hap-hazard, the strangest chance imaginable, and
beyond what any but themselves could ever have imagined. And which being
considered, would give us to understand, that no minute or finite being can be
necessarily.

And hence we may see what it is to be nearer, or at a further distance from
not-being.

For these things that came contingently into being, or at the pleasure of a
free cause, have all but a finite and limited being, whereof, some, having a
smaller portion of being than others, approach so much the nearer to notbeing.
Proportionably, what has its being necessarily and of it self, is at the
farthest distance from no-being, as comprehending all being in it self. Or, to
borrow the expressions, of an elegant Writer, translated into our own Language,
We have much more non-essence than essence; If we have the essence of a Causin.
man, yet not of the Heavens, or of Angels. We are confined and limited within
a particular essence, but God who is what he is comprehends all possible
essences.

Nor is this precariously spoken, or, as what may be hoped to be granted upon
courtesy. But let the matter be rigidly examined and discussed, and the
certain truth of it will most evidently appear. For if any thing be, in this
sense, remoter than other from no-Being, it must either be, what is necessarily
of it self, or what is contingently at the pleasure of the other. But since
nothing is, besides that self-originate necessary Being, but what was from it;
and nothing from it but what was within its productive power; it is plain all
that, with its own Being, was contained in it. And therefore, even in that
sense, it is at the greatest distance from no-Being; as comprehending the
utmost fullness of Being in it self, and consequently absolute perfection. Which
will yet further appear, in what follows. We therefore add,

That necessary Being is most unmixed or V.
purest Being. Without allay. That is pure which is full of it self. Purity is
not here meant in a corporeal sense (which few will think) nor in the moral;
but as with Metaphysicians it signifies simplicity of essence. And in its
present use is more especially intended to signify that simplicity which is
opposed to the composition of act, and possibility. We say then that necessary
Being imports purest actuality. Which is the ultimate and highest perfection of
Being. For it signifies no remaining possibility, yet unreplete, or not filled
up, and consequently the fullest exuberancy and entire confluence of all Being,
as in its fountain and original scurce. We need not here look further to evince
this than the native import of the very terms themselves; necessity and
possibility; the latter whereof is not so fitly said to be excluded the former
(as contingency is) but to be swallowed up of it; as fullness takes up all the
space which were otherwise nothing but vacuity or emptiness. It is plain then
that necessary Being, ingrosses all possible Being, both that is, and (for the
same reason) that ever was so. For nothing can be or ever was in possibility to
come into Being, but what either must spring, or has sprung, from the
necessary self-subsisting Being.

So that unto all that vast possibility, a proportionable actuality of this
Being must be understood to correspond. Else the other were not possible. For
nothing is possible to be produced which is not within the actual productive
power of the necessary Being. I say within its actual productive power, for if
its power for such production were not already actual, it could never become
so, and so were none at all. Inasmuch as necessary being can never alter, and
consequently can never come actually to be, what it, already, is not (upon
which account it is truly said, In aeternis posse and esse sunt idem.)
Wherefore in it, is nothing else but pure actuality, as profound and vast, as
is the utmost possibility of all created or producible Being, i. e. It can be
nothing other than it is, but can do all things (of which more hereafter.) It
therefore stands opposed not only (more directly) to impossibility of Being
(which is the most proper notion of no-Being) but some way, even to possibility
also; That is the possibility of being any thing but what it is; as being every
way complete, and perfectly full already.

Again we might further add, that it is the most abstracted Being, or is Being
in the very VI.
abstract. A thing much insisted on by someof the Schoolmen. And the notion
which with much obscurity they pursue (after their manner) may carry some such
sense as this (if it may throughout be called sense) That whereas no created
nature is capable of any other, than mere mental abstraction, but exists al
ways in concretion with some subject, that, be it never so refined, is grosser
and less perfect than it self; so that we can distinguish the mentally
abstracted essence, and the thing which has that essence, by which concretion
essence is limited, and is only the particular essence of this or that thing,
which has or possesses that essence. The necessary Being is, in strict
propriety, not so truly said to have essence, as to be it; and exist separately
by it self; not as limited to this or that thing. Whence it is, in it self
universal essence, containing therefore (not formally, but eminently) the being
of all things in perfect simplicity. Whence all its own attributes are capable
of being affirmed of it in the abstract, To which purpose we may take notice of
the words of one, not the less worthy to be named, for not being reckoned of
that forementioned order. Si enim denominative de eo quippiam praedicaretur
abstractum esset tum aliud ab ipso, tum ipso prius. Quod same impium est quare
neque ens est led essentia, neque bonus sed bonitas est. Jul. Scal. Exerc. 365.
that it is Wisdom, Power, Goodness, and not only has these, and that, upon
this account, that it is a Being which is necessarily and of it self. For that
which is necessarily and of it self, is not whatsoever it is by the accession
of any thing to it self; whereof necessary Being is incapable. But by its own
simple and unvariable essence. Other Being is upon such terms powerful, wise,
yea, and existent, as that it may cease to be so. Whereas to necessary Being it
is manifestly repugnant and impossible either simply not to be, or to be any
thing else, but what and as it is. And though other things may have properties
belonging to their essence not separable from it, yet they are not their very
essence it self: And, whereas they are in a possibility to loose their very
existence, the knot and ligament of whatsoever is most intimate to their actual
being, all then falls from them together: Here essence, properties, and
existence are all one simple thing that can never cease, decay, or change,
because the whole being is necessary. Now, all this being supposed, of the
force of that form of speech, when we affirm any thing in the abstract of
another, we may admit the common sense of men to be the interpreter. For every
body can tell (though they do not know the meaning of the word abstract) what
we intend when we use that phrase or manner of speaking. As when we say, by way
of hyperbolical commendation, such a man is not only learned, but learning it
self; or he not only has much of Virtue, Justice, and Goodness in him, but he
is Virtue, Justice, and Goodness it self (as was once said of an excellent
Pagan Virtuoso, that I may borrow leave to use that word in the moral sense)
every one knows the phrase intends the appropriating all Learning, Virtue,
Justice, Goodness to such a one. Which, because they know unappropriable to any
man, they easily understand it to be, in such a case, a rhetorical strain, and
form of speech. And yet could not know that, if also they did not understand
its proper and native import. And so it may as well be understood what is meant
by saying of God, he is being it self. With which sense may be reconciled that
of (the so named Dionysius the Areopagite; (...). De Divinis Homi Co. 5.
That God is not so properly said to be of, or be in, or to have (or partake)
of Being as that it is of him, etc. Inasmuch as he is the pre-existent Being to
all Being, i. e. If we understand him to mean all besides his own. In which
sense taking Being, for that which is communicated and imparted, He may truly
be said (as this Author and the Platonists generally speak) Proclus in Plat.
Theol. l. 2. c. 4.
to be super-essential or super-substantial. But how fitly being is taken in
that restrained sense we may say more hereafter.

In the mean time, what has been said concerning this abstractedness of the
necessary Being, has in it some things so unintelligible, and is accompanied
with so great (unmentioned) difficulties (which it would give us, perhaps, more
labor than profit to discuss) and the absolute perfection of God appears so
evidenceable otherwise, by what has been and may be further said, that we are
no way concerned to lay the stress of the cause on this matter only.

Moreover, necessary Being is the cause and author of all Being besides.
Whatsoever is not VII.
necessary is caused; for not having Being of it self, it must be put into
Being by somewhat else. And inasmuch as there is no middle sort of Being
betwixt necessary and not necessary, and, all that is not necessary is caused,
it is plain that which is necessary must be the cause of all the rest. And
surely what is the cause of all being besides its own, must needs, one way or
other, contain its own and all other in it self; and is, consequently,
comprehensive of the utmost fullness of Being. Or is the absolutely perfect
Being, (as must equally, be acknowledged) unless any one would imagine himself
to have got the notice of some perfection that lies without the compass of all
Being.

Nor is it an exception worth the mentioning, that there may be a conception of
possible being or perfection, which the necessary being has not caused. For it
is, manifestly, as well the possible cause of all possible Being and
perfection, as the actual cause of what is actual. And what it is possible to
it to produce it has within its productive power, as has been said before.

And, if the matter did require it, we might say further, that the same
necessary Being, which has been the productive cause, is, also the continual
root and basis of all Being, which is not necessary. For what is of it self and
cannot, by the special privilege of its own Being, but be, needs nothing to
sustain it, or needs not trust to any thing besides its own eternal stability.
But what is not so seems to need a continual reproduction every moment, and to
be no more capable of continuing in Being by it self, than it was by it self of
coming into Being. For (as is frequently alleged by that so often mentioned
Author) since there is no connection betwixt the present and future time, but
what is easily capable of rupture, it is no way consequent that, because I am
now, I shall therefore be the next moment further than as the free Author of my
Being shall be pleased to continue his own most arbitrary influence for my
support. This seems highly probable to be ture, whether that reason signify
any thing or nothing. And that thence also continual conservation differs not
from creation. Which, whether (as is said by the same Author) it be one of the
things that are manifest by natural light; or whether a positive act be
needless to the annihilation of created things; but only the withholding of
influence, let them examine that apprehend the cause to need it. And if upon
enquiry they judge it at least evidenceable by natural light to be so, (as I
doubt not they will) they will have this further ground upon which thus to
reason, That, inasmuch as the necessary Being subsists wholly by it self, and
is that whereon all other does totally depend. It hereupon follows, that it
must, some way, contain in it self all Being. We may yet further add,

That the necessary Being we have evinced, though it have caused, and do
continually sustain all things, yet does not, it self, in the mean time suffer
any diminution. It is not possible, nor consistent with the very terms
necessary Being that it can. It Is true, that if such a thing as a necessary
Atom were admitted, that would be also undiminishable (it were not else an
atom.) But as nothing then can flow from it (as from a perfect parvitude
nothing can) so it can effect nothing. (And the reason is the same of many as
of one.) Nor would undiminishableness, upon such terms, signify any thing to
the magnifying the value of such a trifle.

But this is none of the present case. For our eyes tell us here is a world in
being, which we are sure is not it self necessarily; and was therefore made by
him that is. And that, without mutation or change in him; against which the
very notion of a necessary Being is most irreconciliably reluctant; and
therefore (...). Plotinus Enn. 6. l. 9. c. 9.
without diminution, which cannot be conceived without change.

Wherefore how inexhaustible a fountain of life, being, and all perfection have
we here represented to our thoughts! from whence this vast Universe is sprung,
and is continually springing, and that in the mean time, receiving no recruits
or foreign supplies, yet suffers no impairment or lessening of it self! What is
this but absolute all-fulness! And it is so far from arguing any deficiency or
mutability, in his nature, that there is this continual issue of power and
virtue from him, that it demonstrates its high excellency that this can be
without decay or mutation. For of all this, we are as certain as we can be of
any thing: That many things are not necessarily, That the Being must be
necessary from whence all things else proceed, and that with necessary Being
change is inconsistent. It is therefore unreasonable to entertain any doubt
that things are so, which most evidently appear to be so; only because it is
beyond our measure and compass to apprehend, how they are so. And it would be
to doubt (against our own eyes) whether there be any such thing as motion in
the world, or composition of bodies, because we cannot give a clear account (so
as to avoid all difficulties, and the entanglement of the common sophisms about
them) how these things are performed. In the present case, we have no
difficulty but what is to be resolved into the perfection of the Divine Nature,
and the imperfection of our own. And how easily conceivable is it, that
somewhat may be more perfect than that we can conceive it. If we cannot
conceive the manner of Gods causation of things, or the nature of his causative
influence, it only shows their high excellency, and gives us the more ground
(since this is that into which both his own revelation and the reason of things
most naturally lead us to resolve all) to admire the mighty efficacy of his
allcreating and all-sustaining Will and Word; that in that easy unexpensive
way by his mere fiat, so great things should be performed.

We only say further, That this necessary Being IX.
is such to which nothing can be added; so as that it should be really greater,
or better, or more perfect than it was before. And this not only signifies that
nothing can be joined to it, so as to become a part of it, (which necessary
Being, by its natural immutability manifestly refuses.) But we also intend by
it, that all things else, with it, contain not more of real perfection than it
does alone. Which (though it carries a difficulty with it that we intend not
wholly to overlook when it shall be seasonable to consider it) is a most
apparent and demonstrable truth. For it is plain that all being and perfection
which is not necessary, proceeds from that which is, as the cause of it. And
that no cause could communicate any thing to another which it had not some way
in it self. Wherefore it is manifestly consequent that all other being was
wholly before comprehended in that which is necessary, as having been wholly
produced by it. And what is wholly comprehended of another (i. e. within its
productive power) before it be produced, can be no real addition to it, when it
is.

Now what can be supposed to import fullness of Being and perfection, more than
this [impossibility of addition] or that there can be nothing greater or more
perfect?

And now these considerations are mentioned without solicitude, whether they be
so many exactly distinct heads. For admit that they be not all distinct, but
some are involved with others of them; yet the same truth may more powerfully
strike some understandings in one form of representation, others in another.
And it suffices, that (though not severally) they do together plainly evidence,
that the necessary Being includes the absolute entire fullness of all Being and
perfection actual and possible within it self.

Having therefore thus dispatched that former part of this undertaking; the
eviction of an every way perfect Being, we shall now need to labor little in
the other, viz.

Secondly, the more express deduction of the infiniteness and onliness thereof.
X.


For as to the former of these it is in effect the same thing that has been
already proved. Since to the fullest notion infiniteness, absolute perfection
seems every way most fully to correspond. For absolute perfection includes all
conceivable perfection, leaves nothing excluded. And what does most simple
infiniteness import, but to have nothing for a boundary, or (which is the same)
not to be bounded at all?

We intend not now, principally, infiniteness extrinsically considered, with
respect to time and place, as to be eternal and immense do import: But
intrinsically, as importing bottomless profundity of essence, and the full
confluence of all kinds and degrees of perfection without bound or limit. This
is the same with absoute perfection Which yet, if any should suspect not to be
so, They might, however, easily and expressly prove it of the necessary Being
upon the same grounds that have been already alleged for proof of that.

As that the necessary Being has actuality answerable to the utmost
possibility of the creature; That it is the only root and cause of all other
Being. The actual cause of whatsoever is actually; The possible cause of
whatsoever is possible to be. Which is most apparently true. And has been
evidenced to be so, by what has been said, so lately, as that it needs not be
repeated. That is, in short, that nothing, that is not necessarily, and of it
self, could ever have been or can be, but as it has been, or shall be put into
Being by that which is necessarily and of it self. So that this is as apparent
as that any thing is, or can be.

But now let sober reason judge, whether there can be any bounds or limits set
to the possibility of producible Being, either in respect of kinds, numbers, or
degrees of perfection? Who can say or think, when there can be so many sorts of
creatures produced (or at least individuals of those sorts) that there can be
no more? Or that any creature is so perfect as that none can be made more
perfect? which indeed to suppose were to suppose an actual infiniteness in the
creature. And then it being, however, still, but somewhat that is created or
made, how can its Maker but be infinite? For surely no body will be so absurd
as to imagine an infinite effect of a finite cause.

Either therefore the creature is (or sometime may be actually made) so perfect
that it cannot be more perfect, or not. If not, we have our purpose; that there
is an infinite possibility on the part of the creature always unreplete; and,
consequently, a proportionable infinite actuality of power on the Creators
part. Infinite power, I say, otherwise there were not that (acknowledged)
infinite possibility of producible being. For nothing is producible that no
power can produce. And I say infinite actual power, because the Creator being
what he is necessarily, what power he has not actually, he can never have, as
was argued before.

But if it be said, the creature either is, or may sometime be, actually so
perfect as that it cannot be more perfect. That, as was said, will suppose it
actually infinite, and therefore much more that its cause is so. And therefore
in this way our present purpose would be gained also.

But we have no mind to gain it this latter way, as we have no need. It Is in it
self plain to any one that considers that this possibility on the creatures
part can never actually be filled up; That it is a bottomless abyss, in which
our thoughts may still gradually go down deeper and deeper without end: that
is, that still more might be produced, or more perfect creatures, and still
more, everlastingly without any bound, which sufficiently infers what we aim
at, that the Creators actual power is proportionable.

And indeed the supposition of the former can neither consist with the Creators
perfection, nor with the imperfection of the creature, it would infer that the
Creators productive power might be exhausted, that he could do no more, and so
place an actual boundary to him and make him finite. It were to make the
creature actually full of being, that it could receive no more, and so would
make that infinite.

But it may be said, since all power is in order to act, and the very notion of
possibility imports that such a thing, of which it is said, may some time be
actual; it seems very unreasonable to say that the infinite power of a cause
cannot produce an infinite effect. Or that infinite possibility can never
become infinite actuality. For that were to say and unsay the same thing of the
same. To affirm omnipotency and impotency of the same cause, possibility and
impossibility of the same effect.

How urgent soever this difficulty may seem, there needs nothing but patience
and attentive consideration to disintangle our selves, and get through it. For
if we will but allow our selves the leisure to consider, we shall find that
[power] and [possibility] must here be taken not simply and abstractly, but as
each of them is in conjunction with [infinite.] And what is [infinite,] but
[that which can never be traveled through] or whereof no end can be ever
arrived unto? Now suppose infinite power had produced all that it could
produce, there were an end of it, (i. e. it had found limits and a boundary
beyond which it could not go.) If infinite possibility were filled up there
were an end of that also, and so neither were infinite.

It may then be further urged that there is therefore no such thing as infinite
power or possibility. For how is that cause said to have infinite power, which
can never produce its proportionable effect, or that effect have infinite
possibility, which can never be produced. It would follow then that power and
possibility which are said to be infinite, are neither power nor possibility;
and that infinite must be rejected as a notion either repugnant to it self or
to any thing unto which we shall go about to affix it.

I answer, it only follows, They are neither power or possibility, whereof
there is any bound or end; or that can ever be gone through. And how absurd is
it that they shall be said (as they cannot but be) to be both very vast, if
they were finite; and none at all, for no other reason but their being
infinite! And for the pretended repugnancy of the very notion of infinite, it
is plain, that, though it cannot be, to us, distinctly comprehensible, yet it
is no more repugnant, than the notion of finiteness. Nor when we have conceived
of power in the general, and in our own thoughts set bounds to it, and made it
finite, is it a greater difficulty, (nay, they that try will find it much
easier) again to think away these bounds, and make it infinite. And let them
that judge the notion of infiniteness inconsistent, therefore reject it if they
can. They will feel it re-imposing it self upon them, whether they will or no,
and sticking as close to their minds as their very thinking power it self. And
who was, therefore ever heard of, that did not acknowledge some or other
infinite? Even the Epicureans themselves though they confined their Gods, they
did not the universe. Which, also, though some Peripatetique Atheists made
finite in respect of place, yet in duration they made it infinite. Though the
notion of an eternal world is encumbered with such absurdities and
impossibilities, as whereof there is not the least shadow in that of an every
way infinite Deity.

Briefly, it consists not with the nature of a contingent being to be infinite.
For what is upon such terms, only, in being, is reducible to nothing, at the
will and pleasure of its maker; but it is a manifest repugnancy, that what is at
the utmost distance from nothing (as infinite fullness of being cannot but be)
should be reducible thither.

Therefore actual infinity cannot but be the peculiar privilege of that which
is necessarily.

Yet may we not say, that it is not within the compass of infinite power to
make a creature that may be infinite. For it argues not want of power that this
is never to be done, but a still infinitely abounding surplufage of it, that
can never be drained, or drawn dry. Nor, that the thing it self is simply
impossible. It may be (as is compendiously expressed by that most succinct and
polite Writer D. Boil) in fieri, not in facto esse. That is, it might Now
Bishop of Clogher in his Contemplat. Metaphys.
be a thing always in doing, but never done. Because it belongs to the infinite
perfection of God, that his power be never actually exhausted; and to the
infinite imperfection of the creature, that its possibility or capacity be
never filled up. To the necessary self-subsisting being to be always full and
communicative, to the communicated contingent Being, to be ever empty and
craving. One may be said to have that, some way, in his power, not only which
he can do presently, all at once, but which he can do by degrees, and supposing
he have sufficient time. So a man may be reckoned able to do that, as the
uttermost adequate effect of his wohle power, which it is only possible to him
to have effected with the expiration of his lifes-time. Gods measure is
eternity. What if we say then, this is a work possible to be accomplished, even
as the ultimate proportionable issue of Divine Power (if it were his will, upon
which all contingent being depends, that the creature should be ever growing in
the mean while) at the expiration of eternity? If, then, you be good at
suppositions, suppose that expired, and this work finished both together.

Wherefore if you ask, why can the work of making created being infinite never
be done? The answer will be, because eternity (in every imaginable instant
whereof the inexhaustible power of God can if he will be still adding either
more creatures or more perfection to a creature) can never be at an end.

We might further argue the Infinity of the necessary Being from what has been
said of its undiminishableness by all its vast communications. Its
impossibility to receive any accession For howsoever disputable it may be,
whether whatsoever is infinite can have nothing added to it; yet it is without
dispute, that whatsoever is so full as that nothing can be added to it is
infinite.
to it self by any its (so great productions) both which are plainly
demonstrable (as we have seen) of the necessary Being, even as it is such, and
do clearly (as any thing can) bespeak infinity. But we have thence argued its
absolute perfection which so evidently includes the same thing that all this
latter labor might have been spared, were it not that it is the genius of some
persons not to be content that they have the substance of a thing said, unless
it be also said in their own terms. And that the express asserting of Gods
simple infiniteness, in those very terms, is, in that respect, the more
requisite as it is a form of expression more known and usual.

There are yet some remaining difficulties in the matter we have been
discoursing of; XII.
which partly through the debility of our own minds we cannot but find; and
which partly the subtilty of sophistical wits does create to us. It will be
requisite we have some consideration of, at least, some of them, which we will
labor to dispatch with all possible brevity. Leaving those that delight in the
sport of tying and loosing knots, or of weaving snares, wherein cunningly to
entangle themselves, to be entertained by the Schoolmen; among whom they may
find enough upon this subject to give them exercise unto weariness; and (if
their minds have any relish of what is more savory,) I may venture to say unto
loathing.

It may possibly be here said in short; But what have we all this while been
doing? we have been laboring to prove that necessary Being comprehends the
absolute fullness of all Being: And what does this signify, but that all being
is necessary? That God is all things, and so that every thing is God. That we
hereby confound the being of a man, yea, of a stone, or whatever we can think
of with one another, and all with the Being of God.

And again, how is it possible there should be an infinite self-subsisting
Being. For then how can there be any finite? since such infinite Being includes
all Being, and there can be nothing beyond all.

Here therefore it is requisite, having hitherto only asserted and endeavored
to evince that some way necessary Being does include all being, to show in what
way. And it is plain it does not include all in the same way. It does not so
include that which is created by it, and depends on it, as it does its own,
which is uncreated and independent.

The one it includes as its own or rather as it self, the other, as what it is,
and ever was, within its power to produce. If any better like the terms
formally and virtually they may serve themselves of them at their own pleasure,
which yet, as to many, will but more darkly speak the same sense.

We must here know, the productive power of God terminates not upon himself, as
if he were by it capable of adding any thing to his own appropriate Being;
which is (as has been evinced already) infinitely full and incapable of
addition, and is therefore all pure act: But on the creature, where there is
still a perpetual possibility never filled up; because Divine power can never
be exhausted. And thus all that of Being is virtually in him, which, either
having produced, he does totally sustain, or, not being produced, he can
produce.

Whereupon it is easy to understand how necessary being may comprehend all
Being and yet all being not be necessary. It comprehends all Being besides what
it self is, as having had within the compass of its productive power whatsoever
has actually sprung from it, and having within the compass of the same power
whatsoever is still possible to be produced. Which no more confounds such
produced or producible Being with that necessary being which is its cause, than
it confounds all the effects of humane power with one another, and with the
being of a man, to say that he virtually comprehended them (so far as they were
producible by him) within his power. And is no wiser an inference from the
former, than it would be from this latter, that an house, a book, and a child
are the same thing with one another, and with the person that produced them,
because so far as they were produced by him, he had it in his power to produce
them. And that the effects of Divine power are produced thereby totally,
whereas those of humane power are produced by it but in part only, does, as to
the strength and reasonableness of the argument, nothing alter the case.

And as to the next, that infinite being should seem to exclude all finite. I
confess that such as are so disposed might here even wrangle continually, as
they might do about any thing, in which infiniteness is concerned: And yet
therein show themselves (as Seneca I remember speaks in another case) not a
whit the more learned, but the more troublesome. But if one would make short
work of it, and barely deny that infinite being excludes finite (as Scotus does
little else; Distinct. 2. Q. 2. Q. 1.
besides denying the consequence of the argument by which it was before
enforced, viz. [that an infinite body would exclude a finite; for where should
the finite be when the infinite should fill up all space? And therefore by
parity of reasons, why should not infinite being exclude finite?] showing the
disparity of the two cases) it would perhaps give them some trouble also to
prove it. For which way would they go to work? Infinite self-subsisting Being
includes all Being, very true, and therefore we say it includes finite. And
what then? does it because it includes it, therefore exclude it? And let the
matter be soberly considered, somewhat of finite being and power we say (and
apprehend no knot or difficulty in the matter) can extend so far as to produce
some proportionable effect, or can do such and such things. And what, does it
seem likely then that infinite being and power can therefore do just nothing?
Is it not a reason of mighty force, and confoundingly demonstrative, that an
Agent can do nothing, or cannot possibly produce any the least thing, only
because he is of infinite power?

For if there be a simple inconsistency, between an infinite Being and a
finite, that will be the case; that, because the former is infinite, therefore
it can produce nothing. For what it should produce cannot consist with it (i.
e. even not being finite; and then certainly if we could suppose the effect
infinite, much less.) But what, therefore, is power the less for being
infinite? or can infinite power, even because it is infinite, do nothing? what
can be said or thought more absurd or void of sense? Or shall it be said that
the infiniteness of power is no hinderance but the infiniteness of Being? But
how wild an imagination were that of a finite being that were of infinite
power? And besides, is that power somewhat or nothing? surely it will not be
said it is nothing. Then it is some Being. And if some power be some being,
what then is infinite power, is not that infinite being? And now therefore if
this infinite can produce any thing, which it were a strange madness to deny,
it can at least produce some finite thing. Wherefore there is no inconsistency
between the infinite and finite beings? unless we say the effect produced even
by being produced must destroy, or (even infinitely) impair its cause, so as to
make it cease at least to be infinite. But that also cannot possibly be said of
that which is infinite and necessary, which, as has been shown, cannot, by
whatsoever productions, suffer any diminution or decay. If here it be further
urged. But here is an infinite being now supposed, let next be supposed the
production of a finite. This is not the same with the other; for surely
infinite and finite are distinguishable enough, and do even infinitely differ.
This finite is either something or nothing; nothing it cannot be said; for it
was supposed a Being, and produced; but the production of nothing is no
production. It is somewhat then; here is therefore an infinite Being, and a
finite now besides. The infinite it was said cannot be diminished; the finite,
a real something is added. Is there therefore nothing more of existent Being
than there was before this production? It is answered, nothing more than
virtually was before; for when we suppose an infinite Being, and afterward a
finite. This finite is not to be looked upon as emerging or springing up of it
self out of nothing, or as proceeding from some third thing as its cause, but
as produced by that infinite, or springing out of that, which it could not do,
but as being before virtually contained in it. For the infinite produces
nothing, which it could not produce. And what it could produce was before
contained in it as in the power of its cause. And to any one that attends and
is not disposed to be quarrelsome, this is as plain, and easy to be
understood, as how any finite thing may produce another, or rather more plain
and easy, because a finite Agent does not entirely contain its effect within
it self, or in its own power, as an infinite does. If yet it be again said,
that which is limited is not infinite, but suppose any finite thing produced
into being after a pre-existent infinite, this infinite becomes now limited;
for the being of the finite is not that of the infinite, each has its own
distinct Being.

And it cannot be said of the one, it is the other; therefore each is limited
to it self. I answer, that which was infinite becomes not hereby less than it
was; for it has produced nothing but what was before virtually contained in
it, and still is (for it still totally sustains the other.) But whatsoever it
actually does, it can do, or has within its power: therefore if it were
infinite before, and is not now become less, it is still infinite.

Whefore the true reason why the position of a finite thing after a supposed
all-comprehending infinite does no way entrench upon or detract from the others
all-comprehensive infinity, is, that it was formerly contained, and still is,
within the virtue and power of the other.

It is true, that if we should suppose any thing besides that supposed infinite
to be of it self that would infer a limitation of the former. Infer, I say, not
cause it, that is, it would not make it cease to be all-comprehendingly
infinite, but it would argue it not to have been so before; and that the
supposition of its infinity was a false supposition, because it would then
appear, that the former did not comprehend all being any way in it self.
Somewhat being now found to be in Being, which has no dependence thereon:
whence it would be evident neither can be so. Of which some good use may be
made to a further purpose by and by.

Here only we may by the way annex, as a just corollary from the foregoing
discourse, that as the supposition of necessary self-subsisting matter was
before shown to be a vain, it now also appears plainly to be altogether an
impossible supposition. For since the necessary self-subsisting Being, is
infinite, and all-comprehensive; and if matter were supposed necessary, we must
have another necessary being to form the world inasmuch as matter is not
self-active, much less intelligent (as it has both been proved it cannot be,
and that the Former of this world must be.) It is therefore out of question,
that because both cannot be all-comprehensive, they cannot both be necessary;
Nor can the vastly different kinds or natures of these things salve the
business; for be they of what kinds they will, they are still Beings. Besides,
if matter were necessary, and self-subsisting, every particle of it must be so.
And then we shall have not only two, but an infinite number of such infinites,
and all of the same kind. But Being only of this or that sort (as is apparent
where more sorts do exist than one) could not be simply infinite, except as the
other depends thereon; and as this one is radically comprehensive of all the
rest, that can come under the general and most common notion of Being. For that
there is some general notion, wherein all being agrees, and by which it differs
from no being, is, I think, little to be doubted; how unequally soever, and
dependently, the one upon the other, the distinct sorts do partake therein.
Whereupon the expressions [super-essential] and others like it, spoken of God,
must be understood, as rhetorical strains, importing more reverence, than rigid
truth. Except by essence (as was formerly said) only that which is created be
meant. And that only a purer and more noble kind of essence were intended to be
asserted to him, And we must suppose somewhat agreeable to this to be,
Plottinus his meaning when he denies knowledge to be in God, and yet also
denies that there is in him any ignorance, that is that he means his
intelligence is of an infinitely distinct and more excellent sort from that
which he causes in us, as appears by his annexed reason, (...), Enn. 6. l. 9.
c. 6.
which yet seems also unwarrantable and injuririous that a word of that import
should be so misapplied and transferred from the substance, to signify nothing
but the shadow, rather, of Being. And that they who would seem zealously
concerned to appropriate all Being unto God, should, in the height of their
transport, so far forget themselves, as to set him above all being, and so deny
him any at all. For surely that which simply is above all being is no being.

And as to the unity or onliness rather of this XIII.
being (or of the Godhead) the deduction thereof seems plain and easy from
what has been already proved; that is from the absolute perfection thereof.
For though some do toil themselves much about this matter; and others plainly
conclude that it is not to be proved at all in a rational way, but only by
divine revelation. Yet I conceive, they that follow the method (having proved
some necessary self-subsisting being, the root and original spring of all Being
and perfection actual and possible; which is as plain as any thing can be) of
deducing from thence the absolute all comprehending perfection of such
necessary being will find their work as good as done. For nothing seems more
evident than that there cannot be two (much less more) such Beings. Inasmuch as
one comprehends in it self all being and perfection; for there can be but one
all, without which is nothing. So that, one such being supposed, another can
have nothing remaining to it. Yea so far is it therefore, if we suppose one
infinite and absolutely perfect being, that there can be another independent
thereon (and of a depending infinity we need not say more than we have, which
if any such could be, cannot possibly be a distinct God) that there cannot be
the minutest finite thing imaginable, which that supposed infinity does not
comprehend, or that can stand apart from it, on any distinct basis of its own.
And that this matter may be left, as plain as we can make it; supposing it
already most evident.

That there is actually existing an absolute entire fullness of Wisdom, Power,
so of all other perfection.

That absolute entire fullness of perfection is infinite.

That this infinite perfection must have its primary seat somewhere.

That its primary original seat can be no where but in necessary
self-subsisting Being.

We hereupon add, that if we suppose multitude, or any plurality, of necessary
self-originate Beings concurring to make up the seat or subject of this
infinite perfection. Each one must either be of finite, and partial perfection;
or infinite, and absolute. Not infinite and absolute; because one
self-originate infinitely and absolutely perfect being, will necessarily
comprehend all perfection and leave nothing to the rest. Not finite, because
many finites can never make one infinite; much less can many broken parcels or
fragments of perfection, ever make infinite and absolute perfection: Even
though their number (if that were possible) were infinite. For the perfection
of unity, would still be wanting, and their communication and concurrence to
any work (even such as we see is done) be infinitely imperfect, and impossible.

We might, more at large, and with a (much more pompous) number and apparatus
of arguments, have shown, that there can be no more Gods than one. But to such
as had rather be informed than bewildered and lost, clear proof that is shorter
and more comprehensive, will be more grateful.

Nor does this proof of the uniting of the Godhead any way impugn the Trinity,
which is by Christians believed therein (and whereof some Heathens, as is
known, have not been wholly without some apprehension, however they came by it)
or exclude a sufficient uncreated ground of Trinal distinction. As would be
seen if that great difference of Beings necessary and contingent, be well
stated; and what is by eternal necessary emanation of the Divine Nature, be
duly distinguished from the arbitrary products of the Divine Will. And the
matter be thoroughly examined, whether, herein, be not a sufficient distinction
of that which is increated, and that which is created. In this way it is
possible it might be cleared, how a Trinity in the Godhead may be very
consistently with the unity thereof. But that it is, we cannot know, but by his
telling us so. It being among the many things of God which are not to be known,
but by the Spirit of God revealing and testifying them, in and according to the
holy Scriptures. As the things of a man are not known but by the spirit of a
man. And what further evidence we may justly and reasonably take from those
Scriptures, even in reference to some of the things hitherto discoursed, may be
hereafter shown.

CHAP. V.
Demands in reference to what has been hitherto discoursed, with some
reasonings thereupon: 1. Is is possible, that, upon supposition of This Beings
existence, it may be, in any way suitable to our present state, made known to us
that it does exist? Proved 1. That it may. 2. That, since any other fit way,
that can be thought on, is as much liable to exception as that we have already:
This must be, therefore, sufficient. Strong Impressions. Glorious Apparitions.
Terrible Voices. Surprising Transformations. If these necessary. Is it needful
they be universal? Frequent?

If not, more rare things of this sort not wanting.

2 Demand. Can Subjects, remote from their Prince, sufficiently be assured of
his existence?

3 Demand. Can we be sure there are men on earth?

AND if any should in the mean time, still remain either doubtful, or apt to 1.
cavil, after all that has been said, for proof of that Beings existence which
we have described, I would only add these few things, by way of enquiry or
demand, viz.

First, Do they believe, upon supposition of the existence of such a Being,
that it is possible it may be made known to us, in our present state and
circumstances, by means not unsuitable thereto, or inconvenient to the order and
government of the world, that it does exist? It were strange to say or suppose,
that a Being of so high perfection as this we have hitherto given an account
of, if he is, cannot in any fit way make it known that he is, to an intelligent
and apprehensive sort of creatures.

If, indeed, he is; and be the common cause, Author and Lord of us and all
things (which we do now but suppose. And we may defy cavil to allege any
thing that is so much as colorable against the possibility of the supposition)
surely he has done greater things than the making of it known that he is. It
is no unapprehensible thing. There has been no inconsistent notion hitherto
given of him. Nothing said concerning him; but will well admit that it is
possible such a Being may be now existant. Yea we not only can conceive, but we
actually have (and cannot but have) some conception, of the several attributes
we have ascribed to him; so as to apply them (severally) to somewhat else, if
we will not apply them (jointly) to him. We cannot but admit there is some
eternal necessary Being; somewhat that is of it self, active; somewhat that is
powerful, wise, and good. And these notions have in them no repugnancy to one
another; wherefore it is not impossible they may meet and agree together in
full perfection to one and the same existent Being. And hence it is manifestly
no unapprehensible thing, that such a Being does exist. Now supposing, that it
does exist, and has been to us the cause and Author of our Being; has given
us the reasonable, intelligent nature which we find our selves possessors of;
and that very power whereby we apprehend the existence of such a Being as he is
to be possible (all which we for the present do still but suppose) while also
his actual existence is not unapprehensible, were it not the greatest madness
imaginable to say, that if he do exist, he cannot also make our apprehensive
nature understand this apprehensible thing that he does exist? We will
therefore take it for granted, and as a thing which no man well in his wits
will deny, that upon supposition such a Being, the Cause and Author of all
things do exist, he might, in some convenient way or other, with sufficient
evidence, make it known to such creatures as we, so as to beget in us a
rational certainty that he does exist.

Upon which presumed ground we will only reason thus or assume to it; That
there is no possible, and fit way of doing it; which is not liable to as much
exception, as the evidence we already have. Whence it will be consequent, that
if the thing be possible to be fitly done, it is done already. That is, that if
we can apprehend, how it may be possible such a Being, actually existent, might
give us that evidence of his existence that should be suitable to our present
state, and sufficient to outweigh all objections to the contrary (without
which it were not rationally sufficient.) And that we can apprehend no possible
way of doing this, which will not be liable to the same or equal objections as
may be made against the present means we have for the begetting of this
certainty in us, then we have already sufficient evidence of this Beings
existence. That is such as ought to prevail against all objections, and obtain
our assent that it does exist.

Here it is only needful to be considered what ways can be thought of, which we
will say might assure us in this matter, that we already have not. And what
might be objected against them, equally, as against the means we now have.

Will we say such a Being, if he did actually II.
exist, might ascertain us of his existence by some powerful impression of that
truth upon our minds?

We will not insist, what there is of this already. Let them consider who
gainsay, what they can find of it in their own minds. And whether they are not
engaged by their Atheistical inclinations in a contention against themselves,
and their more natural sentiments: From which they find it a matter of no small
difficulty to be delivered? It was not for nothing, that even Epicurus himself
calls this of an existing Diety, a Proleptical Notion. But you may say, the
impression might have been simply universal, and so irresistible, as to prevent
or overbear all doubt or inclination to doubt.

And, first, for the universality of it, why may we not suppose it already
sufficiently universal? As has been heretofore alleged. With what confidence
can the few dissenting Atheists, that have professed to be of another
persuasion, put that value upon themselves, as to reckon their dissent
considerable enough to implede the universality of this impression. Or what
does it signify more to that purpose, than some few instances may do, of
persons so stupidly foolish as to give much less discovery of any rational
faculty, than some beasts, to the impugning the universal rationality of
mankind?

Besides that, your contrary profession is no sufficient argument of your
contrary persuasion, much less, that you never had any stamp or impression of a
Deity upon your minds, or that you have quite razed it out. It is much to be
suspected that you hold not your contrary persuasion, with that unshaken
confidence, and freedom from all fearful and suspicious mis-givings, as that
you have much more reason to brag of your dis-belief for the strength, than you
have for the goodness of it. And that you have those qualmish fits, which
bewray the impression (at least to your own notice and reflection, if you would
but allow your selves the liberty of so much converse with your selves) that
you will not confess, and yet cannot utterly deface.

But if in this you had quite won the day, and were masters of your design;
were it not pretty to suppose that the common consent of mankind would be a
good argument of the existence of a Deity. If it be so universal as to include
your vote and suffrage (as no doubt it is without you a better than you can
answer) but that when you have made an hard shift to withdraw your assent, you
have undone the Deity and Religion! Does this cause stand and fall with you?
Unto which you can contribute about as much as the fly to the triumph! was that
true before, which now your hard-la-boured dissent has made false?

But if this impression were simply universal, so as also to include you, it
matters not what men would say or object against it; (it is to be supposed they
would be in no disposition to object any thing.) But what were to be said; or
what the case it self, objectively considered, would admit. And though it would
not (as now it does not) admit of any thing to be said to any purpose; yet the
same thing were still to be said that you now say. And if we should but again
unsuppose so much of the former supposition, as to imagine that some few should
have made their escape, and disburdened themselves of all apprehensions of God.
Would they not with the same impudence as you now do, say that all Religion
were nothing else but Enthusiastical Fanaticism? And that all mankind, besides
themselves, were enslaved fools?

And for the mere irresistableness of this impression; It Is true it would take
away all disposition to oppose, but it may be presumed this is none of the
rational evidence which we suppose you to mean; when you admit (if you do
admit) that, some way or other, the existence of such a Being might be
(possibly) made so evident, as to induce a rational certainty thereof. For to
believe such a thing to be true only upon a strong impulse (how certain soever
the thing be) is not to assent to it upon a foregoing reason. Nor can any, in
that case, tell why they believe it, but that they believe it. You will not
sure think any thing the truer for this, only, that such and such believe it
with a sturdy confidence. It Is true that the universality and naturalness of
such a persuasion, as pointing us to a common cause thereof, affords the matter
of an argument, or is a medium not contemptible nor capable of answer, as has
been said before.

But to be irresistibly captivated into an assent, is no medium at all; but an
immediate persuasion of the thing it self without a reason.

Therefore must it yet be demanded of Atheistical persons, what means, that you
yet III.
have not, would you think sufficient to have put this matter out of doubt?
Will you say some kind of very glorious apparitions, becoming the majesty of
such a one as this Being is represented, would have satisfied? But if you know
how to fancy, that such a thing as the Sun, and other luminaries, might have
been compacted of a certain peculiar sort of atoms, coming together of their
own accord; without the direction of a wise Agent: yea and consist so long, and
hold so strangely regular motions;

How easy would it be to object that, with much advantage, against what any
temporary apparition, be it as glorious as you can imagine, might seem to
signify to this purpose.

Would dreadful loud voices proclaiming him to be of whose existence you doubt
have served the turn? It is likely, if your fear would have permitted you to
use your wit, you would have had some subtle inventions how by some odd
rancounter of angry atoms, the air or clouds might become thus terribly vocal.
And when you know already, that they do sometimes salute your ears with very
loud sounds (as when it thunders) there is little doubt, but your great wit can
devise a way, how possibly such sounds might become articulate. And for the
sense and coherent import of what were spoken; you that are so good at
conjecturing how things might casually happen, would not be long in making a
guess that might serve that turn also. Except you were grown very dull and
barren; and that fancy that served you to imagine how the whole frame of the
universe: and the rare structure of the bodies of animals, yea and even the
reasonable soul it self might be all casual productions, cannot now devise how,
by chance, a few words (for you do not say you expect long orations) might fall
out to be sense, though there were no intelligent speaker.

But would strange and wonderful effects that might surprise and amaze you do
the business? we may challenge you to try your faculty, and stretch it to the
uttermost; and then tell us, what imagination you have formed of any thing more
strange and wonderful, than the already extant frame of nature in the whole,
and the several parts of it. Will he that has a while considered the
composition of the world; the exact and orderly motions of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars; the fabric of his own body, and the powers of his soul, expect yet a
wonder to prove to him there is a God?

But if that be the complexion of your minds, that it is not the greatness of
any work, but the novelty and surprisingness of it, that will convince you; It
is not rational evidence you seek. Nor is it your Reason, but your idle
curiosity you would have gratified; which deserves no more satisfaction than
that fond wish, that one might come from the dead to warn men on earth lest
they should come into the place of torment.

And if such means as these that have been mentioned should be thought
necessary, I would ask, are they necessary to every individval person? so as
that no man shall be esteemed to have had sufficient means of conviction who
has not with his own eyes beheld some such glorious apparition; or himself
heard some such terrible voice, or been the immediate witness or subject of
some prodigious wonderful work? Yea, or will tht once seeing, hearing, or
feeling them suffice? Is it not necessary there should be a frequent repetition
and renewal of these amazing things, lest the impression wearing off, there be
a relapse, and a gradual sliding into an oblivion and unapprehensiveness of
that Beings existence, whereof they had, sometime received a conviction. Now if
such a continual iteration of these strange things were thought necessary,
would they not hereby soon cease to be strange? And then if their strangeness
was necessary, by that very thing wherein their sufficiency for conviction is
said to consist, they should become useless. Or, if by their frequent
variations (which it is possible to suppose) a perpetual amusement be still
kept up in the minds of men: and they be always full of consternation and
wonder. Does this temper so much befriend the exercise of Reason? or contribute
to the sober consideration of things? As if men could not be rational without
being half mad. And, indeed, they might soon become altogether so, by being,
but a while, beset with objects so full of terror, as are, by this supposition,
made the necessary means to convince them of a Deity. Now were not that a most
improper course and unsuitable to the nature of man that should rather tend to
destroy his reason or judgment than convince it?
And were this a fit means of ruling the world, of preserving order among
mankind? what business could then be followed? who could intend the affairs of
their callings? who could either be capable of governing, or of being governed
while all men's minds should be wholly taken up either in the amazed view or the
suspenceful expectation of naught else but strange things? To which purpose
much has been of late, with so excellent reason, discoursed by a worthy
Author, that it is Dr. Spencer of Prodigies.
needless here to say more. And the aspect and influence of this state of
things would be most pernicious upon Religion, that should be most served
thereby. And which requires the greatest severity and most peaceful composure
of mind to the due managing the exercises of it. How little would that
contribute to pious and devout converses with God, that should certainly keep
men's minds in a continual commotion and hurry? This course, as our present
condition is, what could it do but craze men's understandings, as a too bright
and dazzling light causes blindness, or any over-excelling sensible object
destroys the sense; so that we should soon have cause to apply the Arabian
Proverb, Shut the windows that the house may be light. And might learn to put a
sense, not intolerable, upon those passages of some mystical Writers D. Areop.
l. de myster. Theol. c. 1.
that God is to be seen in a Divine cloud or darkness, as one (...)
; and with closed eyes, as another Procl. in Plat. Theol. (...).
speaks (though what was their very sense I will not pretend to tell.)

Besides that, by this means, there would naturally ensue the continual
excitation of so vexatious and enthralling passions, so servile and tormenting
fears and amazements; as could not but hold the souls of men under a constant
and comfortless restraint, from any free and ingenuous access to God, or
conversation with him. Wherein the very life of Religion consists. And then to
what purpose does the discovery and acknowledgment of the Deity serve? Inasmuch
as it is never to be thought that the existence of God is a thing to be known
only that it may be known. But that the end it serves for is Religion. A
complacential and cheerful adoration of him and application of our selves with
at once both dutiful and pleasant affections toward him. That were a strange
means of coming to know that he is, that should only tend to destroy or hinder
the very end it self of that knowledge.

Wherefore all this being considered, it is likely it would not be insisted
upon as necessary to our being persuaded of Gods existence, that he should so
multiply strange and astonishing things, as that every man might be a daily
amazed beholder and witness of them.

And if their frequency, and constant iteration be acknowledged not necessary,
but shall V.
indeed be judged wholly inconvenient, more rare discoveries of him in the very
ways we have been speaking of have not been wanting. What would we think of
such an appearance of God as that was upon Mount Sinai? when he came down (or
caused a sensible Glory to descend) in the sight of all that great people!
wherein the several things concurred that were abovementioned! Let us but
suppose such an appearance in all the concurrent circumstances of it as that is
said to have been. That is, we will suppose an equally great assembly or
multitude of people is gathered together, and a solemn forewarning is given and
proclaimed among them by appointed Heralds or Officers of State, that, on such
a prefixed day, now very nigh at hand, the Divine Majesty and Glory (even his
Glory set in Majesty) will visibly appear and show it self to them. They are
most severely enjoined to prepare themselves and be in readiness against that
day. Great care is taken to sanctify the people, and the place, Bounds are set
about the designed Theater of this great appearance. All are strictly required
to observe their due and awful distances, and abstain from more audacious
approaches and gazings; lest that terrible glory break out upon them and they
perish. An irreverent or disrespectful look, they are told, will be mortal to
them, or a very touch of any part of this sacred enclosure. In the morning of
the appointed day, there are thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon
the hallowed Mount. The exceeding loud sound of Trumpet proclaims the Lords
descent. He descends in fire, the flames whereof invelope the trembling Mount
(now floored with a Saphyr pavement clear as the body of heaven.) And ascend
into the middle region or (as it is expressed) into the midst or heart of the
heavens. The voice of words (a loud and dreadful voice) audible to all that
mighty Assembly, in which were 600000 men (probably more than a million of
persons) issues forth from amidst that terrible glory pronouncing to them, that
I am Jehovah thy God. -- And thence proceeding to give them precepts, so plain
and clear, so comprehensive and full, so unexceptionably just and righteous, so
agreeable to the nature of man, and subservient to his good; that nothing could
be more worthy the great Creator, or more aptly suitable to such a sort of
creatures.

It is very likely, indeed, that such a demonstration would leave no spectator
in doubt concerning the existence of God; and would puzzle the Philosophy of
the most skeptical Atheist to give an account, otherwise, of the Phenomenon.
And if such could devise to say any thing that should seem plausible to some
very easy half-witted persons that were not present, they would have an hard
task of it to quiet the minds of those that were; or make them believe this was
nothing else but some odd conjuncture of certain fiery atoms, that by some
strange accident happened into this occursion and conflict with one another; or
some illusion of fancy, by which so great a multitude were all at once
imposed upon. So as that they only seemed to themselves to hear and see what
they heard and saw not. Nor is it likely they would be very confident of the
truth of their own conjecture, or be apt to venture much upon it themselves,
having been the eye and ear-witnesses of these things.

But is it necessary this course shall be taken to make the world know there is
a God? such an appearance indeed would more powerfully strike sense; but unto
sober and considerate Reason were it a greater thing than the making such a
world as this? And the disposing this great variety of particular Beings in it,
into so exact and elegant an order? And the sustaining and preserving it in the
same state through so many ages? Let the vast and unknown extent of the whole,
the admirable variety, the elegant shapes, the regular motions, the excellent
faculties and powers of that unconceivable number of creatures contained in it,
be considered. And is there any comparison between that temporary transient
occasional, and this steady permanent and universal discovery of God? Nor
(supposing the truth of the History) can it be thought the design of this
appearance to these Hebrews was to convince them of the existence of a Deity to
be worshipped; when both they had so convincing evidence thereof many ways
before; and the other Nations, that, which they left, and those whither they
went, were not without their Religion and worship, such as it was. But to
engage them by so majestic a representation thereof, to a more exact
observance of his will, now made known. Though, had there been any doubt of the
former (as we can hardly suppose they could, before, have more doubted of the
being of a God, than that there were men on earth) this might collaterally and
besides its chief intention, be a means to confirm them concerning that alse:
But that it was necessary for that end, we have no pretense to imagine. The
like may be said concerning other Miracles heretofore wrought, that the intent
of them was to justify the Divine Authority of him who wrought them, to prove
him sent by God, and so countenance the Doctrine or Message delivered by him.
Not that they tended (otherwise than on the by) to prove Gods existence. Much
less was this so amazing an appearance needful or intended for that end, and
least of all was it necessary, that this should be Gods ordinary way of making
it known to men that he does exist: So as that for this purpose he should often
repeat so terrible representations of himself. And how inconvenient it were to
mortal men, as well as unnecessary, the astonishment wherewith it possessed
that people is an evidence. And their passionate affrighted wish thereupon, Let
not God any more speak to us, lest we die. They apprehended it impossible for
them to outlive such an other sight!

And if that so amazing an appearance of the Divine Majesty (sometime afforded)
were not necessary, but some way, on the by, useful for the confirming that
people in the persuasion of Gods existence, why may it not be useful also for
the same purpose even now to us? Is it that we think that can be less true now
which was so gloriously evident to be true four thousand years ago? Or is it
that we can dis-believe or doubt the truth of the History? what should be the
ground or pretense of doubt? If it were a fiction, it is manifest it was
feigned by some person that had the use of his understanding, and was not
besides himself, as the coherence and contexture of parts does plainly show.
But would any man not besides himself, designing to gain credit to a forged
report of a matter of fact ever say there were 600000 persons present at the
doing of it?. Would it not rather have been pretended done in a corner? Or is
it imaginable it should never have met with contradiction? That none of the
pretended bystanders should disclaim the avouchment of it? and say they knew
of no such matter? Especially if it be considered that the laws said to be
given at that time; chiefly those which were reported to have been written in
the two Tables, were not so favorable to vicious inclinations, nor that people
so strict and scrupulous observers of them. But that they would have been glad
to have had any thing to pretend against the authority of the legislature, if
the case could have admitted it. When they discovered, in that, and succeeding
time, so violently prone, and unretractable a propension to Idolatry and other
wickednesses directly against the very letter of that Law. How welcome and
covetable a plea had it been, in their frequent and sometimes almost universal
apostasies, could they have had such a thing to pretend that the Law it self
that curbed them was a cheat. But we always find, that though they labored, in
some of their degeneracies, and when they were lapsed into a more corrupted
state, to render it more easy to themselves by favorable glosses and
interpretations. Yet, even in the most corrupt, they never went about to deny
or implead its Divine original; whereof they were ever so Religious asserters
as no people under heaven could be more. And the awful apprehension whereof
prevailed so far with them, as that care was taken (as is notoriously known) by
those appointed to that charge that the very letters should be numbered of the
sacred Writings, lest there should happen any the minutest alteration in them.
Much more might be said if it were needful for the evincing the truth of this
particular piece of History; and its little to be doubted but any man who with
sober and impartial reason considers the circumstances relating to it, the
easily evidenceable antiquity of the Records whereof this is a part. The
certain nearness of the time of writing them to the time when this thing is
said to have been done, the great reputation of the Writer even among Pagans,
the great multitude of the alleged witnesses and spectacles, the
no-contradiction ever heard of. The universal consent and suffrage of that
Nation through all times to this day, even when their practice has been most
contrary to the Laws then given; the securely confident and unsuspicious
reference of later pieces of sacred Scripture thereto (even some parts of the
New Testament) as a most known and undoubted thing. The long series and tract
of time through which that people are said to have had extraordinary and
sensible indications of the Divine Presence, (which if it had been false could
not in so long a time but have been evicted of falsehood.) Their miraculous and
wonderful eduction out of Egypt not denied by any, and more obscurely
acknowledged by some Heathen Writers, their conduct through the Wilderness, and
settlement in Canaan; their constitution and form of Polity known for many Ages
to have been a Theocracy; their usual ways of consulting God upon all more
important occasions. Whosoever I say shall soberly consider these things (and
many more might easily occur to such as would think fit to let their thoughts
dwell a while upon this subject) will, not only, from some of them think it
highly improbable, but, from others of them, plainly impossible that the
history of this appearance should have been a contrived piece of falsehood. Yea,
and though as was said, the view of such a thing with ones own eyes would make
a more powerful impreson upon our fancy or imagination, yet if we speak of
rational evidence (which is quite another thing) of the truth of a matter of
fact that were of this astonishing nature, I should think it were much (at
least if I were credibly told that so many hundred thousand persons saw it at
once, as if I had been the single unaccomcompanied spectator of it my self. Not
to say that it were apparently in some respect much greater; could we but
obtain of our selves to distinguish between the pleasing of our curiosity and
the satisfying of our reason.

So that, upon the whole, I see not why it may not be concluded, with the
greatest confidence, that both the (supposed) existence of a Deity is possible
to be certainly known to men on earth, in some way that is suitable to their
present state, that there are no means fitter to be ordinary than those we
already have, and that more extraordinary additional confirmations are partly
therefore not necessary, and partly not wanting.

Again it may be further demanded (as VI.
that which may both immediately serve our main purpose, and may also show the
reasonableness of what was last said. Is it sufficiently evident to such
Subjects of some great Prince as live remote from the Royal Residence that
there is such a one now ruling over them?

To say no, is to raze the foundation of civil Government, and reduce it wholly
to domestical, by such a Ruler as may ever be in present view. Which yet is,
upon such terms, never possible to be preserved also. It is plain many do
firmly enough believe that there is a King reigning over them; who not only
never saw the King, but never saw the splendour of his Court, the pomp of his
attendance, or it may be, never saw the man that had seen the King? And is not
all dutiful and loyal obedience wont to be challenged, and paid of such as well
as his other Subjects. Or would it be thought a reasonable excuse of
disloyalty, that any such persons should say they had never seen the King or
his Court? Or a reasonable demand, as the condition of required subjection,
that the Court be kept sometime in their Village, that they might have the
opportunity of beholding at least some of the Insignia of Regality, or more
splendid appearances of that Majesty which claims subjection from them? much
more would it be deemed unreasonable and insolent, that every Subject should
expect to see the face of the Prince every day, otherwise they will not obey
nor believe there is any such person. Whereas it has been judged rather more
expedient and serviceable to the continuing the veneration of Majesty (and in a
Monarchy of no mean reputation for wisdom and greatness) that the Prince did
very rarely offer himself to the view of the people. Surely more ordinary and
remote discoveries of an existing Prince and Ruler over them (the effects of
his power, and the influences of his government) will be reckoned sufficient
even as to many parts of his Dominions, that, possibly through many succeeding
generations never had other. And yet how unspeakably less sensible, less
immediate, less constant, less necessary, less numerous are the effects and
instances of regal humane power, and wisdom than of the Divine; which latter we
behold which way soever we look, and feel in every thing we touch or have any
sense of, and may reflect upon in our very senses themselves, and in all the
parts and powers that belong to us. And so certainly that if we would allow our
selves the liberty of serious thoughts, we might soon find it were utterly
impossible such effects should ever have been without that only cause. That
without its influence, it had never been possible, that we could hear, or see,
or speak, or think, or live, or be any thing, nor that any other thing could
ever have been, when as the effects that serve so justly to endear and
recommend to us civil Government (as peace, safety, order, quiet possession of
our rights) we cannot but know are not inseparably and incommunicably
appropriate or to be attributed to the person of this or that particular and
mortal Governor; but may also proceed from another: yea and the same benefits
may (for some short time at least) be continued without any such government at
all. Nor is this intended merely as a rhetorical scheme of speech to beguile or
amuse the unwary Reader: But, without arrogating any thing, or attributing more
to it, than that it is an (altogether inartificial and very defective, but)
true and naked representation of the very case it self as it is. It Is
professedly propounded as having somewhat solidly argumentative in it. That is
that, (whereas there is most confessedly sufficient yet) there is unspeakably
less evidence to most people in the world under civil government; that there
actually is such a government existent over them; and that they are under
obligation to be subject to it; than there is of the existence of a Deity, and
the (consequent) reasonableness of Religion. If therefore the ordinary effects
and indications of the former, be sufficient, which have so contingent and
uncertain a connection with their causes (while those which are more
extraordinary are so exceeding rare with the most) why shall not the more
certain ordinary discoveries of the latter be judged sufficient, though the
most have not the immediate notice of any such extraordinary appearances as
those are which have been before mentioned?

Moreover, I yet demand further, whether it may be thought possible for any one
to have VII.
a full rational certainty that another person is a reasonable creature, and
has in him a rational soul, so as to judge he has sufficient ground and
obligation to converse with him, and carry toward him as a man? without the
supposition of this, the foundation of all humane society and civil
conversation is taken away. And what evidence have we of it, whereunto that
which we have of the being of God (as the foundation of religious and godly
conversation) will not at least be found equivalent?

Will we say that mere humane shape is enough to prove such a one a man? A
Philosopher would deride us, as the Stagyrites Disciples are said to have done
the Platonic man. But we will not be so nice. We acknowledge it is, if no
circumstances concur (as sudden appearing, vanishing, transformation or the
like) that plainly evince the contrary; so far as to infer upon us an
obligation, not to be rude, and uncivil; that we use no violence, or carry our
selves abusively toward one, that, only thus, appears an humane creature. Yea,
and to perform any duty of Justice or Charity toward him within our power,
which we owe to a man as a man. As suppose we see him wronged, or in necessity,
and can presently right, or relieve him; though he do not, or cannot represent
to us more of his case, than our own eyes inform us of. And should an act of
Murder be committed upon one whose true humanity was not otherwise evident,
would he not be justly liable to the known and common punishment of that
offense? Nor could he acquit himself of transgressing the laws of humanity, if
he should only neglect any seasonable act of Justice or Mercy toward him,
whereof he beholds the present occasion.

But if any one were disposed to cavil or play the Sophister; how much more
might be said, even by infinite degrees, to oppose this single evidence of any
ones true humanity; than ever was, or can be brought against the entire
concurrent evidence we have of the existence of God. It is, here, most
manifestly just and equal thus to state the case, and compare the whole
evidence we have of the latter, with that one of the former; Inasmuch as that
one alone, is apparently enough to oblige us to carry toward such a one as a
man. And if that alone be sufficient to oblige us to acts of Justice or Charity
toward man, he is strangely blind that cannot see infinitely more to oblige
him to acts of Piety toward God.

But if we would take a nearer and more strict view of this parallel, we would
state the general and more obvious aspect of this world, on the one hand, and
the external aspect and shape of a man on the other; and should then see the
former does evidence to us an in-dwelling Deity, diffused through the whole,
and actuating every part, with incomparably greater certainty, than the latter
does an in-dwelling reasonable soul. In which way we shall find, what will
aptly serve our present purpose, though we are far from apprehending any such
union of the blessed God with this world, as is between the soul and body of a
man. It is manifestly possible, to our understandings, that there may be, and
(if any history or testimony of others be worthy to be believed) certain to
experience and sense, that there, often, has been, the appearance of humane
shape, and of agreeable actions, without a real man. But it is no way possible
such a world as this should have ever been without God. That there is a world,
proves that eternal Being to exist whom we take to be God; suppose we it as
rude an heap as at first it was, or as we can suppose it; as external
appearance represents to us that creature which we take to be a man; But that,
as a certain infallible discovery, necessarily true. This, but as a probable
and conjectural one, and (though highly probable) not impossible to be false.

And if we will yet descend to a more particular enquiry into this matter,
which way will we fully be ascertained that this supposed man is truly and
really what he seems to be. This we know not how to go about without
recollecting, what is the differencing notion we have of a man that he is
(viz.) a reasonable living creature, or a reasonable soul inhabiting, and
united with a body. And how do we think to descry that, here, which may answer
this common notion we have of a man? Have we any way, besides that discovery,
which the acts and effects of reason do make of a rational or intelligent
Being? We will look more narrowly, i. e. unto somewhat else than his external
appearance: and observe the actions that proceed from a more distinguishing
principle in him; that he reason's, discourse's, does business, pursues
designs; in short he talks and acts as a reasonable creature. And hence we
conclude him to be one, or to have a reasonable soul in him.

And have we not the same way of procedure in the other case. Our first view,
or taking notice of a world, full of life and motion, assures us of an eternal
active Being, besides it; which we take to be God, having now before our eyes a
darker shadow of him; only, as the external bulk of the humane body is only the
shadow of a man. Which, when we behold it stirring and moving, assures us there
is somewhat besides that grosser bulk (that of it self could not so move) which
we take to be the soul of a man. Yet as a principle that can move the body
makes not up the entire notion of this soul; so an eternal active Being, that
moves the matter of the universe, makes not up the full notion of God. We are
thus far sure in both cases, i. e. of some mover distinct from what is moved.
But we are not yet sure (by what we hitherto see) what the one or the other is.
But as, when we have, upon the first sight, thought it was a reasonable soul
that was acting in the former: or a man (if we will speak according to their
sense, who make the soul the man) in order to being sure (as sure as the case
can admit) we have no other way, but to consider what belongs, more
distinguishingly, to the notion of a man, or of a reasonable soul; and observe
how actions and effects, which we have opportunity to take notice of, do answer
thereto, or serve to discover that. So when we would be sure, what that eternal
active Being is (which that it is we are already sure, and) which we have taken
to be God, That I say we may be sure of that also, we have the same thing to do.

That is to consider what more peculiarly belongs to the entire notion of God
(and would even in the judgment of opposers be acknowledged to belong to it)
and see whether his works more narrowly inspected do not bear as manifest
correspondency to that notion of God, as the works and actions of a man do to
the notion we have of him. And certainly, we cannot but find they do correspond
as much. And that upon a serious and considerate view of the works and
appearances of God in the world, having diligently observed, and pondered the
vastness and beauty of this universe, the variety, the multitude, the order,
the exquisite shapes, the numerous parts, the admirable and useful composure of
particular creatures; and, especially, the constitution and powers of the
reasonable soul of man it self, we cannot, surely, if we be not under the
possession of a very voluntary and obstinate blindness, and the power of a most
vicious prejudice, but acknowledge the making sustaining and governing such a
world is as God-like, as worthy of God, and as much becoming him, according to
the notion that has been assigned of him, as at least, the common actions of
ordinary men are of a man; or evidence the doer of them to be an humane
creature. Yea, and with this advantageous difference, that the actions of a man
do evidence an humane creature more uncertainly, and so as it is possible the
matter may be otherwise: But these works of God do with so plain and
demonstrative evidence discover him the Author of them, that its altogether
impossible they could ever otherwise have been done.

Now, therefore, if we have as clear evidence of a Deity as we can have in a
way not unsuitable to the nature and present state of man, and we can have in a
suitable way that which is sufficient.

If we have clear and more certain evidence of Gods government over the world,
than most men have or can have of the existence of their Secular Rulers; yea,
more sure than that there are men on earth, and that thence (as far as the
existence of God will make toward it) there is a less disputable ground for
Religious than for Civil Conversation, we may reckon our selves competently
well ascertained, and have no longer reason to delay the Dedication of a Temple
to him upon any pretense of doubt, whether we have an object of worship
existing yea or no.

Wherefore we may also by the way take notice how impudent a thing is Atheism,
that by the same fulsom and poisonous breath, whereby it would blast Religion,
would despoil man of his reason and apprehensive power, even in reference to
the most apprehensive thing, would blow away the rights of Princes and all
foundations of Policy and Government, and destroy all civil Commerce and
Conversation out of the world, and yet blushes not at the attempt of so foul
things.

And here it may perhaps prove worth our VIII.
while (though it can be no pleasant contemplation) to pause a little, and make
some short reflections upon the Atheistical Temper and Genius, so as therein to
remark some few more obvious characters of Atheism it self.

And first such, as have not been themselves seized by the infatuation, cannot
but judge it a most unreasonable thing, a perverse and crossgrain'd humor,
that so odly writhes and warps the mind of a man, as that it never makes any
effort, or offer at any thing against the Deity, but it therein does (by a
certain sort of serpentine involution and retortion) seem to design a quarrel
with it self: That is, with (what one would think should be most intimate and
natural to the mind of man) his very reasoning power, and the operations
thereof. So near indeeed was the ancient alliance between God and man (his own
Son, his likeness, and living image) and consequently between Reason and
Religion; that no man can ever be engaged in an opposition to God and his
interest, but he must be equally so to himself and his own. And any one that
takes notice how the business is carried by an Atheist, must think in order to
his becoming one, his first plot was upon himself. To assassine his own
intellectual faculty by a sturdy resolution, and violent imposing on himself
not to consider, or use his thoughts, at least with any indifferency, but with
a treacherous pre-determination to the part resolved on beforehand. Otherwise
it is hard to be imagined, how it should ever have been possible, that so plain
and evident proofs of a Deity, as every where offer themselves unto
observation; even such as have been here proposed (that do even lie open for
the most part to common apprehension, and needed little search to find them
out; so that it was harder to determine what not to say than what to say) could
be overlooked.

For what could be more easy and obvious, than, taking notice, that there is
somewhat in Being, to conclude that somewhat must be of it self, from whence,
whatever is not so, must have sprung. That since there is somewhat effected or
made (as is plain, in that some things are alterable, and daily altered which
nothing can be that is of it self, and therefore a necessary Being.) Those
effects have then had an active being for their cause. That since these effects
are, partly, such as bear the manifest characters of wisdom and design upon
them; and are partly, themselves, wise and designing; therefore they must have
had a wisely active and designing cause. So much would plainly conclude the sum
of what we have been pleading for; and what can be plainer or does require a
shorter turn of thoughts? At this easy expense might any one that had a
disposition to use his understanding to such a purpose, save himself from being
an Atheist. And where is the flaw? what Joint is not firm and strong in this
little frame of discourse? which, yet, arrogates nothing to the contriver; for
there is nothing in it worthy to be called contrivance: But things do
themselves lie thus. And what has been further said concerning the Perfection
and Oneness of this Cause of all things (though somewhat more remote from
common apprehension) is what is likely would appear plain and natural to such
as would allow themselves the leisure to look more narrowly into such things.

Atheism, therefore, seems to import a direct and open hostility, against the
most native genuine and facile dictates of common Reason.

And being so manifest an enemy to it, we cannot suppose it should be at all
befriended by it. For that will be always true and constant to it self.
Whatsoever false shows of it a bad cause does sometimes put on. That having yet
somewhat a more creditable name, and being of a little more reputation in the
world, than plain downright madness and folly. And it will appear how little it
is befriended, by any thing that can justly, bear that name; if we consider the
pitiful shifts the Atheist makes for his forlorn cause: And what infirm
tottering supports, the whole frame of Atheism rests upon. For what is there to
be said for their hypothesis, or against the existence of God, and the duness
of Religion?

For there is directly nothing at all. Only a possibility is alleged, things
might be as they are, though God did not exist. And if this were barely
possible, how little does that signify? where Reason is not injuriously dealt
with, it is permitted the liberty of ballancing things equally, and of
considering which scale has most weight. And is he not perfectly blind, that
sees not what violence is done to free reason in this matter? Are there not
thousands of things, not altogether impossible, which yet he would be concluded
altogether out of his wits that should profess to be of the opinion they are or
were actually so? And as to the present case, how facile and unexceptionable,
how plain and intelligible is the account that is given of the original of this
world, and the things contained in it, by resolving all into a Deity, the
Author and maker of them? when as the wild, extravagant suppositions of
Atheists, if they were admitted possible, are the most unlikely that could be
devised. So that, if there had been any to have laid wagers, when things were
taking their beginning; there is no body that would not have ventured thousands
to one that no such frame of things (no not so much as one single Mouse or
Flea) would ever have hit. And how desperate hazards the Atheist runs upon this
mere supposed possibility, it will be more in our way to take notice by and by.

But besides; That pretended possibility plainly appears none at all. It is
impossible any thing should spring up of it self out of nothing. That any thing
that is alterable should have been necessarily of it self, such as it now is.
That what is of it self unactive should be the maker of other things. That the
Author of all the Wisdom in the world should be himself unwise. These cannot
but be judged most absolute impossibilities to such as do not violence to their
own minds; or with whom Reason can be allowed any the least exercise. Wherefore
the Atheistical spirit is most grossly unreasonable in withholding assent, where
the most ungainsayable Reason plainly exacts it.

And are not the Atheists Cavils as despicably silly against the Deity, and
(consequently) Religion? Whosoever shall consider their exceptions against some
things in the notion of God, eternity, infinity, etc. which themselves in the
mean time are forced to place elsewhere, will he not see they talk idly? And as
for such other impeachments of his Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness, as they take
their ground for from the state of affairs, in some respects, in this present
world (many of which may be seen in Lucretius, and answered by Dr. More in his
Dialogues.) How inconsiderable will they be, to any one that bethinks himself
with how perfect and generous a liberty this world was made, by one that needed
it not; who had no design, nor could have inclination, to a fond self-indulgent
glorying, and vaunting of his own work; who did it with the greatest facility,
and by an easy unexpensive vouchsafement of his good pleasure; not with an
operous curiosity, studious to approve it self to the peevish eye of every
froward Momus, or to the nauseous squeamish gust of every sensual Epicure. And
to such as shall not confine their mean thoughts to that very clod or ball of
earth on which they live. Which, as it is a very small part, may, for ought we
know, but be the worst or most abject part of Gods Creation, which yet is full
of his Goodness, and has most manifest prints of his other excellencies
besides; as has been observed. Or, that shall not look upon the present state
of things as the eternal state, but upon this world only as an antichamber to
another, which shall abide in most unexceptionable perfection for ever.

How fond and idle, I say, will all such cavils appear to one that shall but
thus use his thoughts, and not think himself bound to measure his conceptions
of God, by the uncertain rash dictates of men born in the dark, and that talk
at random: Nor shall affix any thing to him which plain Reason does not
dictate, or which he does not manifestly assume or challenge to himself. But
that because a straw lies in my way, I would attempt to overturn heaven and
earth, what raging frenzy is this?

Again it is a base abject temper, speaks a mind sunk and lost in carnality,
and that having dethroned and abjured Reason, has abandoned it self to the
hurry of vile appetite, and sold its liberty, and sovereignty, for the insipid
gustless pleasures of sense: An unmanly thing. A degrading of ones self. For if
there be no God, what am I? A piece of moving thinking clay, whose ill
compacted parts will shortly fly asunder, and leave no other remains of me,
than what shall become the prey and the triumph of worms!

It Is a sad, mopish, disconsolate Temper, Cuts off, and quite banishes all
manly rational joy. All that might spring from the contemplation of the Divine
Excellencies and Glory, shining in the works of his hands. Atheism clothes the
world in black, draws a dark and duskish cloud over all things. Does more to
damp and stifle all relishes of intellectual pleasure, than it would of
sensible, to extinguish the Sun. What is this world (if we should suppose it
still to subsist) without God? How grateful an entertainment is it to a pious
mind to behold his glory stamped on every creature sparkling in every
providence; and by a firm and rational Faith to believe (when we cannot see)
how all events are conspiring to bring about the most happy and blissful state
of things! The Atheist may make the most of this world; he knows no pleasure,
but what can be drawn out of its dry breasts, or found in its cold embraces:
Which yields as little satisfaction, as he finds whose arms aiming to enclose a
dear friend do only clasp a stiff and clammy carcass. How uncomfortable a thing
is it to him, that having neither power nor wit to order things to his own
advantage or content, but finds himself liable to continual disappointments,
and the rencounter of many an unsuspected cross accident, has none to repose
on that is wiser and mightier than himself? But when he finds he cannot command
his own affairs, to have the settled apprehension of an Almighty Ruler that can
with the greatest certainty do it for us, the best way; and will, if we trust
him: How satisfying and peaceful a repose does this yield! And how much the
rather, inasmuch as that filial unsuspicious confidence and trust, which
naturally tends to and begets that calm and quiet rest, is the very condition
required on my part; and that the chief thing I have to do, to have my affairs
brought to a good pass, is to commit them to his management. And my only care
to be careful in nothing. The Atheist has nothing to mitigate the greatness of
this loss, but that he knows not what he loses, which is an allay that will
serve but a little while. And when the most unsupportable pressing miseries
befall him, he must in bitter agonies groan out his wretched soul, without
hope; and sooner die under his burden, than say, Where is God my Maker? At the
best, he exchanges all the pleasure, and composure of mind, which certainly
accompanies a dutiful son-like trust, submission and resignation of our selves,
and all our concernments, to the disposal of fatherly wisdom and love, for a
sour and sullen succumbency to an irresistible fate, or hard necessity, against
which he sees it is vain to contend. So that at the best he only not rages, but
tastes nothing of consolation; whereof his spirit is as incapable, as his
desperate affairs are of redress. And if he have arrived to that measure of
fortitude, as not to be much discomposed with the lighter crosses which he
meets with in this short time of life, what a dreadful cross is it that he must
die! How dismal a thing is a certain never to be avoided death! Against which
as Atheism has not, surely, the advantage of Religion in giving protection: So
it has greatly the disadvantage, in affording no relief. What would the joy be
worth in that hour, that arises from the hope of the glory to be revealed? And
is the want of that the total sum of the Atheists misery at this hour? What
heart can conceive the horror of that one thought if darted in upon him at that
time (as it is strange, and more sad, if it be not) what becomes now of me, if
there prove to be a God! where are my mighty demonstrations upon which one may
venture? and which may cut off all fear and danger of future calamity in this
dark unknown state I am going into? shall I be the next hour nothing or
miserable? Or, if I had opportunity, shall I not have sufficient cause to
proclaim (as Which story I confidently refer to, being of late date, and having
had a certain and circumstantial account of it, by one (a very sober and
intelligent person) who had the Relation from him to whom that dreadful warning
was given, by his then lately deceased associate. But I shall not by a
particular relation gratify the scorn of this sort of men, who taking
advantage from the (sometimes deceived) credulity of well-meaning people, have
but that way of answering all such things by the one word which served once, so
learnedly, to confute Bellarmine.
once one of the same fraternity did, by way of warning, to a surviving
companion) -- A Great and a Terrible God! a Great and a Terrible God! A Great
and a Terrible God!

I only add, It Is a most strangely mysterious and unaccountable Temper. Such as
is hardly reducible to its proper causes. So that it would puzzle any man's
enquiry to find out, or even give but probable conjectures how so odd and
preternatural a disaffection as Atheism should ever come to have place in an
humane mind.

It must be concluded a very complicated disease, and yet when our thoughts
have fastened upon several things that have an aspect that way as none of them
alone could infer it, so it is hard to imagine, how all of them, together,
should ever come to deprave reasonable nature to such a degree.

It Is, first, most astonishingly mavelous (though it is apparent this
distemper has its rise from an ill will) that any man should so much as will,
that which the Atheist has obtained of himself to believe, or affect to be
what he is.

The commonness of this vile disposition of will, does but sorrily shift off
the wonder, and only with those slight and trifling minds that have resigned
the office of judging things to their (more active) senses, and have learned
the easy way of waving all enquiries about common things, or resolving the
account into this only, that they are to be seen every day. But if we allowed
our selves to consider this matter soberly, we would soon find that howsoever
it most plainly appear a very common plague upon the spirits of men (and
universal till a cure be wrought) to say by way of wish, No God, or I would
there were none: Yet by the good leave of them who would thus easily excuse the
thing, the commonness of this horrid evil does so little diminish, that it
increases the wonder. Things are more strange as their causes are more hardly
assignable. What should the reason be, that a Being of so incomparable
excellency, so amiable and alluring glory, purity, love, and goodness is become
undesirable and hateful to his own creatures! That such creatures, his more
immediate peculiar offspring, stamped with his likeness, the so vivid
resemblances of his own spiritual immortal nature, are become so wickedly
unnatural toward their common and most indulgent Parent! what to wish him
dead! to envy life and being, to him from whom they have received their own!
It Is strange as it is without a cause. But they have offended him, are in a
revolt, and sharply conscious of fearful demerits. And who would not wish to
live? and to escape so unsupportable revenge? It Is still strange we would ever
offend such a one! Wherein were his Laws unequal? his Government grievous? But
since we have; this only is pertinent to be said by them that have no hope of
forgiveness, that are left to despair of reconciliation, why do we sort our
selves with Devils? We profess not to be such.

Yea, but we have no hope to be forgiven the sin we do not leave, nor power to
leave the sin which now we love. This, instead of lessening, makes the wonder a
miracle! O wretched forlorn creature! would thou have God out of being for
this? (I speak to thee who do not yet profess to believe there is no God, but
do only wish it.) The sustainer of the world! The common Basis of all Being!
do thou know what thou say? Art thou not wishing thy self and all things
into nothing? This, rather than humble thy self, and beg forgiveness? This!
rather than become, again, an holy, pure, obdeient creature, and again, blessed
in him who first made thee so!

It can never cease, I say, to be a wonder, we never ought to cease wondering
that ever this befell the nature of man, to be prone to wish such a thing that
there were no God!

But this is, it is true, the too common case; and if we will only have what is
more a rarity go for a wonder; How amazing then is it, that if any man would
even never so fain; he ever can make himself believe there is no God! and shape
his horrid course according to that most horrid misbelief! By what fatal train
of causes is this ever brought to pass! Into what can we devise to resolve it?

Why such as have arrived to this pitch are much addicted to the pleasing of
their senses; and this they make their business; so as that, for a long time
they have given themselves no leisure to mind objects of another nature;
especially that should any way tend to disturb them in their easy course: Till
they are (gradually) fallen into a forgetful sleep, and the images of things
are worn out with them; that had only more slightly touched their minds before.
And being much used to go by the suggestions of sense, they believe not what
they neither see nor feel.

This is somewhat, but does not reach the mark; for there are many very great
sensualists (as great as they at least) who never arrive hither, but firmly
avow it that they believe a Deity, whatsoever mistaken notion they have of him;
whereupon they imagine to themselves impunity in their vicious course.

But these, it may be said, have so disaccustomed themselves to the exercise of
their reason, that they have no disposition to use their thoughts about any
thing above the sphere of sense; and have contracted so dull and sluggish a
temper, that they are no fitter to mind or employ themselves in any
speculations that tend to beget in them the knowledge of God, than any man is
for discourse or business when he is fast asleep.

So indeed in reason one would expect to find it, but the case is so much
otherwise, when we consider particular instances, that we are the more
perplexed and entangled in this enquiry, by considering how agreeable it is
that the matter should be thus, and observing that it proves oft-times not to
be so: Insomuch that reason and experience seem herein, not to agree, and hence
we are put again upon new conjectures what the immediate cause of this strange
malady should be.

For did it proceed purely from a sluggish temper of mind, unapt to reasoning
and discourse; the more any were so, the more disposed they should be to
Atheism; Whereas, every one knows that, multitudes of persons of dull and slow
minds to any thing of ratiocination would rather you should burn their houses,
than tell them they did not believe in God; and would presently tell you, it
were pity he should live, that should but intimate a doubt whether there were
a God or no. Yea, and many, somewhat more intelligent, yet in this matter, are
shie of using their Reason, and think it unsafe, if not profane, to go about to
prove, that there is a God, lest they should move a doubt, or seem hereby to
make a question of it. And, in the mean time, while they offer not at
reasoning, they, more meanly, supply that want, after a sorry fashion, from
their education, the tradition of their forefathers common example, and the
universal profession and practice of some Religion, round about them; and it
may be only take the matter for granted, because they never heard such a thing
was ever doubted of, or called in question in all their lives.

Whereas, on the other hand, they who incline to Atheism are, perhaps, some of
them the greatest pretenders to Reason. They rely little upon authority of
former times and ages, upon vulgar principles and maxims, but are vogued great
masters of Reason, diligent searchers into the mysteries of nature, and can
philosophize (as sufficiently appears) beyond all imagination. But it is hoped
it may be truly said for the vindication of Philosophy, and them that profess
it, that modern Atheists have little of that to glory in, and that their chief
endowments are only their skill to please their senses, and a faculty with a
pitiful sort of drollery to tincture their cups, and add a grace to their
(otherwise) dull and flat conversation.

Yet all this howsoever being considered, there is here but little advance made
to the finding out whence Atheism should proceed: For, that want of reason
should be thought the cause, what has been already said seems to forbid. That
many ignorant persons seem possessed with a great awe of a Deity from which
diverse more knowing have delivered themselves. And yet neither does the former
signify any thing (in just interpretation) to the disrepute of Religion. For
truth is not the less true, for that some hold it they know not how or why. Nor
does the latter make to the reputation of Atheism, inasmuch as men otherwise
rational maysometimes learnedly dote. But it confirms us that Atheism is a
strange thing, when its extraction and pedigree are so hardly found out, and it
seems to be directly of the lineage, neither of knowledge nor ignorance,
neither sound Reason nor perfect Dotage.

Nor does it at all urge to say, and why may we not as well stand wondering
whence the apprehension of a God, and an addictedness to Religion should come,
when we find them peculiar, neither to the more knowing, nor the more ignorant.
For they are apparently and congruously enough to be derived from somewhat
common to them both. The impression of a Deity universally put upon the minds
of all men (which Atheists have made a shift to raze out or obliterate to that
degree as to render it illegible) and that cultivated by the exercise of
Reason, in some, and in others, less capable of that help, somewhat confirmed
by education and the other accessaries mentioned above.

Therefore is this matter still most mysteriously intricate that there should
be one temper and persuasion agreeing to two so vastly different sorts of
persons, while yet we are to seek for a cause (except what is most tremendous
to think of) from whence it should proceed, that is common to them both. And
here is in short the sum of the wonder, that any, not appearing very grossly
unreasonable in other matters, (which cannot be denied even of some of the more
sensual and lewder sort of Atheists) should, in so plain and important a case,
be so, beyond all expression, absurd. That they, without scruple, are pleased
to think like other men, in matters that concern and relate to common practice,
and wherein they might more colourably and with less hazard, go out of the
common road. And are here only, so dangerously and madly extravagant. Theirs is
therefore a particular madness, the Dementia quoad hoc. So much the stranger
thing, because they whom it possesses, do only in this one case put off
themselves, and are like themselves, and other men in all things else. If they
reckoned it a glory to be singular they might (as has been plainly shown) more
plausibly profess it as a principle, that they are not bound to believe the
existence of any secular Ruler (and consequently not be subject to any) longer
than they see him, and so subvert all Policy and Government; or pretend an
exemption from all obligation to any act of justice, or to forbear the most
injurious violence toward any man, because they are not infallibly certain any
one they see is an humane wight, and so abjure all morality as they already
have so great a part; than offer with so fearful hazard to assault the Deity
(of whose existence if they would but think a while, they might be most
infallibly assured, or go about to subvert the foundations of Religion. Or, if
they would get themselves glory by great adventures, or show themselves brave
men, by expressing a fearless contempt of Divine Power, and Justice. This
fortitude is not humane. These are without the compass of its object. As
Inundations, Arist. Eth. l. 3.
Earthquakes, etc. are said to be, unto which, that any one should fearlesly
expose himself, can bring no profit to others, nor therefore glory to him.

In all this harangue of discourse the design has not been to fix upon any
true cause of Atheism, but to represent it a strange thing; And an Atheist a
Prodigy, a Monster amongst mankind. A dreadful spectacle, forsaken of the
common aids afforded to other men, hung up in chains, to warn others; and let
them see what an horrid creature, man may make himself by voluntary aversion
from God that made him.

In the mean time they upon whom this dreadful plague is not fallen, may
plainly see before them, the object of that worship which is imported by a
Temple, An existing Deity, a God to be worshipped.

Unto whom we shall yet see further reason to design, and consecrate a Temple
for that end (and even our selves to become such) when we have considered (what
comes next to be spoken of) his Conversableness with men.

CHAP. VI.
What is intended by Gods conversableness with men, considered only as
fundamental and presupposed to a Temple. An account of the Epicurean Deity. Its
existence impossible any way to be proved if it did exist. Nor can be affirmed
to any good intent. That such a Being is not God. That the absolute perfection
proved of God represents him a fit object of Religion. From thence more
particularly deduced to this purpose. His Omnisciency, Omnipotency, Unlimited
Goodness, Immensity. Curcellaeus 's Arguments again this last considered.

NOR is the thing here intended less necessary I.
to a Temple and Religion, than what we have hitherto been discoursing of. For
such a sort of Deity as should shut up it self, and be reclus'd from all
converse with men, would leave us as disfurnish'd of an object of Religion, and
would render a Temple on earth as vain a thing, as if there were none at all.
It were a Being not to be worshipped, nor with any propriety, to be called God
more (in some respect less) than an image or statue. We might, with as rational
design, worship, for a God, what were scarce worthy to be called the shadow of
a man, as dedicate Temples to a wholly unconversable Deity: That is, such a one
as not only will not vouchsafe to converse with men; but, that cannot admit it.
Or whose nature were altogether incapable of such converse.

For that measure and latitude of sense must be allowed unto the expression
[conversableness with men] as that it signify both capacity and propension to
such converse. That God is both, by his Nature, capable of it, and has a
gracious inclination of will thereunto. Yea and we will add (what is also not
without the compass of our present theme, nor the import of this word whereby
we generally express it) that he is not only inclined to converse with men, but
that he actually does it. As we call him a conversable person that upon all
befitting occasions does freely converse with such as have any concern with him.

It will indeed be necessary to distinguish Gods converse with men, into,

That which he has in common with all men: so as to sustain them in their
beings, and some way, influence their actions (in which kind he is also
conversant with all his creatures) and

That which he more peculiarly has with good men.

And, though the consideration of the latter of these will belong to the
discourse concerning his Temple it self, which he has with and in them; yet it
is the former, only, we have now to consider, as presupposed thereto, and as
the ground thereof. Together with his gracious propension to the latter also.

As the great Apostle, in his discourse at Athens, lays the same ground for
acquaintance with God (which he intimates should be set afoot and continued in
another sort of Temple than is made with hands) that he has given to all
breath, and being, and all things, and that he is near and ready (whence they
should therefore seek him, if happily they might feel after him, and find him
out) in order to further converse.

And here, our business will have the less in it of labor and difficulty; for
that we shall have little else to do, besides only the applying of principles
already asserted (or possibly the more express adding of some or other that
were implied in what has been said) to this purpose.

From which principles it will appear, that he not only can, but that (in the
former sense) he does converse with men, and is graciously inclined thereto (in
the latter.) And yet because the former is more deeply fundamental, as whereon
all depends, and that the act of it is not denied for any other reason than an
imagined impossibility; that is, it is not said he does not sustain and govern
the world, upon any other pretense, but that he cannot (as being inconsistent
with his nature and felicity,) This we shall therefore more directly apply our
selves to evince, That his nature does not disallow it, but necessarily
includes an aptitude thereto.

Nor yet though it may be a less laborious work than the former that we have
dispatched, is it altogether needless to deal somewhat more expressly in this
matter. Inasmuch as what opposition has been made to Religion in the world
has for the most part been more expressly directed against this ground of it. I
say more expressly; For indeed by plain and manifest consequence it impugns that
also of Gods existence: That is through this, it strikes at the other. For
surely (howsoever any may arbitrarily, and with what impropriety and latitude
of speech they please, bestow titles and elogies here or there) That being is
not God, that cannot converse with men; supposing them such as what purely and
peculiarly belongs to the nature of man would bespeak them. So that they who
have imagined such a being, and been pleased to call it God, have at once said
and unsaid the same thing. That Deity was but a creature, and that, only, of
their own fancy; and they have by the same breath blown up and blasted their
own bubble, made it seem something, and signify nothing. Have courted it into
being, and rioted it again quite out of it. In their conceit created it a God,
in their practice a mere nullity. And it equally served their turn, and as much
favored the design of being wicked, to acknowledge only a God they could
imagine and dis-imagine at their own pleasure; as to have acknowledged none at
all. It could do no prejudice to their affairs to admit of this fictitious
Deity that they could make be what, or where they pleased. That should affect
ease and pleasure, and (lest his pleasures and theirs should interfere) that
they could confine to remote territories, and oblige to keep at an obedient and
untroublesome distance. Nor, though no imagination could be more madly
extravagant, than that of a God no way concerned in the forming and governing
of the world; and, notwithstanding whom men might take their liberty to do what
they listed; yet, as has been observed long ago, that no opinion was ever so
monstrously absurd, as not to be owned by some of the Philosophers) has not
this wanted patronage, and even among them who have obtained to be esteemed
(not to say idolized) under that name.

Which would be seen if it were worth the while to trouble the Reader with an
account of the Epicurean Deity. As it can only be with this design, that the
representation may render it (as it cannot but do) ridiculous, to sober men;
and discover to the rest the vanity of their groundless, and self-contradicting
hope (still too much fostered in the breasts of not a few) who promise
themselves impunity in the most licentious course of wickedness, upon the
security only of this their own idle dream. That is, that if there be a God
(which they reckon it not so plausible flatly to deny) he is a Being of either
so dull and phlegmatic a temper that he cannot be concerned in the actions and
affairs of men, or so soft and easy that he will not.

But, because his good will alone was not so safely to be relied on, it was
thought the securer way not to let it be in his power, to intermeddle with
their concernments. And therefore being to frame their own God to their own
turn. Thus the matter was, of old, contrived.

First, great care was taken that he be set at a distance remote enough; that
he be complemented out of this world, as a place too mean for his reception,
and unworthy such a presence. They being indeed unconcerned where he had his
residence. So it were not too near them. So that a confinement of him somewhere
Ac designare quidem non licet quibus in locis Dii degant. Cum ne noster quidem
hic mundus, digna sit illorum seeds. Phil. Epicur. Syntag.
was thought altogether necessary.

Secondly, and then, with the same pretense of great observance and respect, it
is judged too great a trouble to him, and inconsistent with the felicity of his
nature and being, that he should have given himself any diversion or
disturbance, by making the world. From the care and labor whereof he is with
all ceremony to be excused. It being too painful and laborious an undertaking
for an immortal and an happy Being. Besides that he was altogether (...).
Laertius, l. 10. Epist. Epicur. ad Pyth^ci -- Quae molitio, quae ferramenta,
qui vectes, quae machinae, qui ministri tanti muneris fuerunt? Vell. apud
Cicer. de natura Deorum.
destitute of instruments, and utensils requisite to so great a performance.

Whence also, thirdly, he was with the same Nihil beatius nihil omnino bonis
omnibus affluentius excogitari potest. Nihil enim agit, nullis occupationibus
est implicatus, etc. Id. (...). Laert. ibid. Itaque imposuistis cervicibis
nostris sempiternum aominum, quem, dies and noctes, timeremus. Quis cnim non
timeat omnia providentem, and cogitantem, and animadvertentem, and omnia ad se
pertinere putantem, curiosum and plenum negotii Deum? Vell. ubi supra. Humana
ante oculos foede cum vita jacere. In terris oppressa gravi sub religione
Primum Graius homo mortalis (meaning Epicurus the first champion of
Irreligion.) Lucret. To which purpose, besides what we have in Laert. (...), l.
10. Much more is collected in the Syntagm. Nam and praestans Deorum natura
hominum pietate coleretur, cum aeterna esset and beatissima. Habet enim
venerationem justam quicquid excellit. Et metus omnis, a vi atque ira Deorum
pulsus esset. Intelligitur enim a beata immortalique natura, and iram and
gratiam segregari. Quibus remotis, nullos a superis impendere metus etc. Sect.
1. cap. 3. An and mundum fecit, and in mundo homines ut ab hominibus coleretur?
At quid Deo cultus hominum confert, beato, and nulla re indigenti? Sect. 2.
cap. 3.
reason to be excused of all the care and encumbrance of government (as indeed,
what right or pretense could he have to the government of a world that chose
him not, which is not his inheritance, and which he never made?) But all is
very plausibly shadowed over with a great appearance of reverence and
veneration, with magnificent elogies of his never interrupted felicity. Whence
also it is made a very great crime not to free even the Divine Nature it self,
from business. Though yet the true ground and root of this Epicurean Faith
does, sometime more apparently discover it self; even an impatiency of the
Divine Government, and a regret of that irksom bondage which the acknowledgment
of a Deity that were to be feared by men would infer upon them.

And therefore fourthly, he is further expressly asserted to be such as need not
be feared; as cares not to be worshipped, as with whom neither anger nor favor
has any place.

So that nothing more of duty is owing to him than a certain kind of arbitrary
veneration, which we give to any thing, or person that we apprehend to excel
us, and to be in some respect better than our selves. An observance merely upon
courtesy. But obedience and subjection to his Government, fear of his
displeasure, expectation of his favor and benefits have no place left them. We
are not obliged to worship him as one with whom we have any concern, and do owe
him no more homage than to the great Mogul, or the Cham of Tartary, and indeed
are less liable to his severity, or capable of his favors than theirs; for of
theirs we are in some remote possibility, of his in none at all. In one word,
all converse between him and man on his part by providence, and on ours by
Religion, is quite cut off. Which evidently appears (from what has been
already collected out of his own words and theirs who pretended to speak that
so adored Authors mind and sense) to be the scope and sum of the Epicurean
doctrine in this matter, and was indeed observed to be so long ago; by one that
we may suppose to have had better opportunity and advantages to know it, than
we: Who discoursing that a man cannot live pleasantly, according to the
principles of Epicurus. And that according to his doctrine beasts are more
happy than men; plainly gives this reason why he says so, viz. that the
Epicureans took away providence. And that (...), etc. Plut.
the design of their discoursing concerning God was that we might not fear him.

Unto which purpose also much more may be seen in the same Author elsewhere,
when he more directly pleads (among diverse more philosophical subjects) on
behalf of Religion against the Epicurean Doctrine which he says they leave to
us in word and show, but, by their Adversus Colotem (...). Unto which purpose
is that also in Tully. At etiam de sanctitate, de pietate adversus Deos libros
scripsit Epicurus. At quomodo in his loquitur? ut Coruncanium aut Scaevulam
Pontifices maximos te audire dicas non eum, qui subtulerit omnem funditus
religionem: Nec manibus ut Xerxes, sed rationibus Templa Deorum and aras
averterit. De natura Deorum.
principles, take away in deed, as they do nanature, and the soul, etc.

It is then out of question that the Doctrine of Epicurus utterly takes away
all intercourse between God and man. Which yet were little worth our notice or
consideration: nor would it answer any valuable end or purpose to revive the
mention of such horrid opinions, or tell the world what such a one said or
thought two thousand years ago. If their grave had been faithful to its trust
and had retained their filthy poisonous savor within its own unhallowed Cell.

But since (against what were so much to have been desired, that their womb
might have been their Grave) their Grave becomes their womb, where they are
conceived and formed anew, and whence by a second birth they spring forth
afresh to the great annoyance of the world, the debauching and endangering of
mankind. And that it is necessary some remedy be endeavored of so mortal an
evil, it was also convenient to run it up to its original. And contend against
it as in its primitive state and vigor.

Wherefore this being a true (though it be a very short) account of the
Epicurean God; resulting all into this shorter sum, That he is altogether
unconversable with men (and such therefore as cannot inhabit their Temple, and
for whom they can have no obligation or rational design to provide any) it will
be requisite in reference hereto, and suitable to our present scope and purpose,
severally to evince these things.

1. That the existence of such a Being as this were impossible ever to be
proved unto men, if it did exist.

2. That, Being supposed, without any good ground; it is equally unimaginable
that the supposition of it ean intend any valuable or good end.

3. That this supposed Being cannot be God, and is most abusively so called; as
hereby, the true God, the cause and author of all things is intended to be
excluded.

4. That it belongs to, and may be deduced from the true notion of God, which
has been given (and proved by parts of a really existent Being) that he is
such as can converse with men.

For the first, That there is no way to prove the existence of such a Being, is
evident. For what ways of proving it can be thought of, which the supposition
it self does not forbid, and reject? Is it to be proved by Revelation? But that
supposes converse with men, and destroys what it should prove, that such a
Being, having no converse with men does exist. And where is that Revelation? Is
it written or unwritten? Or who are its vouchers? Upon what authority does it
rest? who was appointed to inform the world in this matter? was Epicurus
himself the common Oracle? why did he never tell men so? did he ever pretend to
have seen any of these his vogued Gods? No, they are confessed not to be liable
to our sense any more than the Inane it self. And what Miracles did he ever
work to confirm the truth of his Doctrine in this matter? which sure was
reasonably to be expected from one who would gain credit to dictates so
contrary to the common sentiments of the rest of mankind; And that were not to
be proved any other way. And what other way can be devised? can it admit of
rational demonstration? what shall be the medium? shall it be from the cause?
But what cause can (or ever did) he or his followers assign of God? Or from
effects? And what shall they be? When the matter of the whole universe is
supposed ever to have been of it self, and the particular frame of every thing
made thereof to have resulted only of the casual coalition of the parts of that
matter? And no real Being is supposed besides? or shall it be that their Idea
which they have of God includes existence as so belonging to him that he cannot
but exist. But by what right do they affix such an Idea to their petite and
fictitious Deities? How will they prove their Idea true? or are we bound to to
take their words for it? Yea it is easily proved false and repugnant to it
self, while they would have that to be necessarily existent (as they must if
they will have it existent at all) unto which in the mean time they deny the
other perfections which necessary existence has been proved to include. But
how vain and idle trifling is it, arbitrarily, and by a random fancy to imagine
any thing what we please, and attributing of our own special grace and favor
necessary existence to it, thence to conclude that it does exist, only because
we have been pleased to make that belong to the notion of it? What so odd and
uncouth composition can we form any conception of which we may not make exist
at this rate?

But the notion of God is not arbitrary, but is natural, proleptical, and
common to men, impressed upon the minds of all: whence they say it ought not to
be drawn into controversy. What? the Epicurean notion of him? we shall enquire
further into that anon. And in the mean time, need not doubt to say, any man
might, with as good pretense, imagine the ridiculous sort of Gods described in
Cicero's Deos, Strabones, paetulos, naevum habentes, Silos, Flaccos, Frontones,
Capitones, de Natura Deorum, l. 1.
Ironical supposition, and affirm them to exist as they those they have thought
fit to feign, and would impose upon the belief of men. And when they have
fancied these to exist, is not that a mighty proof that they indeed do so?

But that, which for the present we allege, is, that, supposing their notion
were never so absolutely universal and agreeing with the common sentiments of
all other men, they have, yet, precluded themselves of any right to argue, from
its commonness, to the existence of the thing it self. Nor can they, upon their
principles, form an argument thence, that shall conclude or signify any thing
to this purpose. None can be drawn hence, that will conclude immediately, and,
it self, reach the mark; without the addition of some further thing, which so
ill sorts with the rest of their Doctrine that it would subvert the whole
frame. That is, it follows not, that because men generally hold that there is a
God, that therefore there is one, otherwise than as that consequence can be
justified by this plain and irrefragable proof. That no reason can be devised
of so general an agreement, or of that so common an impression upon the minds
of men, but this only; that it must have proceeded from one common cause, viz.
God himself; who having made man, so prime a part of his Creation, has stamped
with his own signature this nobler piece of his workmanship; and purposely made
and framed him to the acknowledgment and adoration of his Maker.

But how shall they argue so, who while they acknowledge a God, deny man to be
his creature? and will have him and all things be by chance, or without
dependence on any Maker? what can an impression infer to this purpose that
comes no one can tell whence or how? But is plainly denied to be from him,
whose being they would argue from it?

The observation of so common an apprehension in the minds of men, might (upon
their supposition) beget much wonder, but no knowledge; and may perplex men
much, how such a thing should come to pass, without making them any thing the
wiser, and would infer astonishment sooner than a good conclusion: or than it
would solidly prove any important truth.

And do they think they have salved the business, and given us a satisfying
account of this matter, by telling us, this impression is from nature (as they
speak.) It were to be wished some of them had told us, or could yet tell us,
what they meant by nature. Is it any intelligent principle? Or was it guided by
any such? If yea, whence came this impression, but from God himself? For surely
an intelligent Being, that could have this universal influence upon the minds
of all men, is much liker to be God than the imaginary entities they talk of,
that are bodies and no bodies, have blood and no blood, members and no members,
are some where, and no where; or if they be any where, are confined to some
certain places remote enough from our world; with the affairs whereof, or any
other, they cannot any way concern themselves without quite undoing and
spoiling their felicity. If they say no, and that nature which put this stamp
upon the minds of men, is an utterly unintelligent thing, nor was ever governed
by any thing wiser than it self. Strange! that blind and undesigning nature,
should, without being prompted, become thus ignorantly officious to these idle
voluptuary Godlings; and should so effectually take course they might be known
to the world, who no way ever obliged it; nor were ever like to do! But to
regress a little, fain I would know what is this thing they call nature? Is it
any thing else than the course and inclination of conspiring Atoms, which
singly are not pretended to bear any such impression; but as they luckily club
and hit together in the composition of an humane soul; by the meerest and
strangest chance that ever happened? But would we ever regard what they say whom
we believe to speak by chance? were it to be supposed that characters and words
serving to make up some proposition or other, were by some strange agitation of
wind and waves impressed and figured on the sand; would we if we really believed
the matter came to pass only by such an odd casualty; think that proposition
any whit the truer for being there, or take this for a demonstration of its
truth, any more than if we had seen it in a Ballad? Because men have casually
come to think so, therefore there are such beings (to be called Gods) between
whom, and them, there never was, or shall be any intercourse or mutual concern.
It follows as well as that because the staff stands in the corner, the morrow
will be a rainy day. The dictates of nature are indeed most regardable things,
taken as expressions of his mind, or emanations from him who is the Author and
God of Nature. But abstracted from him, they are and signify as much as a beam
cut off from the body of the Sun. Or a person that pretends himself an
Ambassador without credentials.

Indeed (as is imported in the words noted Plutarch.
from that grave Pagan a little before) the principles of these men destroy
quite nature it self as well as every thing of Religion. And leave us the names
and show of them, but take away the things themselves. In sum, Though there be
no such impression upon the minds of men as that which they talk of; yet if
there were, no such thing can be inferred from it, as they would infer. Their
principles taking away all connection between the argument and what they would
argue by it.

2. We have also too much reason to add, IV.
That as the supposition of such a Being or sort of Beings can have no
sufficient ground; so it is equally unconceivable that it can be intended for
any good end. Not that we think the last assertion a sufficient sole proof of
this. For we easily acknowledge that it is possible enough men may harmlesly
and with innocent intentions attempt the building very weighty and important
Truths upon weak and insufficient foundations. Hoping they have offered that as
a support unto Truth which proves only an useless cumber. Nor were it just to
impute Treachery where there is ground for the more charitable censure that the
misadventure proceeded only from want of judgment and shortness of discourse.
But it is neither needful, nor seemly, the charity which can willingly wink, in
some cases, should therefore be quite blind. Or that no difference should be
made of well-meant mistakes, and mischief thinly hid, and covered over with
specious pretenses.

And let it be soberly considered, what can the design be, after the cashiering
of all solid grounds for the proving of a Deity, at length to acknowledge it
upon none at all? As if their acknowledgment must oweit self, not to their
reason, but their courtesy. And when they have done what they can, to make the
rest of men believe they have no need to own any God at all, and they can tell
how all that concerns the making and governing the world, may well enough be
dispatched without any. Yet at last they will be so generous as to be content
there shall be one however.

What, I say, can the design of this be, that they who have contended with all
imaginable obstinacy against the most plain and convincing evidences, that do
even defy cavil; have quite fought themselves blind, and lost their eyes in
the encounter: so that they are ready to swear the Sun is a cold of dirt, and
noonday light is to them the very blackness of darkness. They cannot see a
Deity incircling them with the brightest beams and shining upon them with the
most conspicuous glory, through every thing that occurs, and all things that
encompass them on every side. And yet when all is done, and their
thunderstruck eyes make them fancy they have put out the Sun, they have won
the day, have cleared the field, and are absolute victors; they have vanquished
the whole power of their most dreaded enemy, the light that reveals God in his
works. After all this without any inducement at all, and having triumphed over
every thing that looked like an argument to prove it. They vouchsafe to say
however of their own accord There is a God. Surely if this have any design at
all, it must be a very bad one. And see whither it tends. They have now a God
of their own making. And all the Being he has depends upon their grace and
favor. They are not his creatures, but he is theirs. A precarious Deity, that
shall be as long, and what, and where they please to have him. And if he
displease them, they can think him back into nothing. Here seems the depth of
the design. For see with what cautions and limitations they admit him into
being. There shall be a God provided he be not meddlesome, nor concern himself
in their affairs, to the crossing of any inclinations or humors which they are
pleased shall command and govern their lives. Being conscious that if they
admit of any at all, that shall have to do with their concernments, he cannot
but be such as the ways they resolve on will displease. Their very shame will
not permit them to call that God, which if he take any cognizance at all of
their course will dislike it. And herein that they may be the more secure, they
judge it the most prudent course not to allow him any part or interest in the
affairs of the world at all.

Yet all this while they court him at a great rate, and all Religion is taken
away, under pretense of great piety: Worship they believe he cares not for,
because he is full and needs nothing. In this world he must not be, for it is a
place unworthy of him. He must have had no hand in framing. Nor can they think
it fit he should have any in the government of it.

For it would be a great disturbance to him, and interrupt his pleasures. The
same thing as if certain licentious Courtiers impatient of being governed
should address themselves to their Prince in such a form of speech, that it is
beneath him to receive any homage from them, it would too much debase Majesty,
that his Dominions afford no place fit for his residence; and therefore it
would be convenient for him to betake himself into some other Country that has
better air and accommodation for delight. That Diadems and Scepters are
burdensome things. Which therefore if he will quit to them, he may wholly give
up himself to ease and pleasure.

Yea and whatsoever would any way tend to evince his necessary existence, is
with the same courtship laid aside (although if he do not exist necessarily and
of himself, he cannot have any existence at all: For as they do not allow him
to be the cause of any thing, so they assign nothing to be the cause of him)
that is, with pretense there is no need it should be demonstrated, because all
men believe it without a reason; nature having impressed this belief upon the
minds of all; or (which is all one) they having agreed to believe it because
they believe it. But though they have no reason to believe a Deity, they have a
very good one why they would seem to do so, that they may expiate with the
people their irreligion by a collusive pretending against Atheism. And because
they think it less plausible plainly to deny there is a God, they therefore
grant one to please the vulgar, yet take care it shall be one as good as none,
lest otherwise they should displease themselves. And so their credit and their
liberty are both cared for together.

But this covering is too short, and the art V.
by which they would fit it to their design, when it should cheat others,
deceives themselves. For it is most evident.

3. That the Being with the pretended belief whereof they would mock the world
is no God; and that consequently, while they would seem to acknowledge a Deity
they really acknowledge none at all.

Our contest has not all this while been a strife about words; or concerning
the name, but the thing it self. And not whether there be such a thing in being
to which that name may with whatsoever impropriety be given, but whether there
be such a Being as whereto it properly belongs. Supposing and taking for
granted, as a matter out of question, that (even in their own sense) if such a
Being, as we have described do exist; it is most properly God. And that they
will not go about to call it, by another name. Or that they will not pretend
this name agrees to any other thing so fitly as to him. And because we have
already proved this being does exist; and that there can be but one such, it
plainly follows theirs is in propriety of speech (even though he did exist) no
God. And that, much less, should he appropriate the name, and exclude the only
true God. For since the high and dignifying elogies which they are wont to
bestow upon their feigned. Deity do plainly show they would have it thought
they esteem him the most excellent of all existent Beings; if we have proved a
really existent Being to be more excellent than he, it is evident even upon
their own grounds that this is God. Hither the Deity must be deferred. And
theirs must yield, and give out. Inasmuch as we cannot suppose them so void of
common sense as to say the less excellent Being is God; and the more excellent
is no God. But if they should be so, whereas the controversy is not about the
name, we have our main purpose in having proved there is, a being actually
existent that has all the real excellencies which they ascribe to their
Deities, and infinitely more. And as concerning the name, who made them
dictators to all the world? and the sole judges of the propriety of words? Or
with what right or pretense will they assume so much to themselves? so as
against the rest of the world to name that God, from which they cut off the
principal perfections wont to be signified by that name? And if we speak of
such perfections as tend to infer and establish Religion and Providence. Who
but themselves did ever call that God, in the eminent sense that they supposed
could not hear prayers, and thereupon dispense favors, relieve the afficted,
supply the indigent, and receive suitable acknowledgments? They indeed (says a
famed Writer of Roman History) that exercise themselves in the Atheistical
sorts of Philosophy (...), etc.

D. Halicarnass. Ant. Romans l 2.


(if we may call that Philosophy) as they are wont to jeer at all appearances
of the Gods, whether among the Greeks or the Barbarians will make themselves
matter of laughter of our Histories, not thinking that any God takes care of
any man. -- Let the story he there tells shift for it self, in the mean time it
appears they escaped not the infamy of Atheists, who (what ever Deities they
might imagine besides) did deny Gods presence and regard to men. Which sort of
persons he elsewhere often animadverts upon.

But do we need to insist that all the rest of the world acknowledged no Gods,
whom they did not also worship? what meant their Temples, and Altars, their
Prayers and Sacrifices? or did they take him for God, whom they believed to
take no care of them, or from whom they expected no advantage? Even the
Barbarous Scythians themselves understood it most inseparably to belong to a
Deity to be beneficent when they upbraidingly tell Alexander, That if he were a
God (as they it seems had See their Ambassadors Oration in Q. Curtius.
heard he vogued himself) he should bestow benefits upon men, and not take from
them what was their own.

And by the way it is observable how contradictious and repugnant, the
Epicurean sentiments are, in this, even to themselves: that speaking of
friendship (of which they say many Lib. non posse suaviter vivi, etc.
generous and brave things) they (gallantly) profess (as Plutarch testifies of
them) that it is a more pleasant thing to benefit others than to receive
benefits ones self. They yet while they Vid. and lib. maxim cum princip. viris
Pbil. etc.
seem so greatly concerned that their Gods be every way most perfectly happy
deny to them this highest and most excellent part of felicity. that a virtuous
man may a great deal more benefit the world, than they; and, consequently, have
more pure and lively relishes of a genuine and refined pleasure.

Upon the whole, it is manifest they so maim the notion of God, as to make it
quite another thing. And if they think to wipe off any thing of the foul and
odious blot wherewith their avowed irreligion has stained their name and
memory, by the acknowledgment of such a God: They effect the like thing by it,
and gain as much to the reputation of their piety, as he should, of his
loyalty, who being accused of Treason against his Prince, shall think to
vindicate himself, by professing solemnly to own the King. Provided you only
mean by it the King of Clubs; or any such painted one the pack affords.

But here it may be demanded, is every misapprehension of God to be understood
as a denial of his Being? If so, whom can we undertake to assoil of Atheism? or
who can certainly acquit himself? For how impossible is it to be sure we have
no untrue conception of a Being so infinitely, by our own confession, above all
our thoughts? Or how is it to be avoided, in somewhat or other to think amiss
of so unknown and incomprehensibly excellent a Being? Either by detracting
somewhat that belongs to it, or attributing somewhat that belongs not? And
since many, we are sure, have thought and spoken unworthily of God, besides
Epicureans, are all these to go into the account of Atheists? Or whereas it is
commonly wont to be said, whatsoever is in God, is God: how can they who deny
any thing of him, which is really in him be excused of denying his whole being?
or where will we fix the bounds of our censure?

Many things should be said (if we will speak at all) to so manifold an
enquiry. But it belongs not to the design of this discourse to examine and
discuss all men's sentiments of God, that have been exposed to the view of the
world; or arbitrate among the dissenting parties. Much less to explain or abet
every School-maxim that has reference to this theme. The Authors or lovers
whereof will be sufficiently prompted by their own Genius to do, at least as
much as can be requisite herein. But whatever the real sameness is supposed to
be, of the things attributed to God, it is acknowledged we cannot but conceive
of them as diverse. And so, that our conception of any one is not adequate to
the entire object (which is confessed incomprehensible.) Yet any one attribute
gives a true notion of the object so far as it reaches, though not a full. As I
may be said truly to see a man, when I only see his face, and view not every
part and limb; or to know him, while yet I have not had opportunity to discern
every quality in his temper, and what his dispositions and inclinations in all
respects are. Moreover it is one thing to deny any Divine perfection, another
only not to know it.

And such mere nescience is so far from being guilty of the horrid crime of
Atheism, that it is not so much as culpable further than as it is obstinately
persisted in against sufficient evidence: for we are not obliged to know every
thing, but what is to us knowable, and what we are concerned to know. Again
(and which is most considerable to our purpose) we are not concerned to know
what God is in himself, otherwise than as we may thereby know what he is in
relation to us, viz. as he is the Author of our Beings, the governor of our
lives and actions, and thereupon the object of our Religion. For a religious
respect unto him is the very end of that knowledge. Now, if any other than that
sort of persons we oppose have taken up apprehensions of him, not so suitable to
that end; it were to be wished they saw it, and would unthink all those
thoughts? But surely, they who most professedly contend against the very
notions themselves which directly influence all our practice toward God, so
considered, would suggest such as are wholly inconsistent therewith, who oppose
the knowledge of God to the end of that knowledge; and do not merely mistake
the way to that end, while they are aiming at it, but most avowedly resist and
disclaim the end it self; are to be distinguished from them who professedly
intend that same end, only see not wherein their misapprehensions are
prejudicial and repugnant to it: otherwise are ready to reject them. And the
former are therefore most justly to be singled out and designed the objects of
our directest opposition. Nor are they so fitly to be opposed under any other
notion as that of Atheists. For since our knowledge of God ought chiefly to
respect him in that forementioned relative consideration, and the enquiry what
is God? signifies, as it concerns us, what is the object of Religion? They
denying any such thing, deny there is a God. Nor do they deny him in that
relative consideration only; but (as every relation is founded in somewhat that
is absolute) the very reason of their denying him, so, is that they deny in him
those absolute and positive perfections that render him such, as certain of
those do that have been proved to belong to him. Which is that we have next to
consider, viz.

4. That it may evidently be deduced from what has been said, tending to prove
those VI.
things of God which are included in the notion of him, and from that notion it
self, that he is such as can converse with men.

That is, having proved [that there is an eternal self-subsisting independent
necessary being of so great activity, life, power, wisdom, and goodness as to
have been the maker of this world] And by this medium [that we see this world
is in being, which otherwise could never have been, much less such as we see it
is.] It plainly follows that this great Creator can have influence upon the
Creatures he has made in a way suitable to their natures. It follows I say from
the same medium [the present visible existence of this world which could not
otherwise be now in being] that he can thus have influence upon his creatures:
For it is hence manifest that he does; they depend on him; and are sustained by
him: Nor could more subsist by themselves than they could make themselves, or
of themselves have sprung out of nothing.

And if it were possible they could, being raised up into Being, continue in
Being of themselves: Yet since our present question is not concerning what they
need, but what God can do. And our adversaries in the present cause, do not (as
has been noted) upon any other pretense deny that he does concern himself in
the affairs of the universe, but that he cannot, (that is, that it consists not
with his felicity, and he cannot, not be happy.) Is it not plain that he can
with the same facility, continue the influence which he at first gave forth?
And with as little prejudice to his felicity? For if it be necessary to him to
be happy, or impossible not to be so; he must be ever so. His happiness was not
capable of being discontinued so long as while he made the world, settled the
several orders and kinds, and formed the first individuals of every kind of
creatures. Therefore having done this, and without diminution to his happiness,
was it a more toilsome and less tolerable labor to keep things as they were,
than to make them so? If it was (which no man that understands common sense
would say) surely that blind thing which they more blindly call nature (not
understanding or being able to tell what they mean by it) and would have be the
only cause of all things, acting at first to the uttermost, and having no way
to recruit its vigor and reinforce it self, its labor and business being so
much increased, had jaded and grown weary; had given out, and patiently
suffered all things to dissolve and relapse into the old chaos long ago. But if
the labor was not greater to continue things in the state wherein they were
made than to make them, surely a wise intelligent Deity, which we have proved
made them, could as well sustain them being made; as their brutal and (as
unintelligible as) unintelligent nature do both.

So much then of intercourse, God could have with his creatures as his
continual communication of his influence to be received by them amounts to. And
then, man, not being excluded their number, must share in this possible
privilege according to the capacity of his nature.

And inasmuch as we have also proved (more particularly) concerning man, that
he immediately owes the peculiar excellencies of his intelligent nature, as
it is such to God only. It is apparently consequent, that having formed this his
more excellent creature according to his own more express likeness, stamped it
with the glorious characters of his living image, given it a nature suitable to
his own, and thereby made it capable of rational and intelligent converse with
him. He has it ever in his power to maintain a continual converse with this
creature, by agreeable communications. By letting in upon it the vital beams
and influences of his own light and love, and receiving back the return of its
grateful acknowledgements and praises. Wherein its manifest he should do no
greater thing than he has done. For who fees not that it is a matter of no
greater difficulto converse with, than to make a reasonable creature? Or who
would not be ashamed to deny that he who has been the only Author of the soul
of man, and of the excellent powers and faculties belonging to it, can more
easily sustain what he has made? And converse with that his creature sutably
to the way wherein he has made it capable of his converse?

Whereto, the consideration being added of his gracious nature (manifested in
this creation it self) it is further evident, that he is (as things are now
ordered whereof more hereafter) not only able, but apt and ready to converse
with men in such a way as shall tend to the improving of their being unto that
blessedness whereof he has made them naturally capable. If their own voluntary
alienation and aversion to him (yet not overcome) do not obstruct the way of
that intercourse.

And even this were sufficient to give foundation to a Temple, and both afford
encouragement and infer an obligation to Religion; although no other perfection
had been or could be demonstrated of the Divine Being, than what is immediately
to be collected from his works, and the things whereof he has been the sole
and most arbitrary Author. For what if no more were possible to be proved, have
we not, even by thus much, a representation of an object sufficiently worthy of
our honiage and adoration? He that could make and sustain such a world as this,
how unexpressibly does he surpass in greatness the most excellent of all mortal
creatures! To some or other, of whom, upon some (merely accidental) dignifying
circumstances, we justly esteem our selves to owe a dutiful observance and
subjection.

If he did not comprehend within his own Being simply all perfection: If there
were many Gods, and Worlds besides; and he only the Creator and absolute Lord
of our vortex, were not that enough to entitle him to all the obedience and
service we could give him? and enable him sufficiently to reward it? and render
his presence and cherishing influences (which he could every where diffuse
within this circle and limited portion of the universe) even infinitely
covetable and desirable to us?

Yea, if he were only the entire Author of our own particular Being, how much
more is that then the partial subordinate interest of an humane Parent? To whom
(as even an Epicurean would confess) nature it self urges and exacts a duty.
The refusal whereof, even Barbarian ingenuity would abhor, yea and brutal
instinct condemn? How much greater and more absolute is the right which the
parentage of our whole being challenges? If every man were created by a several
God, whose creative power were confined to only one such creature, and each one
were the solitary product, and the charge of an appropriate Deity; whose
dominion the state of things would allow to be extended so far, only, and no
further, were there therefore no place left for Religion? Or no tie unto love,
reverence, obedience, and adoration, because the Author of my being
comprehended not in himself all perfection? when as yet he comprehended so much
as to be the sole cause of all that is in me? And his power over me, and his
goodness to me, are hereby supposed the same, which the only one God, truly
has and exercises toward all? If all that I am and have be from him, I
cannot surely owe to him less than all?

Such as have either had, or supposed themselves to have, their particular
tutelary Genii, (of whom there will be more occasion to take notice hereafter)
though they reckoned them but a sort of deputed or vicarious Deities, underlin
Gods whom they never accounted the causes of their being; yet how have they
coveted and gloried to open their breasts, to become their Temples, and
entertain the converse of those (supposed) Divine inhabitants? If they had
taken one of these, to be their alone Creator, how much greater had their
veneration and their homage been? This it may be hoped, will be thought
sufficiently proved in this discourse (at least to have been so by some or
other) that we are not of our selves; and that our extraction is to be fetched
higher than from matter, or from only humane progenitors. Nothing that is
terrene and mortal could be the author of such powers as we find in our selves.
We are most certainly the offspring of some or other Deity. And he that made us
knows us thoroughly, can apply himself inwardly to us, receive our addresses and
applications, our acknowledgments and adoration. Whereunto we should have even
upon these terms great and manifest obligation, although nothing more of the
excellency and perfection of our Creator were certainly known to us.

But it has been further shown that the necessary being from whence we sprang,
is also VII.
an absolutely and infinitely perfect Being. That necessary Being cannot be
less perfect, than to include the entire and inexhaustible fullness of all being
and perfection. That therefore the God to whom this notion belongs, must,
consequently, be every way sufficient to all, and be himself but one. The only
source and fountain of all life and Being; the common basis and support of the
universe; The absolute Lord of this great Creation, and the central object of
the common concurrent Trust, fear, love, and other worship of his Intelligent
and reasonable creatures.

And therefore there remains no greater or other difficulty in apprehending how
he can, without disturbance to himself, or interruption of his own felicity,
intend all the concernments of his creatures, apply himself to them according
to their several exigencies, satisfy their desires and cravings, inspect and
govern their actions and affairs; than we have to apprehend a Being absolutely
and every way perfect. Whereof if we cannot have a distinct apprehension all at
once, i. e. though we cannot comprehend every particular perfection of God in
the same thought (as our eye cannot behold at one view every part of an
over-large object unto which however, part by part, it may be successively
applied) we can yet in the general apprehend him absolutely perfect,; or such
to whom we are sure no perfection is wanting. And can successively contemplate
this or that, as we are occasionally led to consider them: And can answer to
our selves difficulties that occur to us, with this easy, sure, and ever ready
solution; that he can do all things, That nothing is too hard for him, That he
is full, allsufficient, and every way perfect. Whereof we are the more
confirmed that we find we cannot by the utmost range of our most enlarged
thoughts, ever reach any bound or end of that perfection which yet we must
conclude is necessarily to be attributed to an absolutely perfect Being.

And this we have reason to take for a very sufficient answer to any doubt that
can arise, concerning the possibility of his converse with us, unless we will
be so unreasonable as to pretend that what is brought for solution has greater
difficulty in it than the doubt. Or that because we cannot apprehend at once,
infinite perfection, therefore it cannot be, which were as much as to say, that
it cannot be because it is infinite; for it were not infinite if we could
distinctly apprehend it. And so were to make it a reason against it self, which
is most injuriously and with no pretense attempted, except we could show an
inconsistency in the terms which it is plain we can never do; and should most
idly attempt. And it were to make our present apprehension the measure of all
reality; against our experience, which (if our indulgence to that
self-magnifying conceit do not suspend our farther enquiries and researches)
would daily bring to our notice things we had no apprehension of before.

It were instead of that just and laudable ambition of becoming our selves like
God in his imitable perfections, to make him like our selves. The true model of
the Epicurean Deity.

Nor can any thing be more easy than that wherein we pretend so great a
difficulty; that is to apprehend somewhat may be more perfect than we can
apprehend. What else but proud ignorance can hinder us from seeing that the
more we know, the more there is that we know not? How often are we outdone by
creatures of our own order in the Creation! How many men are there whom we are
daily constrained to admire, as unspeakably excelling us, and whom we cannot
but acknowledge to be far more knowing, discerning, apprehensive of things, of
more composed minds, of more penetrating judgments, of more quick and nimble
wits, easily turning themselves to great variety of objects and affairs without
distraction and confusion, of more equal and dispassionate tempers, less liable
to commotion and disturbance than our selves.

How absurd and senseless a pretense is it, against the thing it self, that we
cannot apprehend an infinite perfection in one common fountain of all
perfection; or because we cannot go through a multitude of businesses without
distraction, that therefore he that made us and all things cannot. If we would
make our selves the measure, it is likely we should confess we were out-stript,
when we are told that Julius Caesar could dictate letters when he was intent
upon the greatest affairs to four (and if Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 7. c. 25. Id.
l. 7. c. 24. vid. and Xenoph. de Cyr. Paed. l. 5. Who though he expressly say
not he knew all the Soldiers names, but seems rather to mean it of their
Officers (for says he, he reckoned it an absurd thing a Mechanic should know
the names of all his Tools, etc. And a General not know the names of his
Captains under him, etc.) yet he says, the Soldiers wondered (...).
he had nothing else to divert him to seven) Secretaries at once. That Cyrus
could call by name all the Soldiers in his numerous Army. With diverse other
strange instances of like nature. And since the perfections of some so far
exceed the measure of the most, why is it then unconceivable that Divine
perfection should so far surpass all, as that God may intend the affairs of the
world according to the several exigencies of his creatures without any
ungrateful diversion to himself, or diminution to his felicity? And since they
who partake of some and but a small portion of perfection only; can be
concerned in many affairs with little trouble, why cannot he that comprehends
all perfection be concerned in all without any? For though we have in what has
been last said endeavored to represent it as not so unapprehensible as is
pretended that it may be so, we take it in the mean time as formerly
sufficiently proved that so it is, That God is a being absolutely perfect, or
that includes eminently all perfection in himself.

Which general perfection of his Being as it modifies all his attributes, so we
shall particularly take notice that it does so, as to those that have a more
direct influence upon, and tend more fully to evince, his conversableness with
men. As first: His wisdom or knowledge VIII.
(for we need not be so curious as at present to distinguish them) must be
omniscience. About which, if any place were left for rational doubt, it would
be obvious to them to allege it, who are of slower inclinations toward
Religion. And object (against all applications to, or expectations from him)
That if we be not sure he knows simply all things so as wisely to consider
them, and resolve fitly about them, it will be no little difficulty to
determine, which he does, and which not; or to be at a certainty that this or
that concernment of theirs about which they might addgess themselves to him be
not among the unknown things. At least, we shall the less need to be curious in
distinguishing, or to consider what things may be supposed rather than other,
to be without the compass of his knowledge; if it appear that it universally
encompasses all things. Or that nothing can be without its reach. And because
we suppose it, already, out of doubt, that the true notion of God imports a
Being absolutely or every way perfect; nothing else can be doubted in this
matter, but, whether the knowledge of all things be a perfection?

The greatest difficulty that has troubled some in this matter has been, How
it is possible there should be any certain knowledge of events yet to come,
that depend upon a free and self-determining cause. But methinks we should not
make a difficulty to acknowledge that to know these things, imports greater
perfection, than not to know them; and then it would be very unreasonable,
because we cannot show how this or that thing was performed, which manifestly
is done; therefore to deny that it is done at all. So far is it that we can
with any show of reason conclude against any act of God from our ignorance of
the manner of it, that we should reckon it very absurd to conclude so,
concerning any act of our own, or our ability thereto. What if it were hitherto
an unknown thing, and impossible to be determined; how the act of vision is
performed by us: were it a wise conclusion, that therefore we neither do nor
can see? r How much more rash and presuming a confidence were it to reason thus
concerning the Divine acts and perfections! would we not in any such case be
determined rather by that which is more evident, than by what is more obscure?
As in the assigned instance: we should have but these two propositions to
compare [that I do (or have such a perfection belonging to me that I can) see]
and [that whatsoever act I do or can do, I am able to understand the course and
method of natures operation therein.] And thereupon to judge which of these two
is more evident. Wherein it may be supposed there is no man in his wits to whom
the determination would not be easy. Accordingly in the present case we have
only these two assertions that can be in competition in point of evidence,
between which we are to make a comparison and a (consequent) judgment, viz.
[whatsoever perfection belongs to a Being absolutely perfect, enabling it to do
this or that, the wit of man can comprehend the distinct way and manner of
doing it] and [it imports greater perfection to know all things, than to be
ignorant of some] and here surely whosoever shall think the determination
difficult, accounts the wit of man so exceeding great that he discovers his own
to be very little. For what can the pretense of evidence be in the former
assertion? Was it necessary that he in whose choice it was whether we should
ever know any thing or no, should make us capable of knowing every thing
belonging to his own being? Or will we adventure to be so assuming, as while we
deny it to God that he knows all things, to attribute to our selves that we do?
But if we will think it not altogether unworthy of us to be ignorant of some
thing, what is there of which we may with more probability or with less
disparagement be thought so, than the manner of Gods knowing things? And what
place is there for complaint of inevidence in the latter? Is not that knowledge
more perfect, which so fully already comprehends all things, as upon that
account to admit of no increase; than that which shall be every day growing,
and have a continual succession of new objects emerging and coming into view,
before, altogether unknown? And will not that be the case if we suppose future
contingencies to lie concealed from the penetrating eye of God? For whatsoever
is future, will some time be present, and then we will allow such contingencies
to be known to him. That is, that God may know them when we our selves can! And
that nothing of that kind is known to him which is not at least knowable some
way or other to our selves, at least successively, and one thing after another.
We will perhaps, allow that prerogative to God in point of this knowledge, that
he can know these things, now fallen out, all at once, we but by degrees, while
yet there is not any one that is absolutely unknowable to us. But why should it
be thought unreasonable to attribute an excellency to the knowledge of God
above ours, as well in respect of the manner of knowing, as the multitude of
objects, at once, known? we will readily confess in some creatures an excelency
of their visive faculty above our own; that they can see things in that
darkness, wherein they are, to us, invisible. And will we not allow that to the
eye of God, which is as a flame of fire to be able to penetrate into the
abstrusest darkness of futurity, though we know not the way how it is done;
when yet we know that whatsoever belongs to the most perfect being, must belong
to his? And that knowledge of all things, imports more perfection, than if it
were lessened by the ignorance of any thing.

Some who have thought the certain foreknowledge of future contingencies not
attributable to God, have reckoned the matter sufficiently excused; by this
that it no more detracts from the Divine omniscience, to state without the
object of it, things not possible, or that imply a contradiction (as they
suppose these to do) to be known, than it does from his omnipotency, that it
cannot do what is impossible, or that implies a contradiction to be done.

But against this there seems to lie this reasonable exception, that the two
cases appear not sufficiently alike: Inasmuch as the supposition of the former
will be found not to leave the blessed God equally entitled to omnisciency, as
the latter to omnipotency. For [all things] should not be alike the object of
both. And why should not that be understood to signify the knowledge of simply
all things; as well as this the power of doing simply all things? Or why should
all things included in these two words, signify so very diversely, that is
there properly all things, here some things only. And why must we so difference
the object of omnisciency and omnipotency? as to make that so much narrower
than this? And then how is it all things, when so great a number of things will
be left excluded? Whereas from the object of omnipotency (that we may prevent
what would be replied) there will be no exclusion of any thing. Not of the
things which are actually already made; for they are still momently reproduc'd
by the same power. Not of the actions and effects of free causes yet future;
for when they become actual God does certainly perform the part of the first
cause (even by common consent) in order, to their becoming so; which is
certainly doing somewhat though all be not agreed what that part is. Therefore
they are in the mean time to be esteemed within the object of omnipotency, or
to be of the things which God can do, viz. as the first cause virtually
including the power of the second.

But more strictly; all impossibility is either natural and absolute, or moral
and conditional. What is absolutely or naturally impossible, or repugnant in it
self, is not properly any thing. Whatsoever simple being not yet existent we
can form any conception of is producible, and so within the compass of
omnipotency; for there is no repugnancy in simplicity. That wherein therefore
we place natural impossibility, is the inconsistency of being this thing, whose
notion is such, and another wholly and entirely; whose notion is diverse, at the
same time (that which, more barbarously than insignificantly, has been wont to
be called incompossibility) But surely all things are properly enough said to
be naturally possible to God, while all simple beings are producible by him, of
which any notion can be formed; yea and compounded so as by their composition
to result into a third thing. So that it is not an exception to say that it is
naturally impossible this thing should be another thing, and yet be wholly it
self still at once, that it should be and not be, or be without it self. There
is not within the compass of actual or conceivable being, such a thing. Nor is
it reasonable to except such actions as are naturally possible to other Agents,
but not to him; As to walk, for instance, or the like. Inasmuch as, though the
excellency of his nature permits not they should be done by him; yet since
their power of doing them proceeds wholly from him, he has it virtually and
eminently in himself. As was formerly said of the infiniteness of his Being.
And for moral impossibility, as to lie, to do an unjust act; That God never
does them proceeds not from want of power, but an eternal aversion of will. It
cannot be said he is not able to do such a thing, if he would, but so is his
will quallified and conditioned, by its own unchangeable rectitude, that he
most certainly never will, or such things as are in themselves evil are never
done by him, not through the defect of natural power, but from the permanent
stability and fullness of all moral perfection. And it is not without the
compass of absolute omnipotency to do what is but conditionally impossible. The
absence of which restrictive condition, would rather bespeak impotency and
imperfection than omnipotency. Therefore the object of omnipotence is simply
all things. Why not of omniscience as well? It may be said [all things] as it
signifies the object of omniscience is only restrained by the act or faculty,
signified therewith in the same word, so as to denote the formal object of that
faculty or act, viz. all knowable things. But surely that act must suppose some
Agent, whereto that knowable has reference. Knowable? to whom? to others, or
to God himself? If we say the former, it is indeed a great honor we put upon
God, to say he can know as much as others: if the latter, we speak absurdly,
and only say he can know all that he can know. It were fairer to deny
omniscience than so interpret it.

But if it be denied, what shall the pretense be? why, that it implies a
contradiction future contingents should be certainly known: Qualis res est
talis est rei cognitio. Si itaque resisit incerta (puta incertum est locus sit
futurum, an non) non datur ulla certa ejus notitia. Quomodo enim fieri potest
ut certo sciatur, ad fore quod certo futurum non est, etc. Strangius de
voluntate and Actionibus Dei, etc. l. 3. c. 6. (as he there objects to himself.)
For they are uncertain, and nothing can be otherwise truly known than as it is.

And it must be acknowledged that to whom any thing is uncertain, it is a
contradiction that to him it should be certainly known. But that such things
are uncertain to God needs other proof than I have met with, in what follows in
that cited Author or elsewhere. All which will amount to no more than this,
that such things as we cannot tell how God knows them, must needs be unknown to
him. But since we are sure many such things have been certainly foretold by God
(and, of them, such as, we may be also sure, he never intended to effect) we
have reason enough to be confident that such things are not unknowable to him.
And for the manner of his knowing them, it is better to profess ignorance about
it, than attempt the explication thereof, either unintelligibly, as some have,
to no purpose, or dangerously and impiously, as others have adventured to do,
to very bad purpose. And it well becomes us to suppose an infinite
understanding may have ways of knowing things which we know nothing of. To my
apprehension, that last mentioned Author does, with ill success, attempt an
explication of Gods manner of knowing this sort of things, by the far less
intelligible notion, of the indivisibility of eternity, comprehending (as he
says) all the parts of time, not successively, but together. And though he
truly say that the Scotists way of expressing how future contingents are
present to God, i. e. according to their objective and intentional being, only,
affords us no account why God knows them, for which cause he rejects it; and
follows that of the Thomists, who will have them to be present according to
their real and actual existence. I should yet prefer the deficiency of the
former way, before the contradictiousness and repugnancy of the latter; and
conceive those words in the Divine Dr. More.
Dialogues, as good an explication of the manner of his knowledge, as the case
can admit, (which yet is but the Scotists sense) That the whole evolution of
times and ages, is so collectedly, and presentifickly represented to God, at
once, as if all things and actions which ever were, are, or shall be, were at
this very instant, and so always really present and existent before him. Which
is no wonder, the animadversion and intellectual comprehension of God, being
absolutely infinite, according to the truth of his Idea: I do therefore think
that a sober resolution in Of Bathymus in the same Dialogues.
this matter, That it seems more safe, to allow this privilege to the infinite
understanding of God, than to venture at all to circumscribe his omniscience:
For though it may safely be said, that he knows not any thing that really
implies a contradiction to be known; yet we are not assured but that may seem a
contradiction to us, that is not so really in it self.

Only, as to that instance of the commensurableness of the diagonial line of a
Quadrate to one of the sides; whereas, though there are great difficulties on
both sides, viz. that these are commensurable, and that they are not; yet any
man's judgment would rather incline to the latter as the easier part: I should
therefore also think it more safe, to make choice of that, as the parallel of
the present difficulty.

Upon the whole we may conclude that the knowledge of God is every way perfect;
and being so, extends to all our concernments. And that nothing remains, upon
that account to make us decline applying our selves to Religious converses with
him; or deny him the honor and entertainment of a Temple. For which we shall
yet see further cause, when we consider next, That his power is also
omnipotence. Which (though the discourse of it IX.
have been occasionally somewhat mingled with that of the last) might be
directly spoken of for the fuller eviction of that his conversableness with men
which Religion and a Temple do suppose. Nor indeed is it enough that he knows
our concernments, except he can also provide effectually about them, and
dispose of them to our advantage. And we cannot doubt, but he, who could create
us, and such a world as this, can do so, even though he were supposed not
omnipotent. But even that, it self, seems a very unreasonable supposition; that
less than infinite power should suffice to the creation of any thing. For
however liable it may be to controversy, what a second cause might do herein;
being assisted by the infinite power of the first: It seems altogether
unimaginable, to us, how, though the power of all men were not in one (which we
will easily suppose to be a very vast power) it could, alone, be sufficient to
make the minutest atom arise into being out of nothing. And that all the matter
of the universe has been so produced out of nothing, it will be no great
presumption to suppose already fully proved; in that, though any such thing as
necessary matter were admitted, yet its essential unalterableness would render
it impossible it should be the matter of the universe. Therefore when we cannot
devise what finite power can ever suffice (suppose we it never so much
increased, but still finite) to the doing of that which we are sure is done,
what is left us to suppose, but that the power which did it is simply infinite:
much more when we consider, not only that something actually is produced out of
nothing, but do also seriously contemplate the nature of the production. Which
carries so much of amazing wonder in it every where, that even the least and
most minute things might serve for sufficient instances of the unlimited
greatness of that power which made them. As would be seen; if we did
industriously set our selves to compare the effects of Divine Power with those
of humane art and skill. As is the ingenious and pious observation of the most
worthy Mr. Hook, who upon his viewing with his Microscope In his Micrographia.
the point of a small and very sharp needle (than which we cannot conceive a
smaller thing labored by the hand of man) takes notice of sundry sorts of
natural things, That have points many thousand times sharper: those of the
hairs of insects, etc. That appearing broad, irregular and uneven, having marks
upon it, of the rudeness and bungling of art. So unaccurate (says he) is it in
all its productions, even in those that seem most neat, that, if examined truly
with an organ more acute than that by which they were made, the more we see of
their shape the less appearance will there be of their beauty; Whereas in the
works of Nature the deepe^ discoveries show us the greatest excellencies. An
evident Argument that he that was the Author of these things was no other than
omnipotent, being able to include as great a variety of parts in the yet
smallest discernable point, as in the vaster bodies (which comparatively are
called also points) such as the Earth, Sun, or Planets. And I may add, when
those appear but points, in comparison of his so much vaster work, how plainly
does that also argue to us the same thing?

And let us strictly consider the matter. Omnipotency as has been said imports
a power of doing all things possible to be done, or indeed, simply all things;
unto which passive power, an active one must necessarily correspond. That is,
there is nothing in it self possible to be done, but it is also possible to
some one or other to do it. If we should therefore suppose God not omnipotent,
it would follow some one or other were able to do more than God. For though
possibility do import a nonrepugnancy in the thing to be done; yet it also
connotes an ability in some Agent to do it. Wherefore there is nothing possible
which some Agent cannot do. And if so, that Agent must either be God or some
other. To say it is God, is what we intend. That is, there is nothing possible
which God cannot do. Or he can do all things. But to say it is some other and
not God, were to open the door to the abovementioned horrid consequence; which
no one that acknowledges a God (and we are not now discoursing with them who
simply deny his Being) would not both blush and tremble to avow.

Some indeed have so over-done the business here as to deny any intrinsecal
possibility of any thing, and say that things are only said to be possible
because God can do them; which is the same thing as thus to explain Gods
omnipotency, i. e. that he can do all things which he can do. And makes a
Chimaera no more impossible in it self to be produced than a not yet existent
man. And the reason of the denial is that what is only possible is nothing; and
therefore can have nothing intrinsecal to it. As if it were not sufficient to
the intrinsecal possibility of a thing, that its Idea have no repugnancy in it.
Yet entire and full possibility connotes a reference to the productive power of
an Agent; so that it is equally absurd to say that things are only possible,
because there is no repugnancy in their Idea's, as it is to say they are only
possible because some Agent can do them. Inasmuch as the entire possibility of
their existence imports both, that there is no repugnancy in their Idea's
(which if there be, they are every way nothing, as has been said before) and
also, that there is a sufficient power to produce them. Therefore, whereas we
might believe him sufficient every way for us, though we did not believe him
simply omnipotent; how much more fully are we assured when we consider that he
is? Whereof also no place of doubt can remain, this being a most unquestionable
perfection, necessarily included, in the notion of an absolutely perfect Being.
But here we need not further insist, having no peculiar adversary (in this
matter singly) to contend with, (as indeed he would have had an hard province
who should have undertaken to contend against omnipotency.)

And now join herewith again the boundlessness of his goodness; which upon the
same ground of his absolute perfection, must be infinite also, (and which it is
of equal concernment to us to consider, that we may understand he not only can
effectually provide about our concernments, but is most graciously inclined so
to do.) And then what rational inducement is wanting to Religion and the
Dedication of a Temple? If we consider the joint encouragement that arises from
so unlimited power and goodness? or what man would not become entirely devoted
to him, who, by the one of these, we are assured, can do all things, and by the
other, will do what is best. (...). Phil. Jud. de Abr.


Nor therefore is there any thing immediately needful to our present purpose,
the eviction of Gods conversableness with men, more than has been already
said. That is, there is nothing else to be thought on, that has any nearer
influence thereon. The things that can be supposed to have such influence being
none else than his Power, Knowledge and Goodness, which have been particularly
evinced from the Creation of the world, both to have been in some former
subject, and to have all originally met in a necessary being, that alone could
be the Creator of it. Which necessary Being, as it is such, appearing, also, to
be infinite and absolutely perfect; the influence of these cannot but the more
abundantly appear to be such as can and may most sufficiently and fully
correspond both in general to the several exigencies of all creatures, and more
especially to all the real necessities and reasonable desires of man. So that
our main purpose seems already gained.

Yet because it may be grateful when we are persuaded that things are so, to
fortify (as much as we can) that persuasion. And because our persuasion
concerning these attributes of God will be still liable to assault unless we
acknowledge him every where present. Nor can it well be conceivable, otherwise,
how the influence of his knowledge, power, and goodness can be so universal, as
will be thought necessary to infer an universal obligation to Religion. It will
be therefore requisite to add somewhat concerning his Omnipresence, or, because
some that love to be very strictly critical will be apt to think that term
restrictive of his presence to the universe (as supposing to be present is
relative to somewhat, one may be said present unto, whereas they will say
without the universe is nothing) we will rather choose it to call it immensity.
For though it would sufficiently answer our purpose that his presence be
universal to all his creatures; yet even this is to be proved by such arguments
as will conclude him simply immense. Which therefore will with the greater
advantage infer the thing we intend.

This part of Divine perfection we will acknowledge to have been impugned by
some that have professed much devotedness to a Deity and Religion; we will
therefore charitably suppose that opposition to have been joined with
inadvertency of the ill tendency of it, that is, how unwarrantably it would
maim the notion of the former and shake the foundations of the latter. Nor
therefore ought that charity to be any allay to a just zeal for so great
concerns.

It seems then, first, manifestly repugnant to the notion of an infinitely
perfect Being to suppose it less than simply immense. For, upon that
supposition, it must either be limited to some certain place, or excluded out
of all. The The latter of these would be most openly to deny it; as has, with
irrefragable evidence, been abundantly manifested by the most learned Dr. More;
whereto it would be needless Both in his Dialogues and Enchiridion Metaphys.
and vain to attempt to add any thing. Nor is that the thing pretended to by
the sort of persons I now chiefly intend.

And for the former, I would enquire; Is amplitude of essence no perfection? or
were the confining of this Being to the very minutest space we can imagine, no
detraction from the perfection of it? what if the amplitude of that glorious
and ever-blessed Essence were said to be only of that extent (may it be spoken
with all reverence, and resentment of the unhappy necessity we have of making
so mean a supposition) as to have been confined unto that one Temple to which
of old he chose to confine his more solemn Worship; that he could be
essentially present only here at once and no where else, were this no
detraction? They that think him only to replenish and be present by his essence
in the highest heaven (as some are wont to speak) would they not confess it
were a meaner and much lower thought to suppose that presence circumscribed
within the so unconceivably narrower limits, as the walls of an house? If they
would pretend to ascribe to him some perfection beyond this; by supposing his
essential presence commensurable to the vaster territory of the highest
heavens, even by the same supposition should they deny to him greater
perfection than they ascribe. For the perfection which in this kind they should
ascribe were finite only, but that which they should deny were infinite.

Again, they will however acknowledge omnipotency a perfection included in the
notion of an absolutely perfect Being; therefore they will grant, he can create
another world (for they do not pretend to believe this infinite; and if they
did, by their supposition, they should give away their cause) at any the
greatest distance we can conceive from this: therefore so far his power can
extend it self. But what, his power without his being? what then is his power?
something, or nothing? nothing can do nothing; therefore not make a world. It
is then some Being, and whose Being is it but his own? Is it a created Being?
That is to suppose him first impotent, and then to have created omnipoteecy,
when he could do nothing. Whence by the way, we may see to how little purpose
that distinction can be applied in the present case of essential and virtual
contact, where the essence and virtue cannot but be the same.

But shall it be said, he must in order to the creating such another world,
locally move thither where he designs it? I ask then, but can he not at the
same time create thousands of worlds at any distance from this round about it?
No man can imagine this to be impossible to him that can do all things.
Wherefore of such extent is his power and consequently his Being.

Will they therefore say he can immensly if he please diffuse his Being but he
voluntarily contracts it; It Is answered that is altogether impossible to a
Being that is whatsoever it is by a simple and absolute necessity: for
whatsoever it is necessarily it is unalterably and eternally, or is pure act
and in a possibility to be nothing which it already is not. Therefore since God
can every where exert his power, he is necessarily, already, every where. And
hence Gods immensity is the true reason of his immobility; there being no
imaginable space which he does not necessarily replenish.

Whence also the supposition of his being so confined (as was said) is
immediately repugnant to the notion of a necessary Being, as well as of an
absolutely perfect, which has been argued from it.

We might moreover add that, upon the same supposition, God might truly be said
to have made a creature greater than himself (for such this universe apparently
were) and that he can make one (as they must confess who deny him not to be
omnipotent) most unconceivably greater.

Nothing therefore seems more manifest than that God is immense; or (as we may
express it) extrinsecally infinite, with respect to place; as well as
intrinsecally, in respect to the plenitude of his being and perfection. Only it
may be requisite to consider, briefly, what is said against it, by the
otherwise minded, XI.
that pretend not to deny his infinity in that other sense. Wherein that this
discourse swell not beyond just bounds, their strength, viz. of argument (for
it will not be so seasonable here to discuss with them the Texts of Scripture
wont to be insisted on in this matter) shall be viewed as it is collected and
gathered up in one of them. And that shall be Curcellaeus, De Vocibus Trinit.
Psov. etc.
who gives it, as succinctly and fully, as any I have met with of that sort of
men.

The Doctrine it self we may take from him thus. First (on the negative part by
way of denial of what we have been hitherto asserting) he says, The foundation
(that is of a distinction of Maresius's to which he is replying, for so
occasionally comes in the discourse) viz. the infinity of the Divine Essence,
is not so firm as is commonly thought.

And that therefore it may be thought less firm, he thinks fit to cast a slur
upon it, by making it the Doctrine of the Stoics, expressed by Virgil, Jovis
omnia plena (as if it must needs be false because Virgil said it, though I
could tell, if it were worth the while where Virgil speaks more agreeably to
this sense than ours, according to which he might as well have interpreted this
passage as diverse Texts of Scripture. And then his Authority might have been of
some value) And by Lucan, who helps it seems to disgrace and spoil it, Jupiter
est quodcunque vides, quocunque moveris (he might if he had a mind to make it
thought Paganish, have quoted a good many more, but then there might have been
some danger it should pass for a common notion). Next he quotes some passages
of Fathers that import dislike of it. About which we need not concern our
selves. For the question is not what this or that man thought.

And then for the positive account of his own judgment in the case, having
recited diverse Texts out of the Bible that seemed as he apprehended to make
against him. He would have us believe, that these all speak rather of Gods
providence and power by which he concerns himself in all our works, words, and
thoughts, wheresoever we live, than of the absolute infinity of his Essence.

And afterward, That God is by his Essence Unto which purpose speaks at large
Volkelius de vera Relig. Quia enim Dei and potentia and sapientia ad res omnes
extenditur, uti and potest as five imperium; ideo ubique praesens, omniaque
numine suo complere dicitur, etc. l. 1. c. 27. Schliclingius Artic. de filio
Dei. Ad Ps. 139. 6, 7. Nec loquitur David de spiritu sancto, qui peculiaris
quidem Dei spiritus est, sed de spiritu Dei simpliciter. Nec dicit spiritum
istum ubique re esse sed tantum docet nullum esse locum, ad quem is nequeat
pertingere, etc. So also F. Socin. Smalcius. And (though not altogether so
expressly as the ^est) Vorstius, Creblius, etc.
in the supreme heaven, where he inhabits the inaccessible light, but thence he
sends out from himself a spirit or a certain force, whether he pleases, by
which he is truly present and works there.

But proceed we to his Reasons, which he says are not to be contemned. We
shall therefore not contemn them so far as not to take notice of them; which
trouble also the Reader may please to be at; and, afterward, do, as he thinks
fit.

1. That no difference can be conceived between God and creatures, if God as
they commonly speak, be, wholly, in every point; or do fill all the points of
the universe with his whole Essence. For so whatsoever at all is will be God
himself.

Answ. And that is most mavelous that the in-being of one thing in another
must needs take away all their difference, and confound them each with other:
which sure would much rather argue them distinct. For certainly it cannot,
without great impropriety, be said that any thing is in it self: And is both
the container and contained. How were these thoughts in his mind? and these
very notions which he opposes to each other, so as not to be confounded with
his mind, and consequently with one another? So that it is a great wonder he was
not of both opinions at once. And how did he think his soul to be in his body,
which, though substantially united with it (and that is somewhat more, as we
will suppose he knew was commonly held, than to be intimately present) was not
yet the same thing. However himself acknowledges the power and providence of
God to be every where. And then at least every thing must it seems be the very
power and providence of God. But he thought it may be only of confuting the
words of Lucan, and chastising his poetic liberty. And if he would have been
at the pains to turn all their strains and raptures into propositions, and so
have gravely fallen to confuting them, he might perhaps have found as proper an
exercise for his Logic as this. As for his talk of a whole, whereof we
acknowledge no parts (as if he imagined the Divine Essence to be compounded of
such, he should have said so and have proved it) it is an absurd scheme of
speech which may be left to him, and them that use it to make their best of.

2. No Idolatry can be committed if there be not the least point to be found,
that is not wholly full of whole God. For whithersoever worship shall be
directed, it shall be directed to God himself, who will be no less there than
in heaven.

Answ. This proceeds upon the supposition that the former would be granted as
soon as it should be heard, as a self-evident principle, that whatsoever is in
another is that in which it is. And so his consequence were most undeniable.
But though we acknowledge God to be in every thing, yet so to worship him in
any thing, as if his essential presence were confined thereto, while it ought
to be conceived of as immense, this is Idolatry. And therefore they who so
conceive of it as confined (or tied in any respect, wherein he has not so tied
it himself) are concerned to beware of running upon this rock.

3. Nor can the opinion of Fanatics be solidly refuted, who call themselves
spiritual, when they determine God to be all in all. To do not only good but
evil things; because he is to be accounted to be essentially in all the atoms
of the world, in whole; and as a common soul by which all the parts of the
universe do act.

Answ. We may in time make trial whether they can be refuted or no; or whether
any solid ground will be left for it. At this time it will suffice to say, that
though he be present every where as a necessary Being, yet he acts as a free
cause. And according as his wisdom, his good pleasure, his holiness, and
justice do guide his action.

4. So God will be equally present with the wicked and with the holy and godly,
with the damned in Hell and Devils, as with the blessed in Heaven or Christ
himself.

Answ. So he will in respect of his essential presence. How he is otherwise
(distinguishingly enough) present in his Temple, we shall have occasion
hereafter to show.

5. That I say not how shameful it is to think that the most pure and holy God
should be as much in the most nasty places as in heaven, etc. (I forbear to
recite the rest of this uncleanly argument, which is strong in nothing but ill
savor.) But for

Answ. How strange a notion was this of Holiness, by which it is set in
opposition to corporal filthiness! As if an holy man should lose, or very much
blemish his sanctity, by a casual fall into a puddle. Indeed if sense must give
us measures of God, and every thing must be reckoned an essence to him that is
so to it; we shall soon frame to our selves a God altogether such a one as our
selves. The Epicureans themselves would have been ashamed to reason or conceive
thus of God, who tell us the Divine Being is as little capable of receiving a
stroke as the Inane. And surely (in proportion) of any sensible offense, we
might as well suppose him in danger, as Dr. More fitly expresses it, to be In
his Dialogues.
hurt with a thorn, as offended with an ill smell.

We have then enough to assure us of Gods absolute immensity and omnipresence,
and nothing of that value against it as ought to shake our belief herein. And
surely the consideration of this, added to the other of his perfections (and
which tends so directly to facilitate and strengthen our persuasion concerning
the rest) may render us assuredly certain, that we shall find him a conversable
Being. If we seriously apply our selves to converse with him, and will but
allow him the liberty of that Temple within us, whereof we are hereafter (with
his leave and help) to treat more distinctly and at large.

The end of the First Part.

