TWO SERMONS Preached at THURLOW IN SUFFOLK.

On those words, Romans 6. 13. -- Yield your selves to God --

By J. H. Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower
end of Cheapside. 1688.

To the much honored Bartholomew Soame of Thurlow Esquire and Susanna his pious
Consort.
My Worthy Friends;
I Have at length yielded to your Importunity; and do here offer these Sermons
to public view, and your own; which were, one day the last Summer, preached
under your roof; attributing more to your pious design herein, than to my own
reasons against it. I no farther insist upon the incongruity, having diverse
years ago published a small Treatise of Self-dedication, now again to send
abroad another on the same Subject. For the way of Tractation is here very
different; this may fall into the hands of diverse, who have never seen the
other; and however, they who have read the other, have it in their choice
whether they will trouble themselves with this or no. And though your purpose
which you urged me with, of lodging one of these little Books in each family of
the hearers, might have been answered by so disposing of many a better Book
already extant; yet you having told me how greatly you observed them to be
moved by these plain Discourses, considering the peculiar advantage of reading
what had been, with some acceptance and relish heard before (through that
greater vigor that accompanies the Ordinance of Preaching to an Assembly, than
does usually the solitary first reading of the same thing) I was not willing to
run the hazard of incurring a guilt, by refusing a thing so much desired, and
which, through God's blessing, might contribute something, though in never so low
a degree, to the saving of men's Souls. I could not indeed, as I told you,
undertake to recollect every thing that was spoken, according to that latitude,
and freedom of expression, wherewith it was fit to inculcate momentous things,
to a plain Countrey-Auditory. But I have omitted nothing I could call to mind.
Being little concerned that the more curious may take notice, with dislike, how
much, in a work of this kind, I prefer plainness (though they may call it
rudeness) of speech, before that which goes for wisdom of words, or the most
labored Periods.

May you find an abundant blessing on your Household, for the sake of the Ark,
which you have so piously, and kindly received: And whereas, by your means, the
parts about you, have an help for the spreading the Knowledge of God among
them, added to what they otherwise more statedly enjoy; may the blessing of
Heaven succeed all sincere endeavors of both sorts; to the more general
introducing of the new man which is renewed in knowledge -- where there is
neither Jew nor Greek, Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision, but Christ is all, and
in all: To whose Grace, you are, with sincere affection, and great sense of
your kindness, earnestly recommended, by

Your much obliged, faithful Servant in Christ, John How.

These Books Written by the same Author, are sold by Thomas Parkhurst at the
Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside.
1. THE Blessedness of the Righteous: The Vanity of this Mortal Life. On Psalm
17. ver. 15. and Psalm 89. 47.

2. Of Thoughtfulness for the Morrow, with an Appendix concerning the
Immoderate Desire of Fore-knowing things to come.

3. The Redeemer's Tears wept over lost Souls, in a Treatise on Luke 19. 41,
42. With an Appendix wherein somewhat is occasionally discoursed concerning the
Sin against the Holy Ghost, and how God is said to Will the Salvation of them
that perish.

4. Of Charity in Reference to other Men's Sins.

5. A Sermon directing what we are to do after a strict inquiry whether or no
we truly love God.

A Discourse of the Saving Grace of God, by David Clarkson Minister of the
Gospel.

The Conversion of the Soul, to which is added, A Warning to Sinners to prepare
for Judgment, by Nath. Vincent Minister of the Gospel.

A Discourse of Old Age, tending to the Instruction, Caution and Comfort of
Aged Persons.

Baptismal Bonds Renewed, being Meditations upon Psalm 50. ver. 5. By O.
Heywood Minister of the Gospel.

Romans 6 part of the 13th verse. -- Yield your selves to God. --
THese are but a few words, but I can speak to you of no greater or more
important thing than I am to press upon you from them this day. We are above
taught how absurd it is to continue in sin, whereto we are avowedly dead, v. 1,
2. as is signified by our Baptism; together with our entrance into a new state
of life, and that in both we are to be conformed unto the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, v. 3, 4, 5. so that sin ought now no more to have a new
dominion over us, than Death can again have over him, v. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. We are
therefore exhorted so to account of our selves, and of our present state, That
we are dead to sin, but alive to God through Jesus Christ our Lord; and
thereupon never more to let sin govern us, or reign over us, or yield to it,
verse 11, 12, 13. former part.

But what then? How are we otherwise to dispose of our selves? If we may not
yield our selves to the service of sin, what are we then to do with our selves?
The Text tells us, and the very reason of the thing shows it; But yield your
selves to God, etc.

The Subject to be discoursed of is an express Precept, charging it upon us all
as our unquestionable duty, to yield our selves to God; which therefore it can
only be our business in speaking to this Text, to explain and apply.

1. We are to explain it. Whosoever shall charge upon others such a duty, not
obvious, perhaps, at the first view, in the full extent of it, to every ones
understanding, may well expect to be asked; But what do you mean by this
Precept? or what does this yielding our selves to God signify?

And here are two things to be opened to you.

1. How, or under what notions, we are to consider God and our selves in this
matter.

2. What our yielding our selves to him, so considered, must include.

1. How we are to consider or look upon God in this affair? You are to consider
him both as he is in himself, and according to the relations he bears to you;
whether before your yielding your selves to him, or in, and upon your so doing.

1. As he is in himself: You that have heard, or now read what I have said, and
do write, here make a stand, and bethink your selves a while!

What! Are you about yielding your selves to God? Sure you ought to be thinking
of it as soon as you hear his claim laid to you.

But do you now know with whom you have to do? Too many have the Name of God,
that great and awful Name! in their mouth or ear, and have no correspondent
thought in their mind; it passes with them as a transient sound, as soon over
as another, common, word, of no greater length; and leaves no impression.
Perhaps there is less in their minds to answer it, than most other words which
men use in common discourse. For they have usually distinct thoughts of the
things they speak of; otherwise they should neither understand one another nor
themselves, but might speak of an Horse, and mean a Sheep: Or be thought to
mean so. And it would no more move a man, or impress his mind, to hear or
mention a Jest, than a matter of life and death. But the holy and reverend Name
of God is often so slightly mentioned, as in common Oaths, or in idle talk is
so merely taken in vain, that if they were on the sudden stopped, and asked what
they thought on, or had in their mind, when they mentioned that word, and were
to make a true answer, they cannot say they thought of any thing: As if the
Name of God, the All! were the name of Nothing! Otherwise had they thought what
that great Name signifies, either they had not mentioned it, or the mention of
it had struck their hearts! and even overwhelmed their very souls! I could tell
you what awe and observance has been wont to be expressed in reference to that
sacred Name, among a people that were called by it; and surely the very sound
of that Name ought ever to shake all the powers of our souls, and presently
form them to reverence and adoration. Shall we think it fit to play or trifle
with it, as is the common wont? My Friends, shall we now do so, when we are
called upon to yield our selves to God? Labor to hear and think, and act
intelligently, and as those that have the understandings of men. And now
especially in this solemn transaction, endeavor to render God great to your
selves: Enlarge your minds, that as far as is possible and needful, they may
take in the entire notion of him. As to what he is in himself, you must
conceive of him as a Spirit, Joh. 4. 24.
as his own Word, which can best tell us what he is, instructs us; and so as a
Being of far higher excellency than any thing you can see with your eyes, or
touch with your hands, or than can come under the notice of any of your senses.
You may easily apprehend Spiritual Being to be the source and spring of life,
and self-moving power. This World were all a dead unmoving lump, if there were
no such thing as Spirit; as your bodies when the soul is fled. You must
conceive him to be an Eternal, Self-subsisting Spirit, not sprung up into Being
from another, as our souls are: But who from the excellency of his own Being,
was necessarily of, and from himself; comprehending originally and eternally in
himself the fullness of all Life and Being. I would fain lead you here, as by
the hand, a few plain and easy steps. You are sure that somewhat now is, of
this you can be in no doubt; and next you may be as sure that somewhat has, of
it self, ever been: For if nothing at all now were, you can easily apprehend it
impossible that any thing should ever be, or of it self now begin to be, and
spring up out of nothing. Do but make this supposition in your own minds, and
the matter will be as plain to you as any thing can be, that if nothing at all
were now in being, nothing could ever come into being; wherefore you may be
sure, that because there is somewhat now in being, there must have been
somewhat or other always in being, that was eternally of it self. And then to
go a little farther, since you know there are many things in being that were
not of themselves, you may be sure that what was always of it self, had in it a
sufficiency of active power to produce other things, otherwise nothing that is
not of it self could ever be. As you know that we were not of our selves; and
the case is the same as to whatsoever else our eyes behold.

You must conceive of God therefore as comprehending originally in his own
Being, which is most peculiar to himself, a power to produce all whatsoever
Being, Excellency and Perfection is to be found in all the whole Creation. For
there can be nothing which either is not, or arises not from, what was of it
self. And therefore that he is an absolutely, universally, and infinitely
perfect Being, and therefore that Life, Knowledge, Wisdom, Power, Goodness,
Holiness, Justice, Truth, and whatsoever other conceivable Excellencies, do all
in highest perfection, belong, as necessary Attributes, unchangeably and
without possibility of diminution unto him. And all which his own Word
(agreeably to the plain reason of things) does in multitudes of places ascribe
to him; as you that are acquainted with the Bible cannot but know. You must
therefore conceive of him, as the All in All. So great, so excellent, so
glorious a One he is, to whom you are to surrender and yield your selves.

You are to conceive of him as most essentially One, for there can be but one
All. And so his Word teaches you to conceive. Hear, O Israel! the Lord our God
is one Lord, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. We know there is no other God but one, etc. 1 Cor. 8.
4, 5, 6. Your thoughts therefore need not be divided within you, nor your minds
hang in doubt, to whom you are to betake and yield your selves: there is no
place or pretense for halting between two Opinions. He most righteously lays
the sole claim to you, a just God and a Savior, and there is none besides him,
Isa. 45. 21. (And so we are told often in that and the foregoing Chapters. He
whose far-discerning eye projects its beams every way, and ranges thorough all
infinity, says, he knows not any, chapter 44. 8.)

Yet again you are to conceive of him as Three in One; and that in your
yielding your selves to him; as the prescribed form, when this surrender is to
be made in Baptism, directs; which runs thus, In the Name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28. 19. You are not to be curious in your enquiries
beyond what is written in this matter, how far the Subsistents in the Godhead
are three, an in what sense one; they cannot be both in the same sense. But
there is latitude enough to conceive how they may be distinct from each other,
and yet agree in one Nature; which in none of them depending upon will and
pleasure, sets each of them infinitely above all created Being; which for the
Divine pleasure only was and is created, Rev. 4. 11. And that we so far
conceive of them as three, as to apprehend some things spoken of one, that are
not to be affirmed of another of them, is so plain, of so great consequence,
and the whole frame of practical Religion so much depends thereon; and even
this transaction of yielding up our selves (which must be introductive, and
fundamental to all the rest) that it is by no means to be neglected in our
daily course, and least of all in this solemn business, as will more appear
anon. In the mean time, set this ever blessed, glorious God, the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost before your eyes, as to whom (thus in himself considered) you
are now to yield your selves.

2. You must conceive of him according to the relations which he bears toward
you, partly before your yielding your selves to him, and partly in and upon
your doing it. That is,

1. Before you do any such thing, you must conceive of him, as

1. Your Creator, the Author of your Beings, Romans 11. 36.
of whom, and through whom, and to whom all things are. He that made you,
demands you for himself. You are required to yield your selves to him that gave
you breath.

2. As the continual Sustainer of your Being; and who renews your life unto you
every moment; Act. 17. 28.
in whom you live, and move, and have your Being continually; so that if he
should withdraw his supports, you immediately drop into nothing.

But these are things common to you with all other creatures; and signify
therefore his antecedent right in you, before you have yielded your selves,
upon which you ought to do it, and cannot without great injustice to him
decline doing it. There are other considerations also you ought to entertain
concerning him in this your yielding your selves to him, viz. of some things
which are partly and in some sense before it, and which it supposes, but which
partly also, and in a more especial sense would follow and be inferred by it.
Principally, this fourfold consideration you should have of him in your
yielding your selves to him, viz. as your Owner, your Teacher, your Ruler, and
your Benefactor, and all these with the addition of Supreme, it being
impossible he should have a Superior; or that there should be any one above him
in any of these. And he is in some sense all these to you before you can have
yielded your selves (as may in great part be collected from what has been
already said;) But when you yield your selves to him, he will be all these to
you in a far higher, nobler, and more excellent sense; and you are to yield
your selves to him as such, or that in your so doing, he may actually become
such to you.

1. As your Owner: The God whose you are (as the Apostle speaks, Act. 27. 23.
and whom, as it there follows, and is naturally consequent, you are to serve.)
You were his by a former right, as all things, being made by him, are. But you
are to yield your selves to him, that you may be more peculiarly his, in a
sense more excellent in it self, and more comfortable to you; as Exodus 19. 5.
If you will obey -- you shall be to me a peculiar treasure above all people,
for all the Earth is mine. Of such as fear him, the great God says, They shall
be mine in the day when I make up my Jewels, Mal. 3. 17. Your yielding your
selves adds nothing to his right in you; you therein only recognize, and
acknowledge the right he had in you before, but it adds to you a capacity and
qualification, both by the tenor of his Gospel Covenant, and in the nature of
the thing, for such nobler uses as otherwise you cannot serve for. As the more
contemptible lumber about a man's house may be as truly his, as the most
precious things; but neither does he intend, nor can such meaner things admit
to be the ornaments, either of his Person, or his House. The great God intends
his devoted peculiar People to be to him a Crown and royal Diadem, (Isa. 62.
3.) when he puts away the wicked of the Earth like dross, Psalm. 119. v. 119. In
a great house there are not only Vessels of Silver and Gold, but also of Wood,
and of Earth, 2 Timothy 2. 20. But it is only the purged and sanctified soul (which
is also a self-devoted one) that shall be the Vessel unto honor, being made
meet for the Master's use, and prepared to every good work, v. 21. Persons and
things acquire a sacredness by being devoted to God. Persons especially, that
can and do devote themselves, are highly ennobled by it; he hereupon (besides
their relative holiness) really more and more sanctifies and frames them for
his own more immediate service and communion. Of such a People he tells us,
that he has formed them for himself, and they shall praise him; and to them he
says (intending it manifestly in the more eminent sense) Thou art mine, Isa.
43. 1, 7, 21. Such may with a modest and humble, but with a just confidence
freely say, I am thine, save me -- Psalm. 119. 94. In yielding your selves
consider therefore first, that he is your Owner by an unquestionable former
right, and let that effectually move you to do it with all your hearts. For
will you not give him his own? When you account duty to your Prince obliges you
to give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, will you not give God the
things that are God's? And will you not know him for your Owner? The Ox knows
his Owner, Isa. 1. 3. Or will it satisfy you to be in no other kind his, than
brutes and Devils are, that either through an incapacity of Nature cannot
acknowledge him, or through a malignity of Nature will not? O yield your
selves, with humble desire and expectation that he will vouchsafe otherwise to
own you!

2. As your Teacher; so indeed he also is to all men, though they never yield
themselves to him. He that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know? Psalm. 94.
10. There is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives him
understanding. Yea and inferior creatures, as they all owe their Natures, and
peculiar Instincts to him, may be said to have him for their Teacher too. But
will it content you to be so only taught by him? There is another sort of
Teaching, which, if you yield your selves to him as your great Instructor, he
will vouchsafe unto you. The things you know not, and which it is necessary you
should know, he will teach you, i. e. such things as are of real necessity to
your true and final welfare, not which only serve to please your fancy, or
gratify your curiosity. For his Teaching respects an appointed, certain end,
suitable to his Wisdom and Mercy, and to the calamity and danger of your state.
The Teaching requisite for perishing sinners, was, what they might do to be
saved. And when we have cast about in our own thoughts never so much, we have
no way to take but to yield our selves to God, who will then be our most
undeceiving Guide. To whom it belongs to save us at last, to him only it can
belong to lead us in the way to that blessed end.

Many anxious Enquiries, and fervent Disputes there have been, how one may be
infallibly assured of the way to be saved. They are to be excused who think it
not fit, but upon very plain grounds, to venture so great a concernment; or to
run so great a hazard in a mere Complement to any man, or party of men.
Confident expressions, as, My soul for yours, and such like, signify nothing
with a cautious considering man, except that such as them care as little for
his Soul as their own. The Papal Infallibility some would have us trust to at a
venture, and would make us think it rudeness to doubt it; when no body stands
upon good manners in endeavoring to escape a ruin; when a great part of their
own Communion trust not to it The Gallican Church, etc.
. And some of them have written strongly against it Du Pin, etc.
. The accurate stating and discussing of the Controversy, how far, or in what
sense any such thing as Infallible Light may belong to the Christian Church,
are not fit for this place, nor for a Discourse of this nature. It Is enough now
to say that this claim hereof to the Pope or Bishop of Rome, as such, 1. Cannot
be proved. 2. May be plainly disproved.


1. It cannot be proved. For since no Principles of common Reason are pretended
sufficient to prove it of any man, or of him more than another, it must be
proved by supernatural Revelation, if at all. But in the written Word of God
there is no such thing. Pretenses from thence are too vain to be refuted or
mentioned. And if any other Revelation should be pretended, 'twill be a new,
and as impossible a task to prove the Divinity of that Revelation, so as to
infer upon the World an obligation to believe it. Nor is it necessary to insist
upon this; because,

2. It may be plainly disproved; for the same thing cannot be both true and
false. And it sufficiently disproves such a man's Infallibility, or the
impossibility of his erring, that it can be evidently proved he has erred.

As when he has determined against the express Word of Christ, forbidding them
(to take one or two Instances among many) to drink of the Eucharistical Cup,
whom he has commanded to drink of it. Or (to mention a more important one)
when Believers in Christ, or Lovers of him, are pronounced damned, who he has
said shall not perish, but have everlasting life, and the Crown of
Righteousness. Or when on the other hand pardon of sin and eternal life are
pretended to be given to such, whom the Evangelical Law condemns to death.

When one to whom this privilege has been asserted to belong, has determined
against another, to whom upon the same grounds it must equally belong. As it is
well known in the Christian Church, that Pope might be alleged against Pope,
and one Papal Constitution against another. Not to insist on what might be
shown out of their own History, that the same Pope has, being so, changed his
judgment in a point of Doctrine, and left us to divine when he was the
fallible, and when the infallible Pope. And again,

When there have been determinations against the common uncorrupted senses of
mankind, as that what their sight, and touch, and taste assures them is Bread,
is said to be the flesh of an humane body.

For if you cannot be sure of what both your own, and the sound senses of any
other man would tell you, you can be sure of nothing at all: You cannot be sure
you see one another, or hear me speaking to you; nor be sure when you heard the
transforming words, This is my Body; or much less that they were ever spoken,
if you heard them not; or that that was Bread and not a Stone, or a piece of
Clay that is pretended to be transubstantiated by them. The foundation of all
certainty were upon these terms taken away from among men on Earth; and upon
the same common grounds upon which it is pretended you ought to believe that
which is shown or offered you to be the flesh of a man, and not bread any
longer, you must believe or judge the quite contrary, that it is bread still,
and not flesh, and consequently that he is far from being infallible, but does
actually err, upon whose authority you are directed to believe otherwise.

And indeed the claimed Infallibility is by this sufficiently disproved, that
there is no imaginable way of proving it. For if there were any such thing, it
must be by God's own immediate gift, and vouchsafement; How otherwise should a
man be made infallible? And if so, it must be for an end worthy of a wise and a
merciful God; whereupon for the same reason, for which he should have made such
a man infallible, he should have made it infallibly certain to other men, that
he has made him so. Whereas there is no one point wherein his infallible
determination can be pretended to be necessary, against which there is more to
be said than against the pretense it self of his Infallibility; Nor for which,
less is to be said than can, with any color, or without highest and most just
contempt be said for it. The most weighty thing that I have known alleged is,
the great expediency of an Infallible Judge. But if we will think that a good
way of arguing, that things are in fact so or so, because we can fancy it would
be better if they were; we may as well prove that all mankind are sincere
Christians, or there is no sin in the World, nor ever was, and a thousand
things besides in the natural World, that never were, or will be, because it
appears to us 'twould be for the better. So much is the follishness of man
wiser than God.

Besides, that Sanctity must be judged as necessary to the final salvation and
felicity of the souls of men as Orthodoxy, or exemption from doctrinal Error,
by all, with whom either Christian Religion, or common Reason signifies any
thing. For the same reason therefore for which it can be thought necessary God
should have put it into the power of any man to make others not err, he should
have put it equally into his power to make them holy, to renew and change their
hearts and lives. But what man has this power? And one would reasonably
expect, if either were, that both powers should be lodged in the same man;
which if they should pretend, who assert the other unto one man, their own
Histories might make them blush, unless they can think it more probable that he
can and will effectually sanctify another, and make him holy, who is himself
most infamously impure and unholy, than that he can secure another from erring
in matters of Doctrine, who cannot secure himself.

But then it may be said, If such sure light and guidance is not to be found or
had from one man, it must be from some community or body of men in the
Christian Church. For, can it be thought God should have taken care to settle a
Religion in the World, on purpose for the saving of men's souls, that yet
affords no man any certainty of being saved by it?

I answer, yes, there is a certain, undeceiving Light afforded by it to the
whole body of sincere Christians sufficient, and intended, not to gratify a
vain humor, but to save their souls, and which you can only, and may
confidently expect by yielding your selves to God as your Teacher. As it cannot
agree with the absolute perfection of his Nature to be himself deceived in any
thing, it can, you may be sure, as little agree with it to deceive you, or let
you mistake your way, in the things wherein he has encouraged and induced you
to commit and entrust your selves to his conduct and guidance: Will he let a
soul wander and be lost, that has entirely given up it self to be led and
taught by him? His Word has at once expressed to you his Nature, and his
Good Will toward you, in this case. Good and upright is the Lord, therefore
will he teach sinners in the way, Psalm. 25. 8. But what sinners? the next words
tell you, the meek (self-resigned ones, humble, teachable learners) he will
guide in Judgment, or with Judgment (as that particle admits to be read) he
will guide them judiciously, and surely, so that your hearts need not misgive,
or suspect, or doubt to follow; The meek will he teach his way, v. 9. Who would
not wish and be glad to have such a Teacher? You shall know (how express is his
Word!) if you follow on to know the Lord; for, his going forth is prepared as
the morning, Hos. 6. 3. You do not need to devise in the morning how to create
your own Light, it is prepared and ready for you; the Sun was made before you
were, and it keeps its course, and so constantly will God's own Light shine to
you, without your contrivance or care, for any thing but to seek, receive it,
and be guided by it.

Know your advantage in having such a Teacher.

1. He will teach you inwardly; even your very hearts, and so as his
Instructions shall reach the center, the inmost of your spirits. God that made
light to shine out of darkness, has shined into our hearts, etc. 2 Cor. 4. 6.
And when that holy good man, had been solacing himself with highest pleasure in
considering this, that God was his portion, so contentful and satisfying a one,
that he cannot forbear saying, The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places,
and I have a goodly heritage, Psalm. 16. 5, 6. He presently adds, I will bless
the Lord who has given me counsel; q. d. I should never else have thought of
such a thing: it had never come into my mind to think of choosing God for my
portion. I should have done like the rest of the vain World, have follow^d
shadows all my days. My reins also instruct me in the night season. He will so
teach you, as to make you teach your selves, put an abiding word into you, that
shall talk with you when you sit in your houses, and walk by the way, and when
you lie down, and when you rise up, and whereby you shall be enabled to commune
with your own hearts upon your beds, while others sleep, and revolve, or roll
over in your minds, dictates of life. You will not need to say, Who shall
ascend into Heaven, to bring down Christ from above? Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, etc.
Or, Who shall descend into the deep, to bring Christ again from the dead? Romans
10. 6, 7, 8.
For the Word will be nigh thee, not in thy mouth only, but in thine heart,
etc. You will have in you an ingrafted Word, Jam. 1. 21.
and the Law of your God will be in your heart, so as none of your steps shall
slide. Psa. 37. 31.
This is our Lord's own interpretation of diverse words of the Prophets, that in
the days of the more general diffusion of holy, vital, light, which was to be
after his own appearance in the World, They shall be all taught of God, John 6.
45. i. e. so as to have their hearts inclined toward himself, and drawn to
him, as the reference of these words to those of the foregoing verse shows.
Wherein,

2. Lies your further advantage, That by him you shall be taught effectually.
Other Teaching, as it does but reach the ear, or only, at the most, beget some
faint notions in the mind, that you are little the better for, his shall
produce rea fruit; He is the Lord your God who teaches you to profit; and who
by gentle and unforcible, but by most prevailing insinuations, shall slide in
upon your spirits, win them by light and love, and allure them to a compliance
with what shall be in the end safe and happy for your selves. He will instruct
you, though not with a violent, yet with a strong hand, so as not to lose his
kind design. Others teach you, and leave you what they found you; convinced
perhaps, but not changed; unable to resist any ill inclination, or your
disinclination to that which was good. Power will accompany his Teaching; a
conquering power that will secretly constrain and captivate your hearts; and
how pleasant a Victory will that be to your selves! O the peace and joy you
will find springing up within you, when once you feel your selves overcome! The
most that a man can say to you is, what the Prophet Samuel once said, (so
great, and so good a man) God forbid I should sin against the Lord in ceasing
to pray for you; 1 Samuel 12. 23.
but I will teach you the good and the right way: He could only show that way,
and pray that God would do the rest; which implies God only can so teach it
you, as to make you walk in it.

I am not persuading you to slight humane Teaching; you will need it; and it is
among the gifts which your glorious Redeemer being ascended on high has given
to men, Psalm. 68. 18.
viz. Pastors and Teachers. Ephesians. 4. 11.
But understand their Teaching to be only subordinate, and Ministerial.
Without, or against God, you are to call no man Master, or Teacher upon Earth.

And thus far their Teaching is to be regarded, as it agrees,

1. With what God does inwardly teach you, by that common light which shines in
every man's own bosom, that with a sincere mind, attends to it, and which is
too little attended to. There are Truths too commonly held in unrighteousness,
seated generally in the Minds and Consciences of men; by which, though they have
not another Law, Romans 1. 18. 2. 14.
they are a Law to themselves; and for the stifling and resisting whereof, the
wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against them. And from such Truths they
might infer others, and where God affords external helps, come to discern a
sure ground whereupon to understand that what is contained besides in the frame
of Christian Doctrine is true; being enabled to judge of the evidences that
prove the whole Revelation thereof to be from God; and nothing being in it self
more evident than that what he has revealed is true. And withal God is
graciously pleased to shine into Minds that with upright aims set themselves to
enquire out and understand his Mind; and so farther light comes to be
superadded to that which is common. Now take heed how you neglect what a man
teaches you, agreeably to that inward light which is already (one way or other)
in your own Minds and Consciences. Hither in some part, and in great part we
are to appeal in our Teaching you: So the more early Christian Teachers did; 2
Cor. 4. 2.
Not handling (say they) the Word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of
the Truth commending our selves to every man's Conscience in the sight of God.
In the most deeply fundamental things that concern your practice every day, we
may appeal to your selves, and your own Consciences. If we say to you, Ought
you not to live according to his Will that gave you breath? Should you not
above all things fear and love, and trust and obey him that made you and all
things? Should you not do as you would be done unto? Should you not take more
care for your immortal Souls, than for your mortal flesh? You must every one
say, I believe in mine own Conscience this is so. If I appeal to you in the
very thing I am speaking of, should you not yield your selves to God whose
Creatures you are? I doubt not you will any of you say, I think in my very
Conscience I should. We have you witnesses against your selves, if you will not
hear us in such things. And again, it being a matter very capable of plain
proof, that those writings which we call the Holy Scriptures, were from God,
our Teaching ought so far to be regarded by you as,

2. We can manifest to you that it agrees with the Scriptures. And we are sure
he will never teach you inwardly against what he has there taught. Will the
God of Truth say and unsay the same thing? That were to overthrow the design of
all his Instructions, and to subvert the Authority which he requires men to
reverence. No man could expect to be regarded on such terms. And by this Rule
freely examine all that we teach you, as our Savior directed the Jews to do,
John 5. 39. And for the doing whereof, the Apostle commended the Berean
Christians, Acts 17. 11. And we have here the same advantage at length, though
not so immediately, upon your Consciences; which cannot but judge that
whatsoever is found in that Word which you confess to be Divine, must be most
certainly true.

And if within such limits you take the help of men for your Instruction;
having yielded your selves to God as your supreme and highest Teacher, you are
upon safe terms. Only be sincere in listening to his dictates, whether internal
or external. Let not a prepossest heart, or vicious inclination be their
Interpreter. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether
it be of God, etc. John 7. 17.

3. You must consider God, in your yielding your selves, as your Sovereign
Ruler. For to whom you yield your selves servants to obey, his servants you are
to whom you obey; as by v. 16. Though Teaching and Ruling may be diversely
conceived of, they cannot be separate in this case. The nobler and final part
of God's Teaching you, is teaching you your duty; what you are to practice and
do. And so when he teaches you, he commands you too; and leaves it not
arbitrary to you whether you will be directed by him or no. What is his by
former right, and by after-consent, and self-resignation, shall it not be
governed by him? if it be a subject capable of Laws and Government, as such
consent shows it to be? Your yielding your selves to God is not an homage but a
mockery, if you do it not with a resolution to receive the Law from his mouth:
and that wherein soever he commands, you will to your uttermost obey. But in
this, and the other things that follow, my limits constrain me unto more
brevity. Only let not this apprehension of God be frightful, yea let it be
amiable to you, as in it self it is, and cannot but be to you, if you consider
the loveliness of his Government, the kind design of it, and how suitable it is
to the kindest design; that it is a Government first and principally over
minds, purposely intended to reduce them to an holy and peaceful order, wherein
it cannot but continue them, when that Kingdom comes to be settled there; which
stands in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, and all the Laws
whereof are summed up in Love; being such also as in the keeping whereof there
is great reward.

4. You are to consider him, and accordingly to yield your self, as your
greatest Benefactor, or rather as your best and supreme good. Indeed you cannot
sever his being your Ruler from his being your Benefactor (more than his being
your Teacher from his being your Ruler) when the tendency and design of his
Government is understood. For it is a very principal part of our felicity to be
under his Government, and he does you the greatest good by ruling you, when
otherwise nothing is more evident than that you would run your selves into the
greatest of evil, and soon be most miserable creatures. You are now so far
happy as you are subject to his Government, and that which it aims at is to
make you finally and completely happy. For it is the design of his Government,
not only to regulate your actions, but your inclinations, and principally
toward himself. You have been alienated from the life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18.
were become strangers to him, yea and enemies in your very minds; Col. 1. 21.
for the carnal mind is enmity against God. Romans 8. 7.
The very business of his Government is in the first place to alter the temper
of your minds; Romans 8. 7. latter part.
for continuing carnal, they neither are subject to the Law of God, nor can be,
as the same place tells you. Therefore if his Government take place in you, and
you become subject, you become spiritual, the Law of the Spirit of Life, Verse
2.
having now the possession and the power of you. Nor was it possible he should
ever be an effectual Benefactor to you, without being thus an over-powering
Ruler, so do these things, run into one another. To let you have your own will,
and follow your carnal inclination, and cherish and favor you in this course,
were to gratify you to your ruin, and concur with you to your being for ever
miserable: Which you may see plainly if you will understand wherein your true
felicity and blessedness must consist, or consider what was intimated
concerning it, in the proposal of this head; that he is to be your Benefactor,
in being to you himself, your supreme and only satisfying Good. He never does
you good effectually and to purpose, till he overcome your carnal inclination.
For while that remains, will you ever mind him? Can you love him? desire after
him? or delight in him? The first and most fundamental Law which he lays upon
you is, that you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and soul,
and mind, and might. What will become of you if you cannot obey this Law? This
World will shortly be at an end, and you must, it is like, leave it sooner; you
are undone, if your hearts be not beforehand so framed as that you can savor
and take complacency in a better and higher Good. You will shortly have nothing
left you but himself; you will be plucked away from your Houses, and Lands, and
Friends, and all your outward comforts; and now in what a case are you, if you
can take no pleasure or satisfaction in God! You are therefore to yield up your
self to him in full union, as with your most grateful and delectable Good; with
this sense possessing your Soul, Psalm. 73. 25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? or whom on Earth can I desire besides thee?

And thus you are to look upon God in your yielding your selves to him.

You are to yield your selves to his Claim as your rightful Owner.

To his Instruction, as your undeceiving Teacher.

To his Government, as your Gracious, Sovereign Ruler. And

To the enjoyment of him, as your best and most satisfying Good. Or your
self-communicating Benefactor.

But it also concerns you to have distinct and right thoughts of the state of
your case, and how things are between him and the Sons of men, that you may
duly apply your selves to him in so great a transaction. The Gospel under which
you live tells you, he treats with men in and by a Mediator, his own Son, who
came down into this wretched World of ours, in great compassion to our
miseries, and took our Nature, was here on Earth among us an incarnate God. God
manifested in the flesh. Because we were partakers of flesh and blood, he took
part with us likewise of the same, and in that Nature of ours died for us, to
make way that we might yield our selves to God, and be accepted. John 14. 6.
No man now comes to the Father but by him. He must be acknowledged with great
reverence; and a most profound homage must be rendered to him. 1 John 2. 23.
He that denies the Son has not the Father. And it being his pleasure, to
treat with us by his Son, and the case requiring that we apply our selves to
him, we are to take notice of him according to those capacities wherein
Scripture represents him to us. And it represents him agreeably to those same
notions according to which we have shown we are to consider God the Father in
this matter; so as that Christ being the Mediator between him and us, when we
yield our selves to him ultimately, and finally, under the notions that have
been mentioned, we are first to yield our selves to his Son, Christ Jesus our
Redeemer, under the like notions. For,

1. Being to yield our selves to God as our Owner, we must know, the Father
has given all things into the hands of the Son, John 13. 3. and that He is
Lord of all, Acts 10. 36. which, in the first sense, signifies him to be, by
the Father's constitution, the Owner of all things, even as he is the Redeemer.
Romans 14. 5.
For, he therefore died and rose again, that he might be Lord of dead and
living; i. e. of both Worlds; agreeably to what he himself speaks immediately
upon his resurrection from the dead; All power is given to me both in Heaven
and Earth, Matthew. 28. 18.

2. And for those other notions of God under which we have shown, we are to
yield our selves to him, as our Teacher, Ruler, and Benefactor, they correspond
to that threefold Office of Christ, of which you cannot but have heard much,
viz. of Prophet, King, and Priest, so that we are to commit our selves to him,
when we yield our selves to God, as a Teacher come forth from God, and who
reveals him to us whom no man has seen at any time: As one that must reign
over us, and over the greatest on Earth, Luke 19. 14. and 27. Psalm. 2. 6, 7, 8,
9, 10. and by whom we are to be reconciled to God, and restored to the
enjoyment of him, Romans 5. 11.

And because our blind minds, and perverse hearts need light and grace from
above, to direct and incline us hereto, therefore has the Spirit of the Father
and the Son a great work to do in us to this purpose. Whereupon we are to yield
our selves to that blessed Spirit also, as our enlightner, and sanctifier;
which our being directed to walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5. 25. and our being told
that they that have not the Spirit of Christ are none of his, Romans 8. 9. and,
that as many as are the Sons of God, are led by his Spirit, v. 14. do plainly
show.

You see then we are to yield our selves to God, the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, which also our having those great names, named upon us in our Baptism
(as we before told you) does import.

And how necessary all this is, you will see, if

2. We consider how we are to look upon our selves in this transaction; i. e.

1. We are to consider our selves as God's creatures, being, as you have heard,
to consider him as our Creator; and so we must reckon we owe our selves to him,
and do but yield him what we owe, and what was his before. For, how can you but
be his, who of his mere pleasure has raised you out of nothing?

2. We must remember we have been apostate creatures, such as had fallen, and
revolted from him; and so our yielding our selves to him, is a giving our
selves back to him, having injuriously withdrawn and withheld our selves from
him before. And because the injury was so great as we could never make any
recompense for, therefore it was necessary such a Mediator should be appointed
between God and us, for whose sake only we can expect to be accepted when we
yield our selves. So great a Majesty was not to be approacht by offending
creatures without so great a Days-man, and Peacemaker.

3. We must consider our selves as impure, and every way unfit for the Divine
Presence, Service, and Converse, and who did therefore need the power of the
Holy Ghost to be put forth upon us to make us fit; and that therefore our case
required we should put our selves into such hands for that purpose.

4. We are to consider our selves as under the Gospel, as sinners invited and
called back to God; as such whose case is not desperate; or who need to abandon
our selves to ruin, though we have greatly offended, as if there were no hope.
We are to consider our selves with distinction from the condition of other fallen
creatures. The Angels that fell and kept not their first station, have no
Gospel sent to them to invite them back, and persuade them again to yield
themselves to God; you have. Into what a transport should this thought put you!
how should it mollify you! oh what a yielding temper and disposition of spirit
should it work in you toward this gracious call, and just challenge, which the
great God now gives you, and makes unto you!

Thus far then you see how you are to consider God and your selves in this your
yielding your selves to him. Second Sermon.
You are now next to consider,

2. What your yielding your selves to God according to such considerations must
include, or be accompanied with. For it is not reasonable to think you have no
more to mind in this matter, than only what is contained in the bare abstract
nature of such an act; but looking upon your case in its circumstances, and
considering the state of things between God and you, it greatly concerns you to
see to it, that the matter be suitably carried to this state of your case.
Whereupon,

1. Your yielding your selves to God must be accompanied with very deep and
serious repentance. It Is a most penitential surrender you are now to make of
your selves to him; for you are to remember that you are but now coming back
out of a state of Apostasy from your Sovereign and most rightful Lord. Yea though
you are but renewing your surrender of your selves, having done somewhat herein
before, you are yet to consider this was your case; and perhaps some never have
yet seriously thought of any such thing, but lived in this World hitherto as if
you were your own, and there were no Lord over you: O then with what inward
remorse, with what brokenness of heart, with what relentings and self-accusings
should this thing now be done! you should come, smiting upon the thigh, and
saying within your selves, What have I done? So long Lord, have I lived in this
World of thine, which thou made, and not I, as if I might do in it, and with
my self, what I pleased? I have usurpt upon thy unquestionable right in me,
have lived to my self, and not to thee; I am now convinced this was a very
undutiful, unlawful way of living. Let him hear you (as he once heard Ephraim,
or shall do) bemoaning your selves, Jerem. 31. 18, 19.
and saying, Turn me and I shall be turned, thou art the Lord my God, etc. How
can you think of yielding your selves now at length to God, without being
deeply sensible of your having deferred it so long, and that you have not done
it sooner? and how great the iniquity was of your former course? that you have
all this while committed a continual robbery upon him that gave you breath.
Will a man rob God? And if you say, Wherein have I robbed him? you have robbed
him of your self, a greater thing than of Tithes and Offerings. And this
robbery was sacrilege. For every thing due and devoted to God, has a
sacredness upon it; and consider, were you not, upon his just claim, in your
Baptism devoted to him? how should this startle you? you have constantly
alienanated from him a sacred thing! You have been in a continual contest with
him about one of the highest rights of his Sovereignty, yea and of his Godhead,
for to that, nothing is more peculiar, than to be Lord of all. So that the
controversy between him and you has been, who shall be God? You have refused
him his own creature; How high a crime was this? Know then you have been a
great transgressor, a grievous revolter, and now therefore yield your self to
him with a melting broken heart, or you do nothing.

2. It must be done with great deliberation; not as the mere effect of a sudden
fright. What is done in a rash haste, may be as soon undone. Leisurely
consider, and take the whole compass of the case; weigh with your selves the
mentioned grounds upon which you are to yield your selves, and the ends you are
to do it for, that things may be set right between him and you, that you may
return into your own natural place and station, that you may be again stated in
that subordination to your Sovereign Lord which fitly belongs to you; that he
may have his right which he claims, and you the mercy which you need. Here is
place for much consideration. And when Israel is complained of as less willing
to acknowledge God for his Owner and Master, than the Ox and Ass were to
acknowledge theirs, all is resolved into this, that the people did not
consider, Isa. 1.

3. It must be done with Judgment, which is the effect of such consideration.
When all things have been well weighed that belong to this case, then let this
formed Judgment pass, Lord, I ought to be thine, and no others. Say to him
hereupon, with a convinced Judgment and Conscience, O God, I surrender my self,
as now seeing none has that right in me that thou have; when the Love of
Christ becomes constraining upon Souls, it is because they thus judge, that
they ought no longer to live to themselves, but to him, etc. 2 Cor. 5. 14. 15.
These things last mentioned will imply a rectified mind, which must be
ingredient into this transaction, else it will be defective throughout.

4. It must be done with a fullness of Consent; and herein it chiefly consists,
when the Soul says, Lord, I am now most entirely willing to be thine: This is
your yielding your selves. And hereby the Covenant is struck between God and
you; which consists in the expressed Consent of the parties covenanting in the
matters about which the Covenant is. This Covenant is about the Parties
themselves, who covenant, as the Conjugal Covenant is, which resembles it; viz.
that they shall be one another. God has expressed his consent in his Word and
Gospel, making therein the first overture to you. When you rejoyn your own
consent, the thing is done: This being the sum of his Covenant, I will be your
God, and you shall be my People, as in many places of Scripture it is gathered
up. When therefore, as God has openly testified his willingness to be their
God who shall accept, and take him to be so, you also are willing, and do
consent too, you do now take hold on his Covenant, matters are agreed between
him and you; and you may take those words as spoken to you particularly; I have
entered into Covenant with thee, and thou art become mine, Ezekiel. 16. 8.

But then you must take notice that this is to be done with a full consent,
which that is said to be which determines you, though it be not absolutely
perfect. No grace in any faculty is perfect in this life. But as in humane
affairs, that will is said to be full, which is the spring of answerable
following actions, so it is here. If a man have some inclination to do this or
that, and do it not, it goes for nothing; if he do it, his will is said to be
full, though he have some remaining disinclination. You may be said to yield your
selves to God, with a full consent, when you live afterward as one devoted to
him.

5. Your yielding your selves to God must carry life in it, as the following
words signify; Yield your selves to God as those that are alive from the dead.
It must be a vital act, and have vigor in it. You must be capable of making
that true Judgment of your case, as it is v. 11. of reckoning truly that you are
dead to sin, but alive to God through Jesus Christ. Do it as feeling life to
spring in your souls toward God in your yielding your selves to him. What!
will you offer God a carcass? not the living Sacrifice, which you see is
required, Romans 12. 1. Beg earnestly for his own Spirit of life and power, that
may enable you to offer up a living Soul to the living God.

6. There must be Faith in your yielding your selves. For it is a committing,
or entrusting your selves to God, with the expectation of being saved, and made
happy by him. So Scripture speaks of it, 2 Timothy 2. 12. I know whom I have
believed (or trusted) and that he is able to keep what I have committed to him
against that day. It Is suitable to the gracious nature of God, to his excellent
greatness, to his design, to the Mediatorship of his Son, to his Promise and
Gospel Covenant, and to your own necessities, and the exigency of your own
lost, undone state, that you so yield your selves to him, as a poor creature
ready to perish, expecting, not for your sake, but his own, to be accepted, and
to find mercy with him. You do him the honor which he seeks, and which is most
worthy of a God, the most excellent, and a self-sufficient Being, when you do
thus. You answer the intendment of the whole Gospel-constitution, which bears
this Inscription, To the praise of the glory of his grace, etc. It Is honorable
to him when you take his Word, that they that believe in his Son, shall not
perish, but have everlasting life. You herein set to your Seal that he is true,
and the more fully, and with the more significancy, when upon the credit of it
you yield your selves, with an assurance that he will not destroy or reject a
poor creature that yields to him, and casts its self upon his mercy.

7. Another Ingredient into this yielding of your selves must be Love. As
Faith, in your yielding your selves to God, aims at your own welfare and
salvation; so Love, in doing it, intends his service, and all the duty to him
you are capable of doing him. You must be able to give this as the true reason
of your act, and to resolve it into this Principle; I yield my self to God,
because I love him, and from the unfeigned love I bear to him; to tell the
World; if there were occasion, he has captivated my heart with his
Excellencies and his Love, and hereupon having nothing else, I tender my self
to him, to tell himself, Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I
love thee; and because I do, I present my self to thee; it is all I can do. I
wish my self ten thousand times better for thy blessed sake; and if I had in me
all the Excellencies of many thousand Angels, I were too mean a thing, and such
as nothing but thy own goodness could count worthy thine acceptance; because I
love thee, I covet to be near thee, I covet to be thine, I covet to lead my
life with thee, to dwell in thy presence; far be it from me to be as without
thee in the World as heretofore. I love thee, O Lord, my strength, because
thine own perfections highly deserve it, and because thou have heard my voice,
and have delivered my Soul from death, mine Eyes from tears, and my Feet from
falling, and I yield my self to thee, because I love thee. I make an offer of
my self to be thy servant, thy servant, O Lord, thou have loosed my bonds; and
now I desire to bind my self in new ones to thee, that are never to be loosed.
And you can make no doubt but that it ought to be done therefore with
dispositions and a temper suitable to the state you are now willing to come
into, that of a devoted Servant; viz.

8. With great reverence and humility. For, consider to whom you are tendering
your self; to the high and lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity: To him that has
Heaven for his Throne, and Earth for his Footstool; and in comparison of whom
all the inhabitants of the World are but as Grasshoppers, and the Nations of the
Earth as the drop of a bucket, and the dust of the Balance, etc. Yea to him
against whom you have sinned, and before whose pure eyes, you cannot, in your
self, but appear most offensively impure; so that you have reason to be ashamed
and blush to lift up your eyes before him.

9. And yet it surely ought to be with great joy and gladness of heart, that he
has expressed himself willing to accept such as you, and that he has made you
willing to yield your selves. The very thought should make your heart leap and
spring within you, that he should ever have bespoken such as we are to yield
our selves to him! when he might have neglected us, and let us wander endlesly,
without ever looking after us more. How should it glad your hearts this day, to
have such a message brought you from the great God, and which you find is
written in his own Word, to yield your selves to him! Should not your hearts
answer with wonder; And blessed Lord! Art thou willing again to have to do with
us! who left thee having no cause, and who returning can be of no use to thee!
O blessed be God that we may yield our selves back unto him! that we are
invited and encouraged to it. And you have cause to bless God, and rejoice, if
this day you feel your heart willing to yield your selves to him, and become
his. Do you indeed find your selves willing? Psa. 110. 3.
You are willing in the day of his power. This is the day of his power upon
your hearts. Many are called and refuse; he often stretches out his hands,
Prove. 1. 24.
and no man regards. Perhaps you have been called upon often before this day to
do this same thing, and neglected it, had no heart to it; and he might have
said to you; Now I will never treat with you more; if you should call, I will
not hear; if you stretch out your hands, I will not regard it, but laugh at
your destruction, and mock when your fear comes. But if now he is pleased to
call once more, your hearts do answer; Lord, here we are, we are now ready to
surrender our selves; you may conclude he has poured out his Spirit upon you:
The Spirit of the Lord is now moving upon this Assembly, this is indeed a
joyful day, Psalm. 118.
the day which he has himself made, and you ought to rejoice and be glad in
it. When the people in David's days offered of their substance to God for the
service of his house, it is said, The people rejoiced for that they offered
willingly: 1 Chronicles. 29. 9.
And David, we are told, blessed God before all the Congregation -- saying,
Thine, O Lord, is the greatness and the power -- But who am I, and what is my
people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? for all
things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. If you are this day
willing to offer your selves, how much is this a greater thing! and it comes of
him, and it is of his own you are now giving him; for he had a most
unquestionable right in you before. See the Treatise of Self-dedication from p.
71. to 103.


10. You should do it with solemnity. For, have you ever had a business of
greater importance to transact in all your days? If you were to dispose of an
Estate, or a Child, would you not have all things be as express, and clear, as
may be? and would not they insist to have it so, with whom you deal in any such
affair? And is there not a solemnity belonging to all such transactions?
especially if you were to dispose of your self; as in the Conjugal Covenant?
though that is to be but for this short uncertain time of life; so as that the
relation you enter into to day, may be by death dissolved and broken off again
to morrow: How much more explicit, clear, and solemn, should this your
covenanting with God in Christ be? wherein you are to make over your Soul to
him? and for eternity. You are to become his, under the bond of an everlasting
Covenant. You are entering a relation never to be broken off. This God is to be
your God for ever and ever, and upon the same terms you are to be his. Is your
Immortal Soul of less account with you than the temporal concernments of a
mortal Child, that you are placing out but for a term of years that soon
expires? yea or than a piece of Ground, or an Horse, or a Sheep, about which
how punctual and express are your Bargains and Contracts wont to be? Or are
only the matters of your Soul, and wherein you have to do with the great God,
to be slightly managed? or to be huddled up in confusion? or to be slid over in
silent intimations? It Is true, that so express and solemn dealing in yielding
and giving up your selves to God, is not needful on his part, who understands
sincerity without any expression of yours; but it is needful on your part, that
a deep and lasting impression may be made upon your Spirits; which if you be
sincere, you will not only feel your selves to need, but your own temper and
inclination will prompt you to it; accounting you can never be under bonds
strong and sure enough to him: You will not only apprehend necessity, but will
relish and taste pleasure in any such transaction with the blessed God, in
avouching him to be your God, and your self to be his. The more solemn it is,
the more grateful it will be to you.

Do so then; Fall before his Throne; Prostrate your self at his footstool; and
having chosen your fit season, when nothing may interrupt you; and having shut
up your self with him, pour out your Soul to him; tell him you are now come on
purpose, to offer your selves to him as his own. O that you would not let this
night pass without doing so! Tell him you have too long neglected him, and
forgotten to whom you belonged; humbly beseech him for his pardon, and that he
will now accept of you, for your Redeemer's sake, as being through his grace
resolved never to live so great a stranger to him, or be such a wanderer from
him more. And when you have done so, remember the time; let it be with you a
noted memorable day, as you would be sure to keep the day in memory when you
became such a ones Servant or Tenant, or your Marriage-day: Renew this your
agreement with God often, but forget it never.

Perhaps some may say, But what needs all this? were we not once devoted and
given up to God in Baptism? and is not that sufficient? To what purpose should
we do again a thing that has once been so solemnly done?

But here I desire you to consider, Are you never to become the Lords by your
own choice? Are you always to be Christians, only by another's Christianity,
not by your own? And again, Have you not broken your Baptismal Vow? have you
not forgot it for the most part ever since? I am afraid too many never think of
any such matter at all, that ever they were devoted to God by others, but only
upon such an occasion as this, to make it an excuse that they may never do such
a thing themselves. And consider, were these Christian Romans on whom the
Apostle presses this duty never Baptized, think you? Read over the foregoing
part of the Chapter, wherein you find him putting them in mind that they had
been baptized into Christ's death, and buried with him in baptism, and that
therefore this was to be an argument to them why they should yield themselves
to God; not why they should not.

Wherefore our way is now plain and open to what we have further to do, viz.

2. To apply this practical Doctrine, and press the Precept further upon you,
which has been opened to you, and pressed by parts in some measure already, in
our insisting on the several heads, which you have seen do belong to it; and
are one way or other comprehended in it. Which will therefore make this latter
part of our work the shorter, and capable of being dispatched in the fewer
words; and with blessed effect, if the Spirit of the living God shall vouchsafe
to cooperate, and deal with your hearts and mine. Shall we then all agree upon
this thing? Shall we unite in one resolution, We will be the Lords? Shall every
one say in his own heart, For my part, I will, and so will I, and so will I?
Come now, one and all. This is no unlawful confederacy, it is a blessed
combination! Come then, let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual
Covenant, Jer. 50. 5.
not to be forgotten. With whatsoever after-solemnity, you may renew this
Obligation, and Bond of God upon your Souls, as I hope you will do it, every
one apart, in your Closets, or in any corner, and you cannot do it too fully,
or too often; yet let us now all resolve the thing; and this assembly make a
joint-surrender, and oblation of it self to the great God our Sovereign
rightful Lord, through our blessed Redeemer and Mediator, by the Eternal
Spirit, (which I hope is breathing and at work among us,) as one living
sacrifice, as all of us, alive from the dead, to be for ever sacred to him? O
blessed Assembly! O happy act and deed! With how grateful and well-pleasing an
odor will the kindness and dutifulness of this Offering ascend, and be
received above! God will accept, Heaven will rejoice, Angels will concur, and
gladly fall in with us. We hereby adjoin our selves in relation, and in heart
and spirit, to the general Assembly, to the Church of the Firstborn Ones
written in Heaven, to the innumerable Company of Angels, and to the Spirits of
just men made perfect, and within a little while shall be actually among them.
Is it possible there should be now among us any dissenting Vote? Consider,

1. It Is a plain and unquestionable thing you are pressed unto: A thing that
admits of no dispute, and against which you have nothing to say, and about
which you cannot but be already convinced. And it is a matter full of danger,
and upon which tremendous consequences depend, to go on in any practice, or in
any neglect, against a conviction of Judgment and Conscience. For your own
Heart and Conscience must condemn you if you consider, and it betrays you if
you consider not. How fearful a thing is it for a man to carry his own Doom in
his own Bosom! to go up and down the World with a Self-condemning Heart, if it
be awake, and which if it be not, yet cannot sleep always, and must awake with
the greater terror at length. And in so plain case it is most certainly Gods
Deputy, and speaks his Mind; If our hearts condemn us, 1 John 3. 20.
God is greater than our hearts, etc.

2. It Is that therefore the refusal whereof none of you would avow. Who among
us can have the confidence to stand forth and say, I will be none of the Lords?
Would any man be content to go with this writ upon his Forehead from day to
day? And does not that signify such a refusal to be a shameful thing? That
must needs be an ill temper of Mind which one would be ashamed any one should
know.

3. And it is a mean thing to dissemble, to be willing to be thought, and
counted what we are not, or to do what in truth we do not.

4. And considering what inspection we are under, it is a vain thing. For do we
not know that eyes which are as a flame of fire, behold us, and pierce into our
very Souls? Do we not know all things in us are naked and manifest to him with
whom we have to do? Heb. 4. 12.
And that he discerns it, if there be any heart among us that is not sincere in
this thing?

5. Consider that this is the very design of the Gospel you live under. What
does it signify or intend, but to recall Apostate Creatures back again to God?
What is the Christian Religion you profess, but a State of devotedness to God,
under the conduct, and thorough the mediation of Christ? You frustrate the
Gospel, and make your Religion a nullity, and an empty name till you do this.

6. And how will you lift up your heads at last in the great day? and before
this God the judge of all? You cannot now plead ignorance. If perhaps any among
you have not been formerly so expressly called, and urged to this yielding your
selves to God; now you are: and from his own plain Word it is chargd upon you.
Will not this be remembered hereafter? What will you say when the great God
whose Creature you are, speaks to you with the voice of Thunder, and bids you
gird up your Loins, and give him an answer? Were you not on such a day, in such
a place demanded and claimed in my Name? Were you not told, were you not
convinced you ought to yield your selves to me, and yet you did it not? Are you
prepared to contest with your Maker? Where is your right, where is your power,
to stand against me in this contest?

7. But if you sincerely yield your selves, the main Controversy is at end
between the Great God and you. All your former sins are pardoned and done away
at once. Those glad-tydings you have often heard that import nothing but glory
to God in the highest, peace on earth, and good will toward men, plainly show
that the Great God whom you had offended, has no design to destroy you, but
only to make you yield, and give him back his own. Though you have formerly
lived a wandering life, and been as a Vagabond on the Earth from your true
Owner, it will be all forgotten. How readily was the returining Prodigal
received! and so will you. How quiet rest will you have this night, when upon
such terms there is a reconciliation between God and you! You have given him
his own, and he is pleased, and most of all for this that he has you now to
save you. You were his to destroy before, now you are his to save. He could
easily destroy you against your will, but it is only with your will, he having
made you willing, that he must save you. And his bidding you yield, implies his
willingness to do so. O how much of Gospel is there in this invitation to you
to yield your selves to God! consider it as the voice of Grace. Will he that
bids a poor wretch yield it self, reject or destroy when it does so?

8. And how happily may you now live the rest of your days in this World. You
will live under his care, for will he not take care of his own, those that are
of his own House? An Infidel would. You are now of his Family, under his
immediate Government, and under his continual Blessing.

And were you now to give an account where you have been to day, and what you
have been doing: If you say, you have been engaged this day in a solemn treaty
with the Lord of Heaven and Earth, about yielding your selves to him: And it be
further asked; Well, and what was the issue? Have you agreed? Must you, any of
you be obliged by the truth of the case to say, No; astonishing answer! What!
Have thou been treating with the Great God, the God of thy life, and not
agreed? What, man! Did he demand of thee any unreasonable thing? Only to yield
my self. Why that was in all the World the most reasonable thing. Wretched
Creature, whither now will thou go? What will thou do with thy self? Where will thou lay thy hated head? But if you can say, Blessed be God I gladly agreed to
the Proposal: He gave me the Grace not to deny him: Then may it be said this
was a good days work, and you will have cause to bless God for this day as long
as you have a day to live.

FINIS.

