A DISCOURSE OF AN Unconverted Man's Enmity, AGAINST GOD.

Preached to a Country Congregation, by J. H. And published by one who wrote it
from his Mouth.

LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall in the Year 1700.

COLOS. I. 21. And you that were sometime alienated, and enemies in your mind
by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled.
IT is a great and wonderful Context, whereof these words are a part, which the
time will not allow me to look into; but presently to fall on the consideration
of the words in themselves; which briefly represent to us,

The wretched and horrid state of men, yet unconverted, and not brought home to
God.

The happy state of those that are reduced, and brought home to him.

The former in these words, And you that were sometime alienated, and enemies
in your mind by wicked works.

The latter in those words, Yet now has he reconciled.

I shall apply my Discourse to the former part of the words, and thence observe;

That men, in their unconverted state, are alienated from God, and enemies to
him by their wicked works.

This I shall endeavor,

1. To explain, and show you the meaning of it.

2. Evince, and let you see the truth of it.

3. Apply it.

1. For the meaning of it. It Is evident, that it is the unconverted state of
man that is here reflected upon, and referred unto. You that were sometime
alienated, and enemies in your mind by wicked works. They were so before they
were turned to God. He writes to those Colossians, as to Converts, to them that
were Saints and faithful Brethren in Christ, Verse. 2. to them that were now
Believers in Christ, and Lovers of the Saints, V. 4. telling them, they
sometimes had been enemies by wicked works. Before conversion, they had as is
elsewhere said, their understandings darkened, being alienated from the life of
God; walking, as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind, Ephesians. 4.
18. compared with the preceding Verse. This is the deplorable condition of the
unconverted World. They are alienated from, and enemies to God, by wicked works.

We are to consider, what this alienation from God does import. It signifies,
estrangement, unacquaintance with God; and that without any inclination toward
him, or dispostion to seek his acquaintance. The word is emphatical, it
signifies people of another Country. You were like people of another Country.
Of such a different Language, Manners, and Behavior, they that are converted
are to you, and you to them. You are estranged to their Speech, Customs, and
Ways. All that is of God was strange to you. Men in their unconverted state are
strangers to God. Wicked men do not understand the words of the Gospel, Joh. 8.
43. What relates to the Kingdom of God the unconverted man dislikes, Job 21.
14. They say to God, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.
Man, who was originally made for the service of God, and communion with him, is
now so degenerated, that he is become a mere stranger to him.

The next word to be taken notice of, is, Enemies, which may seem to add
somewhat to the former word alienated. There is not only no inclination toward
God; but there is a disinclination Not only no affection, but a disaffection.
The carnal mind is enmity to God. And the effects of this enmity are obvious.
This alienation from God is voluntary, affected, and chosen. Men in their
unconverted state, are not only strangers to God, but enemies against God, and
that in their minds. A most fearful case, full of astonishment, that the very
mind of man, the offspring of God, the paternal mind, as an Heathen called
him; that this most excellent part, or power belonging to the nature of man,
should be poisoned with malignity, and envenomed with enmity against the
glorious ever-blessed God! The mind of man; his thinking power; the fountain of
thoughts, should be set against God, who gave him this power to think! Yet into
this Reason must every man's unacquaintance with God be resolved. They know not
God, and converse not with him, only because they have no mind to it. That
noble faculty in man, that resembles the nature of God, is turned off from him,
and set on vain things that cannot profit; as also upon wicked and impure
things, that render them more unlike to God, and disaffected to him.

By wicked works] which must have a double reference.

1. Former wicked works, as done by them.

2. Future wicked works, as resolved on by them.

1. The former wicked works, which they have done, have more and more
habituated their Souls unto a state of distance from God. The longer they live,
the longer they sin. And the longer they sin, the more they are confirmed in
their enmity against God.

2. Future wicked works, as resolved on to be done. They purpose to live as
they have done, and give themselves the same liberty in sin as before, and will
not know God, or be acquainted with him, lest they should be drawn off from
their resolved sinful course. For the knowledge of God, and a course of sin are
inconsistent things, 1 Cor. 15. 34. Awake to righteousness and sin not, for
some have not the knowledge of God. This is the condemnation, Joh. 3. 19. that
light is come into the world; but men love darkness rather than light, because
their deeds are evil. They hate the light, because they will not have their
course altered. They resolve to do as they have done. And that light, which
brings with it a tendency to the obeying of God, they cannot endure. But then,
as this alienation of mind, and enmity are against the light that reveals God,
they finally terminate on the blessed God himself. As God is the term of
Reconciliation, so he is the term of this enmity and alienation. Wicked men
look on God with enmity of mind under several notion;

1. As he claims to be their Owner. When he claims a principal propriety in
them; when he insists on his right in them, as their Creator, as having made
them out of nothing. When God owns, or claims them as their Lord, that first
signifies, he is their Proprietor, or one, to whom they belong. But they say,
they are their own. If we have to do with God, we must quit claim to our
selves, and look on God as our Owner. But this is fixed in the hearts of men,
we will be our own; we will not consent to the claim which God makes to us. Our
tongues are our own, Psalm. 12. 4. Wicked men might as well say the same thing
of their whole selves, our bodies, strength, time, parts, etc. are our own, and
who is Lord over us.

If you consider God under the notion of a Ruler, as well as an Owner. Why
should not God rule over, and govern his own? But this the spirit of man can by
no means comport withal; though it is but reasonable, that he who gave men their
Beings, should give them Laws; and that he who gave life, should also give the
rule of life. But this man, in his degenerate state, will by no means admit of.
There are two things considerable in the Will of God, which the mind of man
cannot comply withal.

The Sovereignty, and the Holiness of it.

1. The Sovereignty of God's Will. We must look on God's Will as absolutely
Sovereign. Man must look on God's Will to be above his Will; so as that man
must cross his own will, to comport with an higher will than his. But this
apostatized man will not do; and therefore he is at enmity with God; he will
not submit to the Will of God, as superior to his Will. And then

2. There is the Holiness of God's Will. His Law is a holy Law, and the renewed
man therefore loves it. But because it is holy, therefore the unregenerate man
dislikes it.

3. Lastly, God is considered under the notion of our end, our last end, as he
is to be glorified, and enjoyed by us. There is a disaffection to God in the
hearts of unregenerate men in this regard also. The spirit of man is opposite
to living to the glory of God. Every one sets up for himself. I will be my own
end. It shall be the business of my whole life to please my self. Therefore,
when God is represented as our end, as in the 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether you eat,
or drink, or whatever you do, do all to the glory of God. And as it is in the 2
Cor. 5. 15. No man is to live to himself, etc. The great design of our being
delivered from the Law, (viz. as a cursing, condemning Law is) that we may live
to God, Gal. 2. 19. I am dead to the Law, that I might live to God. This the
unrenewed heart cannot comport with. The last and great design of all our
actions must terminate on God. Now self is set up, as the great Idol, in
opposition to God, all the world over; and the spirits of men grow by custom
more and more disaffected to God in this respect.

Again, God would be owned by us for our best good. This should be the sense of
our Souls toward him. So it was with the Psalmist, Psalm. 73. 25. Whom have I
in heaven but thee, etc. But says the unregenerate Soul, the World is better to
me than God. And it is upon this account, that when Overtures are made of
changing this state, the unregenerate mind opposes it.

Thus have you this Doctrine explained, and opened. I come now in the

2d. Place, To evince the truth of this Doctrine, and that by two Heads of
Arguments,

Partly from our selves, and partly from God.

1. From our selves. It Is an alienation and enmity of mind, that keeps men off
from God, and Reconciliation with him, which will plainly appear,

1. If we consider, that our minds are capable of knowing God. Such a thing is
the mind of man, which was originally made for such an exercise, as to be taken
up principally with things relating to God. Our minds can apprehend what is
meant by the nature of God, as a Being of uncreated Perfection, in whom all
Power, Wisdom, and Goodness do meet; who fills Heaven and Earth, and from
everlasting was God. Our minds tell us, that we have a capacity thus to
conceive of God. It Is in the capacity of man's nature, to mind God, as well as
to mind vanity; but does it not. And whence does this proceed, but from enmity,
an alienation of the mind from God?

2. This appears in that men are wilfully ignorant of God, and are destitute of
the knowledge of him out of choice; ignorant, and are willing to be so. This
speaks enmity, and alienation of mind more expressly, and fully. That they are
capable of knowing God, and yet are ignorant of him, leaves no other cause
assignable. But their desiring so to be, plainly assigns this cause, Romans 1.
28. They liked not to retain God in their knowledge. It Is not grateful to them,
Job 21. 14. We desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Men are ignorant willingly
of that God, who made the world, and all things therein, 2 Pet. 3. 5. For this
they are willingly ignorant, etc. They will not know God, though his visible
Works show his invisible Power, and Godhead, Romans 1. 19, 20. Now this can
signify nothing but auenation and enmity of mind. Men are willing and
industrious to know other things, and labor after the knowledge of them; but
they decline the knowledge of God, and his ways, being alienated from God,
through the blindness of their hearts, Ephesians. 4. 18. This heart-blindness is
chosen, and voluntary blindness, signifies their having no mind or will to
things of that nature.

But now the voluntariness of this ignorance of God, and the enmity that is,
consequently, in it, appears evidently in two sorts of persons.

1. In many that are of the more knowing and inquisitive sort, who do all they
can to make themselves notional Atheists; to blot, or raze the notion of God
out of their minds. Of them I shall say little here. They do their utmost, but
in vain. It will stick as close to them as their thinking Power. But their
attempt shows their enmity. For they are content to admit the grossest
Absurdities into their minds, rather than permit that notion to remain
unmolested there. Rather imagine such a curious frame of things, as this World
is, to have come by chance, than that it had a wise, just, holy, as well as
powerful, Maker. They would count it an absurdity, even unto madness, to think
the exquisite picture of a Man, or a Tree, to have happened by chance; and can
allow themselves to be so absurd, as to think a Man himself, or a Tree, to be
causal Productions. Is not this the height of enmity!

2. In the unthinking generality; of whom, yet unconverted out of the state of
Apostasy, it is said, they are fools, as is the usual Language of Scripture,
concerning wicked, or unconverted men; and that such fools, though they never
offer at saying in their minds, much less with their mouths; yet they say in
their hearts, no God; i. e. not there is none; for there is no [is] in the
Hebrew Text. The words may rather go in the Optative form, than the Indicative,
O that there were none! The notion is let alone, while it reaches not their
hearts. If it do, they only wish it were otherwise. This speaks their enmity
the more; for the notion lies a continual testimony against the bent of their
hearts, and constant practice; that, while they own a God, they never fear, nor
love him accordingly. And they grossly misrepresent him, sometimes as all made
up of Mercy, without Justice, or Holiness; and so think they need no
Reconciliation to him; he and they are well agreed already. Sometimes think of
him, as merciless, and irreconcilable; and therefore, never look after being
reconciled to him.

3. It appears hence, that men do so seldom think of God, when as a thought of
God may be as soon thought as any other, and would cost us as little. Why not
as well on God, as upon any of those vanities, about which they are commonly
employed? It Is a wonderful thing to consider, how man is capable of forming a
thought! how a thought arises in our minds! And how sad is it to a consider,
that though God has given to man a thinking power, yet they will not think of
him! God has given to man a mind that can think, and think on him, as well as
on any thing else. My body cannot think, if my mind and spirit is gone: Though
God gave man the power of thought; yet men will not use or employ their
thoughts, otherwise than about vain or forbidden things. God forms the Spirit
of man within him; has put an immortal Spirit into him, whence a spring of
thoughts might ascend Heaven-wards. When we have thousands of Objects to choose
of, we think of any thing rather than God! And not only turn this way, or that,
besides him; but tend continually downwards in opposition to him. Yea, men
cannot endure to be put in mind of God. The serious mention of his Name is
distastful. Whence can this proceed, that a thought of God cast in, is thrown
out, as Fire from one's Bosom; whence is it, but from the enmity of mind, that
is in man against God?

4. It further appears hence, That men are so little concerned about the Favor
of God. Whomsoever we love, we naturally value their love. But whether God be a
Friend, or an Enemy, it is all one to the unrenewed Soul, if there be no
sensible effects of his displeasure. The men of this World only value its
Favors. The Favor of God they value not. Whereas in his Favor is Life, in
the account of holy and good men, Psalm. 30. 5. yea, they judge his
loving kindness is better than life without it, Psalm. 63. 3. When men shall go
from day to day without considering, whether God has a Favor for them, or
not; whether they are accepted, or not; whether they have found grace in his
eyes, or not, etc. What does this declare, but an enmity of mind, and
alienation from God? If men had true love for God, it could not be, but they
would greatly value his love.

5 That men do so little converse, and walk with God, does speak a fixed
alienation of mind, and enmity against God. Walking with God includes knowing,
and minding him; but it adds all other motions of Soul toward him, together
with continuance, and approving our selves to him therein. Now agreement is
required to walking with God, Amos 3. 3. Can two walk together, unless they be
agreed? Hos. 3. 3. Men walk not with God, because they are not come to an
agreement with him. God's agreement with us, and ours with him, is, that we may
walk together. If we walk not with God, it is because there is no agreement,
and what does that import, but an alienation of mind from God. Says God, I
would not have you live in the World at so great a distance from me, I would
walk with you, and have you walk with me; and for this end, I would come to an
agreement with you. But Sinners will not come to any agreement with God; and
thence it comes to pass, that they walk not with God; they begin the day
without God, walk all the day long without God, lie down at night without God;
and the reason is, because there is no agreement; and that denotes enmity.
Especially considering,

6. That daily converse with God would cost us nothing. To have any man's
thoughts full of Heaven, and full of holy fear and reverence of God, etc.
(which is included in walking with God) what inconvenience is in this? what
business will this hinder? when a man goes about his ordinary affairs, will it
do any hurt to take God with him? No business will go on the worse for it, it
will not detract from the success of our affairs, 1 Cor. 7. 24. Let every man
wherein he is called, therein abide with God. Let your state be what it will,
there can be no business in this World, but what you may do with God, as well
as without God, and much better.

7. Which makes the matter yet plainer. How uncomfortably do men live in this
World, by reason of their distance from God, and unacquaintedness with him, Job
35. 10. But no one says, where is God my maker, who gives Songs in the night.
They choose rather to groan under their Burdens alone, than cry to God their
maker, as at the 9th Verse of that Chapter. When men will endure the greatest
extremity, rather than apply themselves to God; what does this resolve into,
but enmity against God?

8. That men do so universally disobey God bespeaks alienation and enmity of
mind. As Obedienc proceeds from Love; so Disobedience proceeds from Enmity. And
for this* I shall only instance in two great Precepts, wherein the Mind and
Will of God is expressed, which I mention, and insist upon (though briefly) as
things that concern the constant and daily practice of every Christian.

1. A course of Prayer to God in secret.

2. And having our Conversation in Heaven. How express are both these Precepts
in the same Chapter; the former, Matthew. 6. 6. the latter, verse. 19, 20, 21. Now
consider, whether our disobedience to these two Precepts do not discover great
enmity in our Hearts against God? What, to refuse to pray, and pour out our
Souls to him in secret? To refuse placing our Treasure, and our Hearts in
Heaven, what does this signify, but aversion, and a disaffected Heart?

Let us consider each of them severally and apart by it self.

We are a Christian Assembly: How should it startle us to be (any of us)
convicted of enmity against God, under the Christian Name, in two, so plain
cases?

1. For Prayer, it is a charge laid upon all persons, considered in their single
and personal capacity, Matthew. 6. 6. But thou when thou prayest, enter into thy
Closet, and when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in
secret. I fear, that most of them, who bear the Christian Name, carry the
matter so, as if there were no such place in the Bible. When the mind and will
of God is made known to us by his Son, who came out of his Bosom, that he will
be sought unto; and that not only publicly, but secretly, and daily: that as
we are taught by our Lord himself, to pray for our daily Bread, and the
forgiveness of our daily trespasses; we are also to pray in secret to him that
sees in secret. Can such commands be constantly neglected and disobeyed, and
not signify the contrary bent of our will, especially when we consider, that it
is enjoined us for our own good? It would be profane to say, what profit is it
to us to call upon the Almighty? But it is most justly to be said, what profit
is it to the Almighty that we call upon him? It is honorable to him, but very
profitable to our selves. If we know not how to pray in a corner; confessing
our sins, and supplicating for mercy; we cannot but live miserable lives. When
therefore this is not done, whence is it, but from an enmity of mind? To a
Friend we can unbosom our selves; not to an Enemy.

I might also enlarge upon Family Prayer. But if Closet Prayer were seriously
minded, you that have Families would not dare to neglect Prayer with them too.
But if either be performed with coldness, and indifferency, it makes the matter
worse, or more plainly bad; and shows, it is not love, or any lively affection
that puts you upon praying, but a frightened Conscience only. And a miserably
mistaken, deluded one, that makes you think, the God you pray to, will be
mocked or trifl'd with, or that cannot perceive, whether your Heart be with
him, or against him. And so instead of worshipping him, or giving him honor in
that performance, you reproach and affront him. And all this while, how vastly
does the temper of your mind disagree with the mind of God. I would, says the
blessed God, have a course of Prayer run through the whole course of your
lives; and all this that your Hearts may be lifted up from Earth to Heaven;
that your Hearts may be in Heaven every day, according to Mat. 6. 19. Lay not
up for your selves treasures on Earth; but treasures in Heaven, etc. Where your
treasure is, there will your hearts be also. And so we are led to the other
Precept mentioned before.

2. As to a Heavenly Conversation, God would not have reasonable Creatures, who
have intelligent spirits about them, to grovel and crawl like Worms in the Dust
of this lower World, as if they had no nobler sort of Objects to converse with,
than the things of this Earth; nothing fitter for the contemplation, exercise,
and enjoyment of an immortal mind. The Saints are finally designed for an
inheritance in light, Colos. 1. 12. and their thoughts and affections ought to
be there before hand; that they may become meet for that inheritance. Will it
do a man any harm to have frequent forethoughts of the everlasting joy, purity,
and bliss of the heavenly state! How joyous and pleasant must it be! And why
are we called Christians, if he, who is our Lord, and Teacher, revealing his
mind to us, and expressly charging us, to seek first the Kingdom of God, to set
our affections on the things above, etc. shall not be regarded? Why is not
Heaven every day in our thoughts? Why will we lose the pleasure of an heavenly
life, and exchange it for earthly care, and trouble, or vanity, at the best?
Why is it? no other reason can be given, but only an alienation of our minds
from God.

9. Another Argument to prove this alienation, and enmity against God, is, the
unsuccessfulness of the Gospel, which can be resolvable into nothing else, but
such an enmity. The design of the Gospel is to bring us into an Union with the
Son of God, and to believe on him whom the Father has sent. Christ seeks to
gather in Souls to God; but they will not be gathered. This is matter of
fearful consideration, that when God is calling after men by his own Son, that
there be so few that will come to him. How few are there that say, give me
Christ, or I am lost? None can reconcile me to God but Christ? You are daily
besought in Christ's stead to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 20. but in vain! What
does this signify, but obstinate, invincible enmity?

2. Another head of Arguments may be taken from several considerations that we
may have of God in this matter, whence it will appear, that nothing but enmity
on our parts keeps us at that distance from God, as we generally are at. And
consider to that purpose;

1. That God is the God of all Grace, the fountain of Goodness, the element of
Love. Why are men at that distance from him, who is Goodness, and Grace, and
Love it self? The reason is not on God's part, 1 John 4. 16. God is love, and
he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. What can our so
great distance from this God signify! from the most perfect, the most excellent
goodness! but the most horrid kind, and the highest pitch of enmity! Did men
apprehend this, what frightful monsters would they appear to themselves! This
is not only a plain, but a terrible declaration of a most unaccountable enmity
on our part.

2. God is still pleased to continue our Race on Earth; a succession of men in
this World, from age to age, made after his own Image, with minds, and spirits
that are intelligent, and immortal, which declares a strong propension in God
toward such a sort of creatures; the inhabitants of this lower World, though
degenerated, and fallen from him. Notwithstanding all their neglect of him in
former ages; yet new generations of men still spring up, capable of knowing,
and serving him, Prove. 8. 31. In the foreseen height of man's enmity, this was
the steady bent of his mind toward them, to rejoice in the habitable parts of
this earth, and to have his delights with the sons of men. Thus also in the 2 Chronicles. 6. 18. do we find Solomon in a rapture of admiration on this account:
But will God in every deed dwell with men on earth, etc! And the Psalmist,
Psalm. 68. 18. That gifts are given to the rebellious (the most insolent of
enemies) that the Lord God might dwell among them. How admirable and
unconceivable a wonder is this! The heaven of heavens cannot contain him, and
will he yet dwell with men on earth! And we yet find, notwithstanding God's
great condescension, that there is still a distance. Whence can this be, but
from man's aversion, and enmity of mind against God? Thus are men still
requiting God evil for his goodness. God will dwell with men on Earth, but men
will not dwell with him, nor admit of his dwelling with them. They say to him,
depart from us, Job 21. 14. It Is thus from age to age, and generation to
generation, which shows God's goodness on his part, and the enmity on man's
part. See to this purpose, Psalm 14. and 53. the beginning of each.

3. Consider the forbearance of God toward you, while you are continually at
mercy. With what patience does he spare you, though your own hearts must tell
you, that you are offending creatures, and whom he can destroy in a moment! He
spares you that neglect him. He is not willing that you should perish; but come
to the knowledge of the truth, that you may be saved; by which he calls, and
leads you to repentance, Romans 2. 4. On God's part here is a kind intention; but
on man's part nothing but persevering enmity.

4. Consider God's large and wonderful bounty toward the Children of men in
this World, and the design of it, Acts 17. 25, 26. He gives to all life, and
breath, and all things, that they might seek after him, Psalm. 68. 19. He daily
loadeth us with his benefits. He gives us all things richly to enjoy. Act. 14.
17. God leaves not himself without witness, that he does men good. He gives men
Rain from Heaven, when they want it, and, when unseasonable, he withholds it.
It Is a great thing to understand the loving kindness of the Lord, Psalm. 107.
42. his wonderful works toward the children of men; to understand our Mercies
and Comforts, and what their meaning, and design is. By Mercies to our outward
man, God designs to draw our hearts and minds to himself. Mercies are bestowed
on them that have the power of thought, to consider the end of all God's
Mercies. It Is bespeaking, and seeking to win our hearts to himself, Hos. 11. 4.
It Is drawing us with those cords of a man, with bands of love; which plainly
shows, what the case requires; that the minds and hearts of men are very
averse, and alienated from him, and therefore need such drawing.

5. And that which is more than all the rest, is God's sending his Son into the
World, to procure terms of peace for us, and then to treat with us thereupon;
and that in him he is reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Does not
Reconciliation suppose enmity, as here, and in the Text. You that were enemies
in your minds -- yet has he reconciled. As we have noted, that on our parts,
our withstanding, and too commonly frustrating his Overtures, speaks enmity,
and obstinacy therein; so on his part, those Overtures themselves speak it too.
Here is the greatest kindness and good will, on God's part, that can be
conceived. But it supposes, what we are evincing, ill will in us. Christ came
to seek and save that which was lost. What a lost state was our state! What to
be engaged in a War against him that made us! Woe to him that strives with his
Maker, Isa. 45. 9. Fallen man is little apprehensive of it now. If we continue
unreconciled to the last, at death it will be understood what a lost state we
are in. Upon this account it will then appear; but this was our state before,
when it appeared not. In this state Christ pitied us, when we had no pity for
our selves. Christ came not into the World to save men only at the hour of
their death from Hell; but to raise up to himself a willing people, that may
serve and glorify God in their life on Earth. He is for this purpose intent on
this reconciling design. And how earnest, how alluring were his Solicitations
in the days of his Flesh! Come to me all ye that are weary -- He that comes to
me, I will in no wise cast out. How pathetical his lamentations for the
unreconcilable! O that thou had known the things belonging to thy peace --
And his blood was shed at last, as the blood of Propitiation, of a reconciling
Sacrifice, first, to reconcile God's Justice to us; but thereupon also, as in
this Context, Having made peace by the blood of his cross, verse. 20. to
vanquish our enmity, to reconcile us who were enemies in our minds -- verse. 21,
22.

6. Consider Christ sending, and continuing from Age to Age the Gospel in the
World; the design whereof may be understood by the manifest import and
substance of it, and by the titles given to it. As it reveals Christ, the
Mediator, the Peacemaker, in his Person, Natures, Offices, Acts, Sufferings,
and Performances. As it contains the great commands of Repentance toward God,
and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, with the promises of Pardon and Eternal
Life, with whatsoever is requisite to our present good state Godward, and our
final blessedness in him. As also the various enforcements of such Precepts,
and confirmations of such Promises, with copious Explications of the one and
the other.

And as it is called, the Ministry of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 18. The word
wherein Peace is preached by Jesus Christ, Act. 10. 36. The Gospel of peace,
and of glad tidings, Romans 10. 15. as that very word Gospel signifies.

This Gospel was, in its clearer manifestation, at the fullness of time,
introduced with great magnificence, and solemnity into the world, as the Law
had been, by the Ministry of Angels. When the Sun of Righteousness, the light
of the world was arising, and dawning upon it; then did a multitude of the
Heavenly Host appear, praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest,
peace on earth, and good will toward men, Luke 2. 13, 14.

But this Gospel is not a more express declaration of God's good will toward
men; than their deportment under it, their continuing to live, as without God
in the world, is of their ill will, disaffection, and enmity against God.

7. And lastly, The strivings of the Spirit in the Hearts of Ministers
preaching the Gospel, and with the Souls of men to whom it is preached, show,
that there is a mighty enmity to be overcome.

1. God's giving forth his Spirit to Ministers, enabling them to strive with
Sinners, to bring them to Christ; according to the working of that power, which
works in them mightily, Colos. 1. ult. What need of such striving, but that
there is a great enmity in the minds of People to be conquered and overcome?
Sometimes we read of Ministers of the Gospel weeping over Souls, who, for their
too intent minding of earthly things, are called enemies to the Cross of
Christ, Phil. 3. 18. Sometimes they are ready to breath out their own Souls
toward them, among whom they labor, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 8. Sometimes represented, as
traveling in birth with them that are committed to their charge, Gal. 4. 19.
There are Ministers, whose Hearts are in pangs and agonies for the Souls of
Sinners, when the things of God are too apparently neglected, and not regarded
by them; and when they see destruction from the Almighty is not a terror to
them; and while they visibly take the way that takes hold of Hell, and leads
down to the chambers of death. They would, if possible, save them with fear,
and pluck them, as firebrands, out of the fire; the fire of their own lusts,
and fervent enmity against God and Godliness, and save them from his flaming
wrath. Is all this unncecessary, and what makes it necessary, but that there is
a counterstriving, an enmity working in the Hearts of men, against the Spirits
striving in the Ministry, to be overcome?

2. The Spirit also strives immediately with the Souls of Sinners, and pleads
with them, sometimes, as a Spirit of conviction, illumination, fear and dread;
sometimes, as a Spirit of Grace, woing, and beseeching; and when his motions
are not complied with, there are complaints of men's grieving, vexing,
quenching, resisting the Spirit, Acts 7. 51. Which resistance implies continual
striving. No striving, but does suppose an obstruction and difficulty to be
striven withal. There could be no resisting, if there were not
counter-striving. And hereby despite is done to the Spirit of Grace. O fearful
aggravation! that such a Spirit is striven against! It Is the Spirit of Grace,
Love and Goodness, the Spirit of all Kindness, Sweetness and Benignity, which a
wicked man does despite unto, Heb. 10. 29. How vile, and horrid a thing, to
requite Grace, Love, and Sweetness with Spite! As if the Sinner should say,
Thou would turn me to God; but I will not be turned! The blessed God says,
Turn at my reproof, I will pour out my Spirit unto you, Prove. 1. 23. There are
preventive insinuations, upon which, if we essay to turn, plentiful effusions
of the Spirit may be hoped to ensue. For he is the Spirit of Grace. When we
draw back, and resist, or slight those foregoing good motions of that Holy
Spirit, this is despiting him. And does not this import enmity in an high
degree? That the Spirit needs strive so much, that it may be overcome; as with
some, at his own pleasure, he does; with others, in just displeasure, he
strives no more, and so it is never overcome.

We come now to the Application: Wherein the Subject would admit and require a
very abundant enlargement, if we were not within necessary limits.

Two things I shall take notice of, as very necessary to be remarked, and most
amazingly strange and wonderful, by way of Introduction to some further Use.

1. That ever the Spirit of man, a reasonable, intelligent Being, God's own
Offspring; and whereto he is not only a Maker, but a Parent, styled the Father
of Spirits, should be degenerated into so horried, so unnatural a Monster!
What! to be an hater of God! The most excellent, and all-comprehending Good!
and thy own Father! Hear, O Heavens -- and Earth, says the Lord, I have
nourished, and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me, Isa. 1.
2. Be astonished, O ye Heavens at this! and be horribly afraid! be ye very
desolate! As if all the blessed inhabitants of that upper World should rather
forsake their glorious Mansions, leave Heaven empty, and run back into their
original nothing, than endure such a sight! An intelligent Spirit, hating God
is the most frightful prodigy in universal Nature! If all men's Limbs were
distorted, and their whole outer-man transformed into the most hideous shapes,
'twere a trifle, in comparison with this deformity of thy Soul.

2. That it should be thus, and they never regret, nor perceive it! What
self-loathing Creatures would men be, could they see themselves! so as never to
endure themselves, while they find they do not love God! But men are generally
well pleased with themselves for all this. Though the case is so plain, they
will not see it. When all the mentioned indications show it, they never charge
or suspect themselves of such a thing as this enmity against God! God charges
them, and does he not know them? The Pagan World that they are God-haters,
(...).
Romans 1. 30. even with an hellish hatred, as the word there signifies. They
that profess his Name are apt to admit this true of the Gentiles; but do we
think our Lord Jesus did injuriously accuse the Jews too, that they had both
seen, and hated him, and his Father? Joh. 15. 24. How remote was it from a Jew,
who boasted themselves God's peculiar people, to think himself an hater of God!
And what were they, of whom he says, by the Prophet? loathed them; and their
Soul abhorred me, (which is presupposed) Zech. 11. 8. and most justly, for can
there be a more loathsome thing than to abhor Goodness it self! What the most
perfect Benignity! And those Cretians had received the Christian Faith, whom
the Apostle exhorts Titus to rebuke sharply, that they might be sound in it;
and of whom he says, that professing to know God, in works they denied him,
being abominable, Tit. 1. 16. Hence is our labor lost in beseeching men to be
reconciled to God, while they own no enmity.

Since this matter is so evident, that this is the temper of the unconverted
World Godward, that they are alienated from him, and enemies in their minds
toward him, by wicked works: It is then beyond all expression strange, that
they never observe it in themselves; (as the Toad is not offended, at its own
poisonous nature) and are hereupon apt to think that God observes it not, nor
is displeased with them for it.

It is strange they should not observe it in themselves, upon so manifold
evidence. Do but recount with your selves, and run over the several heads of
evidence that have been given. Can you deny you have minds capable of knowing
God? Cannot you conceive of Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Truth, Justice, Holiness,
and that these may be, either more manifest, or in more excellent degrees, even
among Creatures, in some Creatures more than in others; but that Being, in
which they are in highest, and most absolute perfection, must be God? Can you
deny that you have lived in great ignorance of God much of your time? that your
ignorance was voluntary, having such means of knowing him, as you have had?
That you have usually been thoughtless and unmindfull of him in your ordinary
course? That the thoughts of him have been ungrateful, and very little
welcome, or pleasant to you? That you have had little converse with him, little
trust, reverence, delight, or expectation placed on him as the object? That you
have not been wont to concern him in your affairs, to consult him, to desire
his concurrence? That you have not thought of approving your self to him in
your designs and actions, but lived as without him in the world? That you have
not designed the pleasing, or obeying of him in the course of your
conversation? That the Gospel under which you have lived, has had little
effect upon you, to alter the temper of your Spirits toward him? That, if his
Spirit has sometimes awakened you, raised some fear, or some desires now and
then in your Souls, you have suppressed, and stifled, and striven against such
motions? Do not these things together discover an enmity against God, and the
ways of God? And is it not strange you cannot see this? and perceive a
disaffection to God by all this in your selves? What is so near a man, as
himself? Have you not in you a reflecting power? Know ye not your own selves,
as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Yea, generally, men never find fault with
themselves, upon any such account! and, consequently, think themselves in such
respects very innocent in the sight of God, and think he finds no fault with
them.

Now these two things being premised, will make way for the following Uses. We
infer therefore,

1. That whereas it so evidently appears, that men are at enmity with God, it
cannot but be consequent, that God is not well pleased with them.

No one is well pleased to have another hate him. God discerns that in the
inward temper of men's minds, wherewith he is not well pleased, viz. this
alienation of mind from him, this wicked enmity that is so generally found in
them. They are wont to make light of secret, internal sin. The ill posture of
their minds they think an harmless innocent thing. But this he remonstrates
against, takes notice of with dislike and displeasure; and is counterworking
this spirit of enmity, not only by his word, but by his spirit of love and
power. Though he does not testify his displeasure by flames and thunderbolts;
yet he observes, and approves not the course and current of their thoughts and
affections; though he permit them, sometimes without sensible rebuke, to run on
long in their contempt of him; yet he declares it to be wickedness. The wicked
have not God in all their thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4. He expostulates about it;
Wherefore do the wicked contemn God, verse. 13. threatens them with Hell for
their forgetting him, Psalm. 9. 17. yet Sinners are apt to conclude, that God
does not see, or disallow any thing of that kind, Psalm. 94. 7. How unapt are
they to admit any conviction of Heart-wickedness! Though it is more than intimated
to be destructive, Jer. 4. 14. Wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou
may be saved; q. d. thou art lost if thy Heart be not purged. Yea, when it
is so plain in it self, that enmity against God, which has its seat in the
Heart, makes a man's Soul a very Hell! yet they seem to think themselves very
innocent Creatures, when they are as much devilliz'd, as a mind dwelling in
Flesh can be! This is the common practical error and mistake men lie under,
that they think God takes notice of no evil in them, but what other men can
observe, and reproach them for. But he knows the inward bent and inclination of
their minds, and Spirits. Why else is he called, the heart-searching God? And
knows that this is the principal, and most horrid wickedness that is to be
found among the children of men, an alienated mind from God; and the root of
all the rest. The fountain of wickedness is within a man. Simon Magus's
wickedness lay in his thought. It Is said to him, Repent of this thy wickedness,
and pray the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee, Act. 8. 22. And when
the Prophet exhorts (as before) Jer. 4. 14. to wash the heart from wickedness,
he adds, how long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee. And our Savior tells
us, Out of the heart, first, proceed evil thoughts, and then all the other
wickednesses after mentioned, murders, adulteries, etc. Matthew. 15. 19. And
that enmity and alienation of mind that turns off the whole current of a man's
thoughts from God, is the original evil, and, by consequence, lets them loose
to every thing else that offends him, and ruins themselves. Yet when their very
Hearts are such an Hell of wickedness (as what is more hellish than enmity
against God?) they are, notwithstanding, wont to say, they have good Hearts.

2. Hence see the absolute necessity of Regeneration. A Doctrine, at which most
men do wonder; which our Savior intimates, when he says, Joh. 3. 7. Marvel not
at it, viz. that I said, you must be born again. But who may not now apprehend
a necessity of being regenerate? What will become of thee, if thou die with
such a disaffected mind Godward? Do but suppose your Soul going out of the Body
in this temper! full of disaffection toward the ever-blessed God, before whose
bright Glory, and flaming Majesty (to thee a consuming fire) thou must now
appear: though most unwilling, and as full of horror, and amazing dread! How
will thine heart then meditate terror! and say within thee, This is the God I
could never love! whom I would never know! To whom I was always a willing
stranger! whose admirable Grace never allured or won my Heart! who in a day of
Grace, that is now over with me, offered me free pardon, and reconciliation;
but I was never at leisure to regard it. The love of this world, which I might
have known to be enmity against God, had otherwise engaged me. It has been the
constant language of my Heart to him, Depart from me, I desire not the
knowledge of thy ways; I must now hear from him, that just and terrible voice,
even by the mouth of the only Redeemer and Savior of Sinners, Depart from me,
I knew thee not. And into how hOrrid Society must I now go! The things that eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, more glorious things than ever entered into the
heart, are all prepared for lovers of God. And for whom can everlasting Fire be
prepared but for the Devil and his Angels, and such other accursed God-haters,
as I have been! Matt. 25. 41.

Recollect your selves; consider the present posture, and temper of your Souls;
and what your way and course is: You care not to come nigh to God now, but love
to live at a distance from him, through enmity against him; from whence
proceeds your departing from him, and saying to him, depart from us? But
another day you will have enough of departing from God. A wicked man's life is
nothing else but a continual forsaking of God, or departing from him. I appeal
to your own hearts concerning the justice of that mentioned Repartee, They say
now to God, depart from us, Job 21. 14. And God will then say to them, depart
from me, Matthew. 25. 41. That man's Soul must thus perish, that lives and dies
at enmity with God. Regeneration slays this enmity; and implants in the Soul
Divine Love. Therefore we must be regenerate, or we cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 3, 5. A man must have a new Heart, and a new Spirit
created in him, in which Heart and Spirit the Love of God is the reigning
principle. And therefore I repeat to you, the things, which eye has not seen
-- and a crown of life, are prepared, and promised to them that love him, 1
Cor. 2. 9. Jam. 1. 12. You may your selves collect the rest.

3. Hence take notice of the Seat and Subject of this Regeneration and Change.
It is the mind of man. For you were enemies in your minds by wicked works. We
are to be renewed in the spirit of our minds, Ephesians. 4. 23. To be transformed,
by the renewing of our minds, etc. Romans 12. 2. You that have not considered
what Regeneration is, I tell you, it is to have your minds altered, and changed.
That whereas you did not mind God, or Christ, your minds being changed, you
savor, and delight in the things of God, Romans 8. 5, 7. They that are after the
flesh, savor the things of the flesh. The carnal mind is enmity against God.
It is the mind, therefore, not as speculative merely; but as practical, and
active, that must be renewed. Enquire, therefore, what change do you find in
your minds? Are you in mind and spirit more holy, spiritual and serious? And
are your minds more delightfully taken up with the things of God than formerly?
Till your minds are thus changed, they cannot be toward God; but will be
perpetually full of enmity against God. You will only mind earthly things,
Phil. 3. 19, 20. with the neglect of God, and Heaven, and heavenly things. If
ever the Gospel does us good, it must be by the change of our minds.

4. And in the last place. Hence understand the absolute necessity of
Reconciliation with God; because you have been alienated, and enemies against
him by wicked works. Regeneration cures in part your enmity; but makes no
atonement for your guilt in having been enemies. For this you need a
Reconciler, that could satisfy for you. What will become of the man that is not
reconciled to God? If you be God's Enemy, can he be your Friend? And if God be
your Enemy, he is the most terrible Enemy. How can we lie down in peace in an
unreconciled state? or without knowing, whether we are reconciled, or not? Let
not the Sun go down this day, and leave you at enmity with God. If you have
fallen out with a man, the Sun is not to go down on your wrath. And is your
enmity against God a juster, or more tolerable thing? O let not the Sun go down
before you have made your peace.

And for your encouragement, consider, that it is the Office of the Son of God
to reconcile you to him. He is the Reconciler, the Peacemaker, the maker up of
Breaches between God and Man. He is, if you resist not, ready, by his Spirit,
to remove the enmity that lies in your minds against God; and, by his blood, he
causes Divine Justice to be at Peace with you. If you find the former effect,
that assures you of the latter. Bless God that he has provided, and given you
notice of such a Reconciler, 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the
world to himself. Bless God that he has sent and settled one among you on this
errand, to beseech you to be reconciled to God, verse. 20. Blessed is the man,
whose iniquities are forgiven; and blessed is the man who can say, I was once
an enemy, but now am I reconciled; formerly I saw no need of Christ, but now I
cannot live without him. How fearful a thing will it be to die unreconciled to
God under a Gospel of Reconciliation! While the voice of the Gospel of Grace is
calling upon you, Return and live; Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die? beware of
dying unreconcil'd under such a Gospel.

When you return hence, retire into a corner, and consider what a wicked enmity
of mind you have had against God, and Christ; and pray that you may be renewed
in the spirit of your mind, Ephesians. 4. 23. Let an holy Resolution be taken up at
last (after many neglects) as was by the poor distressed Prodigal, after he had
long lived a wandering life, Luke 15. 18. and onward, I will arise, and go to my
Father, etc. and you will find God a merciful Father, ready to receive you,
and with joy! Oh the joyful meeting between a returning Soul, and a
sin-pardoning God! When once your strangeness, and your enmity are overcome,
and you are come into a state of amity and friendship with God; then will the
rest of your time be pleasantly spent in an holy, humble walking with God,
under the conduct of Grace, till you come eternally to enjoy him in Glory.

FINIS.

