OF THOUGHTFULNES FOR THE MORROW WITH AN APPENDIX CONCERNING The immoderate
Desire of foreknowing things to come. By JOHN HOW Minister of the Gospel.

-- Vive hodie. Heb. 13. 8. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and
for ever. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, at
the lower end of Cheapside near Mercers-Chappel. 1681.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ANNE, LADY WHARTON.
IT was, Madam, the Character an ancient Worthy in the Christian Church gave of
a noble person of your Sex, that, in reference to the matters of Religion she
was not only a Learner, but a Judge. And, accordingly, he inscribes to her
diverse of his writings (even such as did require a very accurate judgment in
the reading of them;) Which remain, unto this day, dispersedly, in several
parts of his works, dignified with her (often prefixed) name.

A greater, indeed, than he, mentions it as an ill character, to be not a doer
of the Law, but a Judge. It makes a great difference in the exercise of the
same faculty, and in doing the same thing, with what mind and design it is done.

There is a judging, that we may learn, and a judging, that we may not. A
judgment subservient to our duty, and a judgment opposite to it. Without a
degree of the former no one can ever be a serious Christian. By means of the
latter, many never are. The World through wisdom knew not God.

A cavilling litigious wit, in the confidence whereof any set themselves above
their Rule, and make it their business only to censure it, as if they would
rather find faults in it, than themselves, is as inconsistent with sincere
piety, as an humbly judicious discerning mind is necessary to it.

This proceeds from a due savor and relish of divine things, peculiar to them,
in whom an heavenly spirit and principle have the possession, and a governing
power. They that are after the Spirit, do savor the things of the Spirit. The
other from the prepossession and prejudice of a disaffected carnal mind. They
that are after the flesh, do only savor the things of the flesh.

The ability God has endowed your Ladyship with to judge of the Truth that is
after godliness, is that you are better pleased to use, than hear of. I shall
therefore be silent herein, and rather displease many of them that know you,
who will be apt to think a copious subject is neglected, than say any thing
that may offend either against your Ladyships inclination or my own.

Here is nothing abstruse and difficult for you to exercise a profound judgment
upon; nor any thing curious to gratify a pleasant wit. But plain things,
suitable to you, upon accounts common to the generality of Christians, not that
are peculiar to your self. It Is easy to a well-tempered mind, (of how high
intellectual excellencies soever) to descend to the same level with the rest;
when for them to reach up to the others pitch, is not so much as possible.

Our heavenly Father keeps not (as to the substantials of our nutriment)
distinct tables for his Children, but all must eat the same spiritual meat, and
drink the same spiritual drink. He has not one Gospel for great wits, and
another for plainer people; But as all that are born of him must meet at length
in one end, so they must all walk by the same rule, and in the same way,
thither.

And when I had first mentioned this Text of Scripture in your hearing, the
savor you expressed to me of the subject, easily induced me, when, afterward, I
reckoned a discourse upon it might be of common use, to address that also (such
as it is) in this way, to your Ladyship. Accounting the mention of your name
might draw the eyes of some to it, that have no reason to regard the Authors,
and that, by this means, if it be capable of proving beneficial to any, the
benefit might be diffused so much the further.

The aptnes of the materials and subject, here discourst of, to do good
generally, I cannot doubt. Neither our present duty or peace; nor our future
safety or felicity can be provided for as they ought, till our minds be more
abstracted from time, and taken up about the unseen, eternal World.

While our thoughts are too earnestly engaged about the events of future time,
they are vain, bitter, impure, and diverted from our nobler, and most necessary
pursuits. They follow much the temper and bent of our Spirits, which are often
too intent upon what is uncertain, and perhaps, impossible.

All good and holy Persons cannot live in good Times. For who should bear up
the Name of God in bad, and transmit it to succeeding times? Especially when
good Men are not of the same mind, it is impossible. And, more especially, when
they have not learned, as yet, to bear one another differences. The same time,
and state of things which please some, must displease others.

For some, that will think themselves much injured if they be not thought very
pious Persons, will be pleased with nothing less, than the destruction of them
that differ from them. So that while this is designed and attempted only;
generally, neither sort is pleased, The One because it is not done, The Other
because it is in doing.

It must be a mavelous alteration of Men's minds that must make the Times
please us all; while, upon supposition of their remaining unaltered, There is
nothing will please one sort, but to see the other Pagans, or Beggars, who in
the mean time are not enough mortified either to their Religion, or the
necessary accommodations of humane life, as to be well pleased with either.

To trust God cheerfully with the Government of this World, and to live in the
joyful hope and expectation of a better, are the only means to relieve and ease
us; and give us a vacancy for the proper work and business of our present Time.

This is the design of the following discourses. The former whereof is directed
against the careful thoughts, which are apt to arise in our minds concerning
the Events of future Time, upon a fear what they may be. The other, which by
way of Appendix is added to the former, tends to repress the immoderate desire
of knowing what they shall be.

Which latter I thought, in respect of it is affinity to the other, fit to be
added to it; and in respect of the commonness, and ill tendency of this
Distemper, very necessary. And indeed both the extremes in this matter are very
unchristian, and pernicious. A stupid neglect of the Christian Interest, and of
Gods Providence about it on the one hand; And an Enthusiastic Frenzy,
carrying Men to expect they well know not what? Or why? on the other.

Our great care should be to serve that Interest faithfully in our own
stations, for our little time, that will soon be over. Your Ladyship has been
called to serve it in a Family wherein it has long flourished. And which it
has dignified, beyond all the splendor that Antiquity and Secular greatness
could confer upon it. The Lord grant it may long continue to flourish there,
under the joint-influence of your noble Consort, and your own; And, afterward,
in a Posterity, that may imitate their Ancestors in substantial Piety, and
solid goodness.

Which is a glory that will not fade, nor vary; not change with times, but
equally recommend it self, to sober and good Men in all times. Whereas that
which arises from the esteem of a Party can neither be diffusive, nor lasting.

It Is true that I cannot but reckon it a part of any ones praise in a time
wherein there are different Sentiments and ways, in circumstantial matters
relating to Religion, to incline most to that which I take to come nearest the
Truth and our common Rule. But, as was said by one that was a great and early
light in the Christian Church; That is not Philosophy, which is professed by this
or that Sect, but that which is true in all Sects. So nor do I take that to be
Religion, which is peculiar to this or that Party of Christians (many of whom
are too apt to say here is Christ, and there is Christ, as if he were divided)
but that which is according to the mind of God among them all.

And I must profes to have that honor for your Ladyship, which I sincerely
bear, and most justly owe unto you, chiefly upon the account not of the things
wherein you differ from many other serious Christians (though therein you agree
also with my self) as for those things wherein you agree with them all. Under
which notion (and under the sensible Obligation of your many singular Favors)
I am

MADAM, Your Ladyships very humble and devoted Servant in the Gospel, JOHN HOW.

Page 52 line 6 dele in.

OF THOUGHTFULNES FOR THE FUTURE.
MATTHEW. 6. 34. Take therefore no Thought for the Morrow: for the morrow shall
take Thought for the things of it self: sufficient for the day is the evil
thereof.
THE Negative Precept (or the Prohibition) in the first words of this Verse, I
shall take for the principal ground of the intended Discourse. But shall make
use of the following words, for the same purpose for which they are here
subjoined by our Lord, viz. the Enforcement of it.

For our better understanding the Import of the Precept, Two things in it
require Explication.

How we are to understand [The Morrow.] What is meant by the [Thoughtfulnes] we
are to abstain from in reference thereto.
1. By the Morrow must be meant 1. Some measure of time or other. 2. Such
Occurrences, as it may be supposed shall fall within the Compass of that time.


We are therefore to consider,

1. What portion or measure of time may be here signified by to morrow, for
some time it must signify, in the first place, as fundamental to the further
meaning. Not abstractly, or for it self, but as it is the Continent of such or
such things as may fall within that time. And so that measure of time may, 1.
Admit, no doubt, to be taken strictly for the very next day, according to the
literal import of the word to morrow. But 2. It is also to be taken in a much
larger sense, for the whole of our remaining time, all our futurity in this
world. Indeed, the whole time of our Life on Earth is spoken of in the
Scriptures, but as a day. Let him alone that he may accomplish as an hireling
his day. Job 14. 6. We are a sort of (...), short-lived Creatures, we live but
a day, take the whole of our time together. Much less strange is it that the
little residue, the future time that is before us, which we do not know how
little it may be, should be spoken of but as a day. Experience has taught even
sensual Epicures so to account their remaining time: Let us eat and drink, for
to morrow we shall dye. i. e. Very shortly. They were right in their
Computation, but very wrong in their Inference. It should have been, Let us
watch and pray to day, we are to dye to morrow, let us labor for Eternity
because time is so short. But say they, Let us eat and drink to day, for to
morrow we shall dye. A day to eat and drink was, it seems, a great gain. And if
the phrase were not so used, to signify all the residue of our future time,
yet by consequence it must be so understood. For if we take to morrow in the
strictest sense for the very next day; they that are not permitted, with
solicitude, to look forward so far as the very next day; much less may they to
a remoter and more distant time. Yea and we may in some sense extend it not
only to all our future time, but simply to all future time as that measures the
concernments and affairs, not of this world only, but, which is more
considerable, even of that lesser select community, the Kingdom of God in it,
mentioned in the foregoing Verse. Which Kingdom, besides its future eternal
State, lies also spread and stretched throughout all time unto the end of the
World. And as to its present and temporal State, or as it falls under the
measure of time, it is not unsupposable that it may be within the compass of
our Saviors design, to forbid unto his disciples (who were not only to pursue
the blessedness of that Kingdom in the other world, but to intend the service
of it in this) an intemperate and vexatious solicitude about the success of
their endeavors, for the promoting its present Interest. i. e. After he had
more directly forbidden their undue carefulness about their own little
concernments, what they should eat, drink or put on; And directed them rather
and more principally to seek the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, with an
assurance that those other things should be added to them. It seems not
improbable he might in conclusion, give this general direction, as with a more
especial reference to the private concernments of humane life, about which
common frailty might make them more apt to be unduly thoughtful: So with Some
oblique and secondary reference to the affairs of that Kingdom too, which they
were here to serve as well as hereafter to partake and enjoy. And about the
success of which service (being once engaged in it, and the difficulties they
were to encounter, appearing great and discouraging to so inconsiderable
persons as they must reckon themselves) they might be somewhat over solicitous
also.

Nor though they might not as yet understand their own work, nor (consequently)
have the prospect of its difficulties as yet in view, are we to think our
Savior intended to limit the usefulness of the instructions he now gave them,
to the present time, but meant them to be of future use to them as occasions
should afterward occur. As we also find that they did recollect some other
sayings of his, and understand better the meaning of them, when particular
occasions brought them to mind, and discovered how apposite and applicable they
then were. Luke 24. 8. John 2. 22.

So that we may fitly understand this prohibition to intend, universally, a
repressing of that too great aptitude and proneness in the minds of men, unto
undue excursions into futurity, their intemperate and extravagant rangings and
roamings into that unknown Country, that Terra incognita, in which we can but
bewilder and lose our selves to no purpose.

Therefore Secondly and more principally, by [to morrow] we are to understand
the things that may fall within that compass of future time. For time can only
be the object of our care, in that relative sense, as it refers unto such and
such occurrences and emergencies that may fall into it. And so our Savior
explains himself in the very next words, that by to morrow he means the things
of to morrow. To morrow shall take care for the things of it self.

And yet here we must carefully distinguish, as to those things of to morrow,
matters of Event and of Duty. We are not to think these the equally prohibited
objects of our thoughts and care. Duty belongs to us, it falls within our
Province, and there are (no doubt) thoughts to be employed, how I may continue
on in a course of duty, unto which I am, by all the most sacred Obligations
tied for a stated course, that may lie before me, let it be never so long, and
be there never so many to morrows in it. There ought to be thoughts used, of
this sort, concerning the duties of the morrow, and of all my future time. If
it please God to give me such additional time I will love him to morrow, I will
serve him to morrow, I will trust him to morrow, I will walk with him to
morrow. I will, through the Grace of God, live in his fear, service and
communion, even as long as I have a day to live. Upon such terms does every
sincere Christian bind himself to God, even for always, as God binds himself
to them on the same terms. This God shall be our God for ever and ever, he
shall be our guide even unto death. Psalm 48. 14. The case can never alter with
us in this regard, but as the worthiest object of all our thoughts is
yesterday, and to day the same, and for ever, so should the course of our
thoughts be too, in reference to that blessed object. Every day will I bless
thee, and praise thy name for ever and ever. Psalm. 145. 2. I will sing unto the
Lord as long as I live; I will sing praise to my God while I have my being.
Psalm. 104. 33. The thoughts of our hearts should be much exercised this way,
how it may be thus with us, in all future time; that to morrow, in this respect
may be as this day, and much more abundant, as is spoken on a much another
account, Isai. 56. 12. To morrow shall be as this day, God assisting, and much
more abundant as to my love to him, serving of him, conversing with him, doing
and designing for him, which are to run through all my days.

But now for the Events of to morrow, they are things quite of another
consideration. They do not belong to us, they are not of the (...), none of the
things within our compass. To employ our selves with excessive intention of
thoughts and cares concerning them, is to meddle without our Sphaere, beyond
what we have any warrant for, farther than as it is in some cases supposable
there may be some connection, and dependence, between such and such Events, and
my own either sin, or duty,

Now Events that may occur to us to morrow, or in our future time, you know are
distingishable into good or bad, grateful and ungrateful, pleasing to us or
displeasing. Good or grateful Events, you easily apprehend, are not here
intended. We do not use to perplex our selves about good things, otherwise than
as they may be wanting, and as we may be deprived of them, which privation or
want is an Evil. And under that notion our Savior considers the object of the
prohibited thoughtfulness, as his after words show. Sufficient for the day is
the Evil of it. And therefore gives caution not equally against all
fore-thoughts, about the Events of future time; of which some may be both
rational, and pleasant. But against forebodings, and presages of evil and
direful things. As lest such thoughts should slide into our minds, or impose
and obtrude themseves upon us. Alas! what shall I do to live to morrow? I am
afraid I shall want bread for to morrow, or for my future time. This our
Savior says is paganish, after these things do the Gentiles seek, that (as is
intimated) have no father to take care of them. Your heavenly father knows you
have need of these things, verse. 32. And directs his disciples to a noble
object of their thoughts and care, verse. 33. Seek you first the Kingdom of God:
wherein, as their future reward, so their present work and business was to lie.
And then adds, Take no thought for to morrow, q. d. It would be indeed an ill
thing if you should want bread to morrow, and it would be worse if the affairs
of Gods Kingdom should miscarry, or you be excluded it. But mind you your own
present work, and be not unduly concerned about these surmised bad events, God
will provide. This is then, in short, the object of this prohibited
thoughtfulness [ future time including whatsoever ungrateful events, we
suppose, and preapprehend in it.]

Secondly, We are to enquire about the thoughtfulness prohibited in reference
hereto. It cannot be that all use of thoughts about future events, even such,
as, when they occur, may prove afflictive, is intended to be forbidden. Which
indeed may be collected from the import of the word in the Text that signifies
another, peculiar sort of thinking, as we shall hereafter have more occasion to
take notice. We were made and are naturally, thinking Creatures; yea and
forethinking, or capable of prospiciency and foresight. It Is that by which in
part Man is distinguished from Beast. Without disputing as some do how far
nature, Maimonid. Mor. Nev. D. Mer.Casaubon. Enthus.
in this, or that man, does contribute to divination and prophecy; we may say
of Man indefinitely, he is a sort of divining creature, and of humane nature in
common, that it much excells the brutal, in this, that, whereas sense is
limited to the present; Reason has dignified our nature by adding to it a
sagacity, and enabling us to use prospection in reference to what yet lies more
remotely before us. And though we are too apt to a faulty excess herein, and to
be overpresaging (which it is the design of this discourse to show) yet we are
not to think that all use of any natural faculty can be a fault; for that would
be to charge a fault on the Author of nature. The faculties will be active. To
plant them therefore in our natures, and forbid their use, were not consistent
with the wisdom, righteousness, and goodness by which they are implanted. It
must therefore be our business to show What Thoughtfulness is not, And then,
what is within the compass of this Prohibition.

1. What is not. There is, in the general, a prudent, and there is a Christian
use of forethought, about matters of that nature already specified; which we
cannot understand it was our Saviors meaning to forbid.

(...)
