THE Redeemer's Tears WEPT OVER Lost Souls,

A TREATISE ON LUKE XIX. 41, 42.

WITH AN APPENDIX, WHEREIN Somewhat is occasionally discoursed, CONCERNING The
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, AND How God is said to Will the Salvation of
them that perish.

By J. H. Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed by J. Astwood for Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and three
Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside, 1684.

PREFACE.
WHEN Spiritual Judgments do more eminently befall a people, great outward
Calamities do often ensue. We know it was so in the instance, which the Text
here insisted on refers to. But it is not always so; The connection between
these two sorts of Judgments is not absolutely certain and necessary, yea and
is more frequent with the contraries of each. For this Reason therefore, and
because Judgments of the former kind are so unexpressibly greater, and more
tremendous, this Discourse insists only upon them, about which serious
monitions both have a clearer ground, and are of greater importance; and wholly
waves the latter.

Too many are apt first to fancy similitudes between the state of things with
one people and another, and then to draw inferences; being perhaps imposed upon
by a strong imagination in both; which yet must pass with them for a Spirit of
Prophecy, and perhaps they take it not well, if it do not so with others too.
It were indeed the work of another Prophet certainly to accommodate, and make
application of what was spoken by a former, to a distinct time and people. It Is
enough for us to learn from such sayings as this of our Savior, those rules of
life and practice, such instructions and cautions as are common to all times,
without arrogating to our selves his Prerogative, of foretelling events that
shall happen in this or that. The affectation of venturing upon futurity, and
of foreboding direful things to Kingdoms and Nations, may, besides its being
without sufficient ground, proceed from some or other very bad Principle.
Dislike of the present methods of Providence, weariness and impatiency of our
present condition, too great proneness to wish what we take upon us to predict,
the Prediction importing more heat of anger than certainty of foresight, a
wrathful Spirit, that would presently fetch down fire from heaven upon such as
favor not our inclinations and desires, so that (as the Poet speaks) whole
Cities should be overturned at our request, if the heavenly Powers would be so
easy, as to comply with such furious imprecations. A temper that ill agrees
with Humanity it self, not to care at what rate of common calamity, and misery,
a purchase be made of our own immunity from sufferings. Nay, to be willing to
run the most desperate hazard in the case, and even covet a general-ruine to
others, upon a mere apprehended possibility that our case may be mended by it;
when it may be more probable to become much worse. But O how disagreeable is it
to the Spirit of our merciful Lord and Savior, whose name we bear, upon any
terms, to delight in humane miseries! The greatest honor men of that
complexion are capable of doing the Christian Name, were to disclaim it. Can
such angry heats have place in Christian breasts, as shall render them the well
pleased spectators, yea authors of one another calamities and ruin! Can the
tears that issued from these compassionate blessed eyes, upon the foresight of
Jerusalem's woeful Catastrophe, do nothing toward the quenching of these flames!

But I add, that the too-intent fixing of our thoughts upon any supposeable
events in this World, argues, at least, a narrow, carnal mind, that draws and
gathers all things into time, as despairing of Eternity; and reckons no better
state of things considerable, that is not to be brought about under their own
present view, in this world; as if it were uncertain or insignificant, that
there shall be unexceptionable, eternal, order, and rectitude in another.

It Is again as groundless, and may argue as ill a mind, to prophesy smooth and
pleasant things, in a time of abounding wickedness. The safer, middle course,
is, without Gods express warrant, not to prophesy at all, but as we have
opportunity, to warn and instruct men, with all meekness and long suffering;
for which the Lords ordinary Messengers can never want his warrant. And, after
our blessed Savior's most imitable Example, to scatter our tears over the
impenitent, even upon the (too probable apprehension of the temporal Judgments
which hang over their heads, but most of all upon the account of their
liablenes to the more dreadful ones of the other state; which, in the following
discourse, I hope, it is made competently evident, this Lamentation of our
Savior has ultimate reference unto. For the other, though we know them to be
due, and most highly deserved; yet concerning the actual infliction of them,
even upon obstinate and persevering sinners, we cannot pronounce. We have no
settled constitution, or rule, by which we can conclude it, any more than that
outward felicity, or prosperity, shall be the constant portion of good men in
this World. The great God has reserved to himself a latitude of acting more
arbitrarily, both as to Promises, and Threatenings of this nature. If the
accomplishment of either, could be certainly expected, it should be of the
Promises rather; because as to promised Rewards God is pleased to make himself
Debtor, and a right accrues to them to whom the Promise is made, if either the
Promise be absolute, or made with any certain condition, that is actually
performed. But God is always the Creditor poenae, the right to punish remains
wholly in himself, the exacting whereof he may therefore suspend, without any
appearance of wrong, as seems good unto him. If therefore he may withhold
temporal blessings, from good and pious men, to which they have a remote and
fundamental right, as having reserved to himself the judgment of the fit time
and season of bestowing them. Much more does it belong to his Wisdom, to fix
the bounds of his Patience, and Longsuffering; and determine the season of
animadverting upon more open and insolent offenders by temporal Punishments,
according as shall make most for the ends of his Government, and finally prove
more advantageous to the dignity and glory (...) it. The practice therefore, of
our Savior, in speaking so positively* concerning the approaching fail and
ruin of Jerusalem, is no pattern unto us. He spoke not only with the Knowledge
of a Prophet, but with the Authority of a Judge: and his words may be
considered both as a Prediction, and a Sentence. We can pretend to speak in
neither capacity, touching things of this nature.

But for the everlasting Punishments in another World, that belong to
unreconciled sinners, who refuse to know the things of their peace, the
Gospel-constitution has made the connection firm, and unalterable, between
their continuing, unrepented wickedness, and those punishments. When therefore
we behold the impudent, provoking sins of the age wherein we live, against the
natural, eternal law of our Creator, persisted in with all the marks of
infidelity, and obduration, against the truth, and grace that so gloriously
shine forth in the Gospel of our Redeemer, we may (after him) speak positively,
He that believes not shall be damned, -- Is condemned already; -- shall not
see Life, but the wrath of God abides on him. If ye believe not that I am HE,
ye shall die in your sins. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. And
here, how does it become us too, in conformity to his great example, to speak
compassionately, and as those that, in some measure, know the terror of the
Lord! O how doleful is the case, when we consider the inconsistent notions of
many, with, not this or that particular doctrine, or article of the Christian
Faith, but with the whole sum of Christianity, the Atheism of some, the
avowed mere Theisme of others! The former sort far outdoing the Jewish
infidelity. Which people; besides the rational means of demonstrating a Deity,
common to them with the rest of mankind, could, upon the account of many things
peculiar to themselves, be in no suspense concerning this matter. How great was
their reverence of the books of the Old Testa^ent, especially those of Moses!
their knowledge most certain of plain, and most convincing matters of fact. How
long the Government of their Nation had been an immediate Theocracy! what
evident tokens of the divine presence had been among them from age to age! in
how wonderful a manner they were brought out of Egypt, through the Red Sea, and
conducted all along through the Wilderness! how glorious an appearance and
manifestation of himself God afforded to them at the giving of the Law, upon
Mount Sinai! and by how apparent exertions of the divine power, the former
inhabitants were expelled, and they settled in the promised land! Upon all
this, they could be in no more doubt concerning the Existence of a Deity, than
of the Sun in the firmament. Whereas we are put to prove, in a Christian
nation, that this World, and its continual successive inhabitants, have a wise,
intelligent Maker, and Lord, and that all things came not into the state
wherein they are, by (no man can imagine what) either fatal necessity, or
casualty.

But both sorts agree in (what I would principally remark) the disbelief of
Christ's being the Messiah. And so, with both, the whole business of
Christianity must be a Fable, and a Cheat. And thus it is determined, not by
men that have made it their business to consider, and examine the matter (for
the plain evidence of things cannot but even obtrude a conviction upon any
diligent enquirer) but by such as have only resolved not to consider; who have
before hand settled their purpose, never to be awed by the apprehension of an
invisible Ruler, into any course of life that shall bear hard upon sensual
inclination, have already chosen their Master, inslaved themselves to brutal
appetite, and are so habituated to that mean servility, made it so connatural,
so deeply inward to themselves, so much their very life, as that, through the
preapprehended pain, and uneasiness of a violent rupture, in tearing themselves
from themselves, it is become their interest not to admit any serious thought.
Any such thought they are concerned (they reckon) to fence against, as against
the point of a sword; it strikes at their only life, the brute must die, that
(by an happy (...)) they may be again born men. That is the design of
Christianity, to restore men to themselves again, and because it has this
tendency, it is therefore not to be endured. And all the little residue of
humane wit which is yet left them (which because the sensual nature is
predominant, is pressed into a subserviency to the interest, and defense of the
brutal life) only serves them to turn every thing of serious Religion into
ridicule, and being themselves resolved never to be reasoned into any
seriousnes, they have the confidence to make the trial, whether all other men
can be jested out of it.

If this were not the case, if such persons could allow themselves to think,
and debate the matter, how certain would the victory, how glorious would the
Triumph be, of the Christian Religion, over all the little cavils, they are
wont to allege against it! Let their own consciences testify in the case,
whether ever they have applied themselves to any solemn disquisition,
concerning this important affair, but only contented themselves with being
able, amidst transient discourse, to cast out, now and then, some oblique
glance, against somewhat or other, that was appendent, or more remotely
belonging, to the Christian Profession (in so much have, as not to stay for an
answer) and because they may have surprised, sometimes, one or other, not so
ready at a quick repartee, or who reckoned the matter to require solemn, and
somewhat larger discourse (which they have not had the patience to hear)
whether they have not gone away puffed, and swollen with the conceit, that they
have whiffled Christianity away, quite off the stage, with their profane
breath; as if its firm and solid strength, wherein it stands stable, as a rock
of Adamant, depended upon this or that sudden, occasional, momentany effort on
the behalf of it. But if such have a mind to try whether any thing can be
strongly said in defense of that sacred profession, let them considerately
peruse what has been written by diverse to that purpose. And not to engage them
in any very tedious longsome task, if they like not to travel thorough the
somewhat abstrufer work of the most learned Hugo Grotius, de veritate
Christianae Religionis, or the more voluminous Huetius his Demonstratio
Evangelica, or diverse others that might be named, let them but patiently and
leasurely read over, that later very plain and clear, but nervous and solid
Discourse of Dr. Parker upon this subject, and judge then, whether the
Christian Religion want evidence, or whether nothing can be alleged, why we of
this age, so long after Christ's appearance upon the stage of the World, are to
reckon our selves obliged to profess Christianity, and observe the rules of
that holy Profession.

And really, if, upon utmost search, it shall be found to have firm truth at
the bottom, it makes it self so necessary (which must be acknowledged part of
that Truth) that any one that has wit enough, to be the author of a jest,
might understand it to be a thing not to be jeasted with. It trifles with no
man. And, where it is once sufficiently propounded, leaves it no longer
indifferent whether we will be of it or no. Supposing it true, it is strange if
we can pretend it not to be sufficiently propounded to Us. Or that we are
destitute of sufficient means to come by the knowledge of that Truth! was this
Religion instituted only for one Nation, or Age? Did the Son of God descend
from Heaven; put on flesh, and die? had we an incarnate Deity conversant among
men on earth, and made a Sacrifice for the sins of men? and has he left the
World at liberty, whether, upon any notice hereof, they should enquire and
concern themselves about him or no? being incarnate he could not, as such, be
every where; nor was it fit he should be long here; or needful, (and therefore
not fit) he should dye often. It was condescension enough that he vouchsafed
once to appear, in so mean and selfabasing a form, and offered himself to put
away sin, by the sacrifice of himself. And whereas he has himself founded a
Dominion over us in his own blood, did dye, and revive, and rise again, that he
might be Lord of the living, and of the dead; And the eternal Father has
hereupon highly exalted him, given him a name above every name, that at his
name every knee should bow, and that all should confess that he is Lord, to the
praise and glory of God. And has required that all should honor the Son as
himself is to be honored; has given him power over all flesh; and made him
head of all things to the Church. Was it ever intended, men should, generally,
remain exempt from obligation, to observe, believe, and obey him? was it his
own intention to wave, or not insist upon, his own most sacred, and so dearly
acquired rights? to quit his claim to the greatest part of mankind? why did he
then issue out his commission as soon as he was risen from the dead, to teach
all nations, to proselyte the world to himself, to baptize them into his name,
(with that of the Father and the Holy Ghost. O the great and venerable names
that are named upon professing Christians!) Could it be his intention, to leave
it lawful to men to choose this, or any, or no Religion, as their humors, or
fancies, or lusts; should prompt them; to disregard, and deride his holy
doctrines, violate and trample upon his just and equal Laws, reject and
contemn his offered favors and mercy, despise and profane his sacred
institutions! When he actually makes his demand, and lay^s his claim, what
amazing guilt, how swift destruction must they incur, that dare adventure to
deny the Lord that bought them! And they that shall do it, among a
Christiani^ed people, upon the pretended insufficiency of the revelation they
have of him, do but heighten the affront, and increase the provocation. It Is to
charge the whole Christian Institution with foolery, as pretending to oblige
men, when they cannot know to what, how, or upon what ground they should be
obliged; to pronounce the means and methods inept, and vain, which he has
thought sufficient (and only fit) for the propagating and continuing
Christianity in the world; to render the rational reception of it from age to
age, impossible, in his appointed way; or unless men should be taught by
Angels, or voices from Heaven, or that Miracles should be so very frequent, and
common, as, thereby also to become useless to their end; and so would be to
make the whole frame of Christian Religion an idle impertinency; and, in
reference to its avowed design, a self-repugnant thing, and consequently were
to impute Folly to him who is the Wisdom of God.

And how are other things known, of common concernment, and whereof an
immediate knowledge is as little possible? Can a man satisfy himself that he
has a title to an estate, conveyed down to him by very ancient writings, the
witnesses whereof are long since dead and gone? or that he is obliged by Laws
made many an age ago? Or could any Records be preserved with more care and
concern, than those wherein our Religion lies? or be more secure from designed,
or material depravation? But this is no place to reason these things. Enough is
said by others, referred to before. I only further say, if any that have the
use of their Understandings, living in a Christian Nation, think to justify
their infidelity and disobedience to the Son of God, by pretending they had no
sufficient means to know him to be so, the excuse will avail them alike, as
that did him, who insolently said, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his
voice? I know not the Lord, neither will I, etc. For have not we as good means
to know who Christ is, as the Egyptians, at that time had, to know who was the
God of Israel, (tho afterward he was more known by the judgments which he
executed?) Although the knowledge of the only true God be natural, and the
obligation thereto common to men, yet the indisposition to use their
understanding this way, is so great and general, and the express Revelation
that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, requires so much less labor to
understand it, than there is in arguing out the existence and attributes of
God, by an inhabile, sluggish mind, that the differenee cannot be great, if
any, on that side. This latter only needs the enquiry, whence the Revelation
comes, which as it is not difficult in it self, so this occasion, viz. of its
being proposed, does invite and urge to it; whereas the generality of the Pagan
World have little of external inducement, leading them into enquiries
concerning the true God. Therefore, all circumstances considered, I see not how
they that live under the Gospel, can be thought to have less advantage and
obligation, to own Jesus of Nazareth to be the Son of God, than the rest of the
World, to own the only living and true God; Or that the former should be less
liable to the revelation of the wrath of God from heaven, for holding
supernatural truth in unrighteousness, than the other, for doing so injurious
violence to that which is merely natural. Unto what severities then, of the
divine wrath and justice, even of the highest kind, do multitudes ly open in
our days!

For besides those (much fewer) mental (or notional) Infidels, that believe not
the principles of the Christian Religion, against the clearest evidence, how
vastly greater is the number of them that are so, in heart and practice,
against their professed belief! that live in utter estrangement from God, as
without him in the World, or in open enmity against him, and contrariety to the
known Rules of the Religion they profess! How many that understand nothing of
its principal and plainest Doctrines! as if nothing were requisite to
distinguish the Christian from the Pagan World, more than an empty name; or as
if the Redeemer of sinners had died upon the Cross, that men might more
securely remain alienated from the life of God, not to reconcile and reduce
them to him! or that they might with safety indulge appetite, mind earthly
things, make the World their God, gratify the flesh, and make provision to
fulfill the lusts of it, defy Heaven, affront their Maker, live in malice,
envy, hatred to one another! not to bless them, by turning them from these
impieties and iniquities! As if it were so obscurely hinted, as that it could
not be taken notice of, that the grace of God, which brings salvation to all
men, has appeared, teaching them to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World, SO looking for the
blessed hope. And that Christ gave himself for us, to redeem us from all
iniquity, and to purify us to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good Works!
How many, again, are Christians, they know not why! upon the same terms that
others are Mahometans, because it is the Religion of their Country, by fate or
by accident, not by their own choice and judgment! the same inconsideration
makes them be Christians, that makes others be none.

And now, shall our Redeemer be left to weep alone, over these perishing souls!
have we no tears to spend upon this doleful subject? Oh that our heads were
waters, and our eyes fountains! Is it nothing to us, that multitudes are
sinking, going down into Perdition, under the name of Christian, under the seal
of Baptism, from under the means of life and salvation! perishing! and we can
do nothing to prevent it. We know they must perish that do not repent and turn
to God, and love him above all, even with all their hearts and souls, and mind
and might; that do not believe in his Son, and pay him homage, as their
rightful Lord, sincerely subjecting themselves to his laws and government. But
this they will not understand, or not consider. Our endeavors to bring them to
it, are ineffectual, it is but faint breath we utter. Our Words drop and dye
between us and them! We speak to them in the name of the eternal God that made
them, of the great Jesus who bought them with his blood, and they regard it
not. The Spirit of the Lord is in a great degree departed from among us, and we
take it not to heart! We are sensible of lesser grievances, are grieved that
men will not be more entirely proselyted to our several parties and
persuasions, rather than that they are so disenclin'd to become proselytes to
real CHRISTIANITY; and seem more deeply concerned to have Christian Religion so
or so modified, than whether there shall be any such thing! or whether men be
saved by it, or lost!

This sad case, that so many were likely to be lost under the first sound of
the Gospel; and the most exemplary temper of our blessed Lord in reference to
it, are represented in the following Treatise; with design, to excite their
care for their own souls, who need to be warned, and the compassions of others,
for them, who are so little apt to take warning. The good Lord grant it may be,
some way or other, useful for good!

John How.

THE REDEEMERS TEARS Wept over LOST SOULS.
LUKE XIX. 41, 42. And when he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over
it, saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the
things which belong unto thy Peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes.


WE have here a compassionate Lamentation in the midst of a solemn Triumph. Our
Lords approach unto Jerusalem at this time, and his entrance into it (as the
foregoing History shows) carried with them some face of regal and triumphal
pomp, but with such allayes, as discovered a mind most remote from Ostentation;
and led by Judgment, (not Vainglory) to transmit thorough a dark umbrage, some
glimmerings only of that excellent Majesty which both his Sonship and his
Mediatorship entitled him unto: A very modest and mean specimen of his true
indubious Royalty and Kingly-state. Such as might rather intimate than plainly
declare it, and rather afford an after Instruction to teachable minds, than
beget a present Conviction and dread in the stupidly obstinate and unteachable.
And this effect we find it had, as is observed by another Evangelical
Historian, who relating the same matter, how in his passage to Jerusalem the
People met him with Branches of Palm Trees, and joyful Hosanna's, he riding
upon an Asses Colt (as Princes or Judges, to signify Meekness as much as
State, were wont to do, Judge. 5.10.) tells us, These things his Disciples
understood not at the first, but when Jesus was glorified, then remembered they
that these things were written of him, and that they had done these things unto
him, Joh. 12.16. For great regard was had in this, as in all the other acts of
his Life and Ministry, to that last and conclusive part, his dying a sacrifice
upon the Cross for the sins of men; to observe all along that Mediocrity, and
steer that middle course between obscur^ty and a terrifying overpow'ring glory,
that this solemn oblation of himself might neither be prevented, nor be
disregarded. Agreeably to this design, and the rest of his Course, he does, in
this solemnity, rather discover his Royal state and dignity by a dark Emblem,
than by an express representation; and shows in it more of Meekness and
Humility, than of awful Majesty and Magnificence, as was formerly predicted,
Zechar. 9.9. Rejoice greatly, O Daughter of Zion: Shout, O Daughter of
Jerusalem: Behold, thy King comes unto thee: he is just, and having Salvation,
lowly, and riding upon an Ass, and upon a Colt, the foal of an Ass.

And how little he was taken with this piece of state, is sufficiently to be
seen in this Paragraph of the Chapter. His mind is much more taken up in the
foresight of Jerusalem's sad case; and therefore being come within view of it,
(which he might very commodiously have in the descent of the higher opposite
Hill, Mount Olivet,) he beheld the City, it is said, and wept over it.

Two things concur to make up the cause of this sorrow.

1. The greatness of the Calamity: Jerusalem (once so dear to God) was to
suffer, not a Skar, but a Ruin; The days shall come upon thee, that thine
Enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee
in on every side, and shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy Children
within thee; and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another.

2. The lost opportunity of preventing it; If thou had known, even thou, at
least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy Peace! but now they are
hid from thine eyes, verse. 42. And again, Thou knew not the time of thy
visitation.

First, The Calamity was greater in his eyes, than if can be in ours. His large
and comprehensive mind could take the compass of this sad case. Our thoughts
cannot reach far, yet we can apprehend what may make this case very deplorable;
we can consider Jerusalem as the City of the great King, where was the Palace
and Throne of the Majesty of Heaven, vouchsafing to dwell with men on Earth.
Here the divine Light and Glory had long shone. Here was the the sacred
Shechinah, the dwelling place of the most High, the Symbols of his presence,
the Seat of Worship, the Mercy Seat, the place of receiving Addresses, and of
dispensing favors: The House of Prayer for all Nations: To his own People this
was the City of their Solemnities, Whither the Tribes were wont to go up, the
Tribes of the Lord, unto the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name
of the Lord: For there were set Thrones of Judgment, the Thrones of the House
of David, Psalm. 122.4, 5. He that was so great a lover of the Souls of men, how
grateful and dear to his Heart had the place been where through the succession
of many bypast Ages the great God did use (though more obscurely) to unfold
his kind Propensions toward Sinners, to hold solemn Treaties with them, to
make himself known, to draw and allure Souls into his own holy Worship and
acquaintance! And that now the dismal prospect presents it self of desolation
and ruin, ready to overwhelm all this glory! and lay wast the dwellings of
Divine Love! His sorrow must be conceived proportionable to the greatness of
this desolating change.

Secondly, And the opportunity of prevention was quite lost! There was an
opportunity: He was sent to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel: He came to
them as his own. Had they received him, O how joyful a place had Jerusalem
been! How glorious had the Triumphs of the Love of God been there, had they
Repented, Believed, Obeyed! These were the things that belonged to their Peace;
this was their opportunity, their day of Visitation; these were the things that
might have been done within that day: But it was now too late, their day was
over, and the things of their Peace hid from their eyes: And how fervent were
his desires, they had done otherwise! taken the wise and safe course. If thou
had known! the words admit the Optative form, (...) being put, as it is
observed to be sometimes with other Authors, for (...), utinam; O that thou
had known, I wish thou had; his Sorrow must be proportionable to his Love.
Or otherwise we may conceive the Sentence incomplete, part cut off by a more
emphatical Aposiopesis, Tears interrupting Speech, and imposing a more speaking
silence, which imports an affection beyond all words. They that were anciently
so over-officious as to raze those words [ and wept over it] out of the Canon,
as thinking it unworthy so Divine a Person to shed Tears, did greatly err, not
knowing the Scriptures (which elsewhere speak of our Lords Weeping,) nor the
Power of Divine Love (now become Incarnate) nor indeed the true Perfections and
Properties of Humane Nature: Otherwise they had never taken upon them to reform
the Gospel, and reduce not only Christianity, but Christ himself to the
measures and square of their Stoical Philosophy: (But these have also met with
a like-ancient Confutation.)

One thing (before we proceed) needs some disquisition, viz. Whether this
Lamentation of our blessed Lord do refer only or ultimately to the temporal
calamity he foresaw coming upon Jerusalem. Or whether it had not a further and
more principal reference to their spiritual and eternal miseries that were
certain to be concomitant, and consequent thereunto? Where let it be considered,

1. That very dreadful spiritual plagues and judgments did accompany their
destruction very generally; which every one knows who is acquainted with their
after-Story, i. e. that takes notice what Spirit reigned among them, and what
their behavior was toward our Lord himself, and afterward toward his
Apostles and Disciples all along to their fearful Catastrophe (as it may be
collected from the sacred Records, and other history,) what blindness of mind,
what hardness of heart, what mighty prejudice, what inflexible obstinacy,
against the clearest light, the largest mercy, the most perspicuous and most
gracious Doctrine, and the most glorious works, wrought to confirm it, against
the brightest beams and evidences of the divine Truth, Love and Power! what
persevering impenitency and infidelity against God and Christ, proceeding from
the bitterest enmity; (Ye have both seen and hated me and my Father. Joh.
15.24.) What mad rage and fury against one another, even when death and
destruction were at the very door! Here were all the tokens imaginable of the
most tremendous infatuation, and of their being forsaken of God. Here was a
concurrence of all kinds of spiritual judgments in the highest degree.

2. That the concomitancy of such spiritual evils with their temporal
destruction, our Lord foreknew as well as their temporal destruction it self.
It lay equally in view before him; and was as much under his eye. He that knew
what was in man, could as well tell what would be in him. And by the same light
by which he could immediately look into hearts, he could as well see into
futurities, and as well the one futurity as the other. The knowledge of the one
he did not owe to his humane understanding; to his divine understanding
(whereby he knew all things) the other could not be hid.

3. The connection between the impenitency and infidelity that prove to be
final; and eternal misery, is known to us all. Of his knowledge of it therefore
(whose Law has made the connection, besides what there is in the nature of the
things themselves) there can be no doubt.

4. That the miseries of the Soul, especially such as prove incurable and
eternal, are in themselves far the greatest, we all acknowledge. Nor can make a
difficulty to believe, that our Lord apprehended and considered things
according as they were in themselves, so as to allow every thing its own proper
weight and import in his estimating of them. These things seem all very evident
to any eye.

Now tho it be confessed not impossible, that of things so distinct from one
another as outward and temporal evils, and those that are spiritual and
eternal, even befalling the same persons, one may for the present consider the
one without attending to the other, or making distinct reflection thereon at
the same time; Yet how unlikely is it, these things bordering so closely upon
one another as they did, in the present case; that so comprehensive a mind as
our Saviors was, sufficiently able to enclose them both; and so spiritual a
mind, apt no doubt to consider most what was in it self most considerable,
should in a solemn Lamentation of so sad a case, wholly overlook the saddest
part! and stay his thoughts only upon the surface and outside of it!

That he mentions only the approaching outward calamity, (verse. 43.44.) was
that he spoke in the hearing of the multitude, and upon the way, but in
passing, when there was not opportunity for large discourse; and therefore he
spoke what might soonest strike their minds, was most liable to common
apprehension, and might most deeply affect ordinary, and
not-yet-enough-prepared hearers.

And he spoke what he had, no doubt, a deep sense of himself. Whatever of
tender compassions might be expected from the most perfect Humanity and
Benignity, could not be wanting in him, upon the foresight of such a calamity
as was coming upon that place and people. But yet what was the sacking of a
City, the destroying of pompous buildings that were all of a perishable
material, the mangling of humane flesh, over which the worm was otherwise
shortly to have had dominion; to the Alienation of men's minds from God, their
disaffection to the only means of their recovery, and reconciliation to him,
and their subjection to his Wrath and Curse for ever! When also it is plain he
considered that perverse temper of mind and spirit in them, as the cause of
their ruin! which his own words imply; that the things which belonged to their
peace were hid from their eyes; and that the things he foretold, should befall
them, because they knew not the day of their Visitation.

For what could the things be that belonged to their peace, but turning to God,
believing in himself, as the Messiah, bringing forth of fruits meet for
repentance? Whence also there must be another latent, and concealed meaning of
their peace it self; than only their continued amity with the Roman State.
Their peace with Heaven; their being set right, and standing in favor and
acceptance with God. For was it ever the first intention of the things enjoined
in the Gospel, but to entitle men to earthly secular benefits?

Nor can we doubt but the same things lay deep in the mind of our blessed Lord
when he uttered these words, as when he spoke those so very like them, Mat.
23.37, 38. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Ptophets, and stonest
them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children
together even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would
not! Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. These other were not spoken
indeed at the same time, but very soon after: Those we are considering, in his
way to the City, these when he was come into it; most probably, by the Series
of the Evangelical History the second day, after his having lodged the first
night at Bethany. But it is plain they have the same sense, and that the same
things lay with great weight upon his Spirit; so that the one passage may
contribute much to the enlightening and expounding of the other.

Now what can be meant by that [ I would have gathered you as the Hen her
Chickens under her wings?] Could it intend a political meaning? that he would
have been a Temporal Prince and Savior to them; which he so earnestly declined
and disclaimed? professing to the last his Kingdom was not of this world? It
could mean no other thing, but that he would have reduced them back to God,
have gathered and united them under his own gracious and safe Conduct in order
thereto, have secured them from the divine Wrath and Justice, and have conferred
on them spiritual and eternal blessings. In a like sense their peace here, was
no doubt more principally to be understood; and their loss and forfeiture of
it, by their not understanding the things belonging thereto, considered and
lamented.

Therefore the principal intendment of this Lamentation, tho directly applied
to a Community, and the formed body of a people, is equally appicable unto
particular persons living under the Gospel, or to whom the ordinary means of
their Conversion and salvation are vouchsafed, but are neglected by them and
forfeited.

We may therefore thus sum up the meaning and sense of these words.

That it is a thing in it self very lamentable, and much lamented by our Lord
Jesus, when such as living under the Gospel, have had a day of grace, and an
opportunity of knowing the things belonging to their peace, have so outworn
that day, and lost their opportunity, that the things of their peace are quite
hid from their eyes. Where we have these distinct heads of discourse to be
severally considered and insisted on.

1. What are the things necessary to be known by such as live under the Gospel,
as immediately belonging to their peace.

2. That they have a day or season wherein to know not these things only, but
the whole compass of their case, and what the knowledge of those things more
immediately belonging to their peace supposes, and depends upon.

3. That this day has its bounds and limits, so that when it is over and lost;
those things are for ever hid from their eyes.

4. That this is a case to be considered with deep resentment, and lamentation,
and was so by our Lord Jesus.

1. What are the things necessary, to be known by such as live under the
Gospel, as immediately belonging to their peace. Where we are more particularly
to enquire,

1. What those things themselves are.

2. What sort of Knowledge of them it is that is here meant, and made necessary.

1. What the things are which belong to the Peace of a People living under the
Gospel? The things belonging to a Peoples Peace, are not throughout the same
with all. Living, or not living under the Gospel makes a considerable
difference in the matter. Before the Incarnation and public appearance of our
Lord, something was not necessary among the Jews, that afterward became
necessary. It was sufficient to them before, to believe in a Messiah to come,
more indefinitely. Afterward he plainly tells them, if ye believe not that I
am he, ye shall dye in your sins, Joh. 8.24. Believing in Christ cannot be
necessary to Pagans that never heard of him, as a duty, howsoever necessary it
may be as a means. Their not believing in him cannot be it self a sin, tho by
it they should want remedy for their other sins. But it more concerns us who do
live under the Gospel, to apprehend aright what is necessary for our selves.
That is a short and full summary which the Apostle gives Acts 20.21. Repentance
toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. The Gospel finds us in a state
of Apostasy from God, both as our Sovereign Ruler, and Sovereign Good, not apt
to obey and glorify him, as the former, nor enjoy him, and be satisfied in
him, as the latter. Repentance toward God cures and removes this disaffection
of our minds and hearts toward him, under both these notions. By it the whole
Soul turns to him, with this sense and resolution. [I have been a rebellious
disloyal Wretch, against the high Authority, and most rightful Government of
him who gave me breath, and whose creature I am, I will live no longer thus. Lo
now I come back unto thee, O Lord, thou art my Lord and God. Thee I now design
to serve and obey, as the Lord of my Life, thee I will fear, unto thee I
subject my self, to live no longer after my own will, but thine; I have been
hitherto a miserable forlorn distressed Creature, destitute of any thing that
could satisfy me, or make me happy; have set my heart upon a vain and thorny
world, that had nothing in it answerable to my real necessities, that has
flattered and mocked me often, never satisfied me, and been wont to requite my
pursuits of satisfaction from it with vexation and trouble, and pierce^ me
through with many sorrows. I have born in the mean time a disaffected heart
toward thee, have therefore cast thee out of my thoughts, so that amidst all
my disappointments and sorrows, it never came into my mind to say, Where is God
my Maker? I could never savor any thing spiritual or divine, and was ever
ready, in distress, to turn my self any way than (that which I ought) toward
thee. I now see and bemoan my folly, and with a convinced, self-judging heart,
betake my self to thee; The desires of my Soul are now unto thy Name, and to
the remembrance of thee. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, or on earth that I can
desire besides thee.]

This is Repentance toward God; and is one thing belonging, and most simply
necessary to our Peace. But tho it be most necessary, it is not enough. It
answers to something of our wretched case, but not to every thing. We were in
our state of Apostasy, averse, and disaffected to God. To this evil, Repentance
toward him is the opposite, and only proper Remedy. But besides our being
without inclination toward him, we were also without Interest in him. We not
only had unjustly cast off him, but were also most justly cast off by him. Our
Injustice had set us against him, and his Justice had set him against us; we
need, in order to our Peace with him, to be relieved as well against his
Justice, as our own Injustice. What if, now we would return to him, he will not
receive us? And he will not receive us for our own sakes. He must have a
recompense for the wrong we had done him, by our rebellion against his
Government, and our contempt of his goodness. Our repentance is no expiation.
Nor had we of our own, or were capable of obliging him to give us the power and
grace to repent. Our high violation of the sacred rights and honor of the
Godhead, made it necessary, in order to our peace and reconciliation, there
should be a sacrifice, and a Mediator between him and us. He has judged it
not honorable to him, not becoming him to treat with us, or vouchsafe us
favors upon other terms. And since he thought it necessary to insist upon
having a sacrifice, he judged it necessary too, to have one proportionable to
the wrong done; lest he should make the Majesty of Heaven cheap, or occasion
men to think it a light matter to have fundamentally overturned the common
order which was settled between himself and men. The whole earth could not have
afforded such a sacrifice, it must be supplied from Heaven. His coeternal Son
made man, and so uniting Heaven and Earth in his own person, undertakes to be
that sacrifice, and, in the virtue of it, to be a standing continual Mediator
between God and us; Through him, and for his sake, all acts and influences of
grace are to proceed toward us. No sin is to be forgiven, no grace to be
conferred but upon his account. It Is reckoned most God-like, most suitable to
the divine Greatness, once offended, to do nothing that shall import favor
toward sinners, but upon his constant interposition. Him has he set over us,
and directed that all our applications to himself, and all our expectations
from him, should be thorough him. Him has he exalted to be a Prince and a
Savior, Acts 9.3^
to give us repentance and remission of Sins. Now to one so high in power over
us, he expects we should pay a suitable homage. That homage the Holy Scripture
calls by the name of Faith, believing on him. God has set him forth to be a
propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God; to declare his
righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believes
in Jesus. Romans 3.25, 26. So that when by repentance we turn to God, as our end,
we must also apply our selves by faith, to our Lord Jesus Christ, as our way to
that end. Which till we do, we are in rebellion still, and know not what
belongs to our peace. He insists that his Son into whose hands he has
committed our affairs, should be honored by us, as he himself requires to be.
John 5.23.

Now these two things sum up our part of the Covenant between God and us. By
repentance we again take God for our God. Repenting we return to him as our
God. By Faith we take his Son for our Prince and Savior. These things, by the
tenor of the Evangelical Covenant, are required of us. Peace is settled between
God and us (as it is usually with men toward one another after mutual
hostilities) by striking a Covenant. And in our case, it is a Covenant by
sacrifice, as you have seen. Nor are harder terms than these imposed upon us.

Do thou now, sinner, apprehend thy self gone off from God? And find a war is
commenced and on foot, between God and thee? He can easily conquer and crush
thee to nothing, but he offers thee terms of peace, upon which he is willing
to enter into Covenant with thee. Do thou like his terms? Art thou willing
to return to him, and take him again for thy God? To resign and commit thy self
with unfeigned trust and subjection, into the hands of his Son thy Redeemer?
These are the things which belong to thy Peace. See that thou now know them.

2. But what knowledge of them is it that is here meant? The thing speaks it
self. It is not a mere contemplative knowledge. We must so know them as to do
them; otherwise the increase of knowledge is the increase of sorrow. Thy guilt
and misery will be the greater. To know any thing that concerns our practice,
is to no purpose if we do not practice it. It was an Hebrew form of speech, and
is a common form, by words of knowledge to imply practice. It being taken for
granted that in matters so very reasonable, and important, if what we are to
do, once be rightly known, it will be done. Thus elsewhere the same great
requisites to eternal life and blessedness are expressed by our Lord. This is
life eternal to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent; It being supposed and taken for granted that a true vivid knowledge of
God and Christ will immediately form the soul to all suitable dispositions and
deportments toward the one and the other; and consequently to all men also, as
Christian precepts do direct to all the acts of sobriety, justice and charity
unto which the law of Christ obliges. An habitual course of Sin in any kind, is
inconsistent with this knowledge of the things of our peace, and therefore with
our peace it self. All Sin is in a true sense reducible to ignorance; and
customary sinning into total destitution of divine knowledge. According to the
usual style of the sacred writings, 1 Cor. 15.34. Awake to righteousness, and
sin not; for some have not the knowledge of God. 3 John 11. He that sins (i.
e. that is a doer of sin, (...), a worker of iniquity) has not seen God.

II. Such as live under the Gospel have a day, or a present opportunity, for
the obtaining the knowledge of these things immediately belonging to their
peace, and of whatsoever is besides necessary thereunto. I say nothing what
opportunities they have who never lived under the Gospel; who yet no doubt
might generally, know more than they do; and know better what they do know. It
suffices us who enjoy the Gospel, to understand our own advantages thereby.
Nor, as to those who do enjoy it, is every ones day of equal clearnes. How few
in comparison, have ever seen such a day as Jerusalem at this time did! made by
the immediate beams of the Sun of righteousness! Our Lord himself vouchsafing to
be their instructor, so speaking as never man did; and with such authority as
far outdid their other Teachers, and astonished the hearers. In what transports
did he use to leave those that heard him, wheresoever he came, wondering at the
gracious words that came out of his mouth! And with what mighty and beneficial
works was he wont to recommend his doctrine, shining in the glorious power, and
savouring of the abundant mercy of Heaven, so as every apprehensive mind might
see the Deity was incarnate, God was come down to treat with men, and allure
them into the knowledge and love of himself. The word was made flesh. What
unprejudic't mind might not perceive it to be so? He was there manifested and
veiled at once; both expressions are used concerning the same matter. The
divine beams were somewhat obscured, but did yet ray through that vail; Joh. 1.
so that his glory was beheld as the glory of the only begotten Son of the
Father, full of grace and truth. This Sun shone with a mild and benign but with
a powerful vivifying light. In him was life, and that life was the light of
men. Such a light created unto the Jews this their day. Happy Jews, if they
had understood their own happiness! And the days that followed, to them (for a
while) and the Gentile world were not inferior, in some respects brighter and
more glorious (the more copious gift of the Holy Ghost being reserved unto the
crowning and enthroning of the victorious Redeemer) when the everlasting Gospel
flew like lightning to the utmost ends of the earth; and the word which began
to be spoken by the Lord himself, Heb. 2.4.
was confirmed by them that heard him, God also himself bearing them witness,
with signs, and wonders, and gifs of the Holy Ghost. No such day has been seen
this many an age. Yet whithersoever the same Gospel, for substance, comes, it
also makes a day of the same kind, and affords always true, tho diminisht,
light; whereby, however, the things of our peace might be understood and known.
The written Gospel varies not; and if it be but simply and plainly proposed
(tho to some it be proposed with more advantage, to some with less, yet) still
we have the same things immediately relating to our Peace extant before our
eyes; and diverse things besides, which it concerns us to be acquainted with
that we may the more distinctly, and to better purpose understand these things.
For instance,

1. We have the true and distinct state of the quarrel between God and us.
Pagans have understood somewhat of the apostasy of man from God; that he is not
in the same state wherein he was at first. But while they have understood that
something was amiss, they could scarce tell what. The Gospel reveals the
universal pravity of the degenerate nature even of all men, and of every
faculty in man. That there is none that does good, Romans 3.
no not one; and that every one is altogether become filthy and impure, that
there is an entire old man to be put off; Ephesians. 4.
wholly corrupt by deceivable lusts, that the (...), the noblest powers are
vitiated, the mind and conscience defiled, that the Spirit of the mind needs
renewing, is sunk into carnality; and that the carnal mind is enmity against
God; Romans 8.
and is not subject to his law, nor can be; nor capable of savouring the things
of God; that the Sinner is in the flesh, under the dominion and power, and in
the possession of the fleshly sensual nature, and can therefore neither obey
God, nor enjoy him; that it is become impossible to him either to please God,
or be pleased with him. That the sinners quarrel therefore with God is about
the most appropriate rights of the Godhead; the controversy is who shall be
God, which is the Supreme authority, and which is the Supreme good. The former
peculiarity of the Godhead, the lapsed creature is become so insolent, as to
usurp and arrogate to himself. When he is become so much less than a man (a
very beast) he will be a God. His sensual will shall be his only law. He lives
and walks after the flesh, serves diverse lusts and pleasures, and says who is
Lord over me? But being conscious that he is not self-sufficient, that he must
be beholden to somewhat foreign to himself for his satisfaction, and finding
nothing else suitable to his sensual inclination; that other divine peculiarity
to be the Supreme good he places upon the sensible world; and for this purpose
that shall be his God; So that between himself and the world he attempts to
share the undivided Godhead. This is a controversy of an high nature, and about
other matters than even the Jewish Rabbis thought of, who when Jerusalem was
destroyed, supposed God was angry with them for their neglect of the recitation
of their Phylacteries morning and evening; or that they were not respectful
enough of one another; or that distance enough was not observed between
superiors and inferiors, etc. The Gospel impleads men as rebels against their
rightful Lord; but of this Treason against the Majesty of Heaven men little
suspect themselves till they are told. The Gospel tells them so plainly,
represents the matter in so clear light, that they need only to contemplate
themselves in that light, and they may see that so it is. Men may indeed, by
resolved, stiff, winking, create to themselves a darkness amidst the clearest
light. But open thine eyes man, thou that live under the Gospel, set thy self
to view thine own soul, thou will find it is day with thee; thou have a day, by
being under the Gospel, and light enough to see that this is the posture of thy
Soul, and the state of thy case Godward. And it is a great matter toward the
understanding the things of thy peace, to know aright what is the true state of
the quarrel between God and thee.

2. The Gospel affords light to know what the issue of this quarrel is sure to
be, if it go on, and there be no reconciliation. It gives us other and plainer
accounts of the punishments of the other world; more fully represents the
extremity, and perpetuity of the future miseries, and state of perdition
appointed for the ungodly world. Speaks out concerning the Tophet prepared of
old, the lake of fire and brimstone; Isa. 30.
Rev. 21.
shows the miseries of that state to be the immediate effects of di^^ne
displeasure; that the breath of the Almighty as a river of brimstone always
foments those flames; Romans 2.
that indignation and wrath cause the tribulation and anguish which must be the
portion of evil doers; and how fearful a thing it is to fall into the hands of
the living God! Heb. 10.
Gives us to understand what accession men's own unaltered vicious habits will
have to their miseries; their own outrageous lusts and passions, which here
they made it their business to satisfy, becoming their insatiable tormentours;
that they are to receive [ the things done] in the body, according to what they
have done; 2 Cor. 5.
and that what they have sowed [the same] also they are to reap; Gal. 6.
and what their own guilty reflections will contribute, the bitings and
gnawings of the worm that dies not, the venomous corrosions of the Viper bred
in their own bosoms, and now become a full-grown Serpent; what the society and
insultation of Devils, with whom they are to partake in woes and torments, and
by whom they have been seduced and trained into that cursed partnership and
^^^munion; and that this fire wherein they are to be tormented together is to
be everlasting, a fire never to be quenched. If men be left to their own
conjectures only, touching the danger they incur by continuing and keeping up a
war with Heaven, and are to make their own hell, and that it be the creature
only of their own imagination; it is like they will make it as easy and
favorable as they can; and so are little likely to be urged earnestly to sue
for peace by the imagination of a tolerable Hell. But if they understand it to
be altogether intolerable, this may make them bestir themselves, and think the
favor of God worth the seeking. The Gospel imports favor and kindness to you,
when it imports most of terror, in telling you so plainly the worst of your
case if you go on in a sinful course. It makes you a day, by which you may make
a truer judgment of the blackness, darkness and horror of that everlasting
night that is coming on upon you; and lets you know that black and endless
night is introduced by a terrible preceding day, that day of the Lord the
business whereof is judgment. They that live under the Gospel cannot pretend
they are in darkness so as that day should overtake them as a thief; and that,
by surprise, they should be doomed and abandoned to the regions of darkness. The
Gospel forewarns you plainly of all this: which it does not merely to fright
and torment you before the time, but that you may steer your course another
way, and escape the place and state of torment. It only says this that it may
render the more acceptable to you what it has to say besides; and only
threatens you with these things if there be no reconciliation between God and
you. But then at the same time,

3. It also represents God to you as reconcilable through a Mediator. In that
Gospel peace is preached to you, by Jesus Christ. That Gospel lets you see God
in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, that sin may not be imputed to
them. That Gospel proclaims glory to God in the highest, peace on earth, good
will toward men. So did the voices of Angels sum up the glad tidings of the
Gospel, when that Prince of peace was born into the world. It tells you God
desires not the death of sinners, but that they may turn and live; that he
would have all men be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth: that he is
long suffering toward them, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance: that he so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have
everlasting Life. The rest of the world can but collect, from darker
intimations, Gods favorable propensions toward them. He spares them, is
patient toward them, that herein, his goodness might lead them to repentance.
He sustains them, lets them dwell in a world which they might understand was of
his making, and whereof he is the absolute Lord. They live move and have their
being in him, that they might seek after him, and by feeling find him out. He
does them good, gives them rain from Heaven and fruitful seasons, filling their
Hearts with food and gladness. He lets his Sun shine on them, whose far extended
beams show forth his kindness and benignity to men, even to the utmost ends of
the earth. For there is no speech or language whither his line and circle
reaches not. But those are but dull and glimmering beams in comparison of those
that shine from the Sun of Righteousness through the Gospel-revelation, and in
respect of that divine glory which appears in the face of Jesus Christ. How
clearly does the light of this Gospel-day reveal Gods design of reducing
Sinners, and reconciling them to himself by a Redeemer! How can thou but say,
sinner, thou have a day of it? and clear daylight showing thee what the good
and acceptable will of God toward thee is? Thou art not left to guess only,
thou may be reconciled and find mercy, and to grope and feel thy way in the
dark, unles it be a darkness of thy own making. And whereas a Sinner, a disloyal
rebellious creature, that has affronted the Majesty of Heaven, and engaged
against himself the wrath and justice of his Maker, and is unable to make him
any recompense, can have no reason to hope God will show him mercy, and be
reconciled to him for his own sake, or for any thing he can do to oblige or
induce him to it; the same Gospel shows you plainly, it is for the Redeemers
sake, and what he has done and suffered to procure it. But inasmuch also as
the sinner may easily apprehend, that it can never answer the necessities of
his state and case, that God only be not his enemy, that he forbear hostilities
toward him, pursue him not with vengeance to his destruction. For he finds
himself an indigent creature, and he needs somewhat beyond what he has ever
yet met with to make him happy; that it is uneasy and grievous to wander up and
down with craving desires among varieties of objects that look speciously, but
which, either he cannot so far compass as to make a trial what there is in
them, or wherewith, upon trial, he finds himself mocked and disappointed, and
that really they have nothing in them: He finds himself a mortal creature, and
considers that if he had all that he can covet in this world, the increase of
his present enjoyments does but increase unto him trouble and anguish of heart,
while he thinks what great things he must shortly leave and lose for ever; to
go he knows not whither, into darksome gloomy regions; where he cannot so much
as imagine any thing suitable to his inclinations and desires. For he knows
all that is delectable to his present sense he must here leave behind him; and
he cannot divest himself of all apprehensions of a future state, wherein if God
should make him suffer nothing, yet if he have nothing to enjoy, he must be
always miserable.

4. The Gospel, therefore, further represents to him the final eternal
blessedness, and glorious state, which they that are reconciled shall be brought
into. They that live under the Gospel are not mocked with shadows, and empty
clouds, or with fabulous Elysiums. Nor are they put off with some
unintelligible notion of only being happy in the general. But are told expressly
wherein their happiness is to consist. Life and immortality are brought to
light in the Gospel. It Is given them to understand how great a good is laid up
in store. The things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which
otherwise could not have entered into the heart of man, the things of Gods
present and eternal Kingdom, are set in view. It shows the future state of
the reconciled shall consist not only in freedom from what is evil, but in the
enjoyment of the best and most delectable good. That God himself in all his
glorious fulness will be their eternal and most satisfying portion. That their
blessedness is to ly in the perpetual fruitive vision of his blessed face, and
in the fulness of joy, and the everlasting pleasures which the divine presence
it self does perpetually afford. And whereas their glorious Redeemer is so
nearly allied to them, flesh of their flesh, and bone of their bone, who
inasmuch as the children were made partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same, Heb. 2.14. and is become by special
title their authorized Lord, they are assured (of that, than which nothing
should be more grateful to them) they shall be for ever with the Lord; that
they are to be where he is, to behold his glory; and shall be joynt-heires with
Christ, and be glorified together with him, shall partake, according to their
measure and capacity, in the same blessedness which he enjoyes. Thou can not
pretend, sinner, who live under the Gospel, that thou have not the light of a
day to show thee what blessedness is. Heaven is opened to thee. Glory beams down
from thence upon thee to create thee a day, by the light whereof thou may
see with sufficient clearnes, what is the inheritance of the Saints in light.
And tho all is not told thee, and it do not in every respect appear what we
shall be; so much may be foreknown that when he shall appear, we shall be like
him, and shall see him as he is. 1 John 3.1, 2. And because the heart, as yet
carnal, can savor little of all this; and finding it self strange and
disaffected to God, affecting now to be without Christ and without God in the
world, may easily apprehend it impossible to it to be happy in an undesired
good, or that it can enjoy what it dislikes; or, in the mean time, walk in a
way to which it finds in it self nothing but utter aversenes and disinclination,

5. The Gospel further shows us what is to be wrought and done in us to
attemper and frame our spirits to our future state and present way to it. It
lets us know we are to be born again, born from above, born of God, made
partakers of a divine nature, that will make the temper of our spirits
connatural to the divine presence. That whereas God is light, and with him is
no darkness at all; we, who were darkness shall be made light in the Lord. That
we are to be begotten again to a lively hope, to the eternal and undefiled
inheritance that is reserved in the heavens for us. That we are thus to be made
meet to be partakers of that inheritance of the Saints in light. And as we are
to be eternally conversant with Christ, we are here to put on Christ, to have
Christ in us the hope of glory. And whereas only the way of holiness and
obedience leads to blessedness, that we are to be created in Christ Jesus to
good works to walk in them. And shall thereupon find the ways prescribed to
us by him, who is the Wisdom of God, to be all ways of pleasantnes and paths
of peace. That he will put his Spirit into us, and cause us to walk in his
statutes, and to account that in keeping them there is great reward. And thus
all that is contained in that mentioned summary of the things belonging to our
peace, Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ will all
become easy to us, and as the acts of nature; proceeding from that new and holy
nature imparted to us.

And whosoever thou art that live under the Gospel, can thou deny that it
is day with thee, as to all this? wast thou never told of this great necessary
heart-change? Did thou never hear that the tree must be made good that the
fruit might be good? that thou must become a new creature, have old things done
away, and all things made new? Did thou never hear of the necessity of having
a new heart and a right spirit created and renewed in thee; that except thou
were born again, or from above (as that expression may be read) thou could
never enter into the Kingdom of God? wast thou kept in ignorance that a form of
Godliness without the power of it would never do thee good? that a name to live
without the principle of the holy divine life would never save thee? that a
specious outside, that all thy external performances, while thou went with
an unrenewed, earthly carnal heart, would never advantage thee as to thy
eternal salvation and blessedness? And this might help thine understanding
concerning the nature of thy future blessedness, and will be found most
agreeable to it, being aright understood; for as thou art not to be blessed by
a blessedness without thee and distant from thee, but inwrought into thy temper,
and intimately united with thee, nor glorified by an external glory but by a
glory revealed within thee: So nor can thou be qualified for that blessed
glorious state otherwise than by having the temper of thy Soul made habitually
holy and good. As what a good man partakes of happiness here is such, that he is
satisfied from himself, so it must be hereafter, not originally from himself,
but by divine communication made most intimate to him. Did thou not know that
it belonged to thy peace, to have a peacemaker? and that the Son of God was
he? and that he makes not the peace of those that despise and refuse him, or
that receive him not, that come not to him, and are not willing to come to God
by him? Could thou think, living under the Gospel, that the reconciliation
between God and thee was not to be mutual? that he would be reconciled to thee
while thou would not be reconciled to him, or should still bear toward him
a disaffected implacable heart? For could thou be so void of all
understanding as not to apprehend what the Gospel was sent to thee for? or why
it was necessary to be preached to thee, or that thou should hear it? who
was to be reconciled by a Gospel preached to thee but thy self? who was to be
persuaded by a Gospel sent to thee? God, or thou? who is to be persuaded but
the unwilling? The Gospel, as thou have been told, reveals God willing to be
reconciled, and thereupon beseeches thee to be reconciled to him? Or could it
seem likely to thee thou could ever be reconciled to God, and continue
unreconcil'd to thy reconciler? To what purpose is there a dayes-man, a middle
person between God and thee, if thou will not meet him in that middle person?
Do thou not know that Christ avails thee nothing if thou still stand at a
distance with him, if thou do not unite and adjoyn thy self to him, or art
not in him? And do thou not again know that divine power and grace must unite
thee to him? and that a work must be wrought and done upon thy Soul by an
almighty hand, by God himself, a mighty transforming work to make thee capable
of that union? 2 Cor. 5.17.

1 Cor. 1.30.


that whosoever is in Christ is a new creature? that thou must be [of God] in
Christ Jesus, who then is made unto thee ( of God also) wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption; every way answering the exigency of thy case,
as thou art a foolish, guilty, impure, and enslaved, or lost creature? Did
thou never hear, that none can come to Christ but whom the Father draws? and
that he draws the reasonable souls of men not violently or against their wills
(he draws, yet drags them not) but makes them willing in the day of power, by
giving a new nature, and new inclinations to them. It Is sure with thee not dark
night, not a dubious twilight, but broad day as to all this.

Yes, perhaps thou may say, but this makes my case the worse not the better;
For it gives me at length to understand that what is necessary to my peace and
welfare is impossible to me; And so the light of my day does but serve to let
me see my self miserable and undone, and that I have nothing to do to relieve
and help my self. I therefore add

6. That by being under the Gospel men have not only light to understand
whatsoever is any way necessary to their peace, but opportunity to obtain that
communication of divine power and grace whereby to comply with the terms of it.
Whereupon, if this be made good, you have not a pretense left you to say your
case is the worse, or that you receive any prejudice by what the Gospel reveals
of your own impotency to relieve and help your selves; or determines touching
the terms of your peace and salvation, making such things necessary thereto, as
are to you impossible, and out of your own present power; unless it be a
prejudice to you not to have your pride gratified; and that God has pitched
upon such a method for your Salvation, as shall wholly turn to the praise of
the glory of his grace, or that you are to be [of him] in Christ Jesus -- that
whosoever glories might glory in the Lord. 1 Cor. 1.30 -- 31.
Is it for a sinner that has deserved, and is ready to perish, to insist upon
being saved with reputation? or to envy the great God upon whose pleasure it
wholly depends whether he shall be saved or not saved, the entire glory of
saving him? For otherwise, excepting the mere business of glory, and reputation:
is it not all one to you whether you have the power in your own hands of
changing your hearts, of being the authors to your selves, of that holy new
nature, out of which actual faith and repentance are to spring, or whether you
may have it from the God of all grace, flowing to you from its own proper
divine fountain? Your case is not sure really the worse that your salvation
from first to last is to be all of grace, and that it is impossible to you to
repent and believe, while it is not simply impossible; but that he can
effectually enable you thereto, unto whom all things are possible; supposing
that he will (whereof by and by.) Nay and it is more glorious and honorable,
even to you, if you understand your selves, that your case is so stated as it
is. The Gospel indeed plainly tells you that your repentance must be given you.
Christ is exalted to be a Prince and a Savior to give repentance, and
remission of sins. And so must your faith, and that frame of spirit which is
the principle of all good works. By grace ye are saved, through faith, not of
your selves, it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast:
for we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto goods works, which God
has before ordained that we should walk in them. Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10. Is it more
glorious to have nothing in you but what is self-sprung, than to have your
souls the seat and receptacle of divine communications; of so excellent things
as could have no other than an heavenly original? If it were not absurd and
impossible you should be self-begotten, is it not much more glorious to be born
of God? As they are said to be that receive Christ. Joh. 1.12, 13. But as many
as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name: which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

And now that by being under the Gospel, you have the opportunity of getting
that grace, which is necessary to your peace, and salvation; you may see, if
you consider what the Gospel is, and was designed for. It is the ministration
of the Spirit; that Spirit by which you are to be born again. Joh. 3.3, 5, 6.
The work of regeneration consists in the impregnating, and making lively and
efficacious in you the holy truths contained in the Gospel. Of his own good
will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of
first fruits of his creatures. Jam. 1.18. And again, being born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, 1 Pet. 1.23. So our
Savior prays. Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is truth. Joh.
17.17. The Gospel is upon this account called the word of life, Phil. 2.16. as
by which the principles of that divine and holy life are implanted in the soul,
whereby we live to God, do what his Gospel requires, and has made our duty,
and that ends at length in eternal life.

But you will say, shall all then that live under the Gospel obtain this grace
and holy life? or if they shall not, or, if so far as can be collected,
multitudes do not, or perhaps in some places that enjoy the Gospel very few do,
in comparison of them that do not, what am I the better? when perhaps it is far
more likely that I shall perish notwithstanding, than be saved?

In answer to this, it must be acknowledged that all that live under the Gospel
do not obtain life and saving grace by it. For then there had been no occasion
for this lamentation of our blessed Lord over the perishing inhabitants of
Jerusalem, as having lost their day, and that the things of their peace were
now hid from their eyes, and by that instance it appears too possible that even
the generality of a people living under the Gospel, may fall at length into the
like forlorn and hopeles condition.

But art thou a man that thus objectest? a reasonable understanding creature?
or do thou use the reason and understanding of a man in objecting thus? Did
thou expect that when thine own wilful transgression had made thee liable to
eternal death and wrath, peace and life and salvation should be imposed upon
thee whether thou would or no, or notwithstanding thy most wilful neglect
and contempt of them, and all the means of them? Could it enter into thy mind,
that a reasonable soul should be wrought and framed for that high and blessed
end, whereof it is radically capable, as a stock or a stone is for any use it
is designed for; without designing its own end or way to it? Could thou think
the Gospel was to bring thee to faith and repentance whether thou did hear it
or no? or ever apply thy mind to consider the meaning of it, and what it did
propose and offer to thee? or when thou might so easily understand that the
grace of God was necessary to make it effectual to thee, and that it might
become his power (or the instrument of his power) to thy salvation, could
thou think it concerned thee not, to sue and supplicate to him for that grace?
when thy life lay upon it, and thy eternal hope? Have thou lain weltring at the
footstool of the throne of grace in thine own tears (as thou have been
formerly weltring in thy sins and impurities) crying for grace to help thee in
this time of thy need? And if thou think this was above thee and without out
thy compass, have thou done all that was within thy compass in order to the
obtaining of grace at Gods hands?

But here perhaps thou will enquire, Is there any thing then to be done by us,
whereupon the grace of God may be expected certainly to follow?

To which I answer, 1. That it is out of question nothing can be done by us to
deserve it, or for which we may expect it to follow. It were not grace if we
had obliged, or brought it by our desert under former preventive bonds to us.
And 2. What if nothing can be done by us upon which it may be [certainly]
expected to follow? Is a certainty of perishing better than an high probability
of being saved? 3. Such as live under the Gospel have reason to apprehend it
highly probable they may obtain that grace which is necessary to their
salvation, if they be not wanting to themselves. For 4. There is generally
afforded to such that which is wont to be called common grace. I speak not of
any further extent of it, it is enough to our present purpose, that it extends
so far, as to them that live under the Gospel, and have thereby a day allowed
them wherein to provide for their peace. Now tho this grace is not yet
certainly saving, yet it tends to that which is so. And none have cause to
despair but that being duly improved and complied with, it may end in it.

And this is that which requires to be insisted on, and more fully evinced; In
order whereto let it be considered, That it is expressly said to such they are
to work out their salvation with fear and trembling for this reason, that God
works (or is working (...)) in them, i. e. is statedly, and continually at
work, or is always ready to work in them, to will, and to do, of his own good
pleasure. Phil. 2.12, 13. The matter fails not on his part. He will work on in
order to their salvation, if they work in that way of subordinate cooperation,
which his command, and the necessity of their own case oblige them unto. And it
is further to be considered, that where God had formerly afforded the symbols
of his gracious presence, given his oracles, and settled his Church, tho yet in
it is Ho^^ge, and much more imperfect state, there he however communicated those
influences of his Spirit, that it was to be imputed to themselves if they came
short of the saving operations of it. Of such it was said, Thou gave thy good
spirit to instruct them. Nehem. 9.20. And to such, Turn ye at my reproof, I
will pour out my spirit to you, I will make known my words unto you. Because I
called and you refused, I stretched out my hand, and no man regarded, but ye
set at naught my counsel, and despised all my reproof, I also will laugh at
your calamity, etc. Prove. 1.23, 24. We see whence their destruction came, not
from Gods first restraint of his Spirit, but their refusing, despising, and
setting at naught his counsels and reproofs. And when it is said, they rebelled
and vexed his spirit, and he therefore turned, and fought against them, and
became their enemy, Isa. 63.10. It appears that before, his Spirit was not
withheld, but did variously, and often make essays, and attempts upon them.
And when Stephen immediately before his Martyrdom thus bespeaks the descendents
of these Jews, Ye stiffnecked, and uncircumcised, -- ye do always resist the
holy Ghost, as your Fathers did, so do ye. Act. 7. It Is implied the holy Ghost
had been always striving from age to age with that stubborn people; for where
there is no counter-striving there can be no resistance, no more than there can
be a war on one side only. Which also appears to have been the course of Gods
dealing with the old world, before their so general lapse into Idolatry and
sensual wickedness, from that passage, Genesis 6.3. (according to the more common
reading and sense of those words.)

Now whereas the Gospel is eminently said to be the ministration of the spirit
in contradistinction not only to the natural Religion of other nations, but the
divinely instituted Religion of the Jews also, as is largely discoursed 2 Cor.
3. and more largely through the Epistle to the Galatians, especially chap. 4.
and whereas we find that, in the Jewish Church, the holy Ghost did generally
diffuse its influences, and not otherwise withhold them, than penally, and upon
great provocation, how much more may it be concluded that under the Gospel, the
same blessed Spirit is very generally at work upon the souls of men, till by
their resisting, grieving and quenching of it, they provoke it to retire and
withdraw from them.

And let the Consciences of men living under the Gospel testify in the case.
Appeal sinner to thine own conscience; Have thou never felt any thing of
conviction, by the word of God? had thou never any thought injected of
turning to God, of reforming thy life, of making thy peace? have no desires
ever been raised in thee, no fears? have thou never had any tastes and relishes
of pleasure in the things of God? whence have these come? what from thy self?
who art not sufficient to think any thing as of thy self, i. e. not any good or
right thought? All must be from that good Spirit that has been striving with
thee; and might still have been so unto a blessed issue for thy soul, if thou
had not neglected and disobeyed it.

And do not go about to excuse thy self by saying, that so all others have done
too, it is like at one time or other; and if that therefore be the rule and
measure, that they that contend against the strivings* and motions of Gods
Spirit must be finally deserted, and given up to perish, who then can be saved?
Think not of pleading so for thy neglecting and despising the grace and Spirit
of God. It Is true that herein the great God shows his sovereignty, when all
tha^ enjoy the same advantages for salvation deserve by their slighting them to
be forsaken alike; he gives instances and makes examples of just severity, and
of the victorious power of grace as seems him good, which there will be further
occasion to speak more of hereafter. In the mean time the present design is not
to justify thy condemnation but procure thy salvation, and therefore to
admonish and instruct thee, that, tho thou art not sure, because some others
that have slighted and despised the grace and Spirit of God are notwithstanding
conquered and saved thereby, it shall therefore fare as well with thee; yet
thou have reason to be confident, it will be well and happy for thee if, now,
thou despise and slight them not. And whether thou do or do not, it is however
plain that by thy being under the Gospel thou have had a day, wherein to mind
the things of thy peace (tho it is not told thee it would last always, but the
contrary is presently to be told thee.)

And thou may now see it is not only a day in respect of light, but influence
also; that thou might not only know notionally what belonged thereto, but
efficaciously and practically, which you have heard is the knowledge here
meant. And the concurrence of such light and influence have made thee a season
wherein thou wast to have been at work for thy soul. The day is the proper
season for work, when the night comes working ceases, both because that then
light fails, and because drowsines and sloth are more apt to possess men. And
the night will come. For (which is the next thing we are to speak to,)

III. This day has its bounds and limits, so that when it is over, and lost
with such, the things of their peace are for ever hid from their eyes. And that
this day is not infinite and endless, we see in the present instance. Jerusalem
had her day; but that day had its period, we see it comes to this at last, that
now the things of her peace are hid from her eyes. We generally see the same
thing, in that sinners are so earnestly pressed to make use of the present time.
To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, Psalm. 95. quoted and
urged Heb. 3.7, 8. They are admonish't to seek the Lord while he may be found,
Isa. 55.
to call upon him while he is nigh. It seems some time he will not be found,
and will be afar off. They are told this is the accepted time, this is the day
of salvation. Isa. 49. 2 Cor. 6.


This day, with any place or people, supposes a precedent night, when the
dayspring from on high had not visited their horison, and all within it sat
in darkness, and in the region and shadow of death. Yea and there was a time, we
know, of very general darkness, when the Gospel day, the day of Visitation had
not yet dawned upon the world; times of ignorance, wherein God as it were winkt
upon the nations of earth; the beams of his eye did in a sort overshoot them,
as the word (...) imports. But when the eyelids of the morning open upon any
people, and light shines to them with direct beams, they are now commanded to
repent Act. 17.30. limited to the present point of time with such
peremptorines, as that noble Roman used toward a proud Prince, asking time to
deliberate upon the proposal made to him of withdrawing his forces that
molested some of the allies of that state, he draws a line about him with the
end of his rod, and requires him now, out of hand, before he stirred out of that
Circle to make his choice, whether he would be a friend or enemy to the people
of Rome. So are sinners to understand the state of their own case. The God of
thy life, sinner, in whose hands thy times are, does with much higher right,
limit thee to the present time, and expects thy present answer to his just and
merciful offers and demands. He circumscribes thy day of grace; it is enclosed
on both parts, and has an evening as well as a morning; as it had a foregoing,
so it has a subsequent night, and the latter, if not more dark, yet usually
much more stormy than the former! For God shuts up this day in much
displeasure, which has terrible effects. If it be not expressly told you what
the condition of that night is that follows your Gospel-day; If the Watchman
being asked, what of the night? do only answer it comes as well as the morning
came; black events are signified by that more awful silence. Or it is all one if
you call it a day; there is enough to distinguish it from the day of grace. The
Scriptures call such a calamitous season indifferently either by the name of
night or day: but the latter name is used with some or other adjunct to
signify day is not meant in the pleasant or more grateful sense: a day of
wrath, an evil day, a day of gloomines and thick darkness, not differing from
the most dismal night; and to be told the morning of such a day is coming, is
all one, as that the evening is coming of a bright and a serene day.

And here perhaps, Reader, thou will expect to be told what are the limits of
this day of grace? It is indeed much more difficult punctually to assign those
limits, than to ascertain thee there are such: but it is also less necessary.
The wise and merciful God does in matters of this nature little mind to
gratify our curiosity; much less is it to be expected from him, that he should
make known to us such things, whereof it were better we were ignorant, or the
knowledge whereof would be much more a prejudice to us than an advantage. And
it were as bold and rash an undertaking, in this case, as it would be vain and
insignificant, for any man to take upon him to say, in it, what God has not
said, or given him plain ground for. What I conceive to be plain and useful in
this matter I shall lay down in the following propositions, insisting more
largely where the matter requires it, and contenting my self but to mention
what is obvious, and clear at the first sight.

1. That there is a great difference between the ends and limits of the day or
season of grace as to particular persons, and in reference to the collective
body of a people, inhabiting this or that place. It may be over with such or
such a place, so as that they that dwell there shall no longer have the Gospel
among them, when as yet it may not be over with every particular person
belonging to it, who may be providentially cast elsewhere, or may have the
ingrafted word in them, which they lose not. And again it may be over with some
particular persons in such a place, when it is not yet over with that people or
place, generally considered.

2. As to both there is a difference between the ending of such a day, and
intermissions, or dark intervals, that may be in it. The Gospel may be
withdrawn from such a people, and be restored. And God often no doubt, as to
particular persons, either deprives them of the outward means of grace, for a
time (by sickness, or many other ways) or may for a time, forbear moving upon
them by his Spirit, and again try them with both.

3. As to particular persons, there may be much difference between such, as,
while they lived under the Gospel, gained the knowledge of the principal
doctrines (or of the sum and substance) of Christianity; tho without any
sanctifying effect, or impression upon their hearts, and such as through their
own negligence, lived under it in total ignorance hereof. The day of grace may
not be over with the former, tho they should never live under the ministry of
the Gospel more. For it is possible, while they have the seeds and principles
of holy truth laid up in their minds, God may graciously administer to them
many occasions of recollecting and considering them, wherewith he may so please
to cooperate, as to enliven them, and make them vital and effectual to their
final salvation. Whereas, with the other sort, when they no more enjoy the
external means, the day of grace is like to be quite over, so as that there may
be no more hope in their case than in that of Pagans in the darkest parts of
the world, and perhaps much less, as their guilt has been much greater by
their neglect of so great and important things. It may be better with Tire and
Sidon, etc.

4. That yet it is a terrible judgment to the most knowing, to lose the
external dispensation of the Gospel, while they have yet no sanctifying
impression upon their hearts by it, and they are cast upon a fearful hazard of
being lost for ever, being left by the departed Gospel, in an unconverted
state. For they need the most urgent inculcations of Gospel Truths, and the
most powerful enforcing means, to engage them to consider the things which they
know. It is the design of the Gospel to beget not only light in the mind, but
grace in the heart. And if that was not done while they enjoyed such means, it
is less likely to be done without them. And if any slighter, and more
superficial impressions were made upon them thereby, short of true and thorough
conversion, how great is the danger that all will vanish, when they cease to be
pressed, and urged, and called upon by the public voice of the Gospel Ministry
any more. How naturally desident is the spirit of man, and apt to sink into
deadnes, worldlines and carnality, even under the most lively and quickening
means; and even where a saving work has been wrought; how much more when those
means fail, and there is no vital principle within, capable of self-excitation
and improvement. O that they would consider this, who have got nothing by the
Gospel all this while, but a little cold, spiritles, notional knowledge, and
are in a possibility of losing it before they get any thing more!

5. That as it is certain death ends the day of grace with every unconverted
person, so it is very possible it may end with diverse before they dye; by their
total loss of all external means, or by the departure of the blessed Spirit of
God from them, so as to return and visit them no more. How the day of grace may
end with a person, is to be understood by considering what it is that makes up
and constitutes such a day. There must be some measure and proportion of time
to make up this (or any) day which is as the substratum, and ground forelaid.
Then there must be light superadded, otherwise it differs not from night, which
may have the same measure of mere time. The Gospel revelation, some way or
other, must be had, as being the light of such a day. And again there must be
some degree of livelines, and vital influence, the more usual concomitant of
light; the night does more dispose men to drowsines. The same Sun that
enlightens the world, disseminates also an invigorating influence. If the
Spirit of the living God do no way animate the Gospel revelation, and breath in
it, we have no day of grace. It is not only a day of light, but a day of power,
wherein souls can be wrought upon, and a people made willing to become the
Lords. Psalm. 110. As the Redeemer revealed in the Gospel, is the light of the
world, so he is life to it too, tho neither are planted, or do take root every
where. In him was life, and that life was the light of men. That light that
rays from him is vital light in it self, and in its tendency and design, tho
it be disliked, and not entertained by the most.

Whereas therefore these things must concur to make up such a day: if either a
man's time, his life on earth expire, or if light quite fail him, or if all
gracious influence be withheld, so as to be communicated no more; his day is
done, the season of grace is over with him. Now it is plain that many a one may
lose the Gospel before his life end; and possible that all gracious influence
may be restrained, while as yet the external dispensation of the Gospel
remains. A sinner may have hardened his heart to that degree, that God will
attempt him no more, in any kind, with any design of kindness to him, not in
that more inward, immediate way at all, i. e. by the motions of his Spirit,
which peculiarly can import nothing but friendly inclination, as whereby men
are personally applied unto, so that another cannot be meant; nor by the voice
of the Gospel, which may either be continued for the sake of others, or they
continued under it, but for their heavier doom at length. Which tho it may seem
severe, is not to be thought strange, much less unrighteous.

It is not to be thought strange to them that read the Bible, which so often
speaks this sense, as when it warns and threatens men with so much terror, as
Heb. 10.26, 27, 28, 29. For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall
devour the adversaries. He that despised Moses law, died without mercy, under
two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be
thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the
blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has
[done despite unto the Spirit of grace?] And when it tells us, after many
overtures made to men in vain, of his having given them up, etc. Psalm. 81.11,
12. But my people would not hearken to my voice: and Israel would none of me;
So I gave them up unto their own hearts lust; and they walked in their own
counsels; and pronounces, Let him that is unjust, be unjust still, and let him
which is filthy, be filthy still. Rev. 22.11. and says, In thy filthiness is
lewdnes, because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged; thou shall not
be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon
thee. Ezekiel. 24.13. Which passages seem to imply a total desertion of them, and
retraction of all gracious influence. And when it speaks of letting them be
under the Gospel, and the ordinary means of salvation, for the most direful
purposes. As that, This Child (Jesus) was set for the fall (as well as for the
rising) of many in Israel, Luke 2.34. As to which Text the very learned Grotius
glossing upon the words (...) and (...), says, Accedo iis qui non necdum
eventum, sed and confilium, that he is of their opinion who think that not the
naked event, but the counsel or purpose of God is signified by it, the same
with (...); and alleges several Texts where the active of that verb must have
the same sense, as to appoint, or ordain; and mentions diverse other places of
the same import with this so understood; and which therefore to recite will
equally serve our present purpose, as that Romans 9.33. Behold, I lay in Zion a
stumbling stone, and rock of offense. And 1 Pet. 2.8. The stone which the
builders refused is made a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, even to
them which stumble at the word, being disobedient, whereunto also they were
appointed. With that of our Savior himself. Joh. 9.39. For judgment I am come
into this world, that they which see not, might see; and that they which see,
might be made blind. And most agreeable to those former places is that of the
Prophet Isai. 28.13. But the word of the Lord was unto them precept upon
precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line, here a little,
and there a little; that they might go, and fall backward, and be broken, and
snared, and taken. And we may add that our Lord has put us out of doubt that
there is such a sin as that which is eminently called The sin against the Holy
Ghost; that a man may, in such circumstances, and to such a degree, sin against
that blessed Spirit, that he will never move, or breathe upon them more, but
leave them to an hopeless ruin. Tho I shall not in this discourse, determine or
discuss the nature of it. But I doubt not it is somewhat else, than final
impenitency, and infidelity; and that every one that dies, not having sincerely
repented and believed, is not guilty of it, tho every one that is guilty of it,
dies impenitent and unbelieving; but was guilty of it before; so as it is not
the mere want of time, that makes him guilty. Whereupon therefore, that such
may outlive their day of grace, is out of question.

But let not such, as, upon the descriptions the Gospel gives us of that sin,
may be justly confident they have not perhaps committed it, therefore think
themselves out of all danger of losing their season of making their peace with
God before they die. Many a one may, no doubt, that never committed the
unpardonable blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, as he is the witness, by his
wonderful works, of Christ's being the Messiah. As one may die, by neglecting
himself, that does not poison himself, or cut his own throat. You will say, but
if the Spirit retire from men, so as never to return, where is the difference?
I answer, the difference lies in the Specific nature, and greater hainousnes of
that sin, and consequently, in the deeper degrees of its punishment. For tho
the reason of its unpardonablenes lies not principally in its greater
hainousnes, but in its direct repugnancy to the way of obtaining pardon, yet
there is no doubt of its being much more heinous than many other sins, for
which men perish. And therefore it is in proportion more severely punished. But
is it not misery enough to dwell in darkness and woe for ever, as every one that
dies unreconconcil'd to God must do, unles the most intense flames and horror
of Hell be your portion? As his case is sufficiently bad that must die as an
ordinary Felon, tho he is not to be hanged, drawn, and quartered.

Nor is there any place, or pretense for so profane a thought, as if there
were any color of unrighteousnes in this course of procedure with such men. Is
it unjust severity to let the Gospel become deadly to them, whose own malignity
perverts it, against its nature, and genuine tendency, into a savor of death,
as 2 Cor. 2.16. which it is (...), i. e. to them, (as the mentioned Author
speaks) who may be truly said to seek their own destruction? or that God should
intend their more aggravated condemnation, even from the despised Gospel it
self, who, when such light is come into the world, hate it, show themselves
lucifugae, tenebriones, (as he also phrases it, speaking further upon that
first mentioned Text,) such as fly from the light, choose and love to lurk in
darkness? He must have very low thoughts of divine favor and acceptance, of
Christ, and grace, and glory, that can have hard thoughts of God, for his
vindicating, with greatest severity, the contempt of such things. What could
better become his glorious majesty, and excellent greatness, than, as all things
work together for good toward them that love him, so to let all things work
for the hurt of them that so irreconcileably hate him, and bear a disaffected
and implacable mind toward him? Nor does the addition of his designing the
matter so, make it hard. For if it be just to punish such wickedness, is it
unjust to intend to punish it? and to intend to punish it according to its
desert, when it cannot be thought unjust, actually to render to men what they
deserve?

We are, indeed, to account the primary intention of continuing the Gospel to
such a people, among whom these live, is kindness toward others, not this
higher revenge upon them; Yet nothing hinders but that this revenge upon them,
may also be the fit matter of his secondary intention. For should he intend
nothing concerning them? Is he to be so unconcerned about his own creatures,
that are under his Government? While things cannot fall out to him unawares,
but that he has this dismal event in prospect before him, he must at least
intend to let it be, or not to hinder it. And who can expect he should? for,
that his gracious influence toward them should, at length, cease, is above all
exception: that it ceasing, while they live still under the Gospel, they
contract deeper guilt, and incur heavier punishment, follows of course. And
who can say he should not intend to let it follow? For should he take away the
Gospel from the rest, that these might be less punished? that others might not
be saved, because they will not?

Nor can he be obliged to interpose extraordinarily, and alter, for their
sakes, the course of nature, and providence, so as either to hasten them the
sooner out of the world, or cast them into any other part of it, where the
Gospel is not, lest they should, by living still under it, be obnoxious to the
severer punishment. For whither would this lead? he should, by equal reason,
have been obliged to prevent men's sinning at all, that they might not be liable
to any punishment. And so not to have made the world, or have otherwise framed
the methods of his Government, and less sutably to an whole community of
reasonable creatures; or to have made an end of the world long ago, and have
quitted all his great designs in it, lest some should sin on, and incur
proportionable punishment! or to have provided extraordinarily that all should
do and fare alike; and that it might never have come to pass, that it should be
less tolerable for Capernaum, and Chorazin, and Bethsaida than for Tire, and
Sidon, and Sodom, and Gomorrah. But is there unrigteousnes with God? or is he
unrighteous in taking vengeance? or is he therefore unjust, because he will
render to every one according to his works; to them who, by patient continuance
in well doing, seek glory, honor and immortality, eternal life: but unto them
that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousnes,
indignation, and wrath, tribulation, and anguish upon every soul of man that
does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile? Romans 2.6, 7, 8, 9. Does
righteousness it self make him unrighteous? O Sinner, understand how much better
it is to avoid the stroke of divine justice, than accuse it! God will be found
true, and every man a liar, that he may be justified when he speaks, and be
clear when he judges. Psalm. 51.4.

6. Yet are we not to imagine any certain fixed rule, according whereto (except
in the case of the unpardonable sin) the divine dispensation is measured in
cases of this nature. viz. That, when a sinner has contended just so long, or
to such a degree, against his Grace and Spirit in his Gospel, he shall be
finally rejected; or if but so long, or not to such a degree, he is yet
certainly to be further tried, or treated with. It is little to be doubted, but
he puts forth the power of victorious grace, at length, upon some more
obstinate, and obdurate sinners, and that have longer persisted in their
rebellions; (not having sinned the unpardonable sin) and gives over some sooner,
as it seems good unto him. Nor does he herein owe an account to any man of his
matters. Here Sovereign good pleasure rules, and arbitrates, that is tied to no
certain rule. Neither, in these variations, is there any show of that blameable
(...), or accepting of persons, which, in his own word, he so expressly
disclaims. We must distinguish matters of right, (even such as are so by
promise only, as well as others) and matters of mere unpromised favor. In
matters of right, to be an accepter of persons, is a thing most highly culpable
with men, and which can have no place with the holy God. i. e. When an humane
judge has his rule before him, according whereto he is to estimate men's
rights, in judgment; there, to regard the person of the rich, or of the poor to
the prejudice of the justice of the cause, were an insufferable iniquity; as it
were also in a private person to withhold another right, because he has no
kindness for him. So even the great God himself, tho of mere grace, he first
fixed and established the rule, (fitly therefore called the Covenant, or law of
grace) by which he will proceed in pardoning, and justifying men, or in
condemning, and holding them guilty, both here, and in the final judgment; Yet
having fixed it, he will never recede from it; so as either to acquit an
impenitent unbeliever, or condemn a beleiving penitent. If we confess our sins,
he is faithful and just to forgive. None shall be ever able to accuse him of
breach of faith, or of transgressing his own rules of justice. We find it
therefore said in reference to the judgment of the last day, when God shall
render to every man according to his works, whether they be Jews or Gentiles,
that there is no respect of persons with God. Romans 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. yet
(qui promisit paenitenti veniam, non promisit peccanti paenitentiam,) whereas
he has, by his Evangelical law, ascertained pardon to one that sincerely obeys
it, but has not promised grace to enable them to do so, to them that have long
continued wilfully disobedient and rebellious, this communication of grace is,
therefore, left arbitrary, and to be dispensed, as the matter of free and
unassured favor, as it seems him good. And indeed, if in matters of arbitrary
favor, respect of persons ought to have no place, friendship were quite
excluded the world, and would be swallowed up of strict and rigid justice. I
ought to take all men for my friends alike, otherwise than as justice should
oblige me to be more respectful to men of more merit.

7. Wherefore no man can certainly know, or ought to conclude, concerning
himself, or others, as long as they live, that the season of grace is quite
over with them. As we can conceive no rule God has set to himself to proceed
by, in ordinary cases of this nature; so nor is there any he has set unto us
to judge by, in this case. It were to no purpose, and could be of no use to
men, to know so much; therefore it were unreasonable to expect God should have
settled and declared any rule, by which they might come by the knowledge of it.
As the case is then, viz. there being no such rule, no such thing can be
concluded; for who can tell what an arbitrary, Sovereign, free Agent will do,
if he declare not his own purpose himself? How should it be known, when the
Spirit of God has been often working upon the soul of a man, that this or that
shall be the last act, and that he will never put forth another? And why should
God make it known? To the person himself whose case it is, it is manifest it
could be no benefit. Nor is it to be thought the holy God will ever so alter
the course of his own proceedings, but that it shall finally be seen to all the
world, that every man's destruction was, entirely, and to the last, of himself.
If God had made it evident to a man, that he were finally rejected, he were
obliged to believe it. But shall it ever be said, God has made any thing a
man's duty, which were inconsistent with his felicity. The having sinned himself
into such a condition wherein he is forsaken of God, is indeed inconsistent
with it. And so the case is to stand, i. e. that his perdition be in immediate
connection with his sin, not with his duty. As it would be in immediate,
necessary connection with his duty, if he were bound to believe himself finally
forsaken, and a lost creature. For that belief makes him hopeles, and a very
devil, justifies his unbelief of the Gospel, toward himself, by removing and
shutting up, toward him, the object of such a faith, and consequently brings
the matter to this state, that he perishes, not because he does not believe God
reconcilable to man, See more to this purpose in the Appendix.
but because, with particular application to himself, he ought not so to
believe.

And it were most unfit, and of very pernicious consequence, that such a thing
should be generally known concerning others. It were to anticipate the final
Judgment, to create an Hell upon Earth, to tempt them whose doom were already
known, to do all the mischief in the world, which malice and despair can
suggest, and prompt them unto; it were to mingle devils with men! and fill the
world with confusion! How should Parents know how to behave themselves toward
Children, an Husband toward the Wife of his bosom in such a case, if it were
known they were no more to counsel, exhort, admonish them, pray with or for
them than if they were devils!

And if there were such a rule, how frequent misapplications would the fallible
and distempered minds of men make of it? so that they would be apt to fancy
themselves warranted to judge severely, or uncharitably, and (as the truth of
the case perhaps is) unjustly concerning others, from which they are so hardly
withheld, when they have no such pretense to embolden them to it, but are so
strictly forbidden it. And the judgment seat so fenced, as it is, by the most
awful interdicts, against their usurpation and encroachments.

We are therefore to reverence the wisdom of the divine Government, that things
of this nature are among the arcana of it; Some of those secrets which belong
not to us. He has revealed what was fit and necessary, for us and our
children, and envies to man no useful knowledge.

But it may be said, when the Apostle (1 John 5.16.) directs to pray for a
brother whom we see sinning a sin that is not unto death, and adds, there is a
sin unto death, I do not say he shall pray for it; Is it not implied that it
may be known when one sins that sin unto death, not only to himself, but even
to others too? I answer it is implied there may be too probable appearances of
it, and much ground to suspect and fear it concerning some, in some cases; As
when any against the highest evidence of the truth of the Christian Religion,
and that Jesus is the Christ, or the Messiah (the proper and most sufficiently
credible testimony whereof, he had mentioned in the foregoing verses, under
heads to which the whole evidence of the truth of Christianity may be fitly
enough reduced) do notwithstanding, from that malice, which blinds their
understanding, persist in infidelity, or apostatize and relapse into it, from a
former profession, there is great cause of suspicion, lest such have sinned
that sin unto death. Whereupon yet it is to be observed, he does not expressly
forbid praying for the persons whose case we may doubt; only he does not enjoin
it, as he does for others, but only says, I do not say ye shall pray for it,
i. e. that in his present direction to pray for others, he did not intend such,
but another sort, for whom they might pray remotely from any such suspicion:
viz. that he meant now such praying as ought to be interchanged between
Christian friends, that have reason, in the main, to be well persuaded
concerning one another. In the mean time intending no opposition to what is
elsewhere enjoined, the praying for all men. 1 Timothy 2.1. Without the personal
exclusion of any, as also our Lord himself prayed indefinitely for his most
malicious enemies, Father forgive them they know not what they do; tho he had
formerly said, there was such a sin as should never be forgiven; Whereof it is
highly probable some of them were guilty: yet such he does not expressly except;
but his prayer being in the indefinite, not the universal form, it is to be
supposed it must mean such as were within the compass and reach of prayer, and
capable of benefit by it. Nor does the Apostle here direct personally to
exclude any, only that indefinitely and in the general such must be supposed
not meant as had sinned the sin unto death; or must be conditionally excluded,
if they had, without determining who had, or had not. To which purpose it is
very observable, that a more abstract form of expression, is used in this
latter clause of this verse. For whereas in the former positive part of the
direction, he enjoins praying for him, or them that had not sinned unto death
(viz. concerning whom there was no ground for any such imagination or suspicion
that they had;) In the negative part, concerning such as might have sinned it,
he does not say for him or them, but for it, (i. e. concerning, or in reference
to it,) as if he had said, the case in general only is to be excepted, and if
persons are to be distinguished (since every sin is some ones Sin, the sin of
some person or other) let God distinguish, but do not you, it is enough for you
to except the sin, committed by whomsoever. And tho the former part of the
verse speaks of a particular person, If a man see his brother sin a sin that is
not unto death, which is as determinate to a person as the sight of our eye can
be, it does not follow the latter part must suppose a like particular
determination of any persons case, that he has sinned it. I may have great
reason to be confident such and such have not, when I can only suspect that
such a one has. And it is a thing much less unlikely to be certain to one self
than another, for they that have sinned unto death, are no doubt so blinded and
stupify'd by it, that they are not more apt or competent to observe themselves,
and consider their case than others may be.

8. But tho none ought to conclude that their day or season of grace is quite
expired, yet they ought deeply to apprehend the danger lest it should expire,
before their necessary work be done, and their peace made. For tho it can be of
no use to them to know the former, and therefore they have no means appointed
them by which to know it, it is of great use to apprehend the latter; and they
have sufficient ground for the apprehension. All the cautions and warnings
wherewith the holy Scripture abounds, of the kind with those already mentioned,
have that manifest design. And nothing can be more important, or apposite to
this purpose, than that solemn charge of the great Apostle. Phil. 2.12. Work
out your own salvation with fear and trembling; considered together with the
subjoyned ground of it verse. 13. For it is God that works in you to will, and
to do, of his own good pleasure. How correspondent is the one with the other;
work, for he works; there were no working at all to any purpose, or with any
hope, if he did not work. And work with fear and trembling, for he works of his
own good pleasure, q. d. 'Twere the greatest folly imaginable to trifle with
one that works at so perfect liberty, under no obligation, that may desist when
he will; to impose upon so absolutely Sovereign, and arbitrary an agent, that
owes you nothing; and from whose former gracious operations not complied with,
you can draw no argument unto any following ones, that because he does,
therefore he will. As there is no certain connection between present time, and
future, but all time is made up of undepending, not-strictly-coherent moments,
so as no man can be sure, because one now exists, another shall; There is also
no more certain connection between the arbitrary acts of a free Agent within
such time; so that I cannot be sure, because he now darts in light upon me, is
now convincing me, now awakening me, therefore he will still do so, again and
again. Upon this ground then, what exhortation could be more proper than this,
work out your salvation with fear and trembling? What could be more awfully
monitory, and enforcing of it, than that he works only of mere good will and
pleasure? How should I tremble to think, if I should be negligent, or
undutiful, he may give out the next moment, and let the work fall, and me
perish!

And there is more especial cause for such an apprehension, upon the
concurrence of such things as these,

1. If the workings of Gods Spirit upon the soul of a man have been more than
ordinarily strong and urgent, and do now cease. If there have been more
powerful convictions, deeper humiliations, more awakened fears, more formed
purposes of a new life, more fervent desires, that are now all vanished and
fled, and the sinner is returned to his old dead, and dull temper.

2. If there be no disposition to reflect and consider the difference, no sense
of his loss, but he apprehends such workings of spirit in him unnecessary
troubles to him, and thinks it well he is delivered and eased of them.

3. If in the time when he was under such workings of spirit, he had made known
his case to his Minister, or any godly friend, whose company he now shuns, as
not willing to be put in mind, or hear any more of such matters.

4. If hereupon he has more indulged sensual inclination, taken more liberty,
gone against the checks of his own conscience, broken former good resolutions,
involved himself in the guilt of any grosser sins.

5. If conscience, so baffled, be now silent; lets him alone, grows more
sluggish and weaker (which it must) as his lusts grow stronger.

6. If the same lively powerful ministry, which before affected him much, now
moves him not.

7. If especially, he is grown into a dislike of such preaching, if serious
godliness, and what tends to it are become distasteful to him, if discourses of
God, and Christ, of death and judgment, and of an holy life, are reckoned
superfluous and needles, are unsavory and disrelisht; if he have learned to
put disgraceful names upon things of this import, and the persons that most
value them, and live accordingly. If he has taken the seat of the scorner, and
makes it his business to deride, what he had once a reverence for, or took some
complacency in.

8. If, upon all this, God withdraw such a Ministry, so that he is now warned,
and admonisht, exhorted and striven with as formerly, no more. O, the fearful
danger of that man's case! Has he no cause to fear lest the things of his peace
should be for ever hid from his eyes? Surely he has much cause of fear, but
not of despair. Fear would in this case be his great duty, and might yet prove
the means of saving him; Despair would be his very heinous and destroying sin.
If yet he would be stirred up to consider his case, whence he is fallen, and
whither he is falling, and set himself to serious seeking of God, cast down
himself before him, abase himself, cry for mercy, as for his life, there is yet
hope in his case. God may make here an instance what he can obtain of himself
to do for a perishing wretch! But

IV. If with any that have lived under the Gospel, their day is quite expired,
and the things of their peace now for ever hid from their eyes, this is in it
self a most deplorable case, and much lamented by our Lord Jesus himself.

That the case is in it self most deplorable, who sees not? A soul lost! a
creature capable of God! upon its way to him! near to the Kingdom of God!
shipwrack't in the Port! O sinner, from how high an hope art thou fallen! into
what depths of misery and woe!

And that it was lamented by our Lord, is in the Text. He beheld the City,
(very generally, we have reason to apprehend, inhabited by such wretched
creatures) and wept over it. This was very affectionate lamentation; we lament
often, very heartily, many a sad case, for which we do not shed tears. But
tears, such tears, falling from such eyes! the issues of the purest, and best
governed passion that ever was, showed the true greatness of the Cause. Here
could be no exorbitancy or unjust excess, nothing more than was proportionable
to the occasion. There needs no other proof that this is a sad case, than that
our Lord lamented it with tears, which that he did, we are plainly told, so
that touching that, there is no place for doubt. All that is liable to question
is, whether we are to conceive in him any like resentments of such cases, in
his present glorified state?

Indeed we cannot think Heaven, a place or state of sadness, or lamentation; and
must take heed of conceiving any thing there, especially on the throne of
glory, unsuitable to the most perfect nature, and the most glorious state. We
are not to imagine tears there; which in that happy region are wiped away from
inferior eyes; no grief, sorrow, or sighing, which are all fled away, and
shall be no more. As there can be no other turbid passion of any kind. But when
expressions that import anger, or grief, are used, even concerning God himself,
we must sever in our conception, every thing of imperfection, and ascribe every
thing of real perfection. We are not to think such expressions signify
nothing, that they have no meaning, or that nothing at all is to be attributed
to him under them.

Nor are we again to think they signify the same thing with what we find in
our selves, and are wont to express by those names. In the divine nature,
there may be real, and yet most serene complacency, and displicency, viz. that
are unaccompany'd with the least commotion, and that import nothing of
imperfection, but perfection rather, as it is a perfection to apprehend things
sutably to what in themselves they are. The holy Scriptures frequently speak of
God as angry, and grieved for the sins of men, and their miseries which ensue
therefrom. And a real aversion and dislike is signified thereby, and by many
other expressions, which in us, would signify vehement agitations of affection,
that we are sure can have no place in him. We ought therefore in our own
thoughts to ascribe to him that calm aversion of will, in reference to the
sins, and miseries of men in general; and, in our own apprehensions, to remove
to the utmost distance from him, all such agitations of passion or affection,
even tho some expressions that occur, carry a great appearance thereof, should
they be understood according to humane measures, as they are humane forms of
speech. As (to instance in what is said by the glorious God himself, and very
near in sense to what we have in the Text) what can be more pathetick, than
that lamenting wish, Psalm. 81.13. O that my people had hearkened unto me, and
Israel had walked in my ways!

But we must take heed lest, under the pretense that we cannot ascribe every
thing to God that such expressions seem to import, we therefore ascribe
nothing. We ascribe nothing, if we do not ascribe to him a real unwillingnes
that men should sin on, and perish; and consequently a real willingness that
they should turn to him, and live; which so many plain Texts assert. And
therefore it is unavoidably imposed upon us, to believe that God is truly
unwilling of some things, which he does not think fit to interpose his
omnipotency to hinder, and is truly willing of some things, which he does not
put forth his omnipotency to effect. That he most fitly makes this the ordinary
course of his dispensations toward men, to govern them by laws, and promises,
and threatenings (made most express to them that live under the Gospel) to work
upon their minds, their hope, and their fear, affording them the ordinary
assistences of Supernatural light and influence, with which he requires them to
comply, and which, upon their refusing to do so, he may most righteously
withhold, and give them the victory to their own ruin, tho oftentimes, he
does, from a sovereignty of grace, put forth that greater power upon others,
equally negligent and obstinate, not to enforce, put effectually to incline
their wills, and gain a victory over them, to their salvation.

Nor is his will toward the rest altogether ineffectual, tho it have not this
effect. For whosoever thou art that live under the Gospel, tho thou do not
know that God so wills thy conversion and salvation, as to effect it,
whatsoever resistance thou now make; though thou art not sure he will finally
overcome all thy resistance, and pluck thee as a firebrand out of the mouth of
hell; yet thou can not say his good will toward thee has been without any
effect at all tending thereto. He has often called upon thee in his Gospel, t^
repent and turn to him through Christ; he has waited on thee with long
patience, and given thee time and space of repentance; he has within that
time, been often at work with thy soul. Has he not many times let in beams of
light upon thee? shown thee the evil of thy ways? convinced thee? awakened
thee? half-perswaded thee? and thou never had reason to doubt, but that if
thou had set thy self with serious diligence to work out thy own salvation,
he would have wrought on, so as to have brought things to a blessed issue for
thy soul.

Thou might discern his mind toward thee to be agreeable to his word,
wherein he has testified to thee he desired not the death of sinners, that he
has no pleasure in the death of him that dies, or in the death of the wicked,
but that he should turn and live, exhorted thee, expostulated with thee, and
others in thy condition, turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die? he has told thee
expressly thy stubbornnes, and contending against him, did grieve him, and vex
his spirit, that thy sin, wherein t^^u have indulged thy self, has been an
abomination to him, that it was the abominable thing which his soul hated, that
he was broken with the whorish heart of such as thou, and pressed therewith, as a
cart that was full of sheaves.

Now such expressions as these, tho they are borrowed from man, and must be
understood sutably to God, tho they do not signify the same thing with him, as
they do in us, yet they do not signify nothing. As when hands and eyes are
attributed to God, they do not signify as they do with us, yet they signify
somewhat correspondent, as active, and visive power: So these expressions, tho
they signify not, in God, such unquiet motions and passions, as they would in
us, they do signify a mind and will, really, tho with the most perfect calmnes
and tranquillity, set against sin, and the horrid consequences of it, which yet,
for greater reasons than we can understand, he may not see fit to do all he can
to prevent.

And if we know not how to reconcile such a will in God, with some of our
notions concerning the divine nature; shall we, for what we have thought of
him, deny what he has so expressly said of himself, or pretend to understand
his nature better than he himself does? See the Appendix.


And when we see from such express sayings in Scripture, reduced to a sense
becoming God, how God's mind stands in reference to sinners, and their
self-destroying ways, we may thence apprehend what temper of mind our Lord
Jesus also bears toward them in the like case, even in his glorified state.
For can you think there is a disagreement between him and the Father about
these things?

And whereas we find our blessed Lord, in the days of his flesh, one while
complaining men would not come to him that they might have life, Joh. 5.40.
elsewhere grieved at the hardness of their hearts, Mark. 3.5. and here
scattering tears over sinning and perishing Jerusalem; we cannot doubt but that
the (innocent) perturbation, which his earthly state did admit, being severed,
his mind is still the same, in reference to cases of the same nature; for can
we think there is a disagreement between him, and himself? We cannot therefore
doubt but that,

1. He distinctly comprehends the truth of any such case. He beholds from the
throne of his glory above, all the treaties which are held and managed with
sinners in his name, and and what their deportments are therein. His eyes are
as a flame of fire, wherewith he searches hearts, and tries reins. He has
seen therefore, sinner, all along, every time an offer of grace has been made
to thee, and been rejected; when thou have slighted counsels, and warnings that
have been given thee, exhortations and entreaties that have been pressed upon
thee, for many years together, and how thou have hardened thy heart against
reproofs, and threatenings, against promises and allurements; and beholds the
tendency of all this, what is like to come of it, and that, if thou persist, it
will be bitterness in the end.

2. That he has a real dislike of the sinfulnes of thy course. It is not
indifferen^ to him whether thou obeyest, or disobeyest the Gospel; whether thou
turn, and repent or no; that he is truly displeased at thy trifling, sloth,
negligence, impenitency, hardness of heart, stubborn obstinacy, and contempt of
his grace, and takes real offense at them.

3. He has real kind propensions toward thee, and is ready to receive thy
returning soul, and effectually to mediate with the offended Majesty of heaven
for thee, as long as there is any hope in thy case.

4. When he sees there is no hope, he pities thee, while thou see it not,
and do not pity thy self. Pity and mercy above are not names only; it is a
great reality that is signified by them, and that has place there, in far
higher excellency, and perfection, than it can with us poor mortals here below.
Ours is but borrowed, and participated from that first fountain, and oririginal
above. Thou do not perish unlamented, even with the purest heavenly pity, tho
thou have made thy ca^e incapable of remedy. As the well-tempered Judge bewails
the sad end of the Malefactor, whom justice obliges him not to spare, or save.

And now let us consider what use is to be made of all this.

And tho nothing can be useful to the persons themselves, whom the Redeemer
thus laments as lost, yet that he does so, may be of great use to others.

Use.
Use. Which will partly concern those who do justly apprehend this is not their
case; And partly such as may be in great fear that it is.

I. For such as have reason to persuade themselves it is not their case. The
best ground upon which any can confidently conclude this, is that they have in
this their present day, thorough the grace of God, already effectually known
the things of their peace, such, viz. as have sincerely, with all their hearts
and souls turned to God, taken him to be their God, and devoted themselves to
him, to be his. Entrusting and subjecting themselves to the saving mercy, and
governing power of the Redeemer, according to the tenor of the
Gospel Covenant, from which they do not find their hearts to swerve or decline,
but resolve, thorough divine assistence, to persevere herein all their days.

Now for such as with whom things are already brought to that comfortable
conclusion, I only say to them,

1. Rejoice and bless God that so it is. Christ your Redeemer rejoices with
you, and over you; you may collect it from his contrary resentment of their
case who are past hope; if he weep over them, he no doubt, rejoices over you.
There is joy in heaven concerning you. Angels rejoice, your glorious Redeemer
presiding in the joyful consort. And should not you rejoice for your selves?
Consider what a discrimination is made in your case! To how many has that
Gospel been a deadly savor, which has proved a savor of life unto life to
you! How many have fallen on your right hand, and your left, stumbling at that
stone of offense, which to you is become the head-stone of the corner, elect,
and precious! Whence is this difference? Did you never slight Christ? never
make light of offered mercy? was your mind never blind or vain? was your heart
never hard or dead? were the terms of peace and reconciliation never rejected
or disregarded by you? How should you admire victorious grace, that would never
desist from striving with you till it had overcome! You are the triumph of the
Redeemers conquering love, who might have been of his wrath and justice!
endeavor your spirits may taste, more and more, the sweetness of reconciliation,
that you may more abound in joy and praises. Is it not pleasant to you to be at
peace with God? to find that all controversies are taken up between him and
you? that you can now approach him, and his terrors not make you afraid! that
you can enter into the secret of his presence, and solace your selves in his
assured favor and love! How should you joy in God through Jesus Christ, by
whom you have received the atonement! What have you now to fear? If, when you
were enemies, you were reconciled by the death of Christ, how much more, being
reconciled, shall you be saved by his life? How great a thing have you to
oppose to all worldly troubles? If God be for you, who can be against you!
Think how mean it is for the friends of God, the favorites of heaven, to be
dismayed at the appearances of danger that threatens them from the inhabitants
of the earth! what if all the world were in a posture of hostility against you,
when the mighty Lord of all is your friend? Take heed of thinking meanly of his
power and love! would any one diminish to himself, whom he takes for his God?
All people will walk, every one in the name of his God; why should not you much
more in the name of yours, glorying in him, and making your beasts of him a^^
the day long? O the reproach which is cast upon the glorious name of the great
God, by their diffidence and despondency, who visibly stand in special relation
to him, but fear the impotent malice of mortal man more than they can trust in
his almighty love! I^ indeed you are justified by faith, and have peace with
God, it becomes you so to rejoice in the hope of the glory of God, as also to
glory in tribulation, and tell all the world that in his favor stands your
life, and that you care not who is displeased with you, for the things,
wherewith, you have reason to apprehend, he is pleased.

2. Demean your selves with that care, caution, and dutifulness that become a
state of reconciliation. Bethink your selves that your present peace and
friendship with God is not original, and continued from thence, but has been
interrupted and broken; that your peace is not that of constantly innocent
persons. You stand not in this good and happy state because you never offended,
but as being reconciled, and who, there^^re, were once enemies. And when you
were brought to know, in that your day, which you have enjoyed, the things
belonging to your peace, you were made to feel the smart, and taste the
bitterness of your having been alienated, and enemies in your minds by wicked
works. When the Terrors of God did beset you round, and his arrows stuck fast
in you, did you not then find trouble and sorrow? were you not in a fearful
expectation of wrath and fiery indignation to consume and burn you up as
adversaries? Would you not then have given all the world for a peaceful word or
look? for any glimmering hope of peace? How wary and afraid should you be of a
new breach! How should you study acceptable deportments, and to walk worthy of
God unto all well-pleasing! How strictly careful should you be to keep faith
with him, and abide steadfast in his Covenant! How concerned for his interest!
and in what agonies of spirit, when you behold the eruptions of enmity against
him from any others! not from any distrust, or fear of final prejudice to his
interest, but from the apprehension o^ the unrighteousnes of the thing it self,
and a dutiful love to his name, throne, and Government. How zealous should you
be to draw in others? how fervent in your endeavors, within your own sphere,
and how large in your desires, extended as far as the sphere of the universe,
that every knee might bow to him, and every tongue confess to him. They ought to
be more deeply concerned for his righteous cause, that remember they were once
most unrighteously engaged against it. And ought besides to be filled with
compassion toward the souls of men, yet in an unreconciled state, as having
known the terrors of the Lord, and remembering the experienced dismalnes and
horror of that state; what it was to have divine wrath and justice armed
against you with almighty power! And to have heard the thunder of such a voice,
I lift my hand to heaven, and swear I live for ever, if I whet my glittering
sword, and my hand take hold on vengeance, I will recompense fury to mine
adversaries, vengeance to mine enemies. -- Do you not know what the case is
like to be, when potsherds, that shou^^ strive but with the potsherds of the
earth, venture to oppose themselves as antagonists to omnipotency? And when
briars and thorns set themselves in battle array against a consuming fire, how
easily it can pass through, and devour, and burn them up together? And how
much more fearful is their condition that know it not! but are ready to rush
like the horse into the battle! Do you owe no duty, no pity to them that have
the same nature with you, and with whom your case was once the same? If you do
indeed know the things of your peace Godward, so as to have made your peace, to
have come to an agreement, and struck a Covenant with him; you have now taken
his side, are of his confederates (not as equals but subjects.) You have sworn
allegiance to him, and associated your self with all them that have done so.
There can hereupon be but one common Interest to him and you. Hence therefore
you are most strictly obliged to wish well ^o that interest, and promote it to
your uttermost, in his own way, i. e. according to his openly avowed
inclination, and design, and the genuine constitution of that Kingdom which he
has erected, and is intent to enlarge and extend further in the world. That
you do well know, is a Kingdom of grace; for his natural Kingdom already
confines with the universe, and can have no enlargement, without enlarging the
creation. Whosoever they are that contend against him, are not merely enemies,
therefore, but rebels. And you see he aims to conquer them by love and goodness;
and therefore treats with them, and seeks to establish a Kingdom over them, in
and by a Mediator, who, if he were not intent upon the same design, had never
lamented the destruction of any of them, and wept over their ruin, as here you
find. So therefore, should you long for the conversion of souls, and the
enlargement of his Kingdom this way, both out of loyalty to him, and compassion
toward them.

2. For such as may be in great fear, le^t this prove to be their case. They
are either such as may fear it, but do not; or such as are deeply afflicted
with this actual fear.

1. For the former sort, who are in too great danger of bringing themselves
into this dreadful deplorate condition, but apprehend nothing of it. All that
is to be said to them apart by themselves, is only to awaken them out of their
drowsy, dangerous slumber, and security; and then they will be capable of
being spoken to, together with the other sort. Let me therefore

1. Demand of you; Do you believe there is a Lord over you, yea or no? use your
thoughts, for, about matters that concern you less, you can think. Do you not
apprehend you have an invisible owner, and Ruler, that rightfully claims to
himself an interest in you, and a governing power over you? How came you into
being? You know you made not your selves. And if you yet look no higher, than
to progenitors of your own kind, mortal men, as you are; how came they into
being? You have so much understanding about you, if you would use it, as to
know they could none of them make themselves more than you, and that therefore,
humane race must have had its beginning, from some superior maker. And did not
he that made them make you and all things else? where are your arguments to
prove it was otherwise, and that this world, and all the generations of men
took beginning of themselves, without a wise, and mighty Creator? produce your
strong reasons, upon which you will venture your souls, and all the
possibilites of your being happy, or miserable to eternity! Will your
imagination make you safe? and protect you against his wrath and justice, whose
authority you will not own? Can you, by it, uncreate your Creator, and nullify
the eternal Being? or have you any thing else, besides your own blind
imagination, to make you confident, that all things came of nothing, without
any Maker? But if you know not how to think this reasonable, and apprehend you
must allow your selves to owe your being to an almighty Creator, let me

2. Ask of you how you think your life is maintained? Does not he that made you
live, keep you alive? Whereas you have often heard that we all live, and move,
and have our beings in him, does it not seem most likely to you to be so? Have
you the power of your own life? Do you think you can live as long as you will?
At least do you not find you need the common helps of meat, and drink, and air,
and clothing for the support and comfort of your lives? And are not all these
his creatures as well as you? And can you have them, whether he will or no?

3. And how can you think that he that made and maintains you, has no right to
rule you? If it were possible any one should as much depend upon you, would you
not claim such power over him? Can you suppose your selves to be under no
obligation to please him, who has done so much for you? and to do his will, if
you can any way know it?

4. And can you pretend you have no means to know it? That book that goes up
and down under the name of his Word, can you disprove it to be his Word? If
such writings should now first come into the world, so sincere, so awful, so
holy, so heavenly, bearing so expressly the divine Image, avowing themselves to
be from God, and the most wonderful works are wrought to prove them his Word,
the deaf made to hear, the blind to see, the dumb to speak, the sick healed,
the dead raised, by a word only commanding it to be so, would you not confess
this to be sufficient evidence that this revelation came from heaven. And are
you not sufficiently assured they are so confirmed? Do you find in your selves
any inclination to cheat your children, in any thing that concerns their well
being? Why should you more suspect your forefathers design, to cheat you in the
mere reporting falsely, a matter of fact? was not humane nature the same, so
many hundred years ago? Did ever the enemies of the Christian name, in the
earlier days of Christianity, when it was but a novelty in the world, and as
much hated, and endeavored to be rooted out, as ever any Profession was, deny
such matters of fact? Have not some of the most spiteful of them confessed it?
Did not Christians then willingly sacrifice their lives by multitudes, upon the
assured truth of these things? Have they not been ever since most strictly
careful to preserve these writings, and transmit them, as wherein the all of
themselves, and their Posterity was contained? And where is now your new light?
where are your later discoveries, upon which, so many ages after, you are able
to evict these writings of falsehood, or dare venture to disbelieve them?

5. But if you believe these writings to be divine, how expressly is it told
you, in them, what the state of your case is Godward, and what he requires of
you? You may see you have displeased him, and how you are to please him, as
has been shown before in this discourse. You know that you have lived in the
world mindless, and inobservant of him, not trusting, fearing, loving, or
delighting in him, declining his acquaintance and converse; seeking your own
pleasure, following your inclination, doing your own will, as if you were
supreme, never minding to refer your actions to his precepts as your rule, or
to his glory as your end. And from that word of his you may understand all this
to be very displeasing to him. And that you can never please him by continuing
this course, but by breaking it off, and returning to him as your Lord, and
your God. That since your case did need a redeemeer, and reconciler, and he
has provided and appointed one for you; you are to apply your selves to him,
to commit and subject your souls to him, to trust in his merits, and blood, and
submit to his Authority, and Government. And

6. Are you not continually called hereto by the Gospel, under which you have
lived all this while? so that you are in actual, continual rebellion against
him all the while you comply not with this call; Every breath you draw is
rebellious breath. There is no moment wherein this lies not upon you, by every
moments addition to your time. And that patience of his which adds by moments
to your life, and should lead you to repentance, is, while you repent not,
perverted by you, only to the treasuring up of wrath against the day of wrath,
and the revelation of his righteous judgment.

7. And do you not find, as his word also plainly tells you, a great aversenes
and disinclination in you to any such serious, solemn applying your self to
him, and your Redeemer? Try your own hearts; Do you not find them draw back and
recoil; if you urge them, do they not still fly off? How loath are you to
retire! and set your selves to consider your case! and unto serious seeking of
God in Christ! both from a reluctance, and indisposition to any such employment
as this is it self; and from disaffection to that whereto it tends, the
breaking off your former sinful course of life, and entering upon a better. And
does not all this show you the plain truth of what the word of God has told
you, that the Ethiopian may as soon change his skin, or the Leopard his spots,
as they do good, who are accustomed to do evil. Jer. 13.23. that you have an
heart that cannot repent, Romans 2.5. till God give you repentance to life, Act.
11.11. That you cannot come to Christ till the father draw you, Joh. 6.44. Do
you not see your case then? that you must perish if you have not help from
heaven? If God do not give you his grace, to overcome, and cure the aversenes
and malignity of your nature? that things are likely thus to run on with you as
they have from day to day, and from year to year; and you that are unwilling to
take the course that is necessary for your salvation to day, are likely to be
as unwilling to morrow, and so your lives consume in vanity, till you drop into
perdition? But

8. Do thou not also know, sinner, (what has been so newly shown thee from
Gods word) that, by thy being under the Gospel, thou have a day of grace? Not
only as offers of pardon and reconciliation are made to thee in it, but also as
thorough it, converting heart-renewing grace is to be expected, and may be had?
that what is sufficient for the turning and changing of thy heart, is usually
not given all at once, but as gentler insinuations (the injection of some good
thoughts and desires) are complied with, more powerful influences may be hoped
to follow? That therefore thou art concerned, upon any such thought cast into
thy mind, of going now to seek God for the life of thy soul, to strive, thy
self, against thy own disinclination; that if thou do not, but yield to it, and
still defer, it may prove mortal to thee? For is it not plain to thee in it
self, and from what has been said, that this day has its limits, and will
come to an end? Do thou not know thou art a mortal creature, that thy breath
is in thy nostrils? Do thou know how near thou art to the end of thy life?
and how few breaths there may be for thee between this present moment and
eternity? Do thou not know thy day of grace may end before thy life end? that
thou may be cast far enough out of the sound of the Gospel? and if thou
should carry any notices of it with thee, thou who have been so unapt to
consider them, while they were daily pressed upon thee, will most probably be
less apt when thou hear of no such thing? that thou may live still under
the Gospel, and the Spirit of grace retire from thee, and never attempt thee
more for thy former despiting of it? For what obligation have thou upon that
blessed Spirit? Or why should thou think a Deity bound to attend upon thy
triflings? And

9. If yet all this move not: Consider what it will be to dye unreconciled to
God! Thou have been his enemy, he has made thee gracious offers of peace,
waited long upon thee, thou have made light of all. The matter must at length
end either in reconciliation, or vengeance! The former is not acceptable to
thee, art thou prepared for the latter? Can thou sustain it? Is it not a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God? Thou will not do him
right, he must then right himself upon thee; Do thou think he cannot do it?
Can thou doubt his power? Cast thine eyes about thee, behold the greatness (as
far as thou can) of this creation of his, whereof thou art but a very little
part. He that has made that Sun over thine head, and stretched out those
spacious heavens, that has furnished them with those innumerable bright stars,
that governs all their motions, that has hung this earth upon nothing, that
made and sustains that great variety of creatures that inhabit it, can he not
deal with thee? a worm? Can thine heart endure, or thine hands be strong if he
plead with thee? if he surround thee with his terrors, and set them in battle
array against thee? Hell and destruction are open before him, and without
covering, how soon art thou cast in and ingulpht? Sit down, and consider
whether thou be able, with thy impotency, to stand before him, that comes
against thee with Almighty power! Is it not better to sue in time for peace?

But perhaps thou may say I begin now to fear it is too late, I have so long
slighted the Gospel, resisted the holy Spirit of God, abused, and baffled my
own light, and conscience, that I am afraid God will quite abandon me, and cast
me off for ever. It is well if thou do indeed begin to fear. That fear gives
hope. Thou art then capable of coming into their rank who are next to be spoken
to, viz.

2. Such as feel themselves afflicted with the apprehension, and dread of their
having outlived their day, and that the things of their peace are now
irrecoverably hid from their eyes. I desire to counsel such faithfully,
according to that light and guidance which the Gospel of our Lord affords us in
reference to any such case.

1. Take heed of stifling that fear suddenly, but labor to improve it to some
advantage, and then to cure and remove it by rational-evangelical means and
methods. Do not as thou love the life of thy soul, go about suddenly, or by
undue means, to smother or extinguish it. It Is too possible, when any such
apprehension strikes into a man's mind, because it is a sharp or piercing
thought, disturbs his quiet, gives him molestation, and some torture, to pluck
out the dart too soon, and cast it away. Perhaps such a course is taken, as
does him unspeakably more mischief, than a thousand such thoughts would ever
do. He diverts, it may be, to vain company, or to sensuality, talks, or drinks
away his trouble; makes death his cure of pain, and to avoid the fear of hell,
leaps into it. Is this indeed the wisest course? Either thy apprehension is
reasonable, or unreasonable. If it should prove a reasonable apprehension, as
it is a terrible one, would the neglect of it become a reasonable creature, or
mend thy case? if it shall be found unreasonable, it may require time, and some
debate to discover it to be so; whereby, when it is manifestly detected, witn
how much greater satisfaction is it laid aside! Labor then to enquire rightly
concerning this matter.

2. In this enquiry, consider diligently what the kind of that fear is that you
find your selves afflicted with. The fear that perplexes your heart, must some
way correspond to the apprehension you have in your mind, touching your case.
Consider what that is, and, in what form, it shows it self there. Does it
appear in the form of a peremptory judgment, a definitive sentence, which you
have past within your self concerning your case; that your day is over, and you
are a lost creature; or only of a mere doubt, lest it should prove so. The fear
that corresponds to the former of these, makes you quite desperate, and
obstinately resolute against any means for the bettering of your condition. The
fear that answers to the latter apprehension, has a mixture of hope in it,
which admits of somewhat to be done for your relief, and will prompt thereunto.
Labor to discern which of these is the present temper and posture of your
spirit.

3. If you find it be the former, let no thought any longer dwell in your mind
[under that form] viz. as a definitive sentence concerning your state. You have
nothing to do to pass such a judgment, the tendency of it is dismal, and
horrid, as you may, your self, perceive. And your ground for it is none at all.
Your conscience within you is to do the office of a Judge; but only of an
under-Judge, that is to proceed strictly by rule, prescribed, and set by the
sovereign Lord, and arbiter of life and death, there is one Lawgiver who is
able to save, and to destroy. Nor is your Conscience, as an under-Judge, to
meddle at all, but in cases within your cognizance. This about your final state
is a reserved, excepted case, belonging only to the supreme tribunal, which you
must take heed how you usurp. As such a judgment tends to make you desperate,
so there will be high presumption in this despair. Dare you take upon you to
cancel, and nullify to your self the obligation of the Evangelical law? and
whereas that makes it your duty to repent, and believe the Gospel, to absolve
your self from this bond, and say, it is none of your duty, or make it
impossible to you to do it? you have matter and cases enough within the
cognizance of your conscience, not only the particular actions of your life,
but your present state also, whether you be as yet in a state of acceptance
with God, thorough Christ, yea or no? And here you have rules set you to judge
by. But concerning your final state, or that you shall never be brought into a
state of acceptance, you have no rule by which you can make such a judgment;
and therefore this judgment belongs not to you. Look then upon the matter of
your final condition, as an exempt case, reserved to the future judgment, and
the present determination whereof, against your self, is without your compass
and line, and most unsuitable to the state of probation, wherein, you are to
reckon, God continues you here, with the rest of men in this world; and
therefore any such judgment you should tear, and reverse, and, as such, not
permit to have any place with you.

4. Yet since, as has been said, yo^ are not quite to reject, or obliterate
any apprehension, or thought touching this subject, make it your business to
correct, and reduce it to that other form, i. e. let it only for the present
remain with you, as a doubt how your case now stands, and what issue it may at
length have. And see that your fear thereupon be answerable to your
apprehension, so rectified. While as yet it is not evident, you have made your
peace with God, upon his known terms, you are to consider God has left your
case a doubtful case, and you are to conceive of it accordingly. And are to
entertain a fear concerning it, not as certainly hopeles, but as uncertain. And
as yours is really a doubtful case, it is a most important one. It concerns your
Souls, and your eternal well-being* and is not therefore to be neglected, or
trifled with. You do not know how God will deal with you; Whether he will again
afford you such help as he has done, or whether ever he will effectually move
your heart unto conversion and salvation. You therefore are to work out your
salvation with fear and trembling, because (as was told you) he works, but of
his own good pleasure. Your fear should not exceed this state of your case, so
as to exclude hope. It is of unspeakable concernment to you, that hope do
intermingle with your fear. That will do much to mollify and soften your
hearts, that after all the abuse of mercy, and imposing upon the patience of
God, your neglects and slights of a bleeding Savior, your resisting and
grieving the Spirit of grace, he may yet, once for all, visit your forlorn Soul
with his vital influence, and save you from going down to perdition! How can
your hearts but melt and break upon this apprehension! And it is not a
groundless one. He that came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance, will not fail to treat them well, whom he sees beginning to listen
to his call, and entertaining the thoughts that most directly tend to bring
them to a compliance with it. Your hope insinuating it self and mingling with
your fear, is highly grateful to the God of all grace. He takes pleasure in
them that fear him, and in them that hope in his mercy. Psalm. 147.11.

5. But see to it also that your fear be not slight, and momentary, and that it
vanish not, while as yet it has so great a work to do in you, viz. to engage
you to accept Gods own terms of peace and reconciliation, with all your heart
and soul. It is of continual use, even not only in order to conversion, but to
the converted also. Can you think those mentioned words were spoken to none
such, Phil. 2.12, 13? Or those, Heb. 4.1. Let us therefore fear, lest a promise
being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short,
etc. And do we not find an holy fear is to contribute all along to the whole of
progressive sanctification? 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these promises (dearly
beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God. And that by it he preserves his own,
that they never depart from him. Jer. 32.40. Much more do you need it in your
present case, while matters are yet in treaty between God and you. And as it
should not exceed the true apprehension of your case, so nor should it come
short of it.

6. You should therefore in order hereto aggravate to your selves the just
causes of your fear. Why are you afraid your day should be over, and the things
of your peace be for ever hid from your eyes? Is it not that you have sinned
against much light, against many checks of your own consciences, against many
very serious warnings and exhortations, many earnest importunate beseechings
and entreaties you have had in the Ministry of the Gospel, many motions and
strivings of the Spirit of God thereby? Let your thoughts dwell upon these
things. Think what it is for the great God, the Lord of glory to have been
slighted by a worm! Does not this deserve as ill things at the hands of God as
you can ^ear? It Is fit you should Apprehend what your desert is, the perhaps
mercy may interpose, and avert the deserved dreadful event. And if he have
signified his displeasure toward you hereupon, by desisting for the present,
and ceasing to strive with you as he has formerly done; if your heart be grown
more cold, and dead, and hard, than sometime it was, if you have been left so
as to fall into grosser sin; it is highly reasonable you should fear being
finally forsaken of the blessed Spirit of God, and greatly fear it, but with an
^^ful fear, that may awaken you most earnestly to endeavor his return to you,
not with a despairing fear that will bind you up from any further endeavor for
your soul at all.

And if upon all this (by death or otherwise) such a Ministry be withdrawn from
you, as God did work by, in some degree, upon you, and you find not in that
kind, what is so suitable to your state and case; take heed lest your be stupid
under such a stroke. Think what it imports unto you, if God have, as it were,
said concerning any servant of his (as Ezekiel. 2.26.) I will make his tongue
cleave to the roof of his mouth, that he shall not be a reprover to you any
more! Consider that God may by this, be making way that wrath may come upon you
to the uttermost, and never let you have opportunity to know more, the things
of your peace. Perhaps you may never meet with the man more, that shall speak
so accommodately to your condition, that shall so closely pursue you thorough
all the haunts and subterfuges, and lurking holes, wherein your guilty
convinced soul has wont to hide it self, and falsely seek to heal its own
wounds. One of more value may be less apt, possibly, to profit you. As a more
polish't Key does not therefore alike fit every lock. And thy case may be such,
that thou shall never hear a sermon, or the voice of a preacher more.

7. And now in this case recollect your selves, what sins you have been
formerly convinced of, under such a Ministry, and which you have persisted in
notwithstanding. Were you never convinced of your neglecting God, and living as
without him in the world? of your low esteem and disregard of Christ? of your
worldlines, your minding only the things of this earth, of your carnality,
pride, self-seeking, voluptuousnes, your having been lovers of pleasures more
than lovers of God? of your unprofitablenes in your station? wherein you ought
to have lived more conformably to christian rules and precepts, according to
the relations wherein God had set you? were you never convinced how very faulty
governors you have been, or members of families? parents, or masters,
children, or servants, etc? What will this come to at last, that convictions
have hitherto signified and served for nothing but increase of guilt?

8. Under all this weight and load of guilt, consider what you have to do for
your souls! Bethink your selves; are you to sit down and yield your selves to
perish? Consider man, it is the business of thy soul, and of thine eternal state
that is now before thee. Thou have the dreadful flaming gulf of everlasting
horror and misery in view, have thou nothing left thee to do but to throw thy
self into it? methinks thou should sooner reconcile thy thoughts to any thing
than that; and that, if any thing at all be to be done for thine escape, thou
should rather set thy self about it, and do it. Thou art yet, alive, not yet
in hell, yet the patience of God spares thee, thou have yet time to consider,
thou have the power to think yet left thee, and can thou use it no other way
than to think of perishing? Think rather how not to perish. A great point is
gained, if thou art but brought to say, what shall I do to be saved? which does
imply thou do both apprehend the distressedness of thy case, and art willing
to do any thing that is to be done for thy relief. And if thou art brought to
this, thy circumstances may perhaps be such, that thou can only put this
question to thy self, and art only thy self to answer it, without a living,
present guide, which may therefore make such an help as this needful to thee.
Possibly some irresistible providence may have so cast thy lot, that thou art
only now to be thy own preacher* tho it sometime was otherwise with thee; and
things were said to thee most suitable to the condition of thy soul, which thou
would not then consider. It is yet pressed upon thee to consider now, with some
design to direct thy thoughts, that they run not into useles and troublesome
confusion only. And your subject being what course you are now to take, that
you may escape eternal wrath and ruin? It Is obvious to you to apprehend
nothing is to be done against, or without God, but with him, and by him* Your
utmost consideration can but bring the matter to this short point, that whereas
you have highly offended the God that made you, incurred his wrath, and made him
your enemy, either to resist, or treat and supplicate. That madness which would
let you intend the former, is not capable of consideration at all. For, if you
consider, will you contend with omnipotency, or fight with an all-devouring
flame? And as to the latter, it is well for you, that it can be the matter of
your consideration, that you have any encouragement to turn your thoughts that
way. You might have enemies that being provoked, and having you in their power,
would never admit of treaty, nor regard your supplications, but fall upon you
with merciles fury, and leave you nothing to think of but perishing. Here it is
not so with you. The merciful God has graciously told you fury is not so in
him, but that (tho if briars and thorns will set themselves in battle against
him, he will easily pass thorough, and burn them up together, yet) if any will
take hold of his strength, that they may make peace with him, they shall make
peace with him. Isai. 27.4, 5. You are to consider there is danger in your
case, and there is hope, that your sin is not so little as to need no
forgivenes, nor too great to be forgiven. Wherefore, whose case soever this is,
since you may be forgiven, if you duly apply your selves, and must be forgiven,
or you are undone, my further advice to you is, and you may, as to this, advise
your self, having nothing else left you to do.

9. That you cast your selves down before the mercy-seat of God, humble your
selves deeply at his footstool, turn to him with all your soul, implore his
mercy thorough Christ, make a solemn Covenant with him, taking him to be your
God, and devoting your self to him, to be his, accepting his son as your Lord
and savior, and resigning your soul with submission and trust entirely to hi^
to be ruled and saved by him. That you are to do this the case is plain, and
even speaks it self, how you are to do it may need to be more particularly told
you.

1. Take heed that what you do in this be not the mere effect of your present
apprehended distress, but of the altered judgment, and inclination of your
mind and heart. The apprehension of your distressed dangerous condition, may be
an useful means and inducement to engage you more seriously to listen and
attend to the proposals made to you in the Gospel. But if upon all this, it
should be the sense of your heart that you would rather live still as without
God in the world, and that you would never come to any such treaty or agreement
with him, if mere necessity, and the fear of perishing did not urge you to it,
you are still but where you were. Therefore, tho the feared danger was
necessary to make you bethink your self, and consider what God propounds to
you; that consideration ought to have that further effect upon you, to convince
you of the equity and desireablenes of the things themselves which he
propounds, summarily, of your betaking your selves to him as your sovereign
Lord, and supreme Good, to fear and love, obey and enjoy him, in Christ Jesus,
and accordingly ought to incline your heart thereto.

2. You are to consider in your entering into this Covenant with God in Christ,
that it is not a transaction for the present only you are about, but for your
whole life. This God is to be your God, for ever, and ever, your God, and your
guide even to the death. Psalm. 48.14. You are to live in his fear and love, in
his service and communion all your days, and must understand this to be the
meaning and tenor of the Covenant which you make with him.

3. And hence, therefore, it is plain that your whole transaction in this
matter must proceed from a new nature, and a new vital principle of grace and
holiness in you. What you do herein will otherwise neither be sincere nor
lasting. You can never embrace Religion for it self, without this, nor continue
on in a religious course. What you do only from a temporary pang of fear upon
you, is but from a kind of force that is for the present upon you, and will
come to nothing, as soon as the impression of that fear wears off. The Religion
which is true, and durable, is not from a spirit of fear, but of love, power
and a sound mind. 2 Timothy 1.7. You must be a new creature, Gods workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus unto good works -- that you may walk in them. The life
of the new creature stands in love to God, as its way and course afterward is
a course of walking with God. If your heart be not brought to love God, and
delight in him, you are still but dead toward God, and you still remain alive
unto sin, as before. Whereas, if you ever come to be a Christian indeed, you
must be able truly to reckon your self dead to sin, and alive to God thorough
Jesus Christ. Romans 6.11. Whereupon in your making the mentioned Covenant you
must yield your self to God, as one that is alive from the dead, as it is, verse.
13. of the same chapter. A new nature and life in you, will make all that you
do, in a way of duty, (whether immediately toward God or man, the whole course
of godliness, righteousness and sobriety) easy and delightful to you. And
because it is evident both from many plain Scriptures, and your own, and all
men's experience, that you cannot be, your selves, the authors of this holy new
life and nature, you must therefore further in entering into this Covenant

4. Most earnestly cry to God, and plead with him for his Spirit, by whom the
vital unitive bond must be contracted between God in Christ and your souls. So
this will be the Covenant of life and peace. Lord! how generally do the
Christians of our age deceive themselves with a self-sprung Religion! Divine
indeed in the institution, but merely humane, in respect of the radication and
exercise. In which respects also it must be divine or nothing? What are we yet
to learn that a divine power must work and form our Religion in us, as well as
divine authority direct and enjoin it? Do all such scriptures go for nothing
that tell us, it is God that must create the new heart, and renew the right
spirit in us, that he must turn us, if ever we be turned, that we can never
come to Christ, except the father draw us, etc. Nor is there any cause of
discouragement in this, if you consider what has before been said in this
discourse. Ask and you shall receive, seek, and you shall find, knock, and it
shall be opened to you. Your heavenly father will give his Spirit to them that
ask, more readily than parents do bread to their children, and not a stone. But
what if you be put to ask often, and wait long, this does but the more endear
the gift, and show the high value of it. You are to remember how often you have
grieved, resisted, and vexed this Spirit, and that you have made God wait long
upon you. What if the absolute sovereign Lord of all expect your attendance
upon him? He waits to be gracious -- and blessed are they that wait for him.
Renew your applications to him. Lay from time to time that Covenant before you,
which your selves must be wrought up unto a full entire closure with. And if it
be not done at one time, try yet if it will another, and try again and again.
Remember it is for your life, for your soul, for your all. But do not satisfy
your self with only such faint motions within thee, as may only be the effects
of thy own spirit, of thy dark, dull, listles, sluggish, dead, hard heart, at
least not of the efficacious regenerating influence of the divine Spirit. Did
thou never hear what mighty wo^^^ngs there have been in others, when God has
been transforming and renewing them, and drawing them into living union with
his Son, and himself thorough him? what an amazing penetrating light has
struck into their hearts, as 2 Cor. 4.6. Such as when he was making the world,
enlightened the Chaos. Such as has made them see things that concerned them as
they truly were, and with their own proper face, God, and Christ, and
themselves, sin and duty, heaven and hell in their own true appearances! How
effectually they have been awakened! how the terrors of the Almighty have
beset and seized their souls! what agonies and pangs they have felt in
themselves, when the voice of God has said to them, awake thou that sleep,
and arise from dead, and Christ shall give thee life! Ephesians. 5.14. How he has
brought them down at his feet, thrown them into the dust, broken them, melted
them, made them abase themselves, loath and abhor themselves, filled them with
sorrow, shame, confusion, and with indignation, toward their own guilty souls,
habituated them to a severity a^^inst themselves, unto the most sharp, and yet
most unforced self-accusations, self-judging and self condemnation; so as even
to make them lay claim to hell, and confess the portion of devils belonged to
them, as their own most deserved portion. And if now their eyes have been
directed toward a Redeemer, and any glimmering of hope has appeared to them;
If now they are taught to understand God saying to them, Sinner, art thou yet
willing to be reconciled, and accept a Savior? O the transport into which it
puts them! this is life from the dead! what is there hope for such a lost
wretch as I? How tastful now is that melting invitation? how pleasant an
intimation does it carry with it, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy
laden, and I will give you rest, etc. If the Lord of heaven and earth do now
look down from the throne of glory, and say, what, Sinner, will thou despise my
favor and pardon, my Son, thy mighty merciful Redeemer, my grace and Spirit
still! -- What can be the return of the poor abashed wretch, overawed by the
glory of the divine Majesty, stung with compunction, overcome with the
intimation of kindness and love? I have heard of thee, O God, by the hearing of
the ear, now mine eye sees thee; wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust
and ashes. So inwardly is the truth of that word now felt, that thou may
remember and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy
shame, when I am pacified toward thee, for all that thou have done, says the
Lord God. Ezekiel. 16.63. But, sinner, will thou make a Covenant with me, and my
Christ? will thou take me for thy God, and him for thy Redeemer and Lord? And
may I, Lord! yet, may I! O admirable grace! wonderful sparing mercy! that I was
not thrown into hell at my first refusal! Yea Lord with all my heart and soul.
I renounce the vanities of an empty cheating world, and all the pleasures of
sin; in thy favor stands my life. Whom have I in heaven but thee? whom on
earth do I desire besides thee? And O thou blessed Jesus, thou Prince of the
Kings of the earth, who have loved me, and washed me from my sins in thy blood,
and whom the eternal God has exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, to give
repentance and remission of sins, I fall before thee, my Lord, and my God; I
here willingly tender my homage at the footstool of thy throne. I take thee for
the Lord of my life. I absolutely surrender and resign my self to thee. Thy
love constrains me henceforth no more to live to my self, but to thee who
dyedst for me, and did rise again. And I subject and yield my self to thy
blessed light and power, O holy Spirit of grace, to be more and more
illuminated, sanctified, and prepared for every good word and work, in this
world, and for an inheritance among them that are sanctified in the other.
Sinner, never give thy soul leave to be at rest 'till thou find it brought to
some such transaction with God (the Father, Son, and Spirit) as this; So as
that thou can truly say, and do feel thy heart is in it. Be not weary or
impatient of waiting and striving, till thou can say, this is now the very
sense of thy soul. Such things have been done in the world (but O how seldom of
latter days!) So God has wrought with men to save them from going down to the
pit, having found a ransom for them. And why may he not yet be expected to do
so? He has smitten rocks ere now, and made the waters gush out; nor is his
hand shortened, or his ear heavy. Thy danger is not, Sinner, that he will be
inexorable, but lest thou should. He will be entreated, if thou would be
prevailed with to entreat his favor with thy whole heart.

And that thou may, and not throw away thy soul, and so great an hope
thorough mere sloth, and loathnes to be at some pains for thy life; Let the
Text, which has been thy directory about the things that belong to thy peace,
be also thy motive, as it gives thee to behold the Son of God weeping over such
as would not know those things. Shall not the Redeemers tears move thee! O hard
heart! Consider what these tears import to this purpose.

1. They signify the real depth, and greatness of the misery into which thou
art falling. They drop from an intellectual and most comprehensive eye, that
sees far, and pierces deep into things, has a wide and large prospect; takes
the compass of that forlorn state into which unreconcileable sinners are
hastening, in all the horror of it. The Son of God did not weep vain and
causeles tears, or for a light matter; nor did he for himself either spend his
own, or desire the profusion of others tears. Weep not for me, O daughters of
Jerusalem, etc. He knows the value of Souls, the weight of guilt, and how low
it will press and sink them; the severity of Gods justice, and the power of his
anger, and what the fearful effects of them will be, when they finally fall. If
thou understandest not these things thy self, believe him that did, at least
believe his tears.

2. They signify the sincerity of his love and pity, the truth and tenderness
of his compassion. Can thou think his deceitful tears? his, who never knew
guile? was this like the rest of his course? And remember that he who shed
tears, did, from the same fountain of love and mercy, shed blood too! Was that
also done to deceive? Thou make thy self some very considerable thing indeed,
if thou think the son of God counted it worth his while to weep, and bleed,
and dye, to deceive thee into a false esteem of him and his love. But if it be
the greatest madness imaginable to entertain any such thought, but that his
tears were sincere and inartificial, the natural genuine expressions of
undissembled benignity and pity, thou art then to consider what love and
compassion thou art now sinning against; what bowels thou spurnest; and that if
thou perishest, it is under such, guilt as the devils themselves are not liable
to, who never had a Redeemer bleeding for them, nor, that we ever find, weeping
over them.

3. They show the remedilesnes of thy case, if thou persist in impenitency and
unbelief till the things of thy peace be quite hid from thine eyes. These tears
will then be the last issues of (even defeated) love, of love that is
frustrated of it is kind design. Thou may perceive in these tears the steady
unalterable laws of heaven, the inflexiblenes of the divine justice, that holds
thee in adamantine bonds, and has sealed thee up, if thou prove incurably
obstinate and impenitent, unto perdition; so that even the Redeemer himself, he
that is mighty to save, cannot at length save thee, but only weep over thee,
drop tears into thy flame, which assuage it not; but (tho they have another
design, even to express true compassion) do yet unavoidably heighten, and
increase the fervor of it, and will do so to all eternity. He even tells thee,
Sinner, thou have despised my blood, thou shall yet have my tears. That would
have saved thee, these do only lament thee lost.

But the tears wept over others as lost and past hope, why should they not yet
melt thee, while as yet there is hope in thy case; If thou be effectually
melted in thy very soul, and looking to him whom thou have pierced, do truly
mourn over him, thou may assure thy self the prospect his weeping eye had of
lost souls, did not include thee. His weeping over thee would argue thy case
forelorn and hopeles. Thy mourning over him will make it safe and happy. That
it may be so, consider further that

4. They signify how very intent he is to save souls, and how gladly he would
save thine, if yet thou will accept of mercy while it may be had. For if he
weep over them that will not be saved, from the same love that is the spring of
these tears, would saving mercies proceed to those that are become willing to
receive them. And that love that wept over them that were lost, how will it
glory in them that are saved? There his love is disappointed and vexed, crossed in
its gracious intendment; but here having compast it, how will he joy over thee
with singing, and rest in his love! And thou also, instead of being involved in
a like ruin with the unreconciled Sinners of the Old Jerusalem, shall be
enrolled among the glorious Citizens of the New, and triumph together with them
in eternal glory.

APPENDIX.
BEcause some things, not fit to be wholly omitted, were as little fit to come
into the body of a practical discourse, 'twas thought requisite to subjoyn here
the following additions, that will, severally have reference to distinct parts
of the foregoing discourse.

As to what was said p. 81. of the unreasonablenes, and ill consequence of
admitting it to be any man's duty to believe himself utterly rejected, and
forsaken of God, inasmuch as it would make that his duty which were repugnant
to his felicity. This is to be evinced by a consideration, which also, even
apart by it self, were not without its own great weight, viz. that such a
belief were inconsistent with his former stated and known duty: It were
therefore inconsistent with his felicity, inasmuch as it would make that duty
impossible to be performed, which, before, was by the constitution of the
Evangelical law, made necessary to it, viz. Repentance toward God, and faith
in our Lord Jesus Christ. The hope of acceptance is so necessary to both these,
that the belief of a man's being finally rejected, or that he shall never be
accepted, cannot but make them both impossible, equally impossible, as if he
were actually in hell, as much impossible to him, as to the devils themselves.
Nor is this impossibility, merely, from a moral impotency, or that obduration
of heart which were confessedly vicious, and his great sin, but from the
natural influence of that belief of his being for ever rejected, which (upon
the mentioned supposition) were his duty. Besides, inasmuch as it is the known
duty of a sinner under the Gospel, to turn to God thorough Christ, and it is
also declared in the same Gospel (sufficiently to make it the common matter of
faith to Christians) that none can of themselves turn to God, and believe in
his Son, without the hlep of special efficious grace; It must hereupon, be a
man's duty also to pray for that grace which may enable him hereto. How deep in
wickedness was Simon Magus, even in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity, when yet Peter calls him to repentance, and puts him upon praying for
forgivenes, (which must imply also his praying for the grace to repent;) but
how can a man pray for that, which, at the same time, he believes shall not be
given him? yea, and which is harder, and more unaccountable, how can he stand
obliged in duty, to pray for that, which, at the same time, he stands obliged
in duty to believe he shall not obtain? How can these two contrary obligations
ly upon a man at the same time? or is he to look upon the former as ceased?
should he reckon the Gospel as to him repealed? or his impenitency and
infidelity, even when they are at the highest, no sins?

I know it is obvious to object, as to all this, the case of the unpardonable
blasphemy against the holy Ghost; which will be supposed to be stated and
determined in the sacred Scriptures, and being so, the person that has
committed it, may equally be thought obliged, (by a mixed assent, partly of
faith to what is written, partly of self-knowledge, which he ought to have of
his own acts and state) to conclude himself guilty of it; whereupon all the
former inconvenience and difficulty will be liable to be urged as above. But
even as to this also, I see not but it may fitly enough be said, that though
the general nature of that sin be stated, and sufficiently determined in thesi,
yet that God has not left it determinable in hypothesi, by any particular
person, that he has committed it. For admit that it generally lies in imputing
to the devil those works of the Holy Ghost, by which the truth of Christianity
was to be demonstrated, I yet see not how any man can apply this to his own
particular case, so as justly, and certainly to conclude himself guilty of it.
I take it for granted none will ever take the notion of blasphemy in that
strictness, but that a man may possibly be guilty of this sin as well in
thought, as by speech. I also doubt not but it will be acknowledged on all
hands, that prejudice and malice against Christianity, must have a great
ingrediency into this sin; not such malice as whereby, knowing it to be the
true Religion, a man hates and detests it as such (which would suppose these
Pharisees, whom our Savior charges with it, or cautions against it, to have
been, at that time, in their judgments and consciences, Christians) but such
malignity, and strong prejudice as darkens and obstructs his mind, that he
judges it not to be true, against the highest evidence of its being so; It will
also be acknowledged, that some enmity and disaffection to true Religion is
common to all men; more especially in their unregeneracy, and unconverted state.

Now let it be supposed that some person or other, of a very unwarrantably
skeptical Genius, had opportunity to know certainly the matter of fact,
touching the miraculous works wrought by our Savior, and understood withal
somewhat generally, of the doctrine which he taught; and that he sets himself
as a Philosopher, to consider the case. Suppose that, partly thorough prejudice
against the holy design of Christianity, whereof there is some degree in all;
and partly thorough shortness of discourse, not having thoroughly considered the
matter; he thinks it possible that some Demon or other, with design, under a
specious pretense, to impose upon, or amuse the credulous vulgar, may have done
all those strange things. Suppose his judgment should for the present more
incline this way. What if thinking this to be the case in the instance of
Apollonius Tyanaeus, he has not yet, upon a slighter view, discerned enough to
distinguish them, but thinks alike of both cases? yea and suppose he have
spoken his sentiments to some or other. Perhaps, upon further enquiry and
search, he might see cause to alter his judgment. And now, setting himself to
enquire more narrowly, he perceives the unexceptionable excellent scope and
tendency of our Saviors doctrine and precepts, considers the simplicity and
purity of his life, contemplates further the awful greatness of his mighty
works; but amidst these his deliberations, he finds among the rest of christian
constitutions this severe one, Mat. 12.31, 32. and begins to fear lest,
supposing the truth of this excellent Religion, he have precluded himself of
all the advantages of it by that former judgment of his; what is he to do in
this case? what were he to be advised unto? what, to pass judgment upon
himself, and his case as desperate? or not rather to humble himself before the
God of heaven, ask pardon for his injurious rash judgment, and supplicate for
mercy, and for further illumination, in the mystery of God, of the Father, and
of Christ? Which course, that it may have a blessed issue with him, who dare
venture to deny, or doubt? And what have we to say hereupon, but that in great
wisdom and mercy, our Savior has only told us there is such a sin, and what
the general nature of it is, or whereabouts it lies, but the judgment of
particular cases wherein, or of the very pitch and degree of malignity
wherewith it is committed, he has reserved to himself; intending further to
strive with persons by his Spirit, while he judges them yet within the reach of
mercy, or withhold it, when he sees any to have arrived to that culminating
pitch of malignity, and obstinacy, wherein he shall judge this sin specially to
consist? And what inconvenience is it to suppose he has left this matter,
touching the degree, humanely undeterminable. The knowledge of it can do them
who have committed it no good: And probably they have by it so blinded and
stupefied their own souls, as to have made themselves very little capable of
apprehending that they have committed it, or of considering whether they have
or no. But they are sunk into a deep abyss of darkness and death, so as that
such knowledge may be as little possible, as it would be useful to them. All
their faculties of intellection, consideration, and self-reflection, being (as
to any such exercise) bound up in a stupifying dead sleep.

And to what purpose should they have a rule by which to determine a case, who
1. Can receive no benefit by the determination, and 2. Who are supposed when
they are to use it, to have no faculty sufficiently apt to make this sad (but
true) judgment of their case by it? But for them who have not committed it, and
who are consequently, yet capable of benefit by what should be made known about
it, there is, therefore, enough made known for their real use and benefit. It
will 1. Be of real use to many such, to know their danger of running into it.
And it is sufficient to that purpose, that they are plainly told wherein the
general nature of it consists, or whereabouts it lies; without showing them the
very point that has certain death in it; or letting them know just how near
they may approach it, without being sure to perish, when there is danger enough
in every step they take toward it. As if there were some horrid desert, into
any part whereof no man has any business to come, but in some part whereof
there is a dreadful gulf, whence arises a contagious halitus, which, if he come
within the verge of it, will be certainly poisonous and mortal to him. What
need is there that any man should know just how near he may come, without being
sure to die for it? He is concerned to keep himself at a cautious awful
distance. 2. It may be of great use to others, that are afflicted with very
torturing fears lest they have committed it, to know that they have not. And
they have enough also to satisfy them in the case. For their very fear it
self, with its usual concomitants in such afflicted minds, is an argument to
them that they have not. While they find in themselves any value of divine
favor, any dread of his wrath, any disposition to consider the state of their
souls, with any thought or design of turning to God, and making their peace;
they have reason to conclude God has hitherto kept them out of that fearful
gulf; and is yet in the way, and in treaty with them. For since we are not
sufficient to think any thing (that good is) of our selves, it is much more
reasonable to ascribe any such thoughts or agitations of spirit that have this
design to him, than to our selves, and to account that he is yet at work with
us (at least in the way of common grace) tho when our thoughts drive toward a
conclusion against our selves, that we have committed that sin, and toward
despair thereupon, we are to apprehend a mixture of temptation in them; which
we are concerned earnestly to watch and pray against. And yet even such
temptation is an argument of such a ones not having committed that sin. For
such as the devil may apprehend more likely to have committed it (and it is not
to be thought he can be sure who have) he will be less apt to trouble with such
thoughts, not knowing what the issue of that unquietnes may prove, and
apprehending it may occasion their escaping quite out of his snare. And I do
conceive this to be a safer method, of satisfying such as are perplexed with
this fear in our days, than to be positive in stating that sin so, or limiting
it to such circumstances, as shall make it impossible to be committed in this
age of the World. For let it be seriously considered, whether it be altogether
an unsupposeable thing, that, with some in our days, there may be an
equivalency, in point of light and evidence of the truth of Christianity, unto
what those Jews had, whom our Savior warns of the danger of this sin, at that
time when he so warned them; his warning and cautioning them about it, implies
that he judged them, at least in a possibility, at that time, of incurring the
guilt of it. If the text Mat. 12. do not also imply that he reckoned them,
then, actually to have committed it. For it is said, ver. 25. he knew their
thoughts, i. e. considered the temper of their minds, and thereupon said to
them that which follows concerning it. Let us consider wherein their advantage
toward their being ascertained of the truth of the Christian Religion, was
greater than we now can have. It was, chiefly, in this respect greater, that
they had a nearer, and more immediate knowledge of the matter of fact, wherein
that evidence which our Savior refers to did consist. A more immediate way of
knowing it they had; the most immediate the persons whom he warns (or charges)
seem not to have had: For those Pharisees, it is said, heard of the cure of the
Daemoniac, not that they saw it. They took it upon the (no doubt sufficiently
credible) report of others. Now let it be further considered, what we have to
balance this one single advantage. We have, to intelligent considering
persons, rationally-sufficient evidence. of the same matter of fact. But how
great things, that have since followed, have we the sufficiently certain
knowledge of besides, beyond what they had in view, at that time. As the
wonderful death of our Lord, exactly according to prediction, in many respects,
together with all the unforetold amazing circumstances that attended it! His
more wonderful resurrection, upon which so great a stresse is laid for
demonstrating the truth of the Religion he taught. The destruction of
Jerusalem, as he foretold, and the shattered condition of the Jewish nation, as
was also foretold, ever since. The strange success of the Gospel in the first,
and some following ages, by so unlikely means, against the greatest opposition
imaginable, both of Jews, and Pagans. Not to insist on the apostasy foretold,
in the Christian Church, with many more things that might be mentioned. Let be
considered whether the want of a so immediate way of knowing some of these
things, be not abundantly compensated by the greatness of the other things that
are however sufficiently known. And if such as have wit and leisure to consider
these things in our days, are often pressed to consider them, have them
frequently represented, and laid before their eyes, if such, I say, have in
view as great evidence, upon the whole, of the truth of Christianity, as these
Pharisees had; it is then further to be considered, whether it be not possible
that some such may equal the Jewish malice, against the holy design of our
Religion. To which I only say, the Lord grant that none may. But if there be
really cause to apprehend such a danger, some other way should be thought of to
cure the trouble of some, than by the danger, and (too probable) ruin of
others.

However, none should themselves make their own case incurable, by concluding
that they have sinned that sin, or by believing they are, otherwise, forsaken
and rejected of God; so as that he will never more assist their endeavor to
repent, and turn to him thorough the Mediatou^.

If it be enquired here, since, as has been shown, some may be quite forsaken
of God, while yet they live in the world; ought such to believe then they are
not forsaken, and so believe an untruth that they may make it true, or try if
they can better their condition by it? I answer, nor that neither. For that God
will further assist an obstinate sinner, that has long resisted his Spirit,
and despised his mercy, is no matter of promise, to him, and so no matter of
faith. When he does conquer, at length, any such, it is of mere unpromised
favor; (as was also shown) whereof therefore, he gives others no ground to
despair; and for which they are deeply concerned, with great earnestnes, to
supplicate. But if it be said, how can they pray for that whereof they have no
promise? and can have no faith, since what is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.23.
I answer, that passage of Scripture would, in this case, be much misapplied. It
speaks not of faith concerning the certainty of any event to be expected, but
the lawfulnes of a work to be done, and of doubting, not concerning the event,
but my own act. Can any man in his wits doubt concerning his own act in this
case? whether it be better to pray for the grace of God to save him, than
slight it and perish? nor are they without very encouraging promises concerning
the event, that God will be a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb.
11.6. And that whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved,
Romans 10.13. which promises it is true the context of both shows, do speak of
believing prayer. They are to faith, not of it, and import, that God will
reward and save the believer: not that he will give faith to the obstinate,
contemptuous unbeliever. If he do this, it is, (as was said) of unpromised
bounty. But tho they are not promises to give faith, they should induce it; and
incline sinners to cast themselves down before the throne of so gracious a God,
and seek grace to help them in their need, in confidence that he will never
reject penitent believing prayer. They, indeed, that for their former wilful
sinning, are utterly forsaken of God, will not thus apply themselves; but our
question is not what they will do, but what they should. Because they would
not, therefore they were forsaken, and because they yet will not, they are
still, and finally forsaken. Their refusal proceeds not from any discouragement
God has given them, but from the malignity of their own hearts. God has not
repealed his Gospel toward them. The connection continues firm between the
preceptive and promisory, parts of it. Their infidelity is not become their
duty, but remains their heinous sin, and the more deeply heinous by how much
their own malignity holds them more strongly in it.

Unto what also is discoursed p. 99. concerning anger and grief, (or other
passions) ascribed to God, it will not be unfit here to add, that unles they
be allowed to signify real aversion of will, no account is to be given what
reality in him they can signify at all. For to say (what some do seem to
satisfy themselves with) that they are to be understood secundum effectum, not
secundum affectum, tho true as to the negative part, is, as to the affirmative,
very defective and short; for the effects of anger and grief, upon which those
names are put, when spoken of God, are not themselves in him, but in us. But we
are still at a loss what they signify in him. Such effects must have some
cause. And if they be effects which he works, they must have some cause in
himself that is before them, and productive of them. This account leaves us to
seek what that cause is, that is signified by these names. That it cannot be
any passion, as the same names are wont to signify with us, is out of question.
Nor indeed do those names primarily, and most properly signify passion in our
selves. The passion is consequent only, by reason of that inferior nature in
us, which is susceptible of it. But the aversion of our mind and will is before
it, and, in another subject, very separable from it, and possible to be without
it. In the blessed God we cannot understand any thing less is signified than
real displicency at the things whereat he is said to be angry or grieved.

Our shallow reason indeed is apt to suggest in these matters, why is not that
prevented that is so displeasing? And it would be said with equal reason in
reference to all sin permitted to be in the world, why was it not prevented?
and what is to be said to this? shall it be said that sin does not displease
God? that he has no will against sin? it is not repugnant to his will? yes; it
is to his revealed will, to his law. But is that an untrue Revelation? His law
is not his will it self, but the signum, the discovery of his will. Now, is it
an insignificant sign? a sign that signifies nothing? or to which there belongs
no correspondent signisicatum? nothing that is signified by it? Is that which
is signified (for sure no one will say it signifies nothing) his real will, yea
or no? who can deny it? that will, then, (and a most calm, sedate, impassionate
will it must be understood to be) sin, and consequently the consequent miseries
of his creatures, are ^^^ugnant unto. And what will is that? it is not a
peremptory will concerning the event, for the event falls out otherwise; which
were, upon that supposition, impossible; for who has resisted his will? as was
truly intimated by the personated questionist; Romans 9.19. but impertinently,
when Gods will of another (not a contrary) kind, i. e. concerning another
object, was in the same breath referred unto, why does he yet find fault? it is
not the will of the event that is the measure of faultines: for then there
could not have been sin in the world, nor consequently misery, which only, by
the Creators pleasure, stands connected with it. For nothing could fall out
against that irresistible will. The objector then destroys his own objection,
so absurdly, and so manifestly, as not to deserve any other reply than that
which he meets with. Nay, but who art thou, O man; that replyest against God?

And what is the other object about which the divine will is also conversant?
matter of duty, and what stands in connection with it, not abstra^^^^ and
separately, but as it is so connected, our felicity. This is objectively
another will, as we justly distinguish divine acts, that respect the creature,
by their different objects. Against this will falls out all the sin and misery
in the world.

All this seems plain and clear, but is not enough. For it may be further said,
when God wills this or that to be my duty, does he not will this event, viz. my
doing it? otherwise wherein is his will withstood, or not fulfilled in my not
doing it? He willed this to be my duty, and it is so. I do not, nor can hinder
it from being so, yet I do it not, and that he willed not. If all that his will
meant was that this should be my duty, but my doing it was not intended; his
will is entirely accomplished, it has its full effect, in that such things are
constituted, and do remain my duty, upon his signification of this his will, my
not doing it, not being within the compass of the object, or the thing willed.

If it be said, he willed my doing it, i. e. that I should do it, not that I
shall, the same answer will recur, viz. that his will has still its full
effect, this effect still remaining, that I should do it, but that I shall he
willed not.

It may be said, I do plainly go against his will however; for his will was
that I should do so, or so, and I do not what he willed I should. It Is true, I
go herein against his will, if he willed not only my obligation, but my action
according to it. And indeed it seems altogether unreasonable, and
unintelligible, that he should will to oblige me to that, which he does not
will me to do.

Therefore it seems out of question, that the holy God does constantly and
perpetually, in a true sense, will the universal obedience, and the consequent
felicity of all his creatures capable thereof; i. e. He does will it with
simple complacency, as what were highly grateful to him, simply considered by
it self. Who can doubt, but that purity, holiness, blessedness, wheresoever they
were to be beheld among his creatures, would be a pleasing and delightful
spectacle to him, being most agreeable to the perfect excellency, purity, and
benignity of his own nature, and that their deformity and misery must be
consequently unpleasing? But he does not efficaciously will every thing that he
truly wills. He never willed the obedience of all his intelligent creatures so,
as effectually to make them all obey, nor their happiness, so as to make them
all be happy, as the event shows. Nothing can be more certain, than that he did
not so will these things; for then nothing could have fallen out to the
contrary, as we see much has. Nor is it at all unworthy the love and goodness
of his nature not so to have willed, with that effective will, the universal
sinlesnes, and felicity of all his intelligent creatures. The divine nature
must comprehend all excellencies in it self, and not be limited to that one
only of benignity, or an aptnes to acts of beneficence. For then it were not
infinite, not absolutely perfect, and so not divine. All the acts of his will
must be consequently conform and agreeable to the most perfect wisdom. He does
all things according to the counsel of his will. He wills, it is true, the
rectitude of our actions, and what would be consequent thereto, but he first,
and more principally wills the rectitude of his own. And not only not to do an
unrighteous, but not an inept, or unfit thing. We find he did not think it fit
efficaciously to provide concerning all men, that they should be made obedient
and happy, as he has concerning some. That in the general he makes a
difference, is to be attributed to his wisdom, i. e. his wisdom has in the
general made this determination, not to deal with all alike, and so we find it
ascribed to his wisdom that he does make a difference; and in what a transport
is the holy Apostle in the contemplation and celebration of it upon this
account! Romans 11.33. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out! But now when in particular, he comes to make this difference
between one person, and another, there being no reason in the object to
determine him this way, more than that, his designing some for the objects of
special favor, and waving others (as to such special favor) when all were in
themselves alike; in that case wisdom has not so proper an exercise, but it is
the work of free, unobliged sovereignty here to make the choice. Having
predestined us unto the adoption of children, by Jesus Christ, to himself,
according to the good pleasure of his will. Ephesians. 1.5.

Yet in the mean time, while God does not efficaciously will all men's obedience
introductive of their happiness, does it follow he wills it not really at all?
to say he wills it efficaciously, were to contradict experience, and his Word;
to say he wills it not really, were equally to contradict his Word. He does
will it, but not primarily, and as the more principal object of his will, so as
to effect it, notwithstanding whatsoever unfitnes h^ apprehe^ds in ^t, viz.
that he so overpower ^ll, as to make them obedient and happy. He really wills
it, but has greater reasons than this or that man's salvation, why he effects
it not. And this argues no imperfection in the divine will, but the perfection
of it, that he wills things agreeably to the reasonablenes and fitnes of them.

THE END.

