THE CHARACTER OF A TRIMMER. HIS OPINION OF I. The Laws and Government.

II. Protestant Religion.

III. The Papists.

IV. Foreign Affairs.

By the Honorable Sir W. C.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, M DC LXXXVIII

The PREFACE.
IT must be more than an ordinary provocation that can tempt a Man to Write in
an Age overrun with Scriblers, as Egypt was with Flies and Locusts: That worst
Vermin of swall Authors has given the World such a Surfeit, that instead of
desiring to Write, a Man would be more inclined to wish, for his own ease, that
he could not Read; but there are some things which do so raise our Passions,
that our Reason can make no Resistance; and when Madmen, in the two Extremes,
shall agree to make common sense Treason, and join to fix an ill Character upon
the only Men in the Nation who deserve a good one; I am no longer Master of my
better Resolution to let the World alone, and must break loose from my more
reasonalble Thoughts, to expose these false Coyners, who would make their
Copper Wares pass upon us for good Payment.

Amongst all the Engines of Dissension, there has been none more powerful in
all Times, than the fixing Names upon one another of Contumely and Reproach,
and the reason is plain, in respect of the People, who are generally incapable
of making a Syllogism or forming an Argument, yet they can pronounce a word;
and that serves their turn to throw it with their due malice at the head of
those they do not like; such things ever begin in just, and end in Blood, and
the same word that makes the Company merry, grows in time to a Military Signal
to cut one another Throats.

These Mistakes are to be lamented, though not easily cured, being suitable
enough to the corrupted Nature of Mankind; but it is hard that Men will not only
invent ill Names, but they will wrest and misinterpret good ones, so afraid
some are even of a reconciling sound, that they raise another noise to keep it
from being heard, lest it should set up and encourage a dangerous sorts of Men,
who prefer Peace and Agreement, before Violence and Confusion.

Were it not for this, why, after we have played the Fool with throwing Whig
and Tory at one another, as Boys do Snow Balls, do we grow angry at a new Name,
which by its true signification might do as much to put us into our Wits, as
the other has done to put us out of them?

This innocent word Trimmer signifies no more than this, That if Men are
together in a Boat, and one part of the Company would weigh it down on one
side, another would make it lean as much to the contrary, it happens there is a
third Opinion of those who conceive it would do as well, if the Boat went even,
without endangering the Passengers; now it is hard to imagine by what Figure in
Language, or by what Rule in Sense this comes to be a fault, and it is much
more a wonder it should become a Heresy.

But so it happens, that the poor Trimmer has all the Powder spent upon him
alone, while the Whig is forgotten, or at least a neglected Enemy; there is no
danger now to the State (if some Men be believed) but from the Beast called a
Trimmer, take heed of him, he is the Instrument that must destory Church and
State; a strong kind of Monster, whose deformity is so exposed, that, were it a
true Picture that is made of him, it would be enough to fright Children, and
make Women miscarry at the sight of it.

But it may be worth the examining, whether he is such a Beast as he is
Painted. I am not of that Opinion, and am so far from thinking him an Infidel
either in Church or State, that I am neither afraid to expose the Articles of
his Faith in Relation to Government, nor to say I prefer them before any other
Political Creed, that either our angry Dons, or our refined Statesmen would
impose upon us.

I have therefore in the following Discourse endeavored to explain the
Trimmer's Principles and Opinions, and then leave it to all Discerning and
Impartial Judges, whether he can with Justice be so Arraigned, and whether
those who deliberately pervert a good Name, do not very justly deserve the
worst that can be put upon themselves.

THE Trimmer's Opinion OF THE LAWS and GOVERNMENT.
OUR Trimmer has a great Veneration for Laws in general, as he has more
particularly for his own, he looks upon them as the Chains that tie up our
unruly Passions, which else, like Wild Beasts let loose, would reduce the World
into its first State of Barbarism and Hostility; all the good things we enjoy,
we owe to them; and all the ill things we are freed from by their Protection.

God himself thought it not enough to be a Creator, without being a Lawgiver,
and his goodness had been defective toward Mankind in making them, if he had
not prescribed Rules to make them happy.

All Laws flow from that of Nature, and where that is not the Foundation, they
may be legally imposed, but they will be lamely obeyed: By this Nature is not
meant that which Fools and Madmen would misquote to justify their Excesses; it
is innocent and uncorrupted Nature, that which disposes Men to choose Virtue,
without its being prescribed, and which is so far from inspiring ill thoughts
into us, that we take pains to suppress the good ones it infuseth.

The Civil World has ever paid a willing subjection to Laws, even Conquerours
have done homage to them; as the Romans who took Patterns of good Laws, even
from those they had subdued; and at the same time they Triumphed over an
enssav'd People, the same Laws of that Place did not only remain safe, but
became Victorious; their new Masters, instead of suppressing them, paid them
more respect than they had from those who first made them: and by this wise
method they arrived to such an admirable Constitution of Laws, that to this day
they Reign by them; the Excellency of them Triumphs still, and the World
pays now an acknowledgment of their obedience to that Mighty Empire, though so
many Ages after it is dissolved; and by a better instance, the Kings of France,
who, in practice use their Laws pretty familiarly, yet think their Picture is
drawn with most advantage upon their Seals, when they are placed upon the Seat
of Justice; and though the Hieroglyphick is not there of so much use to the
People as they would wish, yet it shows that no Prince is so Great, as to think
fit, for his own Credit at least, to givean outward, when he refuses a real
worship to the Laws.

They are to Mankind that which the Sun is to the Plants, as it cherishes and
preserves them, so where they have their force, and are not clouded, every
thing smileth and slourisheth; but where they are darkened, and are not suffered
to shine out, it makes every thing to wither and decay.

They serve Men not only against one another, but against themselves too; they
are a Sanct^^ry to which the Crown has occasion to resort as often as the
People, ^o that it has an Interest as well as a Duty to preserve them.

There would be no end of making a Panegyric of Laws; let it be enough to add,
that without Laws the World would become a Wilderness and Men little less than
Beasts; but with all this, the best things may come to be the worst, if they
are not in good hands; and if it be true that the wisest Men generally make the
Laws, it is as true, that the strongest do often misinterpret them: and as
River belong as much to the Chanel where they run, as to the Spring from whence
they first rise, so the Laws depend as much upon the Pipes, through which they
are to pass, as upon the Fountain from whence they flow.

The Authority of a King who is Head of the Law, as well as the Dignity of
Public Justice, is debased, when the clear stream of the Law is puddled and
distrub'd by Bunglers, or conveyed by unclean Instruments to the People.

Our Trimmer would have them appear in their full luster, and would be grieved
to see the day, when, instead of speaking with Authority from the Seats of
Justice, they should speak out of a Grate, with a lamenting voice, like
Prisoners that desire to be rescued.

He wishes that the Bench may have a Natural as well as a Legal Superiority to
the Bar; he thinks Men's abilities much misplaced, when the Reasons of those
that Plead is visibly too strong for those who Judge and give Sentence.

When those from the Bar seem to dictate to their Superious upon the Bench,
their Furrs will look scurvily about them, and the respect of the World will
leave the bare Character of a Judge, to follow the Essential knowledge of a
Lawyer, who may be greater in himself, than others can be with all their
Trappings.

An uncontested Superiority in any Calling, will have the better of any
distinct Name that Authority can put upon it, and therefore if ever such an
unnatural Method should be produced, it is then that WestminsterHall might be
said to stand upon its Head, and though Justice it self can never be so, yet
the Administration of it would be rendered Ridiculous.

A Judge has such a Power lodged in him, that the King will never be thought
to have chosen well, where the Voice of Mankind has not beforehand
recommended the Man to his Election; when Men are made Judges of what they do
not understand, the World censures such a Choice, not out of ill will to the
Men, but fear to themselves.

If the King had sole Power of choosing Physicians, Men would tremble to see
Bunglers preferred, yet the necessity of taking Physic from a Doctor, is
generally not so great as that of receiving Justice from a Judge; the
Inferences will be very severe in such cases, for either it will be thought
that such Men bought what they were not able to deserve, or which is as bad,
that Obedience shall be looked upon as a better Qualification in a Judge, than
Skill or Integrity, when such sacred things as the Laws are not only touched,
but guided by profane hands; Men will fear that out of the Tree of the Law,
from whence we expect Shade and Shelter, such Workmen will make us Cudgels to
beat us with, or rather that they will turn the Canon upon our Properties, that
were entrusted with them for their Defense.

To see the Laws Mangled, Disguised, Speak quite another Language than their
own, to see them thrown from the Dignity of protecting Mankind, to the
disgraceful Office of destroying them; and, notwithstanding their Innocence in
themselves, to be made the worst Instruments that the most refined Villainy can
make use of, will raise Men's Anger above the power of laying it down again, and
tempt them to follow the Evil Examples given them of Judging without Hearing,
when so provoked by their desire of Revenge. Our Trimmer therefore as he
thinks the Laws are Jewels, so he believes they are no better set, than in
the Constitution of our English Government, if rightly understood, and
carefully preserved.

It would be too great Partiality to say it is perfect or liable to no
Objection; such things are not of the World; but if it has more Excellencies
and sewer Faults than any other we know, it is enough to recommend it to our
Esteem.

The Dispute, which is a greater Beauty, a Monarchy or a Commonwealth, has
lasted long between their contending Lovers, and (they have behaved themselves
so like, who in good Manners must be out of their Wits,) who used such Figures
to exalt their own Idols on either side, and such angry Aggravations, to
reproach one another in the Contest, that moderate Men have at all times smiled
upon this eagerness, and thonght it differed very little from a downright
Frenzy: we in England, by a happy use of the Controversy, conclude them both
in the wrong, and reject them from being our Pattern, taking the words in the
utmost extent, which is a thing that Monarchy leaves them no Liberty, and a
Commonwealth such a one, as allows them no Quiet.

We think that a wise Mean, between these two barbarous Extremes, is that which
self-Preservation ought to dictate to our Wishes; and we may say we have
attained this Mean in a greater measure, than any Nation now in being, or
perhaps any we have read of; though never so much Celebrated for the wisdom or
plenty of their Constitutions; we take from one the too great power of doing
hurt, and yet leave enough to govern and protect us; we take from the other,
the Corfusion, the Parity, the Animosities, and the License, and yet reserve a
due care of such Liberty, as may consist with Men's Allegiance; but it being
hard, if not impossible, to be exactly even, our Government has much the
stronger Biass toward Monarchy, which by the more general Consent and practice
of Mankind, seems to have the Advantage in dispute against a Commonwealth:
The Rules of a Commonwealth are too hard for the Bulk of Mankind to come up to,
that Form of Government requires such a spirit to carry it on, as does not
dwell in great Numbers, but is restrained to so very few, especially in this
Age, that let the Methods appear never so much reasonable in Paper, they must
fail in Practice, which will ever be suited more to Men's Nature, as it is, than
as it should be.

Monarchy is liked by the People, for the Bells and the Tinsel, the outward
Pomp and the Gilding, and there must be milk for Babes, since the greatest part
of Mankind are, and ever will be included in that List; and it is approved by
wise and thinking Men, (Circumstances and Objections impartially considered)
that it has so great an advantage above all other Forms, when the
Administration of that Power fall eth in good hands, that all other Governments
look out of Countenance, when they are set in Competition with it. Lycurgus
might have saved himself the trouble of making Laws, if either he had been
lmmortal, or that he could have secured to Posterity, a succeeding Care of
Princes like himself; his own Example was a better Law, than he could with all
his skill tell how to make; such a Prince is a Living Law, that dictates to his
Subjects, whose thoughts in that case never rise above their Obedience, the
Confidence they have in the Virtue and Knowledge of the Master, preventing the
Scruples and Apprehensions to which Men are naturally inclined, in relation to
those that govern them; such a Magistrate is the Life and Soul of Justice,
whereas the Law is but a Body, and a dead one too, without his influence to
give it warmth and vigor, and by the irresistible Power of his Virtue, he does
so reconcile Dominion and Allegiance, that all disputes between them are
silenced and subdued, and indeed no Monarchy can be Perfect and Absolute
without exception, but when the Prince is Superior by his Virtue, as well as
by his Character and his Power, so that to serve out Presidents of unlimited
Power, is a plain diminution to a Prince that Nature has made Great, and who
had better make himself a glorious Example to Posterity, than borrow an
Authority from Dark Records, raised out of the Grave, which besides their
Non-usage have always in them matter of Controversy and Debate, and it may be
affirmed, that the Instances are very rare of Princes having the worst in
dispute with their People; if they were Eminent for Justice in time of Peace,
and Conduct in time of War, such advantage the Crown gives to those who adorn
and confirm it by their own Personal Virtues.

But since for the greater Honor of Good and Wise Princes, and the better to
set off their Character by the Comparison, Heaven has decreed there must be a
mixture, and that such as are perverse and insufficient, or both, are perhaps
to have their equal turns in the Government of the World, and besides that the
Will of a Man is so various, and so unbounded a thing, and so fatal too when
joined with power unsupply'd; it is no wonder if those who are to be governed,
are unwilling to have so dangerous as well as so uncertain a Standard of their
Obedience.

There must be therefore Rules and Laws, for want of which, or at least the
Observation of them, it was as Capital for a Man to say that Nero did not play
well upon the Lute, as to commit Treason, or Blaspheme the Gods. And even
Vespasian himself had like to have lost himself, for sleeping whilst he should
have attended and admired that Emperors Impertinence upon the Stage; There is
a wantonness in the too great Power that Men are generally too apt to be
corrupted with, and for that Reason, a wise Prince, to prevent the temptation
arising from common frailty, would choose to Govern by Rules for his own Sake,
as well as for the Peoples, since it only seoureth him from Errors, and does
not lessen the real Authority that a good Magistrate would come to be possessed
of; for if the Will of a Prince is contrary either to Reason it self, or to the
universal Opinion of his Subjects, the Law by a kind restraint rescues him from
a disease that would undo him; if his will on the other side is reasonable and
well directed, that will immediately becomes a Law, and he is arbitrary by an
easy and natural Consequence, without taking pains, or overturning the World
for it.

If Princes consider Laws as things imposed on them, they have the appearance
of Fetters of Iron, but to such as would make them their choice as well as
their practice, they are Chains of Gold; and in that respect are Ornaments, as
in others they are a defense to them, and by a Comparison, not improper for
God's Vicegerents upon Earth; as our Maker never commands our obedience to
any thing, that as unreasonable Creatures we ought not to make our own
Election; so a good and wise Governor, though all Laws were abolished, would by
the voluntary direction of his own Reason, do without restraint the very same
things that they would have enjoined.

Our Trimmer thinks that the King and Kingdom ought to be one Creature, not
to be separated in their Political Capacity; and when any of them undertake to
act apart, it is like the crawling of Worms after they are cut in pieces,
which cannot be a lasting Nation, the whole Creature not stirring at a time; if
the Body have a dead Palsy, the Head cannot make it move; and God has not yet
delegated such a healing power to Princes, as that they can in moment say to a
Languishing People oppressed in despair, take up your beds and walk.

The Figure of a King, is so comprehensive and exalted a thing, that it is a
kind of degrading of him to lodge that power separately in his own Natural
Person, which can never be truly or naturally great, but where the People are
so united to him as to be Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone; for when he
is reduced to the single definition of a man, he sinketh into so low a
Character, that he is a temptation under Men's Allegiance, and an impairing that
veneration which is necessary to preserve their duty to him; whereas a Prince
that is so joined to his People that they seem to be his Limbs, rather than his
Subjects, Clothed with Mercy and Justice rightly applied in their several
places, his Throne supported by Love as well as by Power, and the warm wishes
of his devoted Subjects, like never-failing Incense still ascending toward
him, looks so like the best Image we can frame to our selves of God Almighty,
that Men would have much ado not to fall down and worship him, and would be
much more tempted to the Sin of Idolatry, than that of Disobedience.

Our Trimmer is of Opinion, that there must be so much Dignity inseparably
annexed to the Royal Function, as may be sufficient to secure it from violence
and contempt; and contempt; and there must be Condescensions from the Throne,
like showers from Heaven, that the Prince may look so much the more like God
Almighty'd Deputy upon Earth; for power without love has a terrifying aspect,
and the Worship which is paid to it is like that which the Indians give out of
fear to Wild Beasts and Devils: he that fears God only because there is an
Hell, must wish there were no God; and he who fears the King, only because he
can punish, must wish there were no King; So that without a Principle of Love,
there can be no true Allegiance, and there must remain perpetual Seeds of
Resistance against a Power that is built upon such an unnatural Foundation, as
that of fear and terror. All force is a kind of foul play, and whosoever
aims at it himself, does by implication allow it to those he plays with; so
that there will be ever Matter prepared in the minds of People when they are
provoked, and the Prince, to secure himself, must live in the midst of his own
Subjects, as if he were in a Conquered Country, raise Arms as if he were
immediately to meet or resist an Invasion, and all this while sleep as
unquietly from the fear of Remedies, as he did before from that of the Disease;
it being hard for him to forget, that more Princes have been destroyed by their
Guards than by their People; and that even at the time when the Rule was Quod
Principi placuit Lex esto: The Armies and Praetorian Bands which were the
Instruments of that unruly Power, were frequently the means made use of to
destroy them who had it. There will ever be this difference between God and his
Vicegerents, that God is still above the Instruments he uses, and out of the
danger of receiving hurt from them; but Princes can never lodge Power in any
hands, which may not at some time turn it back upon them; for though it is
possible enough for a King to have Power enough to satisfy his Ambition; yet no
Kingdom has Money enough to satisfy the avarice of under-Workmen, who learn
from that Prince who will exact more than belongs to him, to expect from him
much more than they deserve; and growing angry upon the first disappointment,
they are the Devils which grow terrible to the Conjurers themselves who brought
them up, and cannot send them down again; And besides that, there can be no
lasting Radical Security, but where the governed are satisfied with the
governors; it must be a dominion very unpleasant to a Prince of an clevated
Mind, to impose an abject and sordid servility, instead of receiving the
willing Sacrisice of Duty and Obedience. The bravest Priuces in all times, who
were incapable of any other kind of fear, have feared to grieve their own
People; such a fear is a glory, and in this sense it is an insamy not to be a
Coward: So that the mistaken Heroes who are void of this generous kind of fear,
need no other aggravation to complete their ill Characters.

When a despotick Prince has bruised all his Subjects with a slavish
Obedience, all the force he can use cannot subdue his own fears, Enemies of his
own creation, to which he can never be reconciled, it being impossible to do
injustice, and not to fear Revenge: there is no cure for this fear, but the not
deserving to be hurt, and therefore a Prince who does not allow his thoughts to
stray beyond the Rules of Justice, has always the blessing of an inward quiet
and assurance, as a natural effect of his good meaning to his People, and though
he will not neglect due precautions to secure himself in all Events, yet he is
incapable of entertaining vain and remote suspicions of those of whom he
resolves never to deserve ill.

It is very hard for a Prince to fear a Rebellion, who neither does, nor
intends to do any thing to provoke it; therefore so great a diligence in the
Governors, to raise and improve dangers and fears from the People, is no very
good Symptom, and naturally begets an influence, that they have thoughts of
putting their Subjects Allegiance to a Trial; and therefore not without some
Reason fear before hand, that the Irregularities they intend, may raise Men to
a Resistance.

Our Trimmer thinks it no advantage to Government, to endeavor the
suppressing all kind of Right which may remain in the Body of the People, or to
employ small Authors in it, whose Officiousness or want of Money may encourage
them to Write, though it is not very easy to have Abilities equal to such a
Subject; they forget that in their too high strained Arguments for the Rights
of Princes, they very often plead against known Nature, which will always give
a Biass to those Reasons which seem of her side; it is the People that Reads
those Books, and its the People must judge of them, and therefore no Maxims
should be laid down for the Right of Government, to which there can be any
Reasonable Objection; for the World has an Interest, and for that Reason is
more than ordinary discerning, to find out the weak sides of such Arguments as
are intended to do them hurt; and it is a diminution to a Government, to
Promote or Countenance such well affected mistakes, which are turned upon it
with disadvantage, whenever they are detected or exposed; and Naturally the too
earnest Endeavors to take from Men the Right they have, tempt them, by the
Example, to Claim that which they have not.

And in Power, as in all other things, the way for Princes to keep it is, not
to grasp more than their Arms can well hold; nice and unnecessary enquiring
into these things, or the Licensing some Books, and forbidding others, without
sufficient Reason to justify the doing either, is so far from being an
Advantage to a Government, that it exposes it to the Censure of being Partial,
and to the suspicion, of having some sudden Designs to be carried on by these
unusual methods.

When all is said, there is Natural Reason of State, an undesinable thing,
grounded upon the Common Good of Mankind, which is Immortal, and in all Changes
and Revolutions, still preserves its Original Right of saving a Nation, when a
Letter of the Law perhaps would destroy it; and by whatsoever means it moves,
carries a Power with it, that admits of no opposition, being supported by
Nature, which inspireth an immediate consent at some Critical times into every
individual Member, to that which visibly tends to the preservation of the
whole; and this being so, a Wise Prince instead of controverting the right of
this Reason of State, will by all means endeavor it may be of his side, and
then he will be secure.

Our Trimmer cannot conceive that the Power of any Prince can be lasting, but
where it is built upon the foundation of his own unborrow'd virtue, he must not
only be the first Mover and the Fountain, from whence the great Acts of State
originally flow, but he must be thought so by his People, that they may
preserve their veneration to him; he must be jealous of his Power, and not
impart so much of it to any about him, as that he may suffer an Eclipse by it.

He cannot take too much care to keep himself up, for when a Prince is thought
to be led by those, with whom he should only advise, and that the Commands he
gives are transmitted through him, and are not of his own growth; the World
will look upon him as a Bird adorned with Feathers that are not his own, or
consider him rather as an Engine than a living Creature; besides, 'twould be a
Contradiction for a Prince to fear a Commonwealth, and at the same time create
one himself, by delegating such a Power to any Number of Men near him, as is
inconsistant with the true Figure of a Monarch; it is the worst kind of
Coordination the Crown can submit too; for it is the exercise of Power that
draws the respect along with it, and when that is parted with, the bare
Character of a King is not sufficient to keep it up; but though it is a
diminution to a Prince, to parcel out so liberally his Power amongst his
Favorites, it is yet worse to divide with any other Man, and to bring himself
in Competition with a single Rival; a Partner in Government is so unnatural a
thing, that it is a squint-eyed Allegiance that must be paid to such a double
bottomed Monarchy. The Caesar's are an Example that the more civilized part of
the World will not be proud to follow, and whatsover Gloss may be put upon this
Method, by those to whom it may be some use, the Prince will do well to
remember, and reflect upon the Story of certain Men who had set up a Statue in
Honor to the Sua, yet in a very little time they turned their backs to the
Sun, and their Faces to the Statue.

These Mystical Unions are better placed in the other World, than they are in
this, and we shall have much ado to find, that in a Monarchy Gods Vicegerency
is delegated to more Heads than that which is anointed.

Princes may lend some of their Light to make another shine, but they must
still preserve the superiority of being the brighter Planet; and when it
happens the Reversion is in Men's Eyes, there is more care to keep up the
Dignity of Possessions, that Men may not forget who is King, either out of
their hopes or fears who shall be. If the Sun shall part with all his Light,
the Indians would not know where to find their God, after he had so deposed
himself, and would make the Light (wherever it went) the Object of their
Worship.

All Usurpation is alike upon Sovereignty, its no matter from what hand it
comes; and Crowned Heads are to be the more Circumspect, in respect Men's
thoughts are naturally apt to ramble beyond what is present, they love to work
at a distance, and in their greedy Expectations; their minds may be filled with
a new. Master, the old one may be left to look a little out of Countenance.

Our Trimmer owneth a Passion for liberty, yet so restrained, that it does not
in the least impair or taint his Allegiance, he thinks it hard for a Soul
that does not love Liberty, ever to raise it self to another World, he takes
it to be the foundation of all virtue, and the only seasoning that gives a
relish to life, and though the laziness of a slavish subjection, has its Charms
for the more gross and earthly part of Mankind, yet to men made of a better
sort of Clay, all that the World can give without Liberty has no taste; it is
true, nothing is sold so cheap by unthinking men, but that does no more lessen
the real value of it, than a Country Fellow's Ignorance does that of a Diamond,
in selling it for a Pot of Ale; Liberty is the Mistress of Mankind, she has
powerful Charms that do so dazzle, that we find Beauties in her which perhaps
are not there, as we do in other Mistresses; yet if she was not a Beauty, the
World would not run mad for her; therefore since the reasonable desire of it
ought not to be restrained, and that even the unreasonable desire of it cannot
be entirely suppressed, those who would take is away from a People possessed of
it, are likely to fail in the attempting, or be very unquiet in the keeping of
it.

Our Trimmer admireth our blessed Constitutions, in which Dominion and Liberty
are reconciled; it gives to the Prince the glorious Power of Commanding
Freemen, and to the Subject, the satisfaction of seeing the Power so lodged;
as that their Liberties are secure; it does not al^ow the Crown such a Ruining
Power, as that no grass may grow where ever it treads, but a Cherishing and
Protecting Power; such a one as has a grim Aspect only to the offending
Subjects, but is the Joy and the Pride of all the good ones; their own interest
being so bound up in it, as to engage them to defend and support it; and the
King is in some Circumstances restrained, so as nothing in the Government can
move without him; our Laws make a true distinction between Vassalage and
Obedience, between devouring Prerogatives, and a Licentious ungovernable
Freedom: and as of all the Orders of Building, the Composite is the best, so
ours by a happy mixture and a wise choice of what is best in others, is brought
into a Form; that is our Felicity who live under it, and the envy of our
Neighbors that cannot imitate it.

The Crown has power sufficient to protect our Liberties. The People have so
much Liberty as is necessary to make them useful to the Crown.

Our Government is in a just Proportion, no Tympany, no natural swelling either
of Power or Liberty; and whereas in all overgrown Monarchies, Reason, Learning
and Enquiry are banished in Effigy for Mutineers; here they are encouraged and
cherished as the surest Friends to a Government established upon the Foundation
of Law and Justice: When all is done, those who look for perfection in this
World, may look as long as the Jews have for their Messiah, and therefore our
Trimmer is not so unreasonably Partial as to free our Government; no doubt
there have been fatal Instances of its Sickness, and more than that, of its
Mortality, for sometime, though by a Miracle, it has been revived again: but
till we have another Mankind, in all Constitutions that are bounded, there will
ever be some matter of Strife, and Contention, and rather than want
pretensions, Men's Passions and Interest will raise them from the most
inconsiderable Causes.

Our Government is like our Climate, there are Winds which are sometimes loud
and unquiet, and yet with all the Trouble they give us, we owe great part of
our Health unto them, they clear the Air, which else would be like a standing
Pool, and instead of Refreshment would be a Disease unto us.

There may be fresh Gales of asserting Liberty, without turning into such
storms of Hurricane, as that the State should run any hazard of being Cast away
by them; these struglings which are natural to all mixed Governments, while
they are kept from growing into Convulsions, do by a natural agitation from the
several parts, rather support and strengthen, than weaken or mame the
Constitution; and the whole frame, instead of being torn or disjointed, comes
to be the better and closer knit by being thus exercised; but what ever faults
our Government may have, or a discerning Critic may find in it, when he
looks upon it alone; let any one be set against it, and then it shows its
Comparative Beauty; let us look upon the glittering outside of unbounded
Authority, and upon a nearer enquiry, we shall find nothing but poor and
miserable deformity within; let us imagine a Prince living in this Kingdom, as
if he were a great Gally, his Subjects tugging at the Oar, laden with Chains,
and reduced to real Rags; to give him imaginary Laurels, let us present him
gazing among his Flatterers, like a Child never contradicted and therefore
always Cozened, or like a Lady complemented only to be abused, condemned never
to hear Truth, and consequently never to do Justice, wallowing in the soft Bed
of wanton and unbridled Greatness, not less odious to the Instruments
themselves, than to the Objects of his Tyranny, blown up to an Ambitious
Dropsy, never to be satisfied by the Conquest of other People, or by the
Oppression of his own; by aiming to be more than a Man, he becomes a Beast, a
mistaken Creature, swelled with Panegyricks, and slatter'd out of his Senses,
and not only an Encumbrance, but a common Nuisance to Mankind, a hardened and
unrelenting Soul, and like some Creatures that grow fat with Poisons, he grows
great by other Men's Miseries; an Ambitious Ape of the Divine Greatness, an
unruly Giant that would storm even Heaven it self, but that his scaling Ladders
are not long enough; in short, a Wild Beast in rich Trappings, and with all his
Pride no more than a Whip in God Almighty's hand, to be thrown into the Fire
when the World has been sufficiently scourged with it: This Picture laid in
right Colors would not incite Mer to wish for such a Government, but rather to
acknowledge the happiness of our own, under which we enjoy all the Privileges
Reasonable Men can desire, and avoid all the Miseries others are subject too;
so that our Trimmer would keep it with all its faults, and does as little
forgive those who give the occasion of breaking it, as he does those that take
it.

Our Trimmer is a Friend to Parliaments, notwithstanding all their faults, and
excesses, which of late have given such matter of Objection to them, he thinks
that though they may at sometimes be troublesome to Authority, yet they add the
greatest strength to it under a wise Administration, to believe no Government
is perfect, except Omnipotence recide in it, to be exercised upon great
Occasions: Now this cannot be obtained by force upon the People, let it be
never so great, there must be their consent too, or else a Nation moves only
by being driven, a sluggish and restrained Motion, void of that Life and Vigor
which is necessary to produce great things, whereas the virtual Consent of the
whole being inclnded in their Representatives, and the King giving the faction
of the united sense of the People, every Act done by such an Authority, seems
to be an effect of their choice as well as part of their Duty; and they do with
an eagerness, of which Men are incapable whilst under a force, execute
whatsoever is so enjoined as their own Wills, better explained by Parliament,
rather than from the terror of incurring the Penalty of the Law for omitting
it, and by means of this Political Omnipotence, what ever Sap or Juice there is
in a Nation, may be to the last drop produced, whilst it rises naturally from
the Root; whereas all Power exercised without consent, is the giving Wounds and
Gashes, and tapping a Tree at unseasonable Times, for the present Occasion,
which in a very little time must needs destroy it.

Our Trimmer believes, that by the advantage of our Situation, there can
hardly any such Disease come upon us, but that the King may have time enough to
consult with Physicians in Parliament; pretenses indeed may be made, but a real
necessity so pressing, that no delay is to be admitted, is hardly to be
imagined, and it will be neither easy to give an instance of any such thing
for the time past, or reasonable to presume it will ever happen for the time to
come; but if that strange thing should fall out, our Trimmer is not so
strait-lac'd, as to let a Nation dye, or be stifled, rather than it should be
helped by the proper Officers. The Cases themselves will bring a Remedy along
with them; and he is not afraid to allow that in order to its Preservation,
there is a hidden Power in Government, which would be lost if it was designed,
a certain Mystery, by which a Nation may at some Critical times secured from
Ruin, but then it must be kept as a Mystery; it is rendered useless, when
touched by unlucky hands; and no Government ever had or deserved to have that
Power, which was so unwary as to anticipate their claim to it: Our Trimmer
cannot help thinking it had been better, if the Triennial Act had been
observed; first, because it is the Law, and he would not have the Crown, by such
an example, teach the Nation to break it; all irregularity is catching, it has
a Contagion in it, especially in an Age, so much more inclined to follow ill
Patterns than good ones.

He would have a Parliament, because it is an Essential part of the
Constitution, even without the Law, it being the only Provision in
extraordinary Cases, in which there would be otherwise no Remedy, and there can
be no greater Solecisme in Government, than a failure of Justice.

He would have one, because nothing else can unite and heal us, all other Means
are mere Shifts and Projects, Houses of Cards, and blown down with the least
Breath, and cannot resist the difficulties which are ever presumed in things of
this kind; and he would have had one, because it might have done the King good,
and could not possibly have done him hurt, without his Consent, which in that
Case is not to be supposed, and therefore for him to fear it, is so strange and
so little to be comprehended, that the Reasons can never be presumed to grow in
our Soil, or to thrive in it when Transplanted from any other Country; and no
doubt there are such irresistible Arguments for calling a Parliament, that though
it may be denied to the unmannerly threatening Petitions of men that are
malicious and disaffected, it will be granted to the obsequious Murmurs of his
Majesty's best Subjects, and there will be such a Rhetoric it their silent
Grief, that it will at last prevail against the Artifices of those. who either
out of Guilt or Interest are afraid to throw themselves upon their Country,
knowing how scurvily they have used it; that day of Judgment will come, though we
know not the day nor the hour. And our Trimmer would live so as to be prepared
for it, with full assurance in the mean time, that a lamenting Voice of a
Nation cannot long be resisted, and that a Prince, who could so easily forgive
his People when they had been in the wrong, cannot fail to hear them when they
are in the right.

The Trimmer's Opinion concerning Protestant Religion.
REligion has such a Superiority above other things, and that indispensable
Influence upon all Mankind, that it is as nece Tarry to our Living Happy in this
World, as it is to our being Saved in the next, without it Man is an abandoned
Creature, one of the worst Beasts Nature has produced, and fit only for the
Society of Wolves and Bears; therefore in all Ages it has been the Foundation
of Government, and though false Gods have been imposed upon the Credulous part of
the World, yet they were Gods still in their Opinion, and the Awe and Reverence
Men had to them and their Oracles, kept them within bounds toward one another,
which the Laws with all their Authority could never have effected without the
help of Religion; the Laws would not be able to subdue the perverseness of Men's
Wills, which are Wild Beasts, and require a double Chain to keep them down; for
this Reason'tis said, That it is not a sufficient ground to make War upon
a-Neighbouring State, because they are of another Religion, let it be never so
differing; yet if they Worshipped nor Acknowledged no Deity, they may be Invaded
as Public Enemies of Mankind, because they reject the only thing that can bind
them to live well with one another; the consideration of Religion is so
Interessed with that of Government, that it is never to be separated, and the
Foundations of it are to be suited to the several Climates and Constitutions,
so that they may keep men in a willing Acquiescence unto them, without
discomposing the World by nice disputes, which can never be of equal moment
with the public Peace.

Our Religion here in England seems to be distinguished by a peculiar effect of
God Almighty's goodness, in permitting it to be introduced, or more properly
restored, by a more regular Method than the Circumstances of more other
Reformed Churches would allow them to do, in relation to the Government; and
the Dignity with which it has supported it self since, and the great Men our
Church has produced, ought to recommend it to the esteem of all Protestants at
least: Our Trimmer is very partial to it, for these Reasons, and many more, and
desiring that it may preserve its due Jurisdiction and Authority, so far he is
from wishing it oppressed by the unreasonable and malicious Cavils of those who
take pains to raise Objections against it.

The Question will then be, how and by what Methods the Church shall best
support it self (the present Circumstances considered) in relation to
Dissenters of all sorts: I will first lay it for a ground, That as there can be
no true Religion without Charity, so there can be no true humanePrudence
without bearing and condescension: This Principle does not extend to oblige the
Church always to yield to those who are disposed to molest it, the expediency
of doing it is to be considered and determined according to the occasion, and
this leads me to lay open the thoughts of our Trimmer, in reference, first,
to the Protestants, and then to the Popish Recusants.

What has lately happened among us, makes an Apology necessary for saying any
thing that looks like favor toward a sort of Men who have brought
themselves under such a disadvantage.

The lateConspiracy has such broad Symptoms of the disaffection of the whole
Party, that upon the first reflections, while our thoughts are warm, it would
almost persuade us to put them out of the protection of our good Nature, and to
think that the Christian Indulgence which our compassion for other Men's
Sufferings cannot easily deny, seems not only to be forfeited by the ill
appearances that are against them, but even becomes a Crime when it is so
misapplied; yet for all this, upon second and cooler thoughts, moderate Men
will not be so ready to involve a whole Party in the guilt of a few, and to
admit Inferences and Presumptions to be Evidence in a Case, where the Sentence
must be so heavy, as it ought not to be against all those who have a fixed
resolution against the Government established; besides, Men who act by a
Principle grounded upon Moral Virtue, can never let it be clearly extinghish'd
by the most repeated Provocations; if a right thing agreeable to Nature and
good Sense takes root in the heart of a Man, that is impartial and unbiased,
no outward Circumstances can ever destroy it; it is true, the degrees of a Man's
Zeal for the prosecution of it may be differing, the faults of other Men, the
consideration of the Public, and the seasonable Prudence by which Wise Men
will ever be directed, may give great delays, they may lessen and for a time
perhaps suppress the exercise of that, which in a general Prosecution may be
reasonable, but whether be, so will inevitably grow and spring up again, having
a Foundation in Nature, which is never to be destroyed.

Our Trimmer therefore endeavors to separate the detestation of those who
had either a hand or a thought in the late Plot, from the Principle of
Prudential as well as Christian Charity toward Mankind, and for that reason,
would fain use the means of retaining such of the Dissenters as are not
injurable, and even to bearing to a degree those that are, as far as may
consist with the Public Interest and Security; he is far from justifying an
affected separation from the Communion of the Church, and even in those that
mean well, and are mistaken; he looks upon it as a Disease that has seized
upon their Minds, very troublesome as well as dangerous, by the Confequence it
may produce: he does not go about to excuse their making it an indispensable
duty, to meet in numbers to say their Prayers, such Meetings may prove misch
evous to the State at least; the Laws which are the best Judges, have
determined that there is danger in them: he has good nature enough to lament
that the perverseness of a Part should have drawn Rigorous Laws upon the Body of
the Dissenters, but when they are once made, no private Opinion must stand in
Opposition to them; if they are in themselves reasonable, they are in that
respect to be regarded, even without being enjoined, if by the Change of Laws
and Circumstances they should become less reasonable than when they were first
made, even then they are to be obeyed too, because they are Laws, 'till they
are mended or repealed by the same Authority that Enacted them.

He has too much deference to the Constitution of our Government; to wish any
more Prerogative Declarations in favor of scrupulous Men, or to dispense with
Penal Laws in such manner, and to such an end, that suspecting Men might with
some reason pretend, that so hated a thing as Persectuion could never make way
for it self with any hopes of Success, otherwise than by preparing the deluded
World by a false prospect of Liberty and Indulgence; the inward Springs and
Wheels whereby the Engine moved, are now so fully laid open and exposed, that
it is not supposable that such a baffled Experiment should ever be tried again,
the effect it had at the time, and the Spirit it raised, will not easily be
forgotten, and it may be presumed the remembrance of it may secure us from any
more attempts of that nature for the future; we must no more break a Law to
give Men ease, than we are to Rob an House with a devout intention of giving
Plunder to the Poor; in this case, our Compassion would be as ill directed as
our Charity in the other.

In that the veneration due to the Laws is never to be thrown off, let the
Pretenses be never so specious; yet with all this he cannot bring himself to
think, that an extraordinary diligence to take the uttermost penalyt of the
Laws upon the Poor offending Neighbor, is of it self such an all-sufficient
virtue, that without something else to recommend Men, it should Entitle them to
all kind of preferments and Rewards; he would not detract from the merits of
those who execute the Laws, yet he cannot think such a piece of service can
entirely change the Man, or either make him a better Divine, or a more knowing
Magistrate than he was before, especially if it be done with a partial and
unequal hand, in Reference to greater and more dangerous Offenders.

Our Trimmer would have those mistaken Men ready to throw themselves into the
arms of the Church, and he would have those arms as ready to receive them; he
would have no supercilious look to fright those strayed Sheep from coming into
the Fold again; no ill-natured maxims of an Eternal suspicion, or a belief that
those who have once been in the wrong can never be in the right again; but a
visible preparation of mind to receive with joy all the Proselites that come
amongst us, and much greater earnestness to reclaim than punish them: It is to
be confessed, there is a great deal to forgive, a hard task enough for a Church
so provoked; but that must not cut off all hopes of being reconciled, yet if
there must be some anger left still, let it break out into a Christian Revenge,
and by being kinder to the Children of Disobedience than they deserve, let the
injured Church Triumph, by throwing shame and confusion of face upon them;
there should not always be Storms and Thunder, a clear Sky would sometime make
the Church more like Heaven, and would be more toward the reclaiming those
wanderers, than a perpetual terror, which seems to have no intermission, for
there is in many, and particularly in English Man, a mistaken pleasure, in
resisting the dictates of Rigorous Authority; a Stomach that rises against a
hard imposition, nay, in some, raise even a lust in suffering from a wrong
point of Honor, which does not want her greater applause, from the greater
part of Mankind, who have not learnt to distinguish; constancy will be thought
a virtue even where it is a mistake; and the ill Judging World will be apt to
think that Opinion in thought which produces the greatest number of those who
are willing to suffer for it; all this is prevented, and falls to the ground,
by using well-timed Indulgence; and the stubborn Adversary who values himself
upon his resistance whilst he is oppressed, yields insensibly to kind
Methods, when they are applied to him, and the same Man naturally melts into
Conformity, who perhaps would never have been beaten into it. We may be taught
by the Compassion that attends the most Criminal Men when they are Condemned,
that Faults are more natural things than Punishments, and that even the most
necessary acts of severity do some kind of violence to our Nature, whose
Indulgence will not be confined within the strait bounds of inexorable Justice;
so that this should be an Argument for gentleness, besides that it is the
likeliest way to make Men ashamed of their Separation, whilst the pressing them
too hard, tends rather to make them proud of it.

Our Trimmer would have the Clergy supported in their lawful Rights, and in all
the Power and Dignity that belongs to them, and yet he thinks possibly
there may be in some of them a too great eagerness to extend the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction; which though it may be well intended, yet the straining of it too
high has an appearance of Ambition, that causes many Objections to it, and it
is very unlike the Apostolic Zeal, which was quite otherwise employed, that
the World draws inferences from it, which do the Church no service.

He is troubled to see Men of all sides sick of a Calenture of a mistaken
Devotion, and it seems to him that the devout Fire of mutual Charity, with
which the Primitive Christians were inflamed, is long since extinguished, and
instead of it a devouring Fire of Anger and Persecution breaks out in the
World; we wrangle now one with another about Religion 'till the Cloud comes,
whilst the Ten Commandments have no more authority with us, than if they were
so many obsolete Laws or Proclamations out of date; he thinks that a Nation
will hardly be mended by Principles of Religion, where Morality is made a
Heresy; and therefore as he believes Devotion misplaced where it gets into
a Conventicle, he concludes that Loyalty is so, when lodged in a drunken Club,
those Virtues deserve a better Seat of Empire, and they are degraded, when such
Men undertake their defense, as have so great need for an Apology themselves.

Our Trimmer wishes that some knowledge may go along with the Zeal on the
right side, and that those who are in possession of the Pulpit, would quote at
least so often the Authority of the Scriptures as they do that of the State;
there are many who borrow too often Arguments from the Government, to use
against their Adversaries, and neglect those that are more proper, and would be
more powerful; a Divine grows less, and puts a diminution on his own
Character, when he quoteth any Law but that of God Almighty, to get the better
of those who contest with him; and it is a sign of a decayed Constitution, when
Nature with good diet cannot expel noxious Humors without calling Foreign
Drugs to her Assistance; So it looks like want of health in a Church, when
instead of depending upon that Truth which it holds, and the good Examples of
them that teach it, to support it self, and to suppress Errors, it should have
perpetual recourse to the secular Authority, and even upon the slightest
occasions.

Our Trimmer has his Objections to the too hasty diligence, and to the
overdoing of some of the dissenting Clergy, and he does as little approve of
those of our Church, who wear God Almighty's Liveries, as some old Warders in
the Tower do the Kings, who do nothing in their place but receive their Wages
for it; he thinks that the Liberty of the late times gave Men so much Light,
and diffused it so universally amongst the People, that they are not now to be
dealt with, as they might have been of less enquiry; and therefore though in some
well chosen and dearly beloved Auditories, good resolute Nonsense backed with
Authority may prevail, yet generally Men are become so good Judges of what they
hear, that the Clergy ought to be very wary how they go about to impose upon
their Understandings, which are grown less humble than in former times, when
the Men in black had made Learning such a sin in the Laity, that for fear of
offending, they made a Conscience of being able to read; but now the World is
grown saucy, and do expect Reasons, and good ones too, before they give up
their own Opinions to other Men's Dictates, though never so Magisterially
delivered to them.

Our Trimmer is far from approving the Hypocrisy which seems to be the
reigning Voice amongst some of the Dissenting Clergy, he thinks it the most
provoking sin Men can be guilty of, in Relation to Heaven, and yet (which may
seem strange) that very sin which shall destroy the Soul of the Man who
preaches, may help to save those of the Company that hear him, and even those
who are cheated by the false Ostentation of his strictness of life, may by that
Pattern be encouraged to the real Practice of those Christian Virtues which he
does so deceitfully profess; so that the detestation of this fault may possibly
be carried on too far by our own Orthodox Divines, if they think it cannot be
enough expres'd without bending the Stick another way; a dangerous Method, and
a worse Extreme for Men of that Character, who by going to the outward line of
Christian Liberty, will certainly encourage others to go beyond it: No Man does
less approve the ill-bred Methods of some of the Dissenters, in rebuking
Authority, who behave themselves as if they thought ill manners necessary to
Salvation, yet he cannot but distinguish and desire a Mean between the
sawcyness of some of the Scotch Apostles, and the undecent Courtship of some of
the Silken Divines, who, one would think, do practice to bow at the Altar, only
to learn to make the better Legs at Court.

Our Trimmer approves the Principles of our Church, that Dominion is not
founded in Grace, and that our Obedience is to be given to a Popish King in
other things, at the same time that our Compliance with him in his Religion is
to be denied, yet he cannot but think it an extraordinary thing if a Protestant
Church should by a voluntary Election choose a Papist for their Guardian, and
receive Directions for supporting our Religion from one who must believe it a
Mortal Sin not to endeavor to destroy it; such a refined piece of Breeding
would not seem to be very well placed in the Clergy, who will hardly find
presidents to justify such an extravagant piece of Courtship, and which is so
unlike the Primitive Methods, which ought to be our Pattern; he has nc such
unreasonable tenderness for any sorts of Men, as to expect their faults should
not be impartially laid open as often as they give occasion for it; and yet he
cannot but smile to see the same Man, who sets up all the Sails of his
Rhetoric, to fall upon Dissenters; when Popery is to be handled, he does it so
gingerly, that he looks like an Ass mumbling of Thistles, so afraid he is of
letting himself loose upon a Subject, where he may be in danger of letting his
Duty get she better of his Discretion.

Our Trimmer is far from relishing the impertinent Wanderings of those who pour
out long Prayers upon the Congregation, and all from their own Stock, which God
knows, for the most part, is a barren Soil, which produces Weeds instead of
Flowers, and by this means they expose Religion it self, rather than promote
Men's Devotions: On the other side, there may be too great Restraint put upon
Men, whom God and Nature has distinguished from their Fellow Laborers, by
blessing them with a happier Talent, and by giving them not only good Sense,
but a powerful Utteranee too, has enabled them to gust out upon the attentive
Auditory with a mighty Stream of Devout and unaffected Eloquence; when a Man
qualified, endued with Learning too, and above that, adorned with a good Life,
breaks out into a warm and well-deliver'd Prayer before his Sermon, it has the
appearance of a Divine Rapture, he raises and leads the Hearts of the
Assembly in another manner than the most Composed or best Studied Form of Set
Words can ever do; and the Pray-wees, who serve up all the Sermon with the same
Garnishing, would look like so many Statues, or Men of Scraw in the Pulpit,
compared with those who speak with such a Powerful Zeal, that Men are tempted
at the moment to believe Heaven it self has directed their Words to them.

Our Trimmer is not so unreasonably indulgent to the Dissenters, as to excuse
the Irregularities of their Complaints, and to approve their threatening Styles,
which is so ill-suited to their Circumstances as well as to their Duty; he
would have them to show their Grief, and not their Anger to the Government, and
by such a Submission to Authority, as becomes them, if they cannot acquiesce in
what is imposed; let them deserve a Legislative Remedy to their Sufferings,
there being no other way to give them perfect redress; and either to seek it,
or pretend to give it by any other Method, would not only be vain but Criminal
too in those that go about it; yet with all this, there may in the mean time be
a prudential Latitude left, as to the manner of preventing the Laws now in
force against them: The Government is in some degree answerable for such an
Administration of them, as may be free from the Censure of Impartial Judges;
and in order to that, it would be necessary that one of these Methods be
pursued, either to let loose the Laws to their utmost extent, without any
Moderation or Restraint, in which at least the Equality of the Government would
be without Objection, the Penalties being exacted without Remission from the
Dissenters of all kinds; or if that will not be done (and indeed there is no
reason it should) there is a necessity of some Connivance to the Protestant
Dissenters to execute that which in Humanity must be allowed to the Papists,
even without any leaning toward them, which must be supposed in those who are
or shall be in the administration of public Business; and it will follow that,
according to our Circumstances, the distinction of such connivance must be made
in such manner, that the greatest part of it may fall on the Protestant side,
or else the Objections will be so strong, and the Inferences so clear, that the
Friends, as well as the Enemies of the Crown, will be sure to take hold of them.

It will not be sufficient to say, the Papists may be connived at, because they
be good Subjects, but not the Protestant Dissenters, because they are ill ones;
these general Maxims will not convince discerning Men, neither will any late
Instances make them forget what has passed at other times in the World; both
sides have had their Turns of being good and ill Subjects, therefore it is easy
to imagine what suspicions would arise in the present conjuncture, if such a
partial Argument as this should be imposed upon us; the truth is, the Matter
speaks so much of it self, that it is not only unnecessary, but it may be
unmannerly to say any more of it.

Our Trimmer therefore wishes, that since notwithstanding the Laws which deny
Churches to say Mass in; not only the Exercise, but also the Ostentation of
Popery is as well or better performed in the Chapels of so many Foreign
Ministers, where the English openly resort in spite of Proclamations and
Orders of Council, which are grown to be as harmless things to them, as the
Popes Bulls and Excommunications are to Heretics who are out of his reach; I
say he could wish that by a seasonable as well as an equal piece of Justice,
there might be so much consideration had of the Protestant Dissenters, as that
there might be at sometimes, and at some places, a Veil thrown over an Innocent
and retired Conventicle, and that such an Indulgence might be practiced with
less prejudice to the Church, or diminution to the Laws, it might be done so as
to look rather like a kind Omission to enqu^re too strictly, than an allowed
Toleration of that which is against the Rule Established.

Such a skilful hand as this is very Necessary in our Circumstances, and the
Government by making Men entirely desperate, does not only secure it self from
danger of any Wild or Villianous attempts, but lays such a Foundation for
healing and uniting Laws, when ever a Parliament shall meet, that the Seeds of
Differences and Animosities between the contending sides may (Heaven
consenting) be for ever destroyed.

The Trimmer's Opinion concerning the Papists.
TO speak of Popery leads me into such a Sea of Matter, that it is not easy
to forbear launching into it, being invited by such a fruitful stream, and by a
variety never to be exhausted; but to confine it to the present Subject, I will
only say a short word of the Religion it self; of its Influences here at this
time; and of Trimmer's Opinion in Relation to our living with them.

If a Man would speak Maliciously of this Religion, one might say it is like
Diseases, where as long as one drop of the infection remains, there is still
danger of having the whole Mass of Blood corrupted by it. In Swedeland there
was an absolute cure, and nothing of Popery heard of, till Queen Christiana
(whether moved with Arguments of this or the other World, may not be good
Manners to enquire) thought fit to change her Religion and Country, and to live
at Rome where she might find better judges of her Virtues, and less ungentle
Censures of those Princely Liberties she was sometimes disposed to, than she
left at Stockholme, where the good breeding is much inferior to that of Rome,
as well as the Civility of the Religion: The Cardinals having rescued the
Church from those Clownish Methods the Fishermen had first introduced, and
mended that Pattern so effectually, that a Man of that Age, if he should now
come into the World, would not possibly know it.

In Denmark the Reformation was entire, in some States of Germany, as well as
Geneva, the Cure was universal; but in the rest of the World where the
Protestant Religion took place, the Popish humor was too high to be totally
expelled, and so it was in England, though the Change was made with all the
advantage imaginable to the Reformation, it being Countenanced and introduced
by Legal Authority, and by that means might have been perhaps as perfect as in
any other Place, if the short Reign of Edward the 6th and the succession of a
Popish Queen had not given such advantage to that Religion, that it has
subsisted ever since under all the hardships that have been put upon it; it
has been a strong Compact Body, and made the more so by these Sufferings; it
was not strong enough to prevail, but it was able with the help of Rome, to
carry on an Interest which gave the Crown trouble, and to make a considerable
(not to say dangerous) Figure in the Nation; so much as this could not have
been done without some hopes, nor these hopes kept up without some reasonable
grounds: In Queen Elizabeth's time, the Spanish Zeal for their Religion, and
the Revenge for 88 gave warmth for the Papists here, and above all the sight of
the Queen of Scots to succed, while she lived, sufficient to give a better
prospect of their Affairs: In King James' time the Spanish Match and his
gentleness toward them, which they were ready to interpret more in their own
Favor, than was either reasonable or became them, so little tenderness they
have, even where it is most due, if the Interest of their Religion comes in
competition with it.

As for the late King, though he gave the most Glorious Evidence that ever Man
did of his being a Protestant, yet, by the more than ordinary influence the
Queen was thought to have over him, and it so happening that the greatest part
of his Anger was directed against the Puritans, there was such an advantage to
Men to suspect, that they were ready to interpret it a leaning toward Popery,
without which handle it was Morally impossible that the ill-affected part of
the Nation could ever have seduced the rest into a Rebellion.

That which helped to confirm many well meaning Men in their Misapprehensions
of the King, was the long and unusual intermission of Parliaments, so that
every year that passed without one, made up a new Argument to increase their
Suspicion, and made them presume that the Papists had a principal hand in
keeping them off: This raised such heats in Men's Minds, to think that Men who
are obnoxious to the Laws, instead of being punished, should have Credit enough
to serve themselves, even at the price of destroying the Fundamental
Constitution; that it broke out into a Flame, which, before it could be
quenched, had almost reduced the Nation to Ashes.

Amongst the miserable Effects of that unnatural War, none has been more fatal
to us, than the forcing our Princes to breathe in another air, and to receive
the early impressions of a Foreign Education: the Barbarity of the English
toward the King and the Royal Family, might very well tempt him to think the
better of every thing he found abroad, and might naturally produce more
gentleness, at least, toward a Religion by which he was hospitably received,
and the same time he was thrown off and persecuted by the Protestants (though his
own Subjects) to aggravate the Offense. The Queen Mother (as generally Ladies
do with age) grew most devout and earnest in her Religion; and besides the
Temporal Rewards of getting larger Subsidies from the French Clergy, she had
Motives of another kind, to persuade her to show her Zeal: and since by the
Roman Dispensatory, a Soul converted to the Church is a Sovereign Remedy, and
lays up a mighty stock of merit; she was solicitous to secure her self in all
Events, and therefore first set upon the Duke of Gloucester, who depended so
much upon her good will, that she might for that reason believe the Conquest
would not be difficult; but it so fell out that he, either from his own
Constancy, or that he had those near him by whom he was otherways advised,
chose rather to run away from her importunity, than by staying to bear the
continual weight of it: It is believed this had better success with another of
her Sons, who, if he was not quite brought off from our Religion, at least,
such beginnings were made, as made them very easy to be finished; his being of
a generous and aspiring Nature, and in that respect, less patient in the
drudgery of arguing, might possibly help to recommend a Church to him, that
exempteth the Laity from the vexation of enquiring; perhaps he might (though by
mistake) look upon that Religiou as more favorable to the enlarged Power of
Kings, a Consideration which might have its weight with a young Prince in his
warm blood, and that was brought up in Arms.

I cannot hinder my self from a small digression, to consider with admiration
the Old Lady of Rome, with all her wrinkles, should yet have Charms to subdue
great Princes, so painted, and yet so pretending, after having abused, deposed,
and murdered so many of her Lovers, she still finds others glad and proud of
their new Chains; a thing so strange, to indifferent Judges, that those who
will allow no other Miracles in the Church of Rome, must needs grant that this
is one not to be contested; she sets in her Shop, and sells at dear Rates
her Rattles and her Hobby-Horses, whilst the deluded World still continues to
furnish her with Customers.

But whither am I carried with this Contemplation? it is high time to return to
my Text, and to consider the wonderful manner of the Kings coming home again,
led by the hand of Heaven, and called by the Voice of his own People, who
received him, if possible, with Joys equal to the Blessing of Peace and Union
which his Restoration brought along with it; by this there was an end put to
the hopes some might have abroad, of making use of his less happy
Circumstances, to throw him into foreign Interests and Opinions, which had been
wholly inconsistent with our Religion, our Laws, and all other things that are
dear to us; yet for all this, some of those Tinctures and impressions might so
far remain, as though they were very innocent in him, yet they might have ill
effects, by softning the Animosity which seems necessary to the Defender of the
Protestant Faith, in opposition to such a powerful and irreconcilable an Enemy.

You may be sure, that among all the sorts of Men who applied themselves to the
King at his first coming, for his Protection; the Papists were not the last,
nor, as they fain would have flattered themselves, the least welcome, having
their past Sufferings, as well as their present Professions to recommend them;
and there was something that looked like a Considerable Consideration of them,
since so it happened, that the Indulgence promised to Dissenters at Breda, was
carried on in such a manner, that the Papists were to divide with them, and
though the Parliament, notwithstanding its Resignation to the Crown in all other
things, rejected with scorn and anger a Declaration framed for this purpose,
yet the Birth and steps of it gave such an alarm, that Men's suspicions once
raised, were not easily laid asleep again.

To omit other things, the breach of the Tripple League, and the Dutch War with
its appurtenances, carried Jealousies to the highest pitch imaginable, and fed
the hopes of one Party, and the fears of the oth^^ to such a degree, that some
Critical Resolutions were generally expected when the ill success of that War,
and the Sacrifice, Fame thought sit to make of the Papists here, to their own
Interest abroad, gave another Check; and the Act of enjoining the Test on all
Officers, was thought to be no ill Bargain to the Nation, though bought at the
Price of 1200000 pound, and the Money applied to continue the War against the
Dutch, than which nothing could be more unpopular or less approved; not
withstanding those discouragements, Popery is a Plant that may be mowed down,
but the Root will still remain, and in spite of the Laws, it will sprout up and
grow again; especially if it should happen that there should be Men in Power,
who instead of weeding it out of our Garden, will take care to Cherish and keep
it alive; and though the Law of excluding them from Places was tolerably kept as
to their outward Form, yet here were many, Circumstances, which being improved
by the quick-sighted Malice of ill-affected Men, did help to keep up the World
in their suspicions, and to blow up Jealousies to such a height both in and out
of Parliament, that the remembrance of them is very unpleasant, and the Example
so extravagant, that it is to be hoped nothing in our Age like it will be
attempted; but to come closer to the Case in question, in this Condition we
stand with the Papists, what shall now be done according to our Trin. mer's
Opinion, inorder to the better clearing of this grievance, since as I have said
before, there is no hopes of being entirely free from it; Papists we must have
among us, and if their Religion keep them from bringing honey to the Hive, let
the Government try at least by gentle and not by violent means to take away the
Sting from them; the first Foundation to be laid is, that a distinct
Consideration is to be had of the Papists Clergy, who have such an Essential
Interest against all accommodation, that it is a hopeless thing to propose any
thing to them less than all; their Stomachs have been fit for it ever since the
Reformation, they have pinned themselves to a Principle that admits no mean,
they believe Protestants will be damned, and therefore by an extraordinary
Effect of Christian Charity, they would destroy one half of England that the
other might be saved; then for the World, they must be in possession for God
Almighty, to receive his Rents for him, not to account till the Day of
Judgment, which is a good kind of Tenure, and ye cannot well blame the good
Men, that will stir up the Laity to run any hazard in order to the getting them
restored: What is it to the Priest, if the deluded Zealot undoes himself in the
Attempt, he sings Masses as joyfully, and with as good a Voice at Rome or St.
Omers as ever he did; is a single Man, and can have no wants but such as may be
easily supplied yet that he may not seem altogether insensible, or ungratesul
to those that are his Martyrs, he is ready to assure their Executors, and if
they please, will procure a Grant sub Anulo Piscatoris, that the good Man by
being changed, has got a good Bargain, and saved the singing of some hundred
of years, which he would else have had in Purgatory; there is no Cure for those
sorts of Men, no Expedient to be proposed, so that though the utmost severity of
the Laws against them, may in some sort be mittigated, yet no Treaty can be
made with Men who in this Case have no Free Will, but are so muffled by Zeal,
tied by Vows, and kept up by such unchangeable Maxims of the Priesthood, that
they are to be left as desperate Patients, and looked upon as Men that will
continue in an Eternal State of Hostility, till the Nation is entirely subdued
to them; it is then only the Lay Papists that are capable of being treated
with, and we are to examine of what temper they are, and what Arguments are the
most likely to prevail upon them, and how it is advisable for the Government to
be Indulgent unto them; the Lay Papists generally keep their Religion, rather
because they will not break Company with those of their Party, than out of any
settled Zeal that has Root in them; most of them do by the Mediation of the
Priests Marry one another, and by keeping up an ignorant Opinion by hearing
only one side; others look upon it as the Escutcheons, the more Ancient
Religion of the two; and as some Men of a good Pedigree, will despise meaner
Men, though never so much superior to them by Nature, so these undervalue
Reformation as an Upstart, and think there is more Honor in supporting an old
Error, than in embracing what see meth to be a new Truth; the Laws have made
them Men of Pleasure, by excluding them from Public Business, and it happens
well they are so, since they will the more easily be persuaded by Arguments of
Ease and Convenience to them; they have not put off the Man in general, nor the
Englishman in particular; those who in the late storm against them went into
other Countries, though they had all the Advantage that might recommend them to a
good Reception, yet in a little time they chose to steal over again, and live
here with hazard, rather than abroad with security; there is a Smell in our
Natural Earth better than all the Perfumes in the East; there is something in a
Mother, though never so Angry, that the Children will more Naturally trust
sooner, than the Studied Civilities of Strangers, let them be never so
Hospitable; therefore it is not advisable, nor agreeing with the Rules of
Governing Prudence, to provoke Men by hardships to forget that Nature, which
else is sure to be of our side.

When these Men by fair Usage are put again into their right Senses, they will
have quite differing Reflections from those which Rigor and Persecution had
raised in them: A Lay-Papist will first consider his Abby-Lands, which
notwithstanding whatever has or can be alleged; must sink considerably in the
Value, the moment that Popery prevails; and it being a Disputable Matter
whether Zeal might not in a little time get the better of the Law in that case,
a considering Man will admit that as an Argument to persuade him, to be content
with things as they are, rather than run this or any other hazard by Change, in
which perhaps he may have no other Advantage, than that his new humble
Confessor may be raised to a Bishopric, and from thence look down
superciliously upon his Patron, or which is worse, run to take Possession for
God Almighty of his Abbey, in such manner as the usurping Landlord (as he will
then be called) shall hardly be admitted to be so much as a Tenant to his own
Lands, lest his Title should prejudice that of the Church, which will then be
the language; he will think what disadvantage it is to be looked upon as a
separate Creature, depending upon foreign Interest and Authority, and for that
reason, exposed to the Jealousy and Suspicion of his CountryMen; he will
reflect what an Encumbrance it is to have his House a Pasture for hungry
Priests to grow in, which have such a never-failing Influence upon the Foolish,
which is the greatest part of every Man's Family, that a Man's Dominion, even
over his own Children, is mangled and divided, if not totally undermined by
them; then to be subject to what arbitrary Taxes the Popish Convocations shall
impose upon them for the carrying on the Common Interest of that Religion,
under Penalty of being marked out for half Heretics by the rest of the Laity,
to have no share in Business, no opportunity of showing his own Value to the
World; to live at the best an useless, and by others to be thought a dangerous
Member of the Nation where he is born, is a burden to a generous Mind that
cannot be taken off by all the Pleasure of an easy unmanly life, or by the
nauseous enjoyment of a dull Plenty, that produces no good for the Mind, which
will ever be considered in the first place by a Man that has a Soul; when he
should think, that if his Religion, after his wading through a Sea of Blood,
come at last to prevail, it would infinitely lessen, if not entirely destroy
the Glory, Riches, Strength and Liberty of his own Country; and what a
Sacrifice is this to make to Rome, where they are wise enough to wonder there
should be such Fools in the World, as to venture, struggle, and contend, nay,
even to die Martyrs for that which, should it succeed, would prove a Judgment
instead of a Blessing to them; he will conclude that the advantages of throwing
some of their Children back again to God Almighty when they have too many of
them, are not equal to the Inconveniences they may either feel or fear, by
continuing their separation from the Religion established.

Moral things will have their weight in the World, and though Zeal may prevail
for a time, and get the better in a Skirmish, yet the War ends generally on
the side of Flesh and Blood, and will do so till Mankind is another thing than
it is at present: And therefore a wise Papist in cold Blood, considering these
and many other Circumstances, 'twill be worth his pains to see if he can
unmuffle himself from the Mask of Infallibility, will think it reasonable to
set his imprisoned Senses at Liberty, and that he has a right to see with his
own Eyes, hear with his own Ears, and judge by his own Reason; the consequence
of which must probably be, that weighing things in a right Scale, and seeing
them in their true Colors, he would distinguish between the merit of suffering
for good Cause, and the foolish ostentation of drawing inconveniences upon
himself, and therefore would not be unwilling to be convinced that our
Protestant Creed may make him happy in the other World, and the easier in this;
a few of such wise Proselytes would by their Example draw so many after them,
that the Party would insensibly melt away, and in a little time, without any
angry word, we should come to an Union, that all Good Men would have Reason to
rejoice at; but we are not to presume upon these Conversions, without preparing
Men for them by kind and reconciling Arguments; nothing is so against our
Nature, as to believe those can be in the right who are too hard upon us; there
is a deformity in every thing that does us hurt, it will look scurvily in our
Eye while the smart continues, and a Man must have an extraordinary Measure of
Grace, to think well of a Religion that reduces him and his Family to Misery;
in this respectour trimmer would consent to the mitigation of such Laws as were
made, (as it is said King Henry VIII. got Queen Elizabeth) in heat against Rome:
It may be said that even States as well as private Men are subject to Passion;
a just indignation of a villainous Attempt produces at the time such Remedies,
as perhaps are not without some mixture of Revenge, and therefore though time
cannot Repeal a Law, it may by a Natural Effect soften the Execution of it;
there is less danger to rouse a Lion when at Rest, than to wake Laws, that
intended to have their time of Sleeping, nay more than that, in some cases
their Natural periods of Life, dying of themselves without the Solemnity of
being revoked, any otherwise than by the common consent of Mankind, who do
cease to Execute, when the Reasons in great Measure fail that first Created and
Satisfied the Rigor of unusual Penalties.

Our Trimmer is not eager to pick out some places in History against this or
any other Party; quite contrary, is very sollicitous to find out any thing that
may be healing, and tend to an Agreement; but to prescribe the Means of this
Gentleness so as to make it effectual, must come from the only place that can
furnish Remedies for this Cure, viz. a Parliament; in the mean time, it is to
be wished there may be such a mutual calmness of Mind, as that the Protestants
might not be so jealous, as still to smell the Match that was to blow up the
King, and both Houses in the Gunpowder Treason, or to start at every appearance
of Popery, as if it were just taking Possession. On the other side, that the
Papists may not suffer themselves to be led by any hopes, though never so
flattering, to a Confidence or Ostentation which must provoke Men to be less
kind to them; that they may use Modesty on their sides, and the Protestants
Indulgence on theirs; by this means there will be an over-looking of all Venial
Faults, atacit connivance at all things that do not carry Scandal with it, and
it would amount to a kind of Natural Dispensation with the severe Laws, Since
there would be no more Accusers to be found, were the occasions of Anger and
Animosity once removed; let the Papists in the mean time remember, that there
is a respect due from all lesser numbers to greater, a deference to be paid by
an Opinion that is Exploded, to one that is Established; such things well
digested will have an influence upon their Behavior, and produce such a Temper
as must win the most eager Adversaries out of their ill Humor to them, and
give them a Title to all the Favor that may be consistent with the Public
Peace and Security.

The Trimmer's Opinion in Relation to things abroad.
THE World is so composed, that it is hard, if not impossible, for a Nation not
to be a great deal involved in the fate of their Neighbors; and tho'by the
felicity of our Situation, we are more Independent than any other People, yet
we have in all Ages been concerned for our own selves in the Revolutions
abroad. There was a time when England was the over-Ballancing Power of
Christendom, and that eitherby Inheritance or Conquest, the better part of
France received Laws from us; after that we being reduced into our own Limits,
France and Spain became the Rivals for the Universal Monarchy, and our third
Power, though in it self less than either of the other, happened to be Superior to
any of them, by that choice we had of throwing the Scales on that side to which
we gave our Friendship. I do not know whether this Figure did not make us as
great as our Formal Conquest, to be a perpetual Umpire between the two great
contending Powers, who gave us all their Courtship, and offered all their
Incense at our Altar, whilst the Fate of either Prince seemed to depend upon
the Otacles we delivered, for the King of England to sit on his Throne, as in
the Supreme Court of Justice, which the two last Appeal, the two great Monarchs
pleading their Cause, and expecting their Sentence; declaring which side was in
the right, or at least if we pleased which side should have the better of it,
was a piece of Greatness which was peculiar to us, and no wonder if we
endeavor to preserve it, as we did for a considerable time, it being our
Safety, as well as Glory, to maintain it; but by a Fatality upon our Councils,
or by the refined Policy of this latter Age, we have thought fit to use
industry to destroy this mighty Power, which we have so long enjoyed; and that
equality between the two Monarchs, which we might for ever have preserved, has
been chiefly broken by us, whose Interest it was above all others to maintain
it; when one of them, like the overflowing of the Sea, had gained more upon the
other than our convenience, or indeed our safety, would allow, instead of
mending the Banks, or making new ones, we our selves helped to cut them, to
invite and make way for a farther Inundation. France and Spain have had their
several turns in making use of our Mistakes, and we have been formerly as deaf
to the Instances of the then weaker part of the World to help them against the
House of Austria, as we can now be to the Earnestness of Spain, that we would
assist them against the Power of France. Gondamar was as saucy, and as powerful
too in King James his Court, as any French Ambassador can have been at any
time since, when men talked as wrong then on the Spanish side, and made their
Court by it, as any can have done since by talking as much for the French; so
that from that time, instead of weighing in a wise Balance the Power of either
Crown, it looks as if we had meant only to weigh the Pensions, and take the
heaviest.

It would be tedious, as well as unwelcome, to recapitulate all our wrong
steps, so that I will go no farther than the King's Restoration, at which time
the Balance was on the side of France, and that by the means of Cromwell, who
for a separate Interest of his own, had sacrificed that of the Nation, by
joining with the stronger side, to suppress the Power of Spain, which he ought
to have supported. Such a Method was natural enough to an Usurper, and showed
he was not the Father of the People, by his having so little care for them; and
the Example coming from that hand, one would think should, for that Reason, be
less likely to be solIow'd. But to go on, here comes the King, followed with
Courtships of all Nations abroad, of which some did it not only to forget how
familiarly they had used him when he was in other Circumstances, but to bespeak
the Friendship of a Prince, who, besides his other Greatness, was more
considerable by being re-establisht by the love of his people; France had an
Interest either to dispose us to so much good will, or at least to put us in
such a Condition, that we might give no Opposition to their Designs; and
Flanders being a perpetual Object in their Eye, a las^ing Beauty for which they
have an incurable passion, and not being kind enough to consent to them, they
meditated to commit a Rape upon her, which they thought would not be easy to
do, whilst England and Holland were agreed to rescue her, whenever they should
hear her cry out for help to them; to this end they put in practice seasonable
and artificial Whispers, to widen things between us and the States, Amboyna and
the Fishery must be talked of here; the freedom of the Seas and the
preservation of Trade must be talked of and insinuated there; and there being
combustible matter on both sides, in a little time it took fire, which gave
those that kindled it, sufficient cause to smile and hug themselves, to see us
both fall into the Net they had laid for us; and it is observable and of good
example to us, if we will take it, That their Design being to set us together
at Cuffs to weaken us, they kept themselves indifferent till our Victories
began to break the Balance; then the King of France, like a wise Prince, was
resolved to support the beaten side, and would no more let the Power of the
Sea, than we ought to suffer the Monarchy of Europe, to fall into one hand: In
pursuance to this, he took part with the Dutch, and in a little time made
himself Umpire of the Peace between us; some time after, upon pretense of his
Queen's Title to part of Flanders, by Right of Devolution, he falls into it
with a mighty Force, for which the Spaniards were so little prepared, that he
made a very swift Progress, and had such a Torrent of undisputed Victory, that
England and Holland, though the Wounds they had given one another were yet green,
being struck with the apprehension of so near a danger to them, thought it
necessary, for their own defense, to make up a sudden League, into which Sweden
was taken to interpose for a Peace between the two Crowns.

This had so good an effect, that France was stopped in its Career, and the Peace
of Aix le Chapelle was a little after concluded. 'Twas a forced putt; and though
France wisely dissembled their inward dissatisfaction, yet from the very moment
they resolved to unty the Triple knot, whatever it cost them; for his Christian
Majesty, after his Conquering Meals, ever rises with a stomach, and he liked
the Pattern so well, that it gave him a longing desire to have the whole Piece.
Amongst the other means used for the attaining this end, the sending over the
Duchess of Orleans, was not the least powerful, she was a very welcome Guest
here, and her own Charms and Dexterity joined with other Advantages, that might
help her persuasions, gave her such an Ascendent, that she could hardly fail of
success. One of the Preliminaries of her Treaty, though a trivial thing in it
self, yet was considerable in the consequence, as very small Circumstances
often are in relation to the Government of the World About this time a general
humor, in opposition to France, had made us throw off their Fashion, and put
on Vests, that we might look more like a distinct People, and not be under the
servility of imitation, which ever pays a greater deference to the Original,
than is consistent with the Equality all Independent Nations should pretend to;
France did not like this small beginning of ill humors, and least of
Emulation, and wisely considering that it is a natural Introduction first to
make the World their Apes, that they may be afterward their Slaves. It was
thought that one of the Instructions Madam brought along with her, was to laugh
us out of these Vests, which she performed so effectually, that in a moment,
like so many Footmen who had quitted their Masters Livery, we all took it
again, and returned to her Service; so that the very time of doing it gave a
very critical Advantage to France, since it looked like an Evidence of our
returning to their Interest, as well as to their Fashion, and would give such a
distrust of us to our new Allies, that it might facilitate the dissolution of
the knot, which tied them so within their bounds, that they were very impatient
till they were freed from the restraint.

And the Lady had a more extended Commission than this, and we double-laid the
Foundation for a new strict Alliance, quite contrary to the other, in which we
had been so lately engaged. And of this there were such early appearances, that
the World began to look upon us as falling into Apostasy from the common
Interest. Notwithstanding all this, France did not neglect at the same time to
give good words to the Dutch, and even to feed them with hopes of supporting
them against us, when on a sudden, that never to be forgotten Declaration of
War against them comes out, only to vindicate his own Glory, and to revenge
the Injuries done to his Brother of England, by which he came out Second in
this Duel; so humble can this Prince be, when at the same time he does more
Honor than we deserve, he lays a greater share of the blame upon our
shoulders, than did naturally belong to us; the particulars of that War, our
part in it while we staid in, and when we were out of breath, our leaving the
French to make an end to fight, are things too well known to make it necessary,
and too unwelcome in themselves to incite me to repeat them; only the Wisdom of
France is in this to be observed, That when we had made a separate Peace, which
left them single to oppose the united Force of the Confederates, they were so
far from being angry, that they would not show so much as the least coldness,
hoping to get as much by our Mediation for a Peace, as they would have expected
from our Assistance in the War, our Circumstances at that time considered. This
seasonable piece of Indulgence in not reproaching us, but rather allowing those
Necessities of State which we gave for our Excuse, was such an engaging Method,
that it went a great way to keep us still in his Chains, when, to the Eye of
the World, we had absolutely broke loose from him: And what passed afterward
at Nimeguen, though the King's Neutrality gave him the outward Figure of a
Mediator, it appeared that his Interposition was extremely suspected of
Partiality by the Confederates, who upon that Ground did both at and before the
Conclusion of the Treaty, treat his Ministers there with a great deal of
neglect. In this Peace, as well as that in the Pirenean and Aix le Chapelle,
the King of France, at the Moment of making it, had the thought of breaking it;
for a very little time after he broached his Intentions upon a Cost, or things
that if they had been offered by a less formidable hand, would have been smiled
at; but ill Arguments being seconded by good Armies, carry such a power with
them, that naked sense is a very unequal Adversary. It was thought that these
aerie Claims were chiefly raised with the prospect of getting Lunenburgh for
the Equivalent; and this Opinion was confirmed by the blocking it up
afterward, pretending to the Country of China, that it might be entirely
surrounded by the French Dominions, it was so pressed that it might have fallen
in a little time, if the King of France had not sent Orders to his Troops to
retire, and his Christian Generosity which was assigned for the reason of it,
made the World smile, since it has been seen how differently his devout Zeal
works in Hungary: that specious Reason was in many respects ill tuned, and
France it self gave it so faintly, that at the very time it looked out of
Countenance; the true ground of his Retiring is worth our observation; for at
the Instance of the Confederates, Offices were done, and the Memorials given,
but all ineffectual till the word Parliament was put into them; that powerful
word had such an effect, that even at that distance it raised the Siege, which
may convince us of what efficacy the King's words are, when he will give them
their full weight, and threaten with his Parliament; it is then that he appears
that great Figure we ought to represent him in our Minds, the Nation his Body,
he the Head, and joined with that Harmony, that every word he pronounces is
the word of a Kingdom: Such words, even by this Example, are as effectual as
Fleets and Armies, because they can create them, and without this his word
founds abroad like a faint Whisper, that is either not heard (or which is
worse) not minded. But though France had made this step of forced Compliance, it
did not leave off the pursuit of their pretensions; and therefore immediately
proposed the Arbitration to the King; but it appeared, that notwithstanding his
Merit toward the Confederates, in saving Luxenburgh, the remembrances of what
had passed before, left such an ill taste in their Mouths, they could not
without being put into a Condition to dispose of their Interests, and therefore
declined it by insifting upon a general Treaty, to which France has ever since
continued to be averse; our great earnestness to persuade the Confederates to
consent to it, was so unusual, and so suspicious a method, that it might
naturally make them believe, that France spoke to them by our Mouth, and for
that Reason, if there has been no other, might hinder the accepting it; and so
little care has been taken to cure this, and other Jealousies the Confederates
may have entertained, that quite contrary, their Ministers here every day take
fresh Alarms, from what they observe in small as well as greter Circumstances;
and they being apt both to take and improve apprehensions of this kind, draw
such Inferences from them, as make them entirely despari of us.

Thus we uow stand, far from being Innocent Spectators of our Neighbors Ruin,
and by a fatal mistake foregetting what a Certain Forerunner it is to our own;
and now it is time our Trimmer should tell something of his Opinion, upon this
present State of things abroad; he first professes to have no Biass, either
for or against France, and that his thoughts are wholly directed by the
Interest of his own Country; he allows, and has read that Spain used the
same Methods, when it was in its height, as France does now, and therefore it is
not Partiality that moves him; but the just fear which all reasonable Men must
be possessed with, of an overgrowing Power; Ambition is a devouring Beast, when
it has swallowed one Prince, instead of being cloyed, it has so much the
greater Stomach to another, and being fed, becomes still the more hungry; so
that for the Confederates to expect a security from any thing but their own
strength, is a most miserable fallacy; and if they cannot resist the
Encroachments of France by their Arms, it is in vain for them to dream of any
other means of preservation, it will have the better grace, besides the saving
so much Blood and Ruin, to give all up at once; make a Present of themselves,
to appease this hungry Stomach, rather than be whipser'd, flattered, or Cozened
out of their Liberties; nothing is so soft as the first applications of a
greater Prince, to engage a weaker, but that pleasing Countenance is but a
Vizard, it is not the true Face, for as soon as their turn is served, the
Courtship flies to some other Prince or State, where the same part is to be
acted, leaves the old mistaken Friend, to Neglect and Contempt, and like an
insolent Lover to a Cast off Mistress, Reproacheth even with that Infamy, of
which he himself was the Author. Sweden, Bavaria, ^alatine, etc. may by their
Fresh Examples, teach other Princes what they are reasonably to expect, and
what Snakes are hid under the Flowers the Crown of France so liberally throws
upon them, whist they can be useful: The various Methods and deep Riddles, with
the differing Notes in several Countries, do not only give suspicion, but
assurance that every thing is put in Practice, by which the Universal Monarchy
may be obtained: who can reconcile the withdrawing of his Troops from
Luxenburgh, in Consideration of the War in Hungary, which was not then
declared, and presently after encouraging the Turk to take Vienna, and
consequently to destroy the Empire. Or who can think that the Prosecution of
the Poor Protestants of France, will be accepted of God, as an Atonement for
hazarding the loss of the whole Christian Faith? Can he be thought in earnest,
when he seen'd afraid of the Spaniards, and for that reason must have
Luxenburgh, and that he cannot be fafe from Germany, unless he is in possession
of Strasburgh? All Injustice and Violence must in it self be grievous, but the
aggravations of supporting them by false Arguments, and insulting Reasons, has
something in it yet more provoking, than the Injuries themselves; and the World
has ground enough to apprehend, from such a Method of arguing, that even their
Senses are to be subdued as well as their Liberties. Then the Variety of
Arguments used by France, in several Countries is very observable: In England
and Denmark, nothing instilled, but the Greatness and Authority of the Crown;
on the other side, the great Men in Poland are commended, who differ in Opinion
with the King, and they argue like Friends to the Privilege of the Diet,
against the separate Power of the Crown: In Sweden they are troubled that the
King should have changed something there of late, by his single Authority, from
the ancient and settled Authority and Constitutions; at Ratisbone, the most
Christian Majesty takes the Liberties of all the Electors, and their Estates,
into his immediate protection, and tells them the Emperor is a dangerous
Man, an aspiring Hero, that would infallibly devour them, if they were not at
hand to resist him on their behalf; but above all in Holland, he has the most
obliging tenderness for the Commonwealth, and is in such disquiets, lest it
should be invaded by the Prince of Orange, that they can do no less in
gratitude, than destroy themselves when he bids them, to see how sensible
they are of his excessive good Nature; yet in spite of all these
Contradictions, there are in the World such refined Statesmen, as will upon
their Credit affirm the following Paradoxes to be real truth; first that France
alone is sincere and keeps its Faith, and consequently that it is the only
Friend we can rely upon; the King of France, of all Men living, has the least
mind to be a Conqueror; that he is a sleepy, tame Creature, void of all
Ambition, a poor kind of a Man, that has no farther thoughts than quiet; that
he is charmed by his Friendship to us, that it is impossible he-should ever do
us hurt, and therefore though Flanders was lost, it would not in the least
concern us; that he would fain help the Crown of England to be absolute, which
would be to take pains to put it into a condition to oppose him, as it is, and
must be our Interest, as long as he continues in such an overballancing Power
and Greatness.

Such a Creed as this once received, might prepare our belief for greater
things, and as he that taught Men to eat a Dagger, began first with a Penknife;
so that if we can be prevailed with to digest the smaller MIstakes, we may at
last make our stomachs strong enough for that of Transubstantiation: Our
Trimmer cannot easily be converted out of his senses by these State
Sophistries, and yet he has no such peevish Obstinacy to reject all
Correspondence with France, because we ought to be apprehensive of the too
great power of it; he would not have the Kings Friendship to the Confederates
extended to the involving him in any unreasonable or dangerous Engagements,
neither would he have him lay aside the consideration of his better
establishment at home, and of his excessive Zeal to serve his Allies abroad;
but sure there might be a Mean between these two opposite Extremes, and it may
be wished that our Friendship with France may be so bounded, that it may
consist with the humor as well as the interest of England. There is no Woman
but has the fears of contracting too near an intimacy with a much greater
Beauty, because it exposes her too often to a Comparison that is not
advantageous to her; and sure it may become a Prince to be as jealous of his
Dignity, as a Lady can be of her good looks, and to be as much out of
Countenance, to be thought an humble Comparison to so much a greater Power; to
be always seen in an ill light, to be so darkened by the brightness of a greater
Star, is somewhat mortifying; and when England might ride Admiral at the head
of the Confederates, to look like the KitchinYatch to the Grand Louis, is but a
scurvy Figure for us to make in the Map of Christendom; it would rise upon our
Trimmer's stomach, if ever (which God forbid) the power of calling and
intermitting Parliaments here, should be transferred to the Crown of France,
and that all the opportunities of our own settlements at home should give way
to their designs abroad; and that our Interest should be so far sacrificed to
our Compliance, that all the Omnipotence of France can never make us full
amends for it. In the mean time, he shrinketh at the dismal prospect he can by
no means drive away from his thoughts, that when France has gathered all the
fruit arising from our Mistakes, and that we can bear no more with them, they
will cut down the Tree and throw it into the fire; all this while, some
Superfine Statesmen, to comfort us, would fain persuade the World that this or
that accident may save us, and for all that is or ought to be dear to us, would
have us to rely wholly upon Chance, not considering that Fortune is Wisdoms
Creature, and that God Almighty loves to be on the Wisest as well as the
Strongest side; therefore this is such a miserable shift, such a shameful
Evasion, that they would be laughed to death fot it, if the ruining Consequence
of this Mistake did not more dispose Men to rage, and a detestation of it.

Our Trimmer is far from Idolatry in other things, in one thing only he comes
near it, his Country is in some degree his Idol; he does not Worship the Sun,
becanse it is not peculiar to us, it rambleth about the World, and is less kind
to us than others; but for the Earth of EngLand, though perhaps inferior to that
of many places abroad, to him there is Divinity in it, and he would rather dye,
than see a piece of English Grass trampled on by a foreign Trespasser: he
thinks there are a great many of his mind, for all Plants are apt to taste of
the Soil in which they grow, and we that grow here, have a Root that produces
in us a Stalk of English Juice, which is not to be changed by grasting or
foreign infusion; and I do not know whether any thing less wilp prevail, than
the Modern Experiment, by which the blood of one Creature is transmitted to
another, according to which, before the French be let into our Bodies, every
drop of our own must be drawn out of them.

Our Trimmer cannot but lament, that by a Sacrifice too great for one Nation to
make another, we should be like a rich Mine, made useless only for want of
being wrought, and that the Life and Vigor which should move us against our
Enemies is miserably applied to tear our own Bowels, that being made by our
situation, not only safer, but if we please greater too, than Countries which
far exceed us in extent; that having Courage by Nature, Learning by Industry,
Riches by Trade, we should corrupt all these Advantages so as to make them
insignificant, and by a satality which seems peculiar to us, misplace our
active rage one against another, whilst we are turned into Statues on that fide
where Iyeth out greatest danger; to be unconcerned not only in our Neighbors
ruim; but our own, and let our Island lie like a great Hulk in the Sea, without
Rudder or Sail, all the Men cast away in her, or as if we were all Children in
a great Cradle, and rockt asleep to a foreign Tune.

I say our Trimmer represents to his Mind, our Roses blasted and discolored,
whilst the Lillies Triumph and grow Insolent, upon the Comparison; when he
considers our own flourishing Harvest now withered and dying, and nothing
left us but a remembrance of a butter part in History, than we shall make in
the next Age; which will be no more to us than an Escutcheon hung upon our Door
when we are dead; when he foreseeth from hence, growing Infamy from abroad,
confusion at home, and all this without the possibility of a Cure, in respect
of the voluntary fetters good Men put upon themselves by their Allegiance,
without a good measure of preventing Grace, he would be tempted to go out of
the World like a Roman Philosopher, rather than endure the burden of Life
under such a discouraging Prospect: But Mistakes, as all other things, have
their Periods, and many times the nearest way to Cure, is not to oppose them,
but stay till they are crushed with their own weight, for Nature will not let
any thing to continue long that is violent; violence is a wound, and as a
wound, must be Curable in a little time, or else it is Mortal; but a Nation
comes near to be Immortal, therefore the wound will one time or another be
Cured, though perhaps by such wrong Methods, if too long forborne, as may even
make the best Remedies we can prepare, to be at the same time a Melancholy
Contemplation to us; there is but one thing (God Almighties Providence
excepted) to support a Man from sinking under these afflicting thoughts, and
that is the hopes we draw singly from the King himself, without mixture of any
other Consideration.

Though the Nation was lavish of their Kindness to him at his first coming, yet
there remains still a Stock of Warmth in Men's Hearts for him.

Besides the good Influences of his happy Planet are not yet all spent, and
though the Stars of Men past their Youth are generally declining, and have less
Force, like the Eyes of decaying Beauties, yet by a Blessing peculiar to
himself, we may yet hope to be saved by his Autumnal Fortune: He has something
about him that will drawdown a healing Miracle for his and our Deliverance; a
Prince which seems fitting for such an offending Age, in which Men's Crimes
have been so general, that the not forgiving his People has been the
destroying of them, whose Gentleness gives him a natural Dominion that has no
bounds, with such a noble mixture of Greatn^ss and Condeseention, an engaging
Look, that disarmeth Men of their ill Humors, and their Resentments, something
in him that wants a Name, and can be no more defined than it can be resisted;
a Gift of Heaven, of its last finishing, where it will be peculiarly kind; the
only Prince in the World that dares be familiar, or that has right to triumph
over those forms which were first invented to give awe to those who could not
judge, and to hide Defects from those that could; a Prince that has exhausted
himself by his Liberality, and endangered himself by his Mercy; who out-shineth
by his own Light and natural Virtues all the varnish of studied Acquisitions;
his Faults are like Shades to a good Picture, or like Allay to Gold, to make it
the more useful, he may have some, but for any Man to see them through so many
reconciling Virtues, is a Sacrilegious piece of ill nature, of which no
generous Mind can be guilty; a Prince that deserves to be loved for his own
sake, even without the help of a Comparison; our Love, our Duty, and our
Danger, all join to cement our Obedience to him; in short, whatever he can do,
it is no more possible for us to be angry with him, than with a Bank that
securesh us from the raging Sea, the kind Shade that hides us from the
scorching Sun, the welcome Hand that reaches us a Reprieve, or with the Angel,
that rescueth our Souls from the devouring Jaws of wretched Eternity

CONCLUSION.
TO Conclude, our Trimmer is so fully satisfied with the Truth of these
Principles, by which he is directed, in reference to the Public, that he will
neither be palled and threatened, laughed, nor drunk out of them; and instead of
being converted by the Arguments of his Adversaries to their Opinions, he is
very much confirmed in his own by them; he professes solemnly that were it in
his Power to choose, he would rather have his Ambition bounded by the Commands
of a Great and Wise Master, than let it range with a Popular License, though
crowned with Success; yet he cannot commit such a Sin against the glorious
thing called Liberty, nor let his Soul stoop so much below it self, as to be
content without repining to have his Reason wholly subdued, or, the Privilege
of Acting like a sensible Creature, torn from him by the imperious Dictates of
unlimited Authority, in what hand soever it happens to be placed; what is there
in this that is so Criminal, as to deserve that Penalty of that most singular
Apothegme, A Trimmer is worse than a Rebel? What do angry Men ail to rail so
against Moderation, does it not look as if they were going to some very scurvy
Extreme, that is too strong to be digested by the more considering part of
Mankind? These Arbitrary Methods, besides the injustice of them, are (God be
thanked) very unskilful too, for they fright the Birds by talking so loud from
coming into the Nets that are laid for them; and when Men agree to rifle a
House, they seldom give warning, or blow a Trumpet; but there are some small
Statesmen, who are so full charged with their own Expectations, that they
cannot contain.

A kind Heaven sending such a seasonable Curse upon their undertakings, has
made their ignorance an Antidote against their Malice; some of these cannot
treat peacebly, yielding will not satisfy them, they will have Men by storm;
there are others, that must have Plots, to make their Service more necessary,
and have an Interest to keep them alive, since they are to live upon them;
these Men will persuade the King to retrench his own Greatness, so as to shrink
into the head of a Party, which is the betraying him into such an Unprincely
mistake, and to such a wilful diminution of himself, that they are the last
Enemies he ought to allow himself to forgive; such Men if they could, would
prevail with the Sun to shine only upon them and their Friends, and to leave
all the rest of the World in the dark; this is a very unusual Monopoly, and may
come within the Equity of the Law, which makes it Treason to Imprison the
King, when such unfitting bounds are put to his Favor, and confined to the
narrow limits of a particular set of Men, that would enclose him; these Honest
and only Loyal Gentlemen, if they may be allowed to bear Witness for
themselves, make a King their Engine, and degrade him into a property at the
very time that their Flattery would make him believe they paid down Worship to
him; besides these there is a flying Squadron on both sides, that are afraid
the World will agree, small dablers in Conjuring, that raise Apparitions to
keep Men from being reconciled, like Wasps that fly up and down, buz and sting
to keep Men unquiet; but these Infects are commonly short-lived Creatures, and
no doubt in a little time Mankind will be rid of them; they were Giants at
least who fought once against Heaven, but for such pigmies as these to contend
against it, is such a provoking Folly, that the insolent Bunglers ought to be
laughed and hist out of the World for it; they should consider there is a Soul
in that great body of the People, which may for a time be drowzy and unactive,
but when the Leviathan is roused, it moves like an angry Monster, and will
neither be convinced nor resisted; the People can never agree to show their
united Powers, till they are extremely tempted and provoked to it, so that to
apply Cupping Glasses to a great Beast disposed to sleep, and to force that
same thing whether it will or no to be Valiant, must be learnt out of some
other Book than Machiavil, who would never have prescribed such a preposterous
Method; it is to be remembered, that if Princes have Law and Authority on their
sides, the People on theirs may have Nature which is a formidable Adversary;
Duty, Justice, Religion, nay, even Humane prudence too bids the People
suffer any thing rather than resist; but uncorrected Nature, where e're it
feels the smart will come to the nearest Remedy, Men's Passions in this Case
are to be considered as much as their Duty, let it be never so strongly
enforced, for if their Passions are provoked, they being so much a part of us
as our Limbs, they lead Men into a short way of Arguing, that admits no
distinction, and from the foundation of Self Defense, they will draw
Inferences, that will have inseparable effects upon the quiet of a Government.

Our Trimmer therefore dreadeth a general discontent, because he thinks it
differs from a Rebellion, only as a Spotted Fever does from the Plague, the
same Species under a lower degree of Malignity; is works several ways,
sometimes like a slow Poison that has its Effects a great distance from the
time it is given, sometimes like dry Flax prepated to catch at the first Fire,
or like Seed in the Ground ready to sprout upon the first Shower; in every
shape it is fatal, and our Trimmer thinks no pains or precaution can be so
great as to prevent it.

In short, he thinks himself in the right, grounding his Opinion upon the
Truth, which equally hates to be under the Oppressions of wrangling Sophistry
of the one hand, or the short dictates of mistaken Authority on the other.

Our Trimmer adoreth the Goddess Truth, though in all Ages she has been scurvily
used, as well as those that Worshipped her; it is of late become such a cozening
Virtue, that Mankind seems to be agreed to shun and avoid it; yet the want of
Practice which Repealeth the other Laws, has no influence upon the Law of
Truth, because it has root in Heaver, and an Intrinsic value in it self, that
can never be impaired; she shows her Greatness in this, that her Enemies when
they are successful are ashamed to own it; nothing but Power full of Truth has
the Prerogative of Triumphing, not only after Victories, but in spite of them,
and to put Conquest her self out of Countenance; she may be kept under and
supperst, but her Dignity still remains with her, even when she is in Chains;
Falsehood with all her Impudence, has not enough to speak ill of her before
her Face, such Majesty she carries about her, that her most prosperous Enemies
are fain to whisper their Treason; all the Power upon Earth can never
extinguish her, she has lived in all Ages; and let the mistaken Zeal of
prevailing Authority, Christen any opposition to it, with what Name they
please, she makes it not only an ugly and unmannerly, but a daugerous thing to
persist; she has lived very retired indeed, nay sometime so buried, that only
some sew of the discerning part of Mankind could have a Glimpse of her; with
all that she has Eternity in her, she knows not how to dye, and from the
darkest Clouds that shade and cover her, she breaks from time to time with
Triumph for her Friends, and Terror for her Enemies.

Our Trimmer therefore inspired by this Divine Virtue, thinks fit to conclude
with these Assertions, That our Climate is a Trimmer, between that part of the
World where men are Roasted, and the other where they are Frozen; That our
Church is a Trimmer, between Phrenzy of Platonic Visions, and the Lethargick
Ignorance of Popish Dreams; That our Laws are Trimmers, between the Excess of
unbounded Power, and the Extravagance of Liberty not enough restrained: That
true Virtue has ever been thought a Trimmer, and to have its dwelling in the
middle between the two Extremes; That even God Almighty is divided between his
two great Attributes, his Mercy and his Justice.

In such Company, our Trimmer is not ashamed of his Name, and willingly lea
veth to the bold Champions of either Extreme, the Honor of contending with no
less Adversaries, than Nature, Religion, Liberty, Prudence, Humanity, and
Common Sense.

FINIS.

