A Funeral Sermon FOR That FAITHFUL AND LABORIOUS Servant of CHRIST, Mr Richard
Fairclough, (Who Deceased July 4. 1682. in the Sixty first year of his Age.)

BY JOHN HOW Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton at the Black Raven in the Poultrey, 1682.

To the Reverend Mr. SAMUEL FAIRCLOUGH, Mr. JOHN FAIRCLOUGH, Mr. GEORGE JONES,
Mr. RICHARD SHUTE, With their Pious Consorts;
The Brethren and Sisters of the Deceased Mr. RICHARD FAIRCLOUGH.
My worthy Friends,
IT is, I apprehend, a grievous thing to you, to be destitute of the wonted
solace, you have taken in those your most delectable Relatives, the Father, and
the elder Brother of a Family, whereof you were the genuine, or the ingrafted
Branches. Whether Nature or Choice gave you your Interest, you had a common
concern, and Comfort in it. And indeed, from a Love too little common to the
rest of the World. The Love that has so observably flourished among you, and
been your Collective, Unitive Bond, as it has shown it self to be of an
higher, than the Common, kind; demonstrated its own Divine Original, and that
it had its root in Heaven; so have its effects been a Demonstration, what such
a Love can do, for the Cherishing of Union, not only in a private Family, but
in the Church, and Family of the Living God also. And how little necessary it
is unto an Union, even there, that there be a sameness of sentiments, and
Practices in every little punctilio; for a disagreement wherein, too many have
thought themselves licensed to hate, and even destroy one another. As God
himself was the Fountain, so he was tbe first object of that Love with you. And
as your Love to him caused your entire devotedness to his Interest, so your
mutual Love united your Hearts (according to your several Capacities) in
serving it; without grudging, or hard thoughts, that each one served it not
exactly in the same way. By that Love you have been undivided in your Joys,
and Sorrows in reference to one another. While your very eminent Father
Survived, how gladly did you pay a joint Reverence and Duty to him! what a
glory was his hoary Head unto you! This your worthy Brother was the next resort
and center of your united respect, and delight. I doubt not you feel your loss
as to both; which (tho God had made a former breach upon you) the longer
continuance, as well as the pleasantness of the enjoyment, cannot but have made
the more sensible unto you. We are somewhat apt to Plead a Prescription for our
more continued Comforts. But you know how little that avails against a Statute,
as that (for instance) by which it is appointed that all must dye: Nor is it to
be regretted that the absolute Lord of all, should pluck in pieces our earthly
Families, for the Building and Completing his own in Heaven.

What I have said of this your excellent Brother, in the close of the following
Discourse, is but a small part of what you know. The saying it serves for the
Solace of the Survivors, not the advantage of the Dead August. de cur. pr(...)
mort. gerend.
. And the Solace is real, and great, when imitation makes all that is
commendable, our own and most intimate to our selves. It is, otherwise but a
faint Comfort to have been Related to an excellent Person! When a Limb is cut
off, the Soul retires to the remaining parts. May a double Portion of the
Spirit and Life, which were so copious and vigorous in the Deceased, abound
unto you! And I should be very faulty, if I put not in for some share with you,
who must profess my self a great sharer in your Affliction and Loss; and

Your very Affectionate Brother, and Servant in our Lord, John How.

A Funeral SERMON:
MAT. XXV. 21. His Lord said unto him, Well done good and faithful Servant,
thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many
things: enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord.


IT may seem somewhat Incongruous, and an indecency that this Memorial of our
worthy Friend, should be now Solemnized so long after his very remains are gone
from off the face of the Earth. But two things concurred to make the delay
necessary, and unavoidable, viz. That his own desire, expressed in his Will,
limited the Performance of this Office to the Person upon whom it now falls.
And that my own great Infirmities, before the time of his Sickness and Death,
(which made it more likely he should have done this part for me, than I for
him) had obliged me to begin a course, for the repairing of languishing Health,
which required some Weeks attendance abroad, and which could not be sooner over.

But, if our business were only to Mourn, and lament our own, and the more
common Loss, it were not yet too late. The mention of his Name, The worthy Mr.
Richard Fairclough is enough to Open fresh Springs, calling to remembrance such
a Brother, such a Friend, such a Preacher of the Word of Life as he was.

And it should do it most of all upon the most common account: whom would it
not induce to Mourn over this forlorn World, to see that every thing that is
more excellent, more pure, more desirable, more capable of being useful in it,
God is gathering up out of it? O how much of Spirit and Life is gone from it,
when one such man dies? how are we to mourn over the World as dying, gradually,
the worst sort of Death, when the Holy, Divine life is thus exhaled out of it,
and is expiring by degrees?

But come, we have somewhat else to do than Mourn; all this tends to make a
glorious Heaven, one bright Star the more is now added to it; there is nothing
of this holy Life lost; whatsoever of Excellency, Purity, Goodness, Life,
Loveliness, and Love of that Divine kind vanishes from among us, is but
transferred to its own native place, returns to its proper Element, as the
forsaken Dust has to its own. Heaven has its part out of every such Person,
the seat of all Life, Purity, and Goodness; as the Earth draws into its Bosom
its own terrene part, (not without a Sacredness, and a rich Perfume adhering to
that also.)

And as it is not our only, or more principal business to Mourn, so nor is it
to relieve, and fortify our selves against Mourning. We have somewhat to do,
diverse from them both, and that is more considerable than either of them. We
are chiefly so to consider his Death, as may best serve the purposes of our own
yet-continuing Life, which was the scope of that desire of his signified by his
Will, that an Instructive Sermon might be (upon that occasion) Preached to the
People. We are to set our selves to learn from it, what does most concern our
own daily practice and hope; So to acquit our selves as not to neglect the duty
of good and faithful Servants to our common Lord, nor to come shot of their
Reward.

And to this purpose we are more to consider his life than his death. The Life
which he has lived on Earth, and the Life which (we have reason not to doubt)
he does live in Heaven.

Nor could my thoughts reflect upon any portion of Scripture more fit for our
purpose, or that was more suitable to him and us, i. e. that could more aptly
serve to describe him, and Instruct our selves; nor have I known any person to
have left the World, within my time, to whom this Text of Scripture might more
fitly be applied.

I shall only observe and Insist upon these two Heads of Discourse from it,

The Character of such a Servant. And,

The Treatment which he finds at last from his Heavenly Master.

First, His Character. He is said to have done well, or it is said to him ^
well, (no more is there in the Greek Text.) And then he is further bespoken as
a good and faithful Servant, more generally, and particularly his fidelity is
commended in reference to the special trust and Charge which is implied to have
been committed to him: Thou have been faithful in a few things; I have not
over-charg'd thee, and thou have acceptably discharged thy self.

Some think this (and the whole Parable) to belong only to the Ministers of the
Gospel, the Servants of Christ in that special sense. I do not see a reason for
that restriction. The words are of themselves capable of being extended
further, to the faithful Servants of Christ in whatsoever capacity; tho being
spoken to the Disciples, as from the continuation of the Discourse (with this
Evangelist) from the beginning of the foregoing Chapter may be Collected, it
seems not unfit to allow them a more particular reference to their special
Office and trust.

And here we must note that these words of Commendation [ Well done good and
faithful Servant] do speak both the Truth of the thing and the Judgment and
estimate which his Lord makes thereof accordingly.

We are now to consider them under the former notion, as they express the truth
of the thing, the matter of Fact, whereof we cannot have a more certain
account, than (as here we have it) from his Mouth, who employed him, was his
constant Supervisor, must be his final Judge, and will be his bountiful
Rewarder at length.

We shall here, in opening his Character, Note, First, Some things leading and
Introductive, or that belong to his entrance into this Service. And, Secondly,
Some things that belong to his performance afterward.


First, For the Introductive, supposed part of his Character. He is

1. One that has Disclaimed all former and other Masters: All in Coordination,
for of such, no man can serve two: Other Lords had Dominion over him, but by
their Usurpation, and his unjust Consent, who was not his own, and had no right
to dispose of himself. The faithful Servant Repents, and retracts those former
engagements, as Bonds of Iniquity, by which he will be no longer held,
renounces any former inconsistent Master or Service: A truly subordinate Master
he must own for the same reason upon which he acknowledges the Supreme, and do
all that such derived Authority challenges, by his direction who gave it;
Otherwise, he has learned to call no man Master on Earth.

2. He is one that has by Covenant surrendered and resigned himself to this
great Lord and his Service: Some Relations have their foundation in Nature;
this of Servants to a Master, (we except Slaves) in their Consent, or in mutual
contract; and tho this general Relation between God and Man, have the most
deeply natural foundation imaginable, whereupon all are his Servants; yet the
special Relation must have the other ground, viz. That of Consent, or Contract
superadded; not to give God a right to our Service, but more expressly and
effectually to oblige our selves to it, and that we may have a right to his
Rewards. It Is but acknowledging and recognizing his former Right in us, which
is part ( and the initial part) of our Duty to him. He requires and justly
insists upon it, to be acknowledged as our only rightful Lord; which till we
do, we are in Rebellion against him, and in the Condition of Servants broke
away from their Masters, Run-aways, Fugitives, and who keep our selves out of
the Family; and tho that cannot, however, destroy his Right, yet it is
inconsistent with our Duty, for our Service must be throughout voluntary, and
with our Reward, for nothing that is not voluntary, is Rewardable. Therefore
the good and faithful Servant in the Text, is one that affects and chooses the
State, first, and says with the Psalmist ( Psalm. 119.38.) -- Thy Servant who
is devoted to thy Fear: And ( Psalm. 116.16.) Oh Lord, truly I am thy Servant, I
am thy Servant, the Son of thy Handmaid; thou have loosed my Bonds. He does as
is required, Romans 6.13, 19. Yields himself to God, and all his parts and Powers
Servants of Righteousness unto Holiness. He reckons it neither Dutiful toward
God, nor Comfortable to himself, to do him only occasional Service, but ad
libitum, and as an unrelated Person: He thinks it not Honorable to the great
Lord of Heaven and Earth but to Borrow (as it were) another Servant, nor can
he satisfy himself, not to be of the Family, therefore he consents first to
the Relation, and enters himself his Covenant-servant. Faithfulness supposes
having Covenanted, and has the same reference to our part of the Covenant,
that Gods faithfulness has to his.

3. He is one that has thereupon made it his earnest Study to know his Lords
will: His first enquiry is, What will thou have me to do, Lord? he is
solicitous to understand the Duty of his Station, Psalm. 119.125. I am thy
Servant, give me Understanding, that I may know thy Testimonies: To enter one's
self the Servant of another, without any concern to know the business of his
place, shows an insincere mind, and argues he has more a design to serve
himself upon his Master, than to serve him.

4. He is one that has an inclination to the work he is to do when he knows
it, a (...), an inclining bent of mind to it. That which the Scripture means by
having the Law of God written in the heart. Spoken of our Lord himself in
reference to that peculiar Service he was to perform. Lo I come to do thy will,
O God, thy Law is in my heart. Psalm. 40.8. Who tho he were a Son, yet taking
the form of a servant, applied himself to that severe part assigned him, with a
most willing mind; and had, hereupon, the highest approbation imaginable. Isa.
42.1. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom my Soul delights.
And it is spoken of all the inferior true servants of God besides, Jer. 31.33.
I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts. It Is the
same thing with being Gods workmanship, (Ephesians. 2.10.) created unto good works;
and with that readiness to every good work, ((...),) Tit. 3.1. If a man's heart
be not so framed to Gods Service, how awkwardly and untowardly, does he go
about any thing that is enjoined him, he is habitually disobedient, and to
every good work reprobate. Tit. 1.14.

Secondly, And for that part of the Character, which being a good and faithful
servant, includes

1. He is one that endeavors to extend his obedience to the whole compass of
his duty; has an universal respect to all Gods commandments. Is not partial in
the Law.

2. He peculiarly minds the work most, of his own station. Thinks it not
enough, or possible, to be a good Christian, and at the same time an ill
Magistrate, Minister, Parent, Master of a Family, or Servant in it, if it be
his lot to be in any of these capacities.

3. He is diligent in all the Service that belongs to him any way; not slothful
in business, fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12.11.

4. He is with most delight exercised in the most spiritual part of his work.
In the great, vital acts, of faith, love, selfdevoting, and those most
immediately proceeding from them, meditation, prayer and praise.

5. He balks not the most hazardous or more costly part. Thinks it mean to
serve God at no expense, or with what costs him nothing. Measures not his duty,
by the advantage, or safety of his own secular Interest. So as to decline it
when nothing is to be got by it, or if any thing be in danger to be lost.

6. He grudges not that others are less exposed to danger in their work, than
he. And have that liberty of serving God which he has not.

Let me seriously recommend this Property and Disposition of a faithful Servant
to my Brethren in the Ministry. While some have Opportunity of serving our
great and common Lord without fear of the interruption and suffering, to which
we are liable, and when we have reason to judge they do it with sincerity (tho
we may think they gained their greater liberty by their mistake) there can be
no more genuine expression of our fidelity, and sincere devotedness to our
Masters Interest, than to behold, with complacency, all the good which we
observe done by them. If the great Apostle rejoiced, Phil. 1.15, 16, 17, 18.
and declared he would rejoice that Christ was preached, tho not sincerely (and
whether in pretense or truth) much more should we, when we ought to judge that
he is sincerely preached. And if he envied not those that preached Christ even
of envy, How horrid would it be, should we behold with envy, what we are to
suppose done out of love, and good will. They are great admirers of themselves,
and lovers of some Interest of their own more than his, that cannot endure to
see his work done by other hands, than theirs. Or that have nothing of that
disposition in them which those words express, Let him increase and me
decrease.

7. He is much less apt to smite his fellow servants, or hinder them in their
work, unles they will work by his rule and measure, unprescribed by their Lord
himself. He takes no pleasure to see the hands tied up of useful Laborers in
the harvest, wishes not their number diminisht, but because the harvest is
really plenteous, but the laborers are few, rather prays the Lord of the
harvest to send forth laborers into his harvest. Mat. 9.37, 38.

If any of their own private Inclination, would have the necessary work of
their Lord hindered, and take Pleasure in the exclusion of industrious
Laborers, for their conscientious disuse of things, by their own Confession,
not necessary. Good Lord! What Spirit are they are of? I understand it not; nor
Let my Soul enter into their secret! I had rather a thousandfold bear their
Anger, than be of their Spirit! Would any faithful Servant rather wish his
Masters work should be in any part undone, than done by those he dislikes, upon
no more important reason than that their Clothes perhaps are not of the same
color with his?

But thanks be to God that among those that differ from each other in the
lesser things there are so many that rejoice, being under restraints
themselves, for the Liberty of others, and that mourn, while they enjoy
themselves an ample Liberty, for others restraints, and among whom there is no
other contention, but who shall think, and speak, and act, with most kindness
toward one another: And that not whole parties, but an ill mind and Spirit
only in some Persons, can be charged with what so much unbecomes faithful
Fellow Servants.

8. He is less at leisure to mind what others do or do not, than what he is to
do himself. Is above all things solicitous to prove his own work, that he may
have rejoicing in himself, and not in another, Gal. 6.4.

9. He esteems the utmost he can do but little; and counts when he has done
his best, he is an unprofitable Servant.

10. He approves himself in all that he does to the eye of his great Master.
Here we cannot serve too much with Eye-service, or be too apprehensive of the
constant Inspection of our heavenly Lord. One may be too much a pleaser of Men,
but no man can too much Study to please, and approve himself to the eye of God.

11. He laments lost time, and labors to redeem it.

12. He greatly rejoices in the success of his Work. If, for instance, it be
his business to bring home Souls to God, nothing is more grateful to him than
to prosper in it. My Beloved, my Joy, and my Crown, -- (Philip. 4.1.) So he
counts such as he can make Proselytes to Christ: I have no greater Joy, than to
hear that my Children walk in truth: Joh. 3.4. It Is said of Barnabas, (a great
number believing and turning to the Lord,) Acts 11.22, 23. that, When he saw
the Grace of God, he was glad; For ('it is added) he was a good Man, and full of
the Holy Ghost.

13. He loves his work and his Master, is willing to have his Ear bored and
serve him for ever. If any thought arises of changing, he presently represses
it by some seasonable check, and counter-thought As Holy Mr. Herbert. -- Well,
I will change the Service, and go seek
Some other Master out.
Ah my dear God! though I be clean forgot,
Let me not love thee, if I love thee not.

, and confirms his Resolution of cleaving to him unto the end.

14. He puts the highest value upon such present encouragements from his Lord,
as are most expressive of peculiar favor. The blessed God knows what is most
suitable to the Genius and Spirit of his own New Creature: They who are his
sincere Servants, are his Sons too, born of him, and to the divine and heavenly
Nature in them, those things are most agreeable that are most Spiritual, and
whereof others of terrene minds, no more know the value, than that
Dunghil-creature did of the Gem it found there: They must have great Stores of
Corn, Wine and Oil. His better born servants are of a more excellent Spirit,
and better pleased with the light of his Countenance; he differently treats
them accordingly. As that victorious Persian Monarch Cyrus.
, entertaining at a Feast, the principal Men of his Army, gave among them
costly Gifts; Xen. de Ped. Cyr.
but for Chrysantas, a more peculiar Favorite ((...),) he only drew him near
to him, and gave him a Kiss; which was intended by the one, received by the
other, and envied by a Artabazus who had a golden Cup given him at the same
time.
third, as an expression of more special kindness. And of the Divine love,
which that borrowed expression signifies, Pious Souls, upon all occasions, show
their highest value, Cant. 1.2.

15. He trusts his Master for his final Reward, and is content to wait for it,
as long as he thinks fit to defer. St. Paul professes himself a Servant of God,
and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, in hope of Eternal life, which he that could
not lie had promised, and hereupon resolvedly encounters all the difficulties
of that hazardous Service.

II. The Acceptance and Reward which such a Servant finds above. His Acceptance
is expressed in the same words, (as was said) which have generally given us his
Character, not only showing what he was, and did, but that his Lord esteemed,
and passes an approving judgment of him (as it was not to be doutbed he would)
accordingly.

Concerning this Judgment we are to note, both what it supposes, and what it
includes.

It supposes both an account taken how this Servant demeaned himself, and a
Rule according whereto the matters to be accounted for, were to be examined and
judged of.

1. That our Lord calls his Servants to an account; so we find it expressly said
verse. 19. After a long time, the Lord of those Servants comes, and reckons
with them. And here it is implied, when he says, Well done -- it implies he
takes Cognizance, and enquires whether they have done well or ill, he is not
indifferent or regardless how they quit and behave themselves; nor does he*
pronounce rashly, and at random, without searching into the matter. So then
every one of us shall give an account of himself to God, Romans 14.12.

2. That there is some certain stated Rule, by which their doings must be
measured. Well doing stands in conformity to some Rule or other; and what is
the next and most immediate rule of our Duty, is also the rule of Gods
Judgment: Such a Rule it must suppose as according whereto a true Judgment is
possible, of our having done well. That cannot be the Law of works, according
whereto no flesh can be Justified in his sight, It must therefore be the Law of
Grace: And so this Servant is only said to have done well according to the
(...) Evangelica, The Indulgence of the Gospel can say (...), it is well, to
that which the rigor of the Law would condemn. Bonum orit^^ ex causis
integris, etc. Well doing arises out of the concurrence of all requisites; Evil
from any the least defect; and so indeed whatever the rule be, all things must
concur that are requisite to acceptance by that rule. But here simply every
thing of Duty is requisite; so that the condition of acceptance and life was
not to be distinguished (as a thing of less latitude) from mere Duty in its
utmost extent. Jam. 2.10. For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet
offend in one point, he is guilty of all. Cursed is every one that continues
not in all things which are written in the book of the Law to do them, Gal.
3.10.

2. This Judgment includes,

1. Well-pleasedness: (...), It Is well, q. d. I like well thy way and work, it
pleases and is grateful to me, and so art thou.

2. An acknowledgment of his Title to the designed Reward, according to the
Gospel constitution. It Is said to be well not only according to the absolute
and abstract consideration of what was done, but according to its relative
consideration and prospect to what was to ensue; and therefore follows in the
subjoyned words, the collation of the Reward, of which Reward we have here a
twofold expression, I will make thee Ruler over many things; enter thou into
the Joy of thy Lord.

1. I will make thee Ruler over many things:] In the Evangelist Luke's account
of this Parable (if his account refer to the same thing, as spoken at the same
time, which some of old, upon the manifold diversity, have doubled, how
reasonably I shall not here dispute) it is said, Have thou authority over so
many Cities. Either expression represents the remuneration here vouchsafed by a
Metaphor, which nearly approaches that very usual one, by which the Felicity of
Saints is represented under the notion of a Kingdom, q. d. Thou shall have an
honorable Prefecture, be a glorious Viceroy, shall according to thy capacity,
share with me in the dignity of my Royal State; If we Suffer, we shall also
Reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.12. This I pass, and shall stay a little more upon the
other Expression which is plainer, and without a Metaphor.

2. Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord.] Wherein, as Expositors observe, our
Lord slides insensibly out of the Parable, into the thing designed by it, using
words indifferently applicable to either, but such as wherein he might be
easily understood, ultimately to mean the Joys and Glories of the other World
or State. Expressions serving to signify, as an Ancient speaks, (...),
Chrysostom. in lo^.
the sum of all Felicity, as what can more fitly signify that than Joy, the
Joy of his Lord, and whereinto he was to enter?

Let us consider these severally, tho but briefly.

1. Joy.] q. d. The laborious part is over with thee, now follows thy rest and
Reward. Joy, the very notion whereof is rest, (...)
quies appetitus in appetibili; (as it is aptly defined;) They that sow in
tears shall reap in joy. When the dark shady Vale is past over, with much toil,
the Path of Life leads into that Presence where is fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.
and pleasures for evermore. The fullness of joy speaks the purity of it; that
is pure which is plenum sui, etc. full of it self, and without mixture of any
thing else; which has so entirely all degrees of it self, as not to admit the
least degree of its contrary: Such is this, it is joy and not sorrow with it;
Perfect and most complete Joy. This cannot therefore be meant of a slight and
momentary Act, but a perfect and permanent state of joy: which state is made up
by the continual concurrence of a twofold everlasting perfection, Viz.
Objective, Viz. Subjective.


1. Objective, That there be a perfect, and never failing good to be enjoyed.

2. Subjective, That there be a perfect and immutable contemperation, or a
through undecaying disposition of the subject to the enjoyment of it.

From these two cannot but result a most permanent, everlasting state of Joy.

And of the concurrence of these two, the holy Scripture sufficiently assures
us, when it makes God himself to be the object of our eternal vision in that
other state; and tells us that in order thereto, We shall be like him, for we
shall see him as he is; signifying all that proportion and agreeableness of the
blessed Soul to the beatific Object, which is requisite to a most pleasant,
perfect and perpetual enjoyment.

2. This Joy is more expressly specified by being called the joy of our Lord;
which signifies it to be not only, 1. The joy whereof he is the object, a Joy to
be taken in him, (as before:) But 2. Whereof he is the Author; Psalm. 4.
as he now puts gladness into the Heart, in this our imperfect state, he is not
less the Author of our most perfect Joy. And 3. Also that whereof he is the
possessour, q. d. Enter into that Joy that is now to be common to me and thee,
and wherein thou shall partake with me. So one glosses the words; Esto
particeps, etc. L^^. Bragens^ in (...)
Be thou partaker of the same Joy with thy Lord, enjoy thou the same Joy that
thy Lord enjoyes. Amazing thought! yet so Scripture speaks. Where I am there
also shall my Servant be. Joh. 12.26. The glory which thou gave me I have
given them; and verse. 24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given
me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given
me; and that beholding cannot mean a merely contemplative but a fruitive
intuition. If so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together, ((...)) Romans 8.17. Other joys are in comparison mean and sordid,
this is the highest and most excellent, for it is the Divine Joy.

3. It Is that they are to enter into, which notes both the plenitude of their
Right; Their Lord bids them enter: and the plenitude of this Joy it self; they
are to enter into it, and the dominion it must for ever have over them, they
are to be absorp't of it, lose themselves in it, not so much to possess it, as
be possessed by it. And the perpetuity is intimated of that possession. We are
told of their entrance into it, nothing of their passing out of it any more.
The last thing we hear of them is that they are gone into Joy.

Now let us see what brief useful reflections are to be made upon all this. USE.
And,

1. How blessed a thing is it to be a faithful Servant of Christ! if any have
not yet learnt to value his service for it self, let them make their estimate
by the end of it, and by what is even at present most certainly annexed to it.
To be accepted with him! to appear gracious in his eyes! An Euge from such a
mouth! Where the word of a King is there is power. How joyful a sound do these
words carry from the mouth of God, Well done good and faithful Servant! The
Persic version (as it is rendered) most significantly Paraphrases this Passage;
The owner of the Money received him pleasantly, Dominus pecuniae illum blande
excepit, and cordi verba grata dedit; Eug^, inquit, O bone and (...) etc.
and uttered words to him grateful to his Heart, saying, Well done, O thou good
and faithful servant, etc. What can be more grateful and reviving to the heart
of a good man, than that the glorious Lord of Heaven and Earth should say to
him, Well done? To have him say to us as to Moses, Thou have found Grace in my
sight, Exodus 33.12. To have gained this Testimony, as Enoch did, Heb. 11.5.
That we have pleased God; and that our Case might truly admit of such an
Angelical Salutation, (tho upon a less peculiar account) Hail thou that art
highly favored? how great a thing is it! So great a thing in the Apostles
account, that living or dying, being in the body or out of the body, seemed
little things to him in comparison of it: He was willing rather to be absent,
but is more solicitous whether present or absent, that he might be accepted of
him, 2 Cor. 5.8, 9. Yea, and the more abject spirit of a very Cain, resents so
deeply his not being accepted, tha^ his troubled mind imprints Characters of
Sorrow in his Face, shows it self in a fallen Countenance, and dejected looks.

What ingenuous mind but knows how to value, even the (unprofitable) kindness
of a mean Friend: Can the Love of a God seem little with us? it adds greatly
to the value of mere Kindness, abstracted from Beneficence, if it be born me by
a judicious, wise person, such a one honors whom he loves; we less esteem the
love of a Fool; there can be no greater contempt of God, than to make light of
being accepted with him.

But how transporting a thing should it be, besides the present sense of such
acceptance, which (with more or less expresness) accompanies diligence and
fidelity in his Service, to have it judicially declared with solemnity, and
publicly said to us, before Angels and men, Well done good and faithful
Servant? when so great consequences depend and are to ensue upon it; as that it
should be further said, Come, be thou Ruler over many things, Inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you; Enter into the Joy of your Lord. Who would think
meanly of being the accepted Servant of the most high God? They that finally
despise so Priviledg'd a State, will see it with their eyes, (exemplifi'd in
others) but shall never taste the sweetness of it.

2. How easily accountable is it why our Lord lets his Servants suffer hard
things in this World a while? He may permit it to be so, who has it in his
Power to make their Sorrow be turned into Joy: It is not strange if Weeping
endure with them for a night, unto whom such Joy is coming in the morning; it
is unworthy to repine in this Case. It Is want of foresight that makes any
wonder and censure. Consider well those weighty words, 1 Pet. 4.12, 13.
Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which is to try you,
as tho some strange thing happened unto you; But rejoice, in as much as ye are
partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his Glory shall be revealed, ye may
be glad also with exceeding Joy.

3. How wicked and foolish a thing is it to refuse this Service? it is horridly
unjust toward our most rightful Lord, and most imprudent for our selves: Do
men know what they do in this? whose right they invade and resist? and what
Cruelty they use toward their own Souls?

4. How much to be lamented is the condition of the sinful World, who so
generally decline this Service, and make themselves Slaves in the mean time to
the worst of Masters? how do men drudge to the Devil? what Slaves are they to
themselves and their own vile Lusts? As indeed no man serves himself, but has
a Fool and a mad Tyrant (as one well says) for his Master. We do not enough
live up to the Principles of our Religion, while we consider not with more
compassion the condition of infatuated Mankind in this respect.

5. What may be expected by unfaithful negligent Servants that hide their
Talent in a Napkin? The others Joys serve to measure their Sorrows; what a
killing word will it be, when instead of Well done good and faithful Servant,
it shall be said, Thou wicked and slothful Servant! and instead of Enter thou
into the Joy of thy Lord, they must hear and feel, Cast ye the unprofitable
Servant into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth,
(verse. 30.)

6. See what estimate we are to make of the nature of God, especially of his
large, munisicent goodness (which is his nature, God is love:) For consider the
various emanations and discoveries of it, which may here be taken notice of.

1. That he should seek to have any for servants (which the text supposes that
he does) in this world of ours: A world of Apostate, Degenerous, Impure,
Impotent creatures, disaffected to him and his Government, hating him, and (as
in themselves they are) hateful to him. He who has so little need of servants
for any real use! who can do all things with a word! And if he thought it fit
to have them for state, and as a thing becoming his majesty and greatness, is
attended, above, by so excellent God-like Creatures! So suitable, and
obsequious! So powerful and agile! Those ministers of his that do his pleasure,
hearkening to the voice of his word. A World of ministering Spirits that might
be used for purposes less kind to us than they are! That he should seek
Servants among us! (for his having them implies it, who ever served him
unsought unto?) invite men into his service with so importunate solicitation!
whom he might despise for their vileness, and destroy for their rebellion,
which he can in a moment! And that he should seek such to become his Servants,
not with indifferency, but with so great earnestness! and use afterward so
various endeavors to retain them in his service! When they gradually decline,
that he so graciously upholds them; when ready to break faith with him, and
quit his service, that by so apt methods he confirms them; when they actually
wander and turn Vagabonds, that he should be so intent to reduce them! How
admirable is all this! View the whole case at once. They neglect his first
Invitations, he repeats and inculcates them; They faint, he encourages and
supports them; They revolt, he follows to bring them back: The cause of our
admiration still rises higher and higher. How much is it, in this last instance
above all humane measures! Most men would disdain so to sue to Servants that
forsake them, and are loath to confess their real need and want of them (were
it never so great:) The Cynick scorned to look after his servant that left him,
counting it a disgrace when Manes thought he could live without Diogenes, Sen.
that Diogenes should not be able to live without Manes. The All-sufficient
Deity stoops to that which indigency and wretchedness think even too mean for
them!

2. Consider the frankness of his acceptance, even of the best: for how many
omissions, how much lazieness and sloth, how many incogitancies and mistakes,
how much real disservice must he forgive when he accepts them, and says (yet)
It Is well done? How little is it they do at the best? and how unprofitable to
him? and yet that little also he forms and even creates them to, and
continually succors, and assists them in it; Works in them to will and to do.
Otherwise nothing at all would be done, and yet how full, how complacential his
acceptance is!

3. Consider the largeness and bounty of his rewards, too large for our
expression or conception. So that we even say most to it, when (even lost in
wonder) we only admire and say nothing.

4. Consider the kind of the Service which he thus bespeaks, accepts, and
rewards. The best and most acceptable service any are capable of doing him, is
when they accept him, take and choose him to be their portion, and blessedness.
Trust, love and delight in him as such, live upon his fullness, and (according
to their several stations) persuade as many as they can to do so too. They that
in the most peculiar sense are his Ministers or Servants, as they are more
earnestly intent upon this, and win more Souls, are the more amply and
gloriously rewarded. They that turn many to righteousness, shine as stars. And
for all the rest of his Servants, wherein do they serve him most, but when by
their converse and example, they induce others to entertain good thoughts of
God, and Religion, and thereupon to make the same Choice which they have made,
and become seriously Religious, which is most certainly connected with their
being happy, and indeed in greatest part, their very Happiness it self. And
when they relieve, support, encourage, and help on those that are in the way,
or whom they are endeavoring to bring into the way to final blessedness! We as
much need our servants, as they can us; they are our living, reasonable, but
most necessary instruments. The whole universe of created beings subsists by
mutual dependencies; the uncreated being without any. Creatures are made to
need one another. Infinite self-fulness, not capable of receiving additions, is
most highly gratified by our cheerful reception of its communications.

Let us learn now to conceive of God answerably to all this: We do him not
right, that we consider not his admirable goodness, in so plain instances of
it, with more frequent seriousness and intention of mind and Spirit, and show
our selves stupid, unapprehensive Creatures; have we a thinking faculty about
us? a power to use thoughts? and can we use it upon any thing more evident,
more considerable, or that more concerns us? or do we never use it less
pertinently?

7. How unreasonable is it either to quit the Service of our blessed Lord, or
to serve him dejectedly? Quit it! Who has more right in us? or where will we
mend our selves? O the treacherous folly of Apostasy! and how severely is it
wont to be animadverted on! 2 Chronicles. 12.1. It Is said Rehoboam forsook the Law
of the Lord, and all Israel with him: And what followed? Shishak the King of
Egypt comes against them with a great power, and God sends them this Message by
Shemaiah the Prophet, that Because they had forsaken him, (verse. 5.) therefore
he also had left them in the hands of Shishak: and afterward that tho upon
their humbling themselves, he would not quite destroy them, but grant them some
deliverance; yet he adds, nevertheless ye shall be his (i. e. Shishak's)
Servants, that ye may know my Service, and the Service of the Kingdoms of the
Countries, verse. 8. Since they would abandon God and the true Religion, he
would by a very sensible instruction, and costly experience teach them to
distinguish, and understand the difference, and make them know when they have a
good Master; and if we serve him despondingly, and with dejected Spirits, how
causeless a Reproach do we cast upon him and his Service? it is a greater
iniquity than is commonly considered, implies dislike of his work, and the
rules and orders of the Family, impatiency of the restraints of it, distrust of
his Power to protect, or Bounty to reward us; and we may expect it to be
resented accordingly; so we sometimes find it has been, Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48.
Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness and with gladness of
Heart, for the abundance of all things; therefore shall thou serve thine
Enemies which the Lord shall send against thee, in hunger and in thirst, and in
nakedness, and in want of all things, and he shall put a yoke of Iron upon thy
neck, until he have destroyed thee.

8. How are we concerned to follow the Example, and expect the acceptance and
reward of any such faithful Servant of Christ.

And that we may imitate such a good and faithful Servant, let me briefly set
the example of such a one before you, in this excellent person lately taken
from among us; which were it possible to represent entirely, were one of the
fairest Copies to write after, that this, or perhaps many former ages could
afford us.

That indeed, which it is fit should first, be noted of him, is least of all
imitable. I mean his natural temper (with its more immediate dependencies)
which no man can have the privilege to choose. His indeed was one of the
happiest that I ever knew: And did so set off all that was superadded and
inserted into it, by humane culture or divine Grace as an advantageous setting
does the luster of a Diamond. He had all the advantages of Education from his
Childhood, which the pious care of an affectionate, prudent, learned Father
could give him, that were proper, and preparatory to the Function he was
intended for: viz. that of the sacred Ministry. An Office whereof his excellent
Father (the eminent, holy, heavenly, reverend, ancient Mr. Fairclough of
Suffolk, whose Name in that Country has still a grateful savor with all good
men of whatsoever persuasion,) showed his high esteem and love, not only by the
most diligent discharge of it himself, but by dedicating all his Sons (which
were four in number) to it, and giving his two Daughters in Marriage to such
also. So that he was the Father of a Sacred Tribe, an Offspring and Race of
Ministers, or that (even naturally) united with such. This was the eldest of
his Children, and of whose Education the first care was to be taken. Scarce any
Mind could be more receptive of the proper impressions from an ingenuous
Institution. About twelve Years he continued a Student (whereof diverse, a
Fellow) and great Ornament of Emanuel College in Cambridge, as he was also
much adorned by it. He went from it furnished with such a stock of rational,
substantial, as well as polite Literature, that showed him to have been no
Loiterer there. He was a man of a clear, distinct understanding, of a very
quick, discerning and penetrating Judgment, that would, on a sudden (as I have
sometimes observed in discourse with him) strike through knotty difficulties
into the inward Center of Truth, with such a felicity that things seemed to
offer themselves to him, which are wont to cost others a troublesome search.
Nor were his Notions merely Book-learnt, borrowed from Systems, and taken on
trust, but formed by a due (but more speedy) comparing of things, as if Truth
were more akin, and connatural to him than to most others, sooner digested,
made his own, and inwrought into the temper and habit of his Mind, which
afterward* he liked not to muddy and discompose by busy agitations with
others about that Truth which he found himself in a pleasant secure possession
of, nor to contend concerning that which he had not found it necessary to
contend for; he declined Controversy, not from inability but dislike; for as
he less needed it for a further good end, so he was most remote from loving it
for it self; he was satisfied to have attained his end, and was better pleased
to know, than to seem to others that he knew; he was of a curious sublime
Fancy, and a lofty Style both in speaking and writing, even in his most
familiar Letters, tho he industriously deprest it in his popular Sermons, and
other Negotiations with those of meaner cap^city.

But his Moral, and holy Excellencies were his chief Luster, being in
themselves of a more excellent kind, and shining in him in a very eminent
degree.

The bent of his Soul was toward God; I never knew any man under the more
constant governing power of Religion, which made it be his business both to
exercise and diffuse it to his uttermost; he was a mighty Lover of God and Men;
and being of a lively active Spirit, that Love was his facile, potent mover to
the doing even of all the good that could be thought (in an ordinary way)
possible to him, and more than was possible to most other men: To give a true
succinct account of the complexion of his Soul, he was even made up of Life and
Love. Such was the clearness and sincerity of his Spirit, his constant
Uprightness and Integrity, so little darkened by an evil Conscience, (and
indeed, little ever clouded with melancholy Fumes) that he seemed to live in
the constant sense of Gods favor and acceptance, and had nothing to do but to
serve him with his might; whence his Spirit was formed to an habitual
Cheerfulness, and seemed to feel within it self a continual Calm. So
undisturbed a Serenity has to my observation rarely been discernable in any
man; nor was his a dull, sluggish Peace, but vital, and joyous; seldom has
that been more exemplified in any man, Romans 8.6. To be Spiritually minded is
Life and Peace: Seldom have any lived more under the Government of that Kingdom
which stands in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17.
His Reverence of the Divine Majesty was most profound, his thoughts of God high
and great, that seemed totally to have composed him to Adoration, and even made
him live a worshipping life; he was not wont to speak to God or of him at a
vulgar rate; he was most absolutely resigned and given up to him; Devotedness
to his Interest, Acquiescence in his Wisdom and Will, were not mere Precepts
with him but Habits. No man could be more deeply concerned about the affairs of
Religion, and Gods Interest in the World, yet his solicitude was tempered with
that steadfast trust, that it might be seen the acknowledged Verities of Gods
governing the World, superintending and ordering all humane affairs by wise and
steady Counsel, and almighty Power, which in most others are but faint Notions,
were with him turned into living sense and vital Principles which governed his
Soul: whereupon his great Reverence of the Majesty of God falling into a
conjunction with an assured trust, and sense of his Love and Goodness, made
that rare and happy Temperament with him, which I cannot better express than by
a pleasant seriousness: What friend of his did ever at the first congress, see
his face but with a grave Smile? when unexpectedly and by surprise he came in
among his familiar Friends, it seemed as if he had blessed the room, as if a new
Soul, or some good Genius were come among them.

I need not tell them that survive who were nearest to him, how pleasant a
Relative he was. Nor does any man need to tell me how pleasant a Friend! No man
ever more understood than he the ingenuities and delights of Friendship,
especially the high pleasure of gratifying and obliging another. The relishes
whereof were so delicious to him, that no Festival could be so grateful to any
man as the opportunity was to him of making another taste, and feel his
Kindness. Nor did I ever observe any thing so like a frequent fault in him, as
an aptnes to overvalue his Friend.

He was a man of most punctual, scrupulous fidelity. His word was ever with him
so strictly Sacred, that in the smallest matters his appointments, tho
numerous, were, through his great prudence, so sure that one might, without the
intervenience of extraordinary Providence, as certainly expect them, as the
returns of Day and Night. So that they that knew him, tho most delighted with
his Society, were never wont to urge for his stay with them beyond his prefixed
time (which he commonly mentioned at his first entrance) knowing it would be in
vain.

He was of a large and great Soul, Comprehensive of the Interests of God, the
World, the Church, his Country, his Friends, and (with a peculiar
concernednes) of the Souls of men. Ready, to his uttermost, to serve them all.
Made up of compassion toward the distressed. Of delight in the good, and of
general benignity toward all men. He had a Soul, a Life, a Name darkened with
no cloud but that of his own great humility, which clouded him only to himself,
but beautified and brightned him in the eyes of all others. An humility that
allowed no place with him to any aspiring design, or high thought, that could
ever be perceived by word, look or gesture. Except the high thoughts and
designs which neither ought to be excluded nor represt. His greatest ambition
was to do good, and partake it in the highest and best kind of it. To make the
nearest approaches he could to the pattern and fountain of all goodness.

And now looking upon so qualified a person, as engaged by Office in a peculiar
sort of service to Christ, to gather and draw in Souls to him, and prepare them
for a blessed Eternity: How great things may we expect? What do we not find?

Mells in Sommersetshire was his first, and only (public) Station.

Thither he was brought by so peculiar a conduct and direction of Providence,
as seemed to carry with it some signification what great use he was afterward
to be of in that place.

The very reverend Dr. Whitchcot, being, also, at that time Fellow of the same
College in Cambridge, and presented to a Living in that Country, that was in
the disposition of that College, obtained of him to accompany him in a Journey
to visit, and make some trial of the People he had been designed to take the
Charge of. Where that so accomplished Person expressed a Resolution fit to be
exemplary to others of profoundest Learning (and which was strictly afterward
followed by this his chosen Companion) Preaching his first Sermon (as himself
was pleased to tell me) upon those words, I determined to know nothing among
you, but Jesus Christ and him crucified.

After some time spent together here, the Doctors affairs recalling him, for
the present, to Cambridge, he prevailed with our worthy Friend to stay behind,
and supply his absence among that People.

What follows I was informed of by another hand, but one so nearly related to
this our deceased Friend, and so well acquainted with the more considerable
occurrences of his Life, as not to leave me in doubt concerning so momentous a
thing, as how he came to be settled in a Country so remote from his own, and
where he was so mere a Stranger. And it fell out thus.

During his abode upon this occasion in those parts, a noted Gentleman, the
Patron of the Rectory of Mells, being at that time High Sheriff of the County,
sent to Mr. Fairclough (of whose worth, Fame had not let him long be ignorant)
desiring him to Preach the Assize-Sermon. Some circumstances having also
brought the matter within so narrow a compass, that the straits of time made it
necessary to press the request with more importunity than could admit of a
denial. That Performance was so highly acceptable, and so newly over when the
Patron was surprised with the tidings of the former Rector of Mells his Death,
that he immediately told our worthy Friend, he could not otherwise so fitly
gratify him for his Sermon, as by conferring upon him such a Living, which, if
he pleased to accept it, was his.

The Opportunity of stated Service, in a Calling to which he had most seriously
devoted himself, more than the emolument (as did afterward sufficiently
appear) soon determined his thoughts, and fixed him in this Station: There he
shone many years a bright and a lively Light, a Burning as well as a Shining
one; it was soon observed what a Star was risen in that Horizon, and a
confluence was quickly gathered, of such as rejoiced in the light of it, which
made an obscure Country Village, soon become a most noted place; from sundry
Miles about, thither was the great resort, so that I have wondered to see so
throng an Auditory as I have sometimes had the opportunity to observe in such a
place, that did usually attend his most fruitful Ministry. And O how has that
Congregation been wont to melt under his holy Fervours! His Prayers, Sermons,
and other Ministerial Performances had that strange pungency, quickness, and
authority with them, at some times; that softness, gentleness, sweetness,
alluringness at others, that one would think it scarce possible to resist the
Spirit and Power wherewith he spoke. And the effect did in a blessed measure
correspond; they became a much enlightened, knowing, judicious, convinced,
reformed, even somewhat generally, and in good part, a seriously Religious
People; his Labors here were almost incredible; besides his usual exercises on
the Lord's Day, of Praying, Reading the Scriptures, Preaching, Catechizing,
Administering the Sacraments; (as the occasions or stated seasons occurred) he
usually five days in the week, betimes in the morning, appeared in public,
Prayed, and Preached an expository Lecture upon some portion of the Holy
Scriptures, in course to such as could then Assemble, which so many did, that
he always had a considerable Congregation; nor did he ever produce in public
any thing which did not smell of the Lamp. And I know that the most eminent for
quality and judgment among his Hearers, valued those his Morning-Exercises for
elaborateness, accuracy, instructiveness, equally with his Lords-dayes Sermons.
Yet also he found time not only to visit the sick, (which opportunities he
caught at with great eagerness) but also in a continual course, all the
Families within his charge; and personally, and severally to converse with
every one that was capable, laboring to understand the present state of their
Souls, and applying himself to them in Instructions, Reproofs, Admonitions,
Exhortations and Encouragements suitably thereto; and he went through all with
the greatest facility and Pleasure imaginable; his whole Heart was in his work.
Every day for many years together he used to be up by Three in the Morning or
sooner, and to be with God (which was his dear delight) when others Slept. Few
men had ever less hindrance from the Body, or more dominion over it, a better
habited Mind and Body have rarely dwelt together. No controversies arose among
his Neighbors, within his notice, which he made it not his business to get
presently composed, and his help and advice was wont to be sought by Persons of
eminent rank, and in matters of very great difficulty and importance for that
purpose; his own Love of Peace always inclining him, and his great Prudence
well enabling him to be exceeding useful in any such Case.

Nor were his Labors confined within that narrower verge; his Name and worth
were too well known abroad to let him be engrossed by one single Parish: in how
many places did he scatter Light, and diffuse the Knowledge of God,
wheresoever, within his reach, the opportunity of a Lecture, occasional or fixed
did invite!

The state of things in those days making it necessary (and not hindering)
that what was to be done for the preservation of Common Order, must be by the
spontaneous Associating of the Pastors of many Congregations; how did he
inspirit those Assemblies! The deference that was given to him even by very
reverend Persons of great value, and much exceeding him in years, with the
effectual influence he had upon all their affairs (manifestly aiming at nothing
but the promoting of Religion, and the common good) were only arguments of the
commanding Power of true worth: And the good effects upon the People showed,
how much could be done by a naked, undisguised recommendation of ones self to
men's Consciences in the sight of God: Nor would his Brethren of greatest value
(and diverse there were in those parts of very great) think it any detraction
from themselves to acknowledge much more to the wise, modest, humble activity
of his Spirit in their common concernments, than I shall be willing to arrogate
to him. He was, upon the whole, a very public Blessing in that Country while
he kept his public Station in it: And when the time approached of his quitting
it, he eminently showed his constant, great Moderation in reference to the
controverted things that occasioned his doing so in all his reasonings with his
Brethren about them. And it further appeared in the earnest bent of his
endeavors to form the minds of his People, as much as was possible, unto
future Union under the conduct of whosoever should succeed him in the serious care
of their Souls; and to a meek, unrepining Submission to that present Separation
which was, now, to be made between him and them; whereof the extant abridgment
of sundry his later Sermons to them, are an abundant Testimony; (tho such a
repression of their Sorrows, it was not possible to them to receive othewise,
than as dutiful Children are wont to do, the Exhortations of an affectionate
dying Father, not to mourn for his Death:) In the Substantial things of
Religion no man was more fervently zealous, about the Circumstantials none more
cool and temperate.

But he could in nothing prevaricate with his (once settled) Judgment, or
depart in his Practice one Ace from it; yet such was the candor and softness of
his Spirit, that nothing could be more remote from him, than to pass any harsh
Censures upon those that received that satisfaction in the scrupled points,
which he could not: But he continued a most entire undiminisht Friendship with
many of them (and several of eminent note, by whom also it was equally cherisht
on their parts) even to the last.

His great contempt of the world, and remoteness from making the sacred Office
subservient to secular Interest, a design of enriching himself by it, or more
than to subsist, too soon appeared in the mean condition, to which he was
brought by that deprivation. For tho the Annual profits of his Living were very
considerable, yet his free (but well regulated) hospitality, and large,
diffusive Charity (wherein his excellent Consort, one of the most pious,
prudent, well accomplished Matrons I ever knew, most readily concurred with him)
kept them from being superfluous, or flowing into Coffers. He had laid up no
Treasure but in Heaven. And was the Son of a no way unlike Father, from whom
the expectancy of a patrimonial Estate could not be great; and whom (to his no
small Joy while he continued) he survived but a little. So that for some Years
(as I have heard him say) he did owe much of his Subsistence to the Bounty of
some worthy Citizens of London, whose temper it is, to take more pleasure in
doing such good, than in having it told the World who they were.

His Usefulness was such since his deprivation, ( not in serving a Party, a
thing too mean, and little to be ever thought of by him without disdain; but)
in pressing the great, and agreed things that belong to serious, living
Religion, that it even melts my Soul to think of the overwhelming Sorrows
wherewith the tidings of his Death must have been received, by Multitudes in
the West, that were often wont with greatest delight and Fruit to enjoy his
most lively, edifying Labors.

His Decease confirms it to us, once more, that nothing belonging to this World
of ours is too good to die.

But it is a great Argument of Gods kind propensions toward it, and speaks
much of his good will to men, that now and then such heavenly Creatures are
permitted to inhabit it, and such Specimina and Efforts of the divine Life, to
appear and be put forth in it. It shows God has not forsaken the Earth, and
that his Tabernacle is with men, when any such are to be found here.

It ought to be reckoned very Monitory, and a great Rebuke, when such are
(earlier than according to natural course) taken away.

It should make us love Heaven so much the better, that such as he are gathered
thither; not that it needs any thing to better it in it self, but that we can
now, better relish the thoughts that arise out of our own present knowledge;
and having seen true goodness exemplified, may thence, more easily, take our
advantage to apprehend what that State is, wherein there will be so vast a
collection of excellent Creatures, so perfectly good, by most liberal eternal
participations from the first and uncreated good. How taking is this notion of
Heaven! I especially pronounce this holy man blessed (says a great man in the
Chrysostom. Panegyr.
ancient Church, speaking of an excellent person Deceased Philogonius.
) for that he has passed from one order to another ((...)) and leaving our
City, has ascended to another City, even that of God himself, and leaving this
Church of ours, is gone into the Church of the Firstborn who are written in
Heaven, and has left our solemn Conventions for that of Myriads of Angels:
Referring to that of the Apostle, Heb. 12. and magnifying (that (...)) that
glorious convention not for the multitude of the powers above only, but for the
Confluence of the good, with a perfect vacancy of envy, and an abounding
perpetual Joy and satisfaction of Mind -- Love, Peace, Goodness, etc. and every
fruit of the Spirit in most plenteous fullness. (To this purpose he speaks;) And
what an amiable Heaven is this!

Yea, and it may incline us to have somewhat the Kinder Thoughts of this our
meaner native Element, and less to regret that our earthly part should dissolve
and incorporate with it; to think what rich Treasure, what Shrines of a lately
inhabiting Deity (now become Sacred Dust) it has from time to time received
and transmuted into it self. How voluminously have some written of Roma
Subterranea Jo. Severanus,

P. Aringhus, etc.


! of the Tombs of Martyrs, and other excellent persons (as many of them were)
collected in one little spot of this Earth? And if there were as particular an
account of the more refined part of Subterraneous London, much more of all
places, where just and holy men have dropped, and deposed their earthly
Tabernacles, how would our Earth appear ennobled (and even hallowed) by such
continual accessions to it, in all times and Ages? What a glorious Host will
arise and spring up even out of one London? Is not the Grave now a less gloomy
thing? who would grudge to lie obscurely a while, among them with whom we
expect to rise and ascend so gloriously?

It should make us diligent in the remaining time of our abode here: what
should not the expectation of such a Welcome carry us through? Well done good
and faithful Servant, etc. How studious should we be so to acquit our selves as
he has done? Blessed is that Servant whom the Lord when he comes shall find so
doing: Let us then be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of
the Lord, as knowing our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 16. insert,, before and after there: p. 18. l. 14. r. (...): p.
22. l. 13. for doubled, r. doubted: p. 23. l. 14. comma, after that: p. 25.
marg. r. Luc. Brugensis: p. 38. l. 9. for have r. had. Sense, to be every where
read, sense.


