THE Life and Reign OF KING RICHARD THE SECOND.

By a Person of Quality.

LONDON: Printed for M. L. and L. C. and Sold by Langly Curtis on Ludgate Hill.
1681.

TO THE READERS.
Gentlemen,
YOU are here presented with the Life and Reign of a Prince whose Misfortunes
render his Story perhaps as Remarkable as any in our English Annals. Concerning
which I shall only assure you, that the Compiler (for he as little affects, as
deserves the Title of an Author) has made it his Business truly to set down
naked Matters of Fact as he finds them Related by the best Authors, without
obtruding his own Fancies or Dreams under the Notion of History. Which that it
may more evidently appear, he thinks fit to give you an Account of Two of the
Authors whom he has principally followed; Because One of them living in that
very time, and the other either then, or not long after, they may rationally be
supposed to have the most certain knowledge of those Transactions.

The first is Henricus Knighton, whose Work De Eventibus Angliae, in Latin, is
Printed amongst diverse other ancient Histories in that large and accurate
Collection, Entitled, Historiae Anglicanae Scriptores December: First brought
into Public Light from Authentic Manuscripts, by those two learned
Antiquaries, Sir Roger Twysden Knight and Baronet, and the Famous John Seldom
Esquire, (who both prefixed their Epistles thereunto.) Nor was that Miraculous
Treasury of all solid Learning, the most Reverend Usher Primate of Armaugh,
wanting in Advising and Promoting that Edition.

The Great Seldom in his Preface, Fol. 46. tells us, That this Knighton was a
Canon of the Abbey of Leicester, and that he flourisht in the time of this King
Richard the Second, the most part of whose Reign he wrote, deducing his History
from William the Conqueror, until within Four years before the Deposition of
the said King Richard, viz. To the year 1395. At which time we may suppose that
Author was himself snatched away by Death, or disabled by some Disease, for else
he would not so abruptly have discontinued his Book. Which Conjecture is
confirmed by what Sir Roger Twysden in his Epistle tells us, That in the
Manuscript in the Renowned Cotton's Library, (which he conceives to be the very
Autographon, or Original Handwriting of the Author, and from which the same was
exactly Printed) there is in the first Page an Inscription, Entitled, Lamentum
Compilatoris, The Compilers Complaint, beginning thus; Sum Caecus factus subita
Caligine tactus.
Blind I am grown, with sudden darkness struck.


And thus concluding:

Me Deus allisit, cum vult sanare, valebit.
In Domino semper stat quod relevabitur Aeger.
Smitten I am by God, who when he please
Can help me, and alone cure each Disease.
-- And so much for Knighton.
The other is Thomas Walsingham, a Benedictine Monk belonging to the Abbey of
S. Albans; who for ought appears might likewise live in King Richard's days,
for he is said to have flourisht, that is, to be grown famous by his Labors,
about the year 1440. And Leland gives this Character of him, In Historiis
Colligendis studiosus atque diligens, that he was a Person very studious and
diligent in Collecting or Compiling of Histories. His History (herein made use
of) begins, An. Dom. 1273, and ends Anno 1432.

To these chiefly is the present work Indebted, and in most material passages,
they are Cited, and their very words strictly Translated, yet still not
omitting to consult other the most credible Historians that have wrote of those
times.

And as for the Process touching the Deposition of King Richard, the Articles
against him, etc. The same are punctually Translated from the words of the
Record, as the same (Examined and attested) are Printed in the said Volum
called, Hist. Anglicanae Scriptores december, from Col. 2743. to Col. 2762.

Some of the Principal Contents.
KIng Richard so entertained by the City at his coming to the Crown, that he
was called the Londoners King. Page 3 Alice Price, her Insolence and
Banishment. 5 A Parliament tell the King his Demeasns were sufficient to
maintain his Court and carry on his Wars. 5 Philpots brave Exploits at Sea. 6 A
rare Example of Fidelity in a Spaniard. 8 An odd Scotch Charm against the
Plague. 12 A very severe Poll-Bill granted. 14 The Relation of Wat Tylers
Rebellion, which thereupon ensued. 15 The Kings Charter of Freedom to the
Bondmen and Pardon. 18 His Revocation thereof. 27 Scroop Lord Chancellor,
turned out for refusing to Seal an unlawful Grant. 32 Articles against Wicliff,
and a brief account of his Life. 34 The University of Oxfords Testimonial of
his Piety and Learning. 44 We do not find Christ ever Converted a Priest. 47
The first pretended Act against the true Professors of Religion. -- Complained
of as Surreptitious, and Repealed. 47 Notable Railing Letters between the
Cardinals. 51 The Bishop of Norwich's Croisado against Schismatics, the
Indulgences and Cheats thereof, and his ill success at last. 59. Sharp Messages
between King Richard and his Parliament. A Copy of the Impeachment of Michael
Pole. 81 Fourteen Lords appointed by Parliament to inspect past management of
affairs and redress grievances. 87 The King Commands Sheriffs to return such as
he should Name to serve in Parliament, the Sheriffs Answer, The People would
hold their Ancient Customs of free choice. 97 Questions to the Judges, and
their Answers. 99 The shrewd Repartee of Sir Huge de Lyn a Natural, to King
Richard. 105 The Lords in Arms treat with the King, are promised redress in
Parliament. 107 The Duke of Ireland routed. 110 The Answer of the Governor of
Calice, when Commanded by the King to deliver it up to the French to whom he
had sold it. 111 The Articles against the Duke of Ireland, the Lord Chief
Justice, etc. 115 The Lord Chief Justice Tresilian Hanged at Tyburn, the other
Judges Banished. 135 The King not to Pardon Murder. 141 The Kings severities to
the Londoners. 146 An interview between K. R. and the French K. 154 The Duke of
Gloucester surpised and basely Murdered. 159 The Earl of Arundel beheaded 161
All Bay-trees wither, and the Current of a River dried up. 166 A Combat
appointed between the Duke of Hereford and Norfolk, and they both Banished. 167
The Duke of Lancaster Lands in England. 182 King Richard surrenders his Person.
190 The Record of his Resignation and Deposition 192 The Articles against him.
201 Touching the manner of his Death. 239
THE Life and Reign OF KING RICHARD The Second.
KIng Richard the Second was born at Bordeaux in France, in the Year 1366. His
Father was that Renowned Hero Edward, commonly called The Black Prince, eldest
Son of the Great and Victorious King, Edward the Third, His Mother Joan
Daughter of the Earl of Kent, for her exquisite Beauty, styled, The fair Maid
of Kent. And if he were so unhappy, as not altogether to Inherit his
Grandfathers Prudence, and his Fathers Spirit and Conduct, yet it cannot be
denied but he retained something of his Mothers Handsomness, being celebrated
for the goodliest Personage, and most amiable Countenance of any King that had
been before him since the Conquest.

His Father, after he had filled both France and Spain with terrible Trophies
of his Valor, (having taken the King of the former Prisoner, and in the latter
generously by his Arms restored Peter King of Castile and Leon, when
injuriously driven out of those Realms by the Arragonians and French) was in
the Forty sixth year of his Age, snatched away by death (some say hastened by
Poison) during the Life of his Father King Edward; who having then three other
Sons still surviving, viz. John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster; Edmund of Langley
afterward Earl of Cambridge, and Duke of York; and Thomas of Woodstock,
afterward Duke of Gloucester: For preventing any Quarrels after his own
decease, and all Pretensions which any of them might make to the Crown, to the
prejudice of his Grandchild, (this our Prince Richard, to whom as Son of the
eldest Brother it was adjudged to belong:) He resolves to see his Right
declared and settled in Parliament; Creating likewise the said Richard first
Earl of Chester and Cornwall, and then Prince of Wales; and taking an Oath of
all the Lords of the Realm to accept him for their King as his lawful Heir,
when ever himself should expire.

Being thus put into the immediate Prospect of a Crown, the over-burdensom
Glory came too fast* upon his tender head, for King Edward having overliv'd his
Fortune, and the better part of himself, his Conquests abroad being daily
ravished back, and Alice Price his Concubine shamefully ruling both Him and most
Affairs at home, oppressed with Grief and Age, (though some say much more
debilitated by the Caresses of that petulant Strumpet) resigned his last Breath
at Richmond, the One and twentieth of June, Anno Dom. 1377, in the Sixty fourth
Year of his Age, having Reigned Fifty Years, four Months, and odd Days.

Upon the first notice of his Death, the City of London sent Deputies to Prince
Richard, (who with the Princess his Mother lay then at Kingstone) to
acknowledge him their lawful Sovereign, and request that he would please to
honor them with his Presence and nearer Residence: Which Message was kindly
received, and the young King soon after came to his Palace at Westminster, and
on the Sixteenth day of July was solemnly Crowned; the Citizens sparing no Cost
to express their Loyalty and zealous Affection to his Person, both in his
Passage through the Town, and at his Coronation; As by several Triumphant
Arches, Conduits running with Wine, and all other Demonstrations of a
transporting Joy; Insomuch that by some of the Nobility he was Ironically caled
The Londoner's King.

His tender Age (being at his Grandfathers Death but eleven years old) required
some Protector, or chief Managers of Public Affairs, but to whom to commit so
weighty a Trust, is the Difficulty: If to One, Ambition joined with Power, may
tempt to Usurpation; Nor wanted they a Precedent at home, whilst they remembered
how King John justled out his Nephew Prince Arthur. If to several, then it
might be feared, that different private Interests, Factions, and By-ends, (from
which scarce any of the Grandees were free) might entangle or retard their
Proceedings, so as to obstruct their acting unanimously and cheerfully for the
Public Weal: At last hoping to please all Pretenders, and considering that
from a multitude of Counselors most safety might be expected; They entrusted
first the Kings Three Uncles; but Lancaster, whether discontented to have any
Partners, or that he cared not much to intermeddle, because he had contracted
both the Enmity of the Clergy, and the dissatisfaction of the Londoners: Or
whether having a pretense to the Crown of Castile, by the Marriage of Constance
Daughter of the beforementioned King Peter, that he might better pursue his
Claim thereunto, warily withdrawing himself from that Charge; several other
Lords both Spiritual and Temporal were added, till at last being found too
many, the same was Conferred wholly upon the Earl of Warwick, who discharged
the Office with good satisfaction.

The Scotch and French promising themselves Advantages from the Kings Minority,
began to make Attempts upon his Territories, almost before he was in possession
of the Crown. The first surprised the Castle of Berwick, the second the Isle of
Wight, and burnt and pillaged several Towns and Villages on the Coasts, but
were both quickly repulsed and beaten out again.

About two Months after the Coronation, a Parliament is called, which sat from
Michaelmas to S. Andrew's Day, and Banished Alice Price, King Edward's
Mistress; for that whereas formerly being complained of as a Grievance in
Parliament, she had sworn never to come again into the Kings Court or Presence,
(which the King had likewise confirmed with his Oath) yet after the death of
the Black Prince, she had returned and misgovern'd the King, presuming to fit
in judicial Courts, and by her Presence and Influence to wrest Justice, and in
his sickness flattered him with hopes of Life, so that he neglected making
Provision for his Soul, till he was quite speechless, whilst she in the mean
time purloyned away the choicest things in the Palace, and stole even the very
Rings off his Fingers, and then (like a Right Harlot) left him gasping for
Life, and unable to speak one word, in the Company only of one poor Priest. My
Author says, when she came now to be questioned, she had with Money corrupted
many of the Lords, and all the Lawyers of England, who did not only secretly
but publicly plead and use all their Interest in her behalf; yet she was so
vigorously prosecuted by the Knights in Parliament, that being by her own Mouth
Convicted, she was Banished the Land, and all her Estate moveable and
immovable, forfeited to the Exchequer; from whence by the late Kings Favor,
or rather Dotage, it had unduly been obtained.

There was also by this Parliament given to the King Two Tenths of the Clergy,
and Two Fifteenths of the Temporalty, to be paid the same year; but on this
Condition, viz. That the King for the future should not burden them with more
Requests of that kind, to draw away his Subjects Money, but would live on his
Demeasns, and continue his War; for that (as it was there answered) His proper
Royal Revenues were sufficient both to maintain his Court, and carry on his
Wars, if the same were but managed by fit and trusty Ministers: And therefore
it was agreed, that this Money so given, should as it was raised, be deposited
in the hands of two Citizens of London, William Waller, and John Philpot, who
were to see it bestowed for the Defense of the Realm.

[1378.] This John Philpot was an Alderman of London, a Person of no less
Courage than Prudence, as appears by the following Exploit: Sometime after the
Parliament broke up, and the Money collected; the Duke of Lancaster (to whom
nothing almost could be denied) was very Importunate to have the same delivered
to his Dispose, promising therewith to free the Nation from all Invasions and
Pyracies, wherewith it was lamentably infested, and to perform other very
advantageous Services for the Public: Whereupon he obtained an Order for the
same, notwithstanding the Proviso in the Act, so impossible it is de facto to
bind up the Hands of Power: But though some Naval Preparations were made, yet
little was effected to repel or prevent those Injuries and Depredations, which
the Nation suffered by Sea from the French on the one side, and the Scottish
Pickaroons on the other; so that by the common neglect of securing the Coasts,
and scowring the Seas, our Merchants durst not Traffic abroad for fear of
Pirates, who hovered in every Corner, but especially of one Mercer, a bold and
potent Scottish Rover, who having drawn together a considerable Fleet of
French, Scots and Spaniards, daily committed insufferable Outrages, spoiling
all they met: Hereupon the said Alderman Philpot first complained of these
Grievances to the Kings Council, humbly Remonstrating the Damages sustained,
and imploring Redress; But receiving from them only fair Promises, and no
Relief, full of grief and disdain, to see his Countrymen thus devoured by
those insolent Water-vermin; He at length Provided, Victualled, and Manned forth
at his own proper Costs and Charges, a competent Fleet of tall Ships, himself
in person, putting forth with them to Sea, where he soon encountered the
Pirates, took the said Mercer, destroyed his Ships, and recovered most of the
Prizes formerly taken, with Fifteen Spanish Bottoms well fraught with Riches,
besides many French and Scottish Ships, and so returned with Triumph and the
general Acclamations of the People: But Envy is always the Attendant of
extraordinary Virtue, instead of Thanks or Reward, several of the Nobles from
whom he seemed to have snatched by this his fortunate Attempt, the Glory of that
Service, which their Country justly, though in vain expected from them, passed
harsh Censures on his forwardness; and particularly the Earl of Stafford called
him in question at the Council Table, for presuming (being but a private man)
for to levy Arms, and equip a Fleet without Authority: But Philpot with a
prudent Gallantry, composed of an undaunted Innocence, and an humble Merit,
gave such a justifiable Account of the Act, as satisfied the Board, or at least
silenced his Accusers: For thus in particular to that Lord, he is said to have
answered, I would have your Honor undoubtedly know, that I did not adventure
my Money, my Person, and my Men to the dangers of the Sea, and hazards of War,
with any design to Rob your Lordship, and your Colleagues, of the Glory of
Chivalry, or Fame of Military Achievements and gain it to my self. But
condoling the losses of my fellow Citizens, and misery of my Country which by
your sloth from a most noble Kingdom, giving Laws to all her Neighbors, is
sunk into so deplored a state as to ly open to the Insolences and Pillagings
of the vilest of Nations and men, whilst yet not one of you lent a hand her
defense, I freely exposed my self and mine for her deliverance, and the public
safety, to which the Earl had nothing to reply.

About the same time, viz. in the Second Year of the King, there happened a
Fray which (not so much for the importance of the Quarrel, as a rare Example of
Fidelity and honesty attending it) I cannot but Relate; Though even the thing
it self in those ignorantly zealous times, wanted not its ill Influence on the
Public, and the Monkish Historians cry out about it as Tragically, as if
Heaven and Earth were engaged, all Christianity at Stake, and the Pillars of
Religion in danger. The business thus; Two valiant Squires, Robert Haule, and
John Schakel, in the late Wars in Spain under Prince Edward, chanced to take
the Count de Dena, a Spanish Don of great Quality and Estate, who was fairly by
the Law of Arms adjudg'd their Prisoner, and brought into England, where he
left his Eldest Son with them as a Pledge, whilst he went home to raise his
ransom, the Son swearing to continue with them till it came; but the Father
being got into Spain, never regarded to send the Money, but in little time
dies, whereby the Honor and Estate devolves to the Young Hostage; which being
understood by King Edward, (for in his days happened this first part of the
Story) both he and Prince Edward's Son, were very importunate with these two
Gentlemen, to release the Spanish Cavaleir, which they desired either in favor
to the Duke of Lancaster, who thought by the help of this Nobleman to faciliate
his pretentions to the Crown of Castile, or else with an intent to Match him to
Mathilda Relict of the Lord Courtney, the Kings Sister; but no matter what
their Design was, the Squires were so far from parting with him, that they
would not discover where he was, and so were sent to the Tower, whence making
their escape they took Sanctuary in Westminster Abbey, and there continued,
till now the Duke of Lancaster resolved to ferret them out, to which purpose
Fifty men at Arms were sent thither, who entering the Sanctuary, put a trick
upon John Schakel, and soon got him out and hurried him to the Tower; but as
for Haule, he was more strongly Ensconc'd in the Church amongst the Monks, and
at Mass, however thither they went, and after a little expostulation why he
would so refractorily disobey the Kings Command, when even Majesty had
condescended to a request? they tell him, he must go with them, which he
peremtorily refuses, and draws a short Sword and makes at them; whereupon they
resolve to force him away, who still making resistance, was at last knocked on
the Head amongst them which our Author calls Crowned with Martyrdom: the Monks
would fain have rescued him, but drust not, because they saw the Soldiers too
strong for them, however the Archbishop of Canterbury presently thundered out an
Excommunication against these Violaters of the Sanctuary and all their
abettors, the King and his Mother, and his Uncle Lancaster only excepted; And
the Bishop of London did the like for several days together, but about a Year
after by the mediation of diverse grave and venerable Persons, the matter was
composed on these terms; that the said Schakel, who was so sent to the Tower,
should discover and deliver up the said Count de Dena, and so be set at
liberty, upon consideration, that the King should settle upon him Lands, to the
value of an Hundred Marks per annum, and pay him down Five hundred Marks ready
Money, in lieu of the expected Ransom, and also that his Majesty for
satisfaction to the Church, should at his proper Charges erect a Chauntry of
Five Priests for ever, to pray for the Soul of him whom his Officers had so
slain, though one would have thought dying, in their Opinion, a Martyr, he
might have had no great need of such everlasting Orisons. But still the more
surprising Intrigue of the Tragedy is behind, when Schakel came to produce his
Captive, he showed them his man that waited on him; for the brave Spaniard had
that regard to his Word which he had passed, that he scorned to discover
himself without his leave, but on the contrary had all along both in the
Sanctuary, and in the Tower, faithfully and submissively served him in
disguise, neglecting both his Quality and Interest, when they stood in
competition with his Honor; a piece of Gallantry and generous Honesty, scarce
to be paralleled in Story.

About the Feast of S. Luke, a Parliament was held at Gloucester, with an intent
as was thought to have alipp'd the Wings of the Towering Churchmen, but finding
their Interest too strong, nothing of that kind was offered, but for the Kings
further supply, it was granted, that he should have of the Merchants for every
Sack of Wool Exported, a Mark, and for every Twenty shillings of Wares or
Merchandises whatsoever Imported from beyound the Seas, Six pence, to be paid
by the Buyer.

[1379.] The next year another Parliament was called at London, where the
Privileges of the Sanctuary at Westminster were regulated; for whereas before
great numbers of Persons when they were got in Debt, would shelter themselves,
and waste in Revelling and Debauchery their Revenues, which could not be
touched for their just Debts, to the grievous prejudice of their Creditors; it
was now Ordained, That if upon Proclamation made, they should not surrender
themselves, them their Goods should be sold and their Lands extended, wherever
found, till their Debts satisfied. There was also a new Tax granted, but
because the Commons were already much impoverisht, it was laid only on the
Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy, by way of Poll; Viz. Dukes and Archbishops, Ten
Marks apiece; every Earl, Bishop, and Mitred Abbot, Six Marks, besides each
Abbot to pay Forty Pence per Head for all his Monks; and so Justices, Sheriffs,
Knights, Esquires, Rectors, Vicars, and even down to simple Chaplains, every
one his Allotment.

This Summer there was a most dreadful Pestilence in England, especially in the
Northern parts, insomuch that whole Families were swept away. Nay Towns and
Villages left without Inhabitants: During the Heat of which Calamity, the Scots
took their Advantage to enter the Land, and committed great Spoils in small
Parties, but durst not stay for fear of the Infection, and yet (as our Author
relates) they had got a wonderful Preservative against it: for asking some
English, the reason of so great a Mortality amongst them, and being told it
came by the Grace of God, they therefore every Morning with great solemnity
used this Charm, or (if any body will call it so) Prayer -- God and Saint
Mango, Saint Roman, and Saint Andrew, shield us this day from God's Grace, and
the foul Death that English men die upon.

[1380.] The next Year in Jan. the Parliament was again Assembled at London,
and continued till March, wherein to avoid unnecessary Charge it was agreed,
that the Tutelage of the King, should be committed but to one, and by unanimous
consent, Thomas Beuchamp, Earl of Warwick, was pitched upon for the Man, an
Honorable allowance being assigned to him out of the Royal Exchequer for his
pains and care therein to be taken; but the Young King though a Minor as to the
Public Affairs, thought himself of Age sufficient at least to conduct himself
in his private and personal concerns; for though for want of ripening
experience; his Wisdom had not time to Bud, yet his Will was grown to full
Strength: being already Plunged in the Gulf of pleasure, and Vanities of Youth,
he set himself to Promote such as most pleased him with Flatteries, rather than
such as were truly qualified to serve him with solid Council and able conduct;
whence arose Three fatal mischiefs: for First, his Affairs were indiscreetly
managed, and without success, by reason unfit Ministers were employed about
them, Secondly, debauchery was increased, First, in the Court, and next
throughout the Kingdom; for many of the Young Nobility, observing the secret
favors and distastes of the King, studying in all things to gratify his
pleasure, gave up themselves to dissolute and dishonorable courses; which ill
precedents descended like an Infection amongst the Gentry and Commonalty; for
Vice always finds too many followers, even when it has no incouragers, but
much more does it increase, when flusht with Great Examples, and made the Scale
or perferment. And lastly the King by thus misplaceing his favors impaired the
Veneration due to Majesty, became Cheap in the Eyes of his Subjects, and less
respected, for it is almost as dangerous to a Prince to have evil and despised
Favorites and Adherents, as to be evil or despicable himself. In this
Parliament was granted a Tenth from the Clergy and a Fifteenth from the Laiety,
but on condition, that from thence, which was March 1380. to Michaelmas 1381.
there should be no more Parliaments; that is, no more Money raised.

This Summer the King and Council sent a strong Army to assist the Duke of
Bretaigne, under the Command of his Uncle Thomas of Woodstock, Sir Thomas
Peircy, etc. who landing at Calice, forced their passage through the Body of
France, leading their Troops to and fro, and laying the Country waste at their
pleasure, without any resistance, till they came to the Borders of Bretaign,
where they were joyfully received, but the very Terror of their March, had
disposed the French to an accommodation, so that they made peace with the Duke
of Bretaign, whereupon our Army without any other advantages, but those of
Renown and Glory returned home.

Notwithstanding it was agreed in the last Parliament to the contrary, yet by
the too great prevalency of some Counselors, a Parliament against the will and
consent of almost all the Great Men of the Land, was this same Year about the
Feast of S. Martin, (which is November. 10th) Convened at Northampton, a place
most unfit for such an Assembly, as well for that it was Winter, and scarce any
Fuel for Firing there to be procured; as also because it afforded not Lodgings
enough to entertain those that should have resorted thither: but perhaps so much
the more fit for the design of the small Politicians; for here they got past a
very severe Tax, or Poll bill. Whereby every Priest, Secular or Religious, was
to pay a Noble, and every Nun as much, and every Man and Woman, Married or
unmarried, being of the age of Sixteen years, Twelve Pence, (Beggars only
excepted) the paying whereof was esteemed very grievous by the People,
especially of the poorer sort. And that which aggravated their misery, was,
that when it came into the Exchequer, it was so handled by those employed about
it, that it amounted not to so much as some former Taxes, which were given in
less proportion: whereupon some of the Kings Ministers complained that it had
not been duly Collected; and one John Leg, and three of his Associates,
obtained a Commission to inspect and review the Levy, bargaining to give the
King a great Sum of Money for the same: But indeed on that pretense committing
horrible Oppressions, Exactions, and Insolences in diverse parts, especially in
Kent, Norfolk, and the adjacent Counties.

Hence immediately after, viz. In the Spring of the Year 1381, arose one of the
most formidable and mischievous Insurrections that had been heard of almost in
any Age; the old Bellum servile of the Romans was acted in England, but with
greater Impudence and mischief; the Slaves are in Arms, and the very Dregs of
the people will be Lords and Masters. The true Causes or Occasions of this
unexpected Confusion are very differently related, some Monkish Historians
(followed, blindfold by some later Authors) out of hatred to Wickliffe and his
Tenets, (which now began to be much disseminated, and of which we shall by and
by give a further account) attributed it chiefly to his Doctrine: for it is an
ordinary thing to proclaim all Evils, concurring with any Attempts of
Reformation in Religion, to be proper fruits thereof; as the Heathens of old
imputed all their Calamities to the then new and rising Sect of the Christians:
But as we find nothing in that good man's real Positions (for several of his
Works are yet extant) to foment such a lewd Rebellion; so neither do the more
impartial Authors of that Age lay it at his Door: though it is agreed, one Ball
a factious Clergy^man was an Incendiary of that Combustion, which seems in its
Original ascribable to the natural desire of Liberty, and pride of Humane
Nature, impatient of Superiority, since the Villains or Bondmen were chief in
the Tumult; and partly to the heavy Taxes and Insolences of the Collectors,
and especially of these New Farmers of the Subsidy, or Commissioners, which
exasperated the common people into a Mutiny. But whatever were the
Provocations, dismal were the Effects, and might have proved fatal to the utter
ruin of the Kingdom, had not the Providence of God wonderfully prevented it.

Nor is it less disputable where the Uproar began, some say in Essex, some in
Kent; for the Flame was so suddenly spread into diverse places, that they could
scarce tell where the Fire broke forth, and who first headed them, is also
uncertain; some speak of one Thomas a Baker of Fobhyngges; others of Walter
Tyler at Deptford in Kent, to be the Ringleader: but the most received
Tradition is thus. That one of the said Collectors of Poll-money, coming to the
house of the said Tyler (so called from his Trade) and requiring of his Wife to
pay for a Daughter of hers, whom she affirmed was not of age to pay, the rude
Fellow told her, he would presently see whether she were so or not, and
forceably turned up her Coats, whereupon the Mother made such an Outcry, that
her Husband being at work hard by, heard her, and came running with his Lathing
Staff in his hand, wherewith he beat out the Collectors Brains, and knowing
that for the same he must be hanged, endeavored to secure himself by greater
Crimes, drawing together the Rabble, and incensing them, (who of themselves
were but too ready) unto a Rebellion: Thus Multitudes flockt together, broke
open the Goal at Maidstone, where the beforementioned Ball the Priest was then
a Prisoner, who having gained his Liberty, marched along with them; and they
growing still more numerous, (some write an Hundred thousand strong) came to
Blackheath, where he made a seditious Preachment to them, taking for his Text
or Theme the old Proverb; When Adam Delv'd, and Eve Span,
Who was then a Gentleman?
From thence telling them, That by Descent from Adam, all men were of one
Condition; That the Laws of the Realm were injurious to Christian Liberty, and
unjust by making such difference of men's Estates, preferring some to be Peers
and Potentates, with great Authority and large Possessions, whereby they took
advantage of the humble pliable Condition of others, to keep them in slavery,
hardly affording them Sustenance; whereas there ought to be an equal sharing of
all things, and that in common, etc.

This Doctrine was extremely pleasing to these Raggamuffins, who animated thus
with Multitudes, and holding Correspondence with others as mad as themselves in
other Counties, they Arrested all Strangers that they met with, making them
swear to be true to King Richard, and to the Commons, and never to own any King
that should be called John: which they did out of spite to the Duke of
Lancaster, against whom they had an implacable Malice. They likewise beheaded
all Lawyers they could catch, saying, Till they were rooted out, the Land would
never enjoy free liberty.

At Black Heath they sent for the King to hear their Grievances, but the
Archbishop of Canterbury and the Lord Treasurer, dissuaded him from venturing
his Royal Person amongst them, which being understood by the Commons, they were
thereupon more enraged against those two, calling them Traitors; and to be
revenged immediately march toward London; in Southwark they discharge all
Prisoners, and when the Mayor of London would have pulled up the Drawbridge,
and shut the Gates against them, the Rabble of the City would not suffer him,
so that all that Night they came in and out at their pleasure, being the more
favored, because hitherto they spoiled no man, but honestly paid for all they
had, saying, They came not as Robbers, but to bring Malefactors to justice. The
King to prevent Mischief, sent them word to meet Him at Mile-end, where he
would hear their Complaints, and part of them accordingly went thither, where
the King gave them a C^arter under the Great Seal of England, That thenceforth
all the Men of England should be free, and discharged from the Tenor of
Villenage, and all Bondage of that kind. The Tenor of which Charter of
Manumission, as it was given to them, and within few days sent into several
Counties, was as follows.

RICHARD, By the Grace of God King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland,
to all his Bailiffs and faithful Subjects to whom these Presents shall come,
Greeting, Know ye, that of our special Grace, we have Manumiss'd or set free
all and singular our Liege Subjects, and other of the County of E. and them and
every of them from all Bondage do Release and Acquit by these Presents. And
also we pardon to our said Liege-men and Subjects, all manner of Felonies,
Treasons, Transgressions, and Extortions, by them or any of them, in any manner
whatsoever done or committed; And also all and every Outlawry or Outlawries, if
any be or shall be Published against them, or any of them, for or by occasion
of the Premises; and do thereof to them and every of them grant Our highest
Peace: In witness whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patent:

Witness Our self at London, the Fifteenth of June, in the Fourth Year of Our
Reign.

Upon this Concession, most of the Essex-men that met at Mile-end went home;
but while this was doing, others that staid behind in London, entered the,
Tower, and dragged out thence Hen. Earl of Derby the Duke of Lancaster's Son,
and but a youth; Simon of Sudbury, Archbishop of Canterbury* and Chancellor of
England; Robert Hales Prior of the Hospital, and Treasurer of England; he the
beforementioned John Leg, and and John a Minorite, being a Crony of
Lancaster's and 3 others, all which 7 last they forthwith Beheaded, carrying
their Heads on Poles, as in Triumph: And now being heated with both Wine and
Blood, they march to the Savoy, and burn the Duke of Lancaster's stately
Palace, (the best House in England) with all its rich Furniture to Ashes,
breaking in pieces all his Plate and Jewels of inestimable value, and flinging
them into the Thames, and when one of their Fellows was spied to thrust a piece
of Plate into his Bosom, they presently flung it and him into the fire to be
destroyed together* saying, They came not like Thieves to enrich themselves.
But of Liquors they were not so scrupulous; for two and thirty of them being
got ito the Dukes Wine-Cellar, Tippled so long till the Rafters of the House on
fire, fell down, and stopped the passage, that they could not get out, but were
heard to cry seven days after, and so perished. From the Savoy they came back
to the Temple, and burnt the Lawyers Lodgings, Books, Papers, and all Records
they could meet with: The house of S. John's by Smithfield, they set fire to,
so that it burnt seven days; Nor had they any regard to Churches* but forced
out such as fled thither for Sanctuary, and Beheaded them, for they used no
other manner of Execution to high or low.

That Night wearied with spoil, and generally Drunk, they lay sleeping like
Swine in the open Streets and under the Walls: and the next day being routed
together again, the King with a small Guard coming to Smithfield, offered a
Pardon to all such as yet after all these Outrages would cease from the like
for the future, and go quickly home. Whereupon Wat Tyler declared, That he was
for Peace very willingly, provided it were on such Terms as he should approve
of: Therefore to understand what he would have, one Sir John Newton is sent to
Invite and desire (for so they were glad in that Juncture of Affairs to
compliment his Sawciness) Wat to come and Treat thereof with the King; and when
the Knight urged him to make haste, he answered with some Indignation; If thou
art in such haste, go back to thy Master the King; I Will come when I see mine
own time. However he soon followed him on Horse back, but slowly for the
greater State, and being come near the King, the same Knight was commanded to
go to him, and receive and bring back his Proposals. Tyler offended, because
this Messenger came to him mounted, told him it became him to alight from his
Horse in his Presence; and therewith drew out his Dagger to strike him: But the
King to pacify him, made him alight. The Demands which Tyler made, besides a
general Enfranchisement of the Bond men, (which the King had already granted)
were, That all Warrens, Parks, and Chases, should be made common and free to
all, so that as well the Poor as the Rich, should have liberty to Fish, Fowl,
and Hunt in all places throughout the Kingdom, with several other the like
extravagant Demands: In which Tyler behaved himself so insolently, that the
Kings Attendants could not but represent to his Majesty that it was
insufferable, and the before celebrated John Philpot, according to his usual
Courage, told the King, That if his Majesty would but command his Lieutenant;
viz. The Mayor to Arrest the Traitor, he would lose his Life if it were not
happily accomplished; Whereupon the King was prevailed with to give such a
Command, or rather leave to William Walworth, then Mayor of London, who waiting
an Opportunity, and observing Tyler to play with his Dagger, tossing it from
hand to hand, as if he meant some mischief, and that at last (to what intent is
not known, whether out of rudeness, or design) he laid one of his hands upon
the Kings Bridle, fearing the Ruffian might attempt his Royal Person, instantly
executed his Arrest, by giving him a Blow on his Head with a Dagger; which was
seconded with Philpot's Sword and another in his Body, so that immediately he
fell down dead on the ground: When the Rabble saw this, they began furiously to
cry out, O our Captain is slain, our Captain is murdered: Let Us revenge the
Death of our Captain, etc. But the King with a Courage and Ingenuity beyond any
thing could be expected from his Years, (for he was not yet above Fifteen)
Clapped Spurs to his Horse and rod to the Head of them, crying aloud, What mean
you my Men? Or what do you do? Will you shoot your King? You shall have no
cause to grieve for the Death of that Traitor and Ribauld; I that am the King,
will be your Captain and your Leader: Follow me into the Field, and you shall
have whatever you will?

Upon which words, amazed, and not certainly resolved either of one another
minds, nor indeed each man of his own, they followed awhile, till Sir Richard
Knolls, with a Thousand armed men raised in the mean time by the Mayor, came
upon them out of the City, at whose approach (being now headless, and all in
confusion) they were so terrified, that they forthwith flung down what Arms
they had, and begged for Mercy; which the King granted, and withal gave them a
Charter of Freedom in form as before recited; but proclaimed, that no Citizen
should have any Correspondence with any of them, nor suffer them to come within
the Liberties: And so this dreadful rout from the height of Insolence was in a
moment scattered and reduced to the depth of misery and fear, sneaking back by
stealth into the Country: many in their passage slain or perishing for want,
and multitudes of them soon after Executed.

For this good Service, the King upon the place conferred the Honor of
Knighthood upon the said John Walworth Mayor, and John Philpot, as likewise on
Nichol. Brembre, John Land, and Nicholas Twyford, Citizens of London. And in
memory of so Honorable an Exploit, performed by the Mayor, the Dagger has
('it is said) ever since that time been added in the City-Arms, which before bore
only the Cross.

But though things were thus appeased at London, there was still no less
Hurley-burley in several Counties: At St. Albans they committed many Outrages,
and Cancelled the Ancient Charter of the Abbot and Monks. In Suffolk there were
swarmed together Fifty thousand Villains, under the Conduct of one John Straw,
a lewd Priest, who beheaded Sir John Cavendish, Lord Chief Justice of England,
and ^et his Head on the Pillory in S. Edmundsbury. The like Commotions also
there were at the same time in Norfolk, Cambridge-shire, and the Isle of Ely,
at the Instigation of one Littester, a Dyer, who called himself King of the
Commons, and forced several Lords, and Persons of Quality to be sworn to them,
and ride along with them to countenance their Proceedings; but these were for
the most part subdued and dispersed, by the active valor of Hugh Spenser
Bishop of Norwich, who gathering an Army together, set upon the Rebels with
incredible fury, pursuing them from place to place, and giving no Quarter to
any of them.

It is to be noted, That these Rebels in several Shires held correspondence,
and their Leaders sent abroad their Epistles of Advice, and encouragement; some
of which (as they were afterward taken and owned) I shall insert, for the
Readers diversion: that he may admire the style of these popular Orators, and
observe what strength of persuasion there was in Nonsense.

A LETTER of John Ball to the COMNONS in Essex.
John Sheep sometime S. Mary Priest of York, and now of Colchester, Greeteth
well John Nameless, and John the Miller and John Charter, and bids them
beware of Guil in Borough, and stand together in Gods Name, and bids Piers
Plowman go to his werk, and Chastise well Hob the Robber, and take with you
John Trewman, and all his Fellows, and no mo. John the Miller has yground
small, small, small: The Kings Son of heven shall pay for all. Beware, or ye be
woe; know your Friend fro your Foe, have enough, and say No, and do well and
better, and flee sin, and seek peace, and hold you therein: And so bids
John Trewman, and all his Fellows.


Another.
John Ball gretyth you well All, and does you to understand, he has rungen the
Bell; Now right. and^myght, will and skyll, God speed every ye dele. Now is
time, Lady help to Ihesu the Sone, and thid Sone to his Fadur, to make a good
end, in the name of the Trinity, of that is begun: Amen, Amen, pur Charity,
Amen.


Another.
John Bell S. Mary Prist gretes well all manner men, and byddes them in the
Name of the Trinity, Fadur and Son and Holy Ghost, stond manlyche togedyr in
trewthe, and helps trewthe, and trewthe shall help you: Now regneth Pride in
prise, and Covetous is hold wise; and Lechery without en shame, and Glotony
without en blame. Envy regneth with treason, and slouthe is take in great
sesone. God do bote, for now is the time. Amen, in Esex, Southfolc, and
Northfolc.


Jack the Millers Epistle.
JAKK Mylner asket help to turn his Mylne aright. He has Grounden small,
small, The Kings Son of Heven he shall pay for all. Look thy Mylne do a right,
with the four Sails, and the Post stand in steadfastness. With right and with
might, with skill and with will, lat might help right, and skill go before
will, and right before might* than goes our Mylne aright. And if might go
before right, and will before skill than is our Mylne mysadyght,


Jack the Carter's
JAKK Carter pryes you all, that ye make a good end of that ye have begunnen,
and does well, and ay bettur and bettur, for at the even men heryth the day:
for if the end be well than is all well. Lat Peers the Plowman my Brother duele
at home, and dyght us Corn, and I will so with you, and help that ye may so
dyght your mete and your drynk, that ye none fail. Lokke that Hobb Robbyoure
be well chastised for lesing of your Grace, for ye have great need to take God
with you in all yowr deeds, for now is time to beware.


Jack Trewman's Scroll.
JAkk Trewman does you to understand, that falseness and gile havith reigned to
long, and truth has been set under a Lokke, and falsneth and gile regneth in
everylk Flokke. No man may come truth to, both sing Si dedero, Speak, spend,
and speed quoth John of Bathon, and therefore sin fares as wild flode, true
love is a way that was so good, and Clerks for wealth worth hem woe. God do bote,
for nowze is time.


The Storm being thus happily over-blown, the Rebels suddenly mastered, and a
competent Force raised to secure the Peace of the Kingdom, it was quickly
thought fit to revenge such an Affront, and bring the Delinquents to justice.
In order to which, the King as soon as he could do it with safety to Himself
and the Public, revokes his former Charters of Manumission and Pardon, by a
Proclamation under His Great Seal, in these Terms.

RICHARD, by the Grace of God, King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland;
To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting: Although in the late
detestable Disturbance, horribly made by diverse of Our Liege People and
Subjects rising up against Our Peace, certain Letters Patent of Ours were made
at the importunate Instance of the Rebels, containing, That We have freed all
Our Liege People, Common Subjects, and others of the several Counties of Our
Realm of England, and them, and every of them discharged and acquitted from all
Bondage and Service. And also, That we have pardoned them all manner of
Insurrections by them against Us made, and all manner of Treasons, Felonies,
Transgressions, and Extortions, by them or any of them committed. As also, all
Outlawries Published against them, or any of them, on those Occasions; Or that
we have granted to them and every of them Our firm Peace: And that Our Will
was, That Our said Liege People and Subjects should be free to buy and Sell in
all Cities, Buroughs, Towns, Markets, and other Places within the Kingdom of
England; and that no Acre of Land which holds in Bondage or Villenage, should
be accounted higher than at Four Pence; And if any were before held for less,
that it should not be raised for the future. Yet for that such Our Letters did
Issue without Mature Deliberation, and unduly, We well weighing, that the Grant
of the said Letters, does manifestly tend to the very great prejudice of Us and
Our Crown, and to the Disinherison as well of us, and the Prelates and Nobility
of Our said Realms, as of the Holy Anglicane Church, and also the the Damage
and Incommodity of the Commonwealth. Therefore by the Advice of Our Council, We
have Revoked, made void, and do utterly annul the said Letters, and whatever
has been done or followed thereupon, willing that none of what state or
condition soever he be, shall any way have or reap, or enjoy any liberty or
benefit whatsoever, of or by the said Letters. For We will, and it is our
intention, by the Advice of Our sound Council, for the future, to impart such
Grace and Favor to all and singular, although they have grievously forfeited
their Allegiance, as shall be well-pleasing and profitable to Our Realm, and
with which Our faithful Subjects may reasonably hold themselves contented. And
this we do notify to all persons concerned, by these Presents, Commanding the
same to be Proclaimed in all Cities and Towns, Villages, etc. And further We
strictly require and command, That all and singular as well Free as Bondmen,
shall without any contradiction, murmuring, resistance or difficulty, do and
perform the Works, Customs, and Services, which to us or any other their Lords
they ought to do, and which before the said Disturbance were used to be done,
without lessening or delaying the same. And that they do not presume to
require, pretend, or claim any other Liberties or Privileges, than what they
reasonably had before the said Tumults. And that all such as have any of Our
said Letters of Manumission and Pardon in their Custody, shall immediately
bring and restore the same to Us and our Council to be Cancelled, upon the
Faith and Allegiance in which to Us they are bound, and upon pain of forfeiting
All that to Us they can forfeit for the future. In testimony whereof* We have
caused these Our Letters to be made Patent.

Witness Our Self at Chelmsford, the Second Day of July, in the Fifth Year of
Our Reign.

By this Revocation, all Pretensions of pleading a Pardon being cut off,
procedings were next made against the principal Offenders, several of them
being convicted before the Mayor, and beheaded, as John Straw, John Kickby,
Alane Tradder, and John Sterling, which last boasted that he was the man that
slew the Archbishop. Also Sir Robert Tresilian Chief Justice, was empowered by
special Commission, to judge others of the Rebels, before whom in sundry
places, above Fifteen hundred were found Guilty, and put to death; and amongst
them the before mentioned Incendiary Ball the Priest, who being taken at
Coventry, was brought before the King at S. Alban^, and the^e drawn, hanged and
quartered.

During these Uproars, the Duke of Lancaster, (very happily for the
preservation of his Person, against whom the Commons had so great a spite) was
gone into the North against the Scots, but having Tidings of the Insurrection,
thought fit to clap up a Truce for Two years, which he got ratified upon Oath
some days before the Scots had any notice of the Troubles in England; but
conceiving himself in danger, for the general (though false) report was, that
the King to pacify the Rebels had consented to abandon him to their pleasure,
when ever they could seize him, and having receiceived some Affronts in that
distress from the Earl of Northumberland, he desired of the Scots a safe
Conduct, and to reside for a time amongst them, who honorably entertained him,
till he was sent for by the King, and then a new cause of grudge happened between
him and the Earl of Northumberland, for in his return he was denied passage
through the Town of Barwick, by the Captain Sir Matthew Redman, by virtue of a
Command from the said Earl Lord Warden of the Marches, not to suffer any from
Scotland to enter the same, which indeed the King had specially ordered,
forgetting the Dukes being then in that Kingdom. However this bred such an
Animosity in the Duke against the Earl, that being come home, he charged him
with several things, which the Earl as stoutly answered, and great numbers of
armed men followed each of them, but the King taking their Differences into his
own hands, workt a Reconciliation.

About All-hallontide, began a Parliament, but had not accomplished any thing of
moment before they were adjourned till after Christmas, by reason of the
arrival of the new Queen, Sister of Wyncelaus King of Bohemia, and elected
Emperor: an Alliance of some honor, but little profit to the Realm, she being
followed with a multitude of insatiate Bohemians; who by the Kings facility,
drained abundance of Wealth out of the Kingdom. It was observed, that as soon
as ever she set foot on shore at Dover, an horrible Storm arose at Sea, which
so tossed the Ships in the Harbor, that the same which her Majesty came in,
was immediately dashed to pieces; which some then looked upon as Ominous,
presaging Tempests of State to follow her.

[1382.] The Nuptial Solemnities, which were very splendid and costly, being
over, the Parliament meets again, to begin the New Year, in which several
wholesome Laws were ordained; as to admit Merchant-strangers freely to sell their
Merchandises here, to regulate Excesses in in the Apparel of inferior people,
to settle the price of Wines, and many other matters. But, what (says our
Author Thomas Walsingham, condemning such Practices) signify Acts of
Parliaments, when after they are made, they take no effect, or are nothing
regarded, for the King with his Privy Council, took upon them to alter or
wholly se^ aside all things, that by general consent had in Parliament been
established.

Of the truth whereof, there were too many unhappy Instances, as amongst the
rest, in this very Parliament, upon the request of the Lords and Commons, Sir.
R. Scroop was by the King appointed Lord Chancellor as being a Person of known
Judgment, Learning, and inflexible Integrity; but within few Months he was
turned out of that Office, (which he had laudably and prudently administered)
merely because to do the King faithful Service he had displeased some of his
unworthy M^nors: the Relation of which, I shall set down in Walsinghams own
Words. Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March, and several other Lords, being lately
dead, certain greedy and ambitious Knights and Squires, and others of inferior
Rank, that were Servants to the King, had begged of him Grants of diverse Lands
and Lordships, lately belonging to the deceased, that they might have the
profits thereof, for so long time as the King by the Custom of the Realm, was
to hold them in his Hands; which the King, not minding the value, nor
considering any reason they had to desire, or merit to deserve, such Revenues,
presently consents to, ordering them to the Chancellor to have their Grants
confirmed under the great Seal; but the prudent and honest Chancellor, who
zealously desired the prosperity of the Kingdom, and just profit of the King,
absolutely refused to do it; telling them, the King was much in debt, and 'twas
most necessary he should reserve such Contingencies to himself, therewith in
part to satisfy his Creditors; and that since they well knew such the Kings
urgent occasions, they could be no good Subjects to his Majesty, that
consulting their own advantages more than his service, and preferring private
lucre before public necessities, should go about to circumvent, and further
impoverish him, by such prejudicial Requests, from which they should do well to
desist, and be content with his Majesty's former Largesses, which were
sufficient for them.

Nettled with this repulse, these Courtiers resort back to the King, grievously
complaining of the Chancellors Obstinacy, that he contemned his Majesty's
Command, and that it concerned his Majesty suddenly, and with due severity, to
Chastise such an affronted disobedience; for otherwise the Royal Authority
would become contemptible to all his People, and his Command be accounted of no
value, etc. The young King therefore more regarding the false suggestions of
these self-designing flatterers, than the faithful allegations and advice of
his Chancellor, sends in his fury messengers to demand the Seal of him, but the
Chancellor would deliver it to no hands but the Kings. To whom having
surrendered it, he was pleased to retain it for many days in his own Custody,
Sealing Grants therewith himself, etc. Till at length the keeping of it was
conferred on Braibrook Bishop of London.

To this last mentioned Parliament, John Wickliff exhibited a certain
Complaint, or Articles, chiefly against the Abuses of Monks, Friars, etc. An
Abstract of the substance whereof is as follows.

1. Article, That all Persons of what Kind, Order, Sect, or singular Religion
soever, made or instituted by men, may freely without any let or punishment,
leave the same at their pleasure, and are only bound stably to hold the Rule of
Jesus Christ, taken and given by him and his Apostles, and far more profitable
than such new Religions founded by sinful men.

2. Art. That those things which men have unreasonably and wrongfully
condemned; As, That the King cannot take away the Goods of Prelates, Monks,
etc. misbehaving themselves, or the like; may be vindicated and asserted, and
the contrary Error condemning them Exposed: For that nothing ought to be
condemned, unless it savor of Error or unrighteousness against Gods Law.

3. Art. That both Tithes and Offerings be given, paid, and received, with and
to the same intent only, as by Gods Law they ought; that is, that what is more
than sufficient to serve the Priests, etc. with Necessaries, be given to the
Poor: And that if they be abused to luxury or covetousness, then they may
lawfully be taken away.

4. Art. That Christ's Doctrine, and the Belief touching the Sacrament plainly
delivered by him and his Apostles, be openly taught in Churches, and the
contrary Teaching and false Belief, brought up by cursed Hypocrites and worldy
Priests, exploded.

Wickliff's preferring these Articles (which he at large Confirmed both by
Authorities and Reason) stirred up fresh hatred against him in the
Ecclesiastics, and procured him much trouble.

Wherefore because all Papists so furiously condemn him to this day as a wicked
Heretic, and we justly own him as one of the first and most eminent Authors of
the Reformation in Doctrine, by his painful Writing and Preaching, his Tenets
being generally the same See Doctor James of Oxford, his Apology for Wickliff,
showing his Conformity with the new Church of England, Printed An. 1608.
with those professed at this day by the Protestant Churches, bating some few
Errors intermixed, which are as less material, so likewise more excusable,
considering the Ignorance and Blindness of the Age he lived in. And since his
Story, is one of the Remarkables of this King Richard's Reign, it will not be
impertinent briefly to relate the same.

Wickliff is said to be descended of an ancient Family in the North, but the
exact year of his Birth we do not find Recorded; he was Educated in Merton
College in Oxford, became first Divinity Reader in that Famous University, and
afterward Rector of Lutterworth in Leicester shire: Touching his Parts, his
Contemporary Henry de Knyghton, Cannon of Leicester, (and by consequence none
of his Friends) does yet give this Honorable Character, That he was the most
eminent Doctor of Divinity of those times, second to none in Philosophy,
incomparable for School learning, and transcending most both in subtilty of
Science, and profoundness of Wit. These great Abilities enabled him quickly to
discover the Falsity of the Doctrines, and the Cheat of the Practices then in
vogue in the Church: For in his Studies, he had run through the whole Course of
the Schoolmen; and amongst them was a professed Follower of Occham, by reading
whose Works, and others that lived about the same time, or not long before,
such as Bradwardine, Marsilius, Gulielmus de Sancto Amore, Abelardus,
Armachanus, and the Learned Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln: God gave him Grace to
see the Truth of his Gospel, and by seeing it, to loath Superstition and
Popery. By Occham and Marsilius he was informed of the Popes Intrusions and
Usurpations upon Kings, their Crowns and Dignities. Of Gul. de S. Amore and
Armachanus, he learned the sundry Abuses of the Monks and Friars in upholding
this Usurped Power. By Abelard and others, he got a Prospect of the Right Faith
touching the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. By Bradwardine he was instructed in
the nature of a true Sole Justifying Faith, against Merit-mongers, and
Pardoners, Pelagians, etc. Finally by perusing Grosthead's Works (in which he
seemed to be most conversant) he descryed the Pope to be Antichrist, by
hindering the Preaching of the Gospel, and placing unfit men in the Church, only
to support his own Tyranny. And being thus enlightened, his Zeal to Truth would
not suffer him to Conceal his Candle under a Bushel: And therefore those that
assigned his being deprived of a Benefice in Oxford, to be the occasion of
first spreading his Opinions, and would attribute all to Resentment and
Revenge, speak either rashly or maliciously, no such provocation being so much
as mentioned by Authors of best Credit, to occasion his preaching against the
Corruptious of the Times; nor is it likely that he would have so inveighed
against Clergy-covetousness and Pride, if they could have retorted on him any
such cause of his Discontent; or how can we but imagine, that if he had
affected any such small Business as the Headship of Canterbury College, the
Duke of Lancaster (who was his Great Patron) could have helped him to it. For
indeed the Fame of his Learning, his unwearied diligence in Preaching and
Writing, together with his pious exemplary Life, procured him many Disciples
amongst the People, and several Favorers of the first Rank: The rather, for
that he justly opposed the Ambition and Avarice of the Clergy, a Theme no less
grateful than necessary; for the Temporal Statesmen already found it to be an
insufferable Grievance, though they wanted Skill or Courage to abate it. King
Edward the Third (though a great Doter on Ecclesiastics) is supposed not to
have been his Enemy; and it is certain the pious Duke of Lancaster, (so our
Author Knyghton always calls him) and several of the Nobles were much his
Friends, and Protectors against the Rage of the Prelates; for Wickliff being in
King Edward's days Cited to Answer before the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Bishop of London, and others in Paul's, the said Duke, and Sir Henry Piercy Lord
Marshal, were pleased to attend him thither, and would needs have him sit in
presence of the Court, alleging he had much to answer, and therefore needed
convenient ease; which favor the Bishop of London refusing to grant, hard words
arose between the Temporal and Spiritual Lords; insomuch that the Duke
threatened he would pull down the pride of all the Bishops of England: And by
reason of their Contest, Wickliff for the present got off, and little was done
against him.

But in the beginning of King Richards Reign, the Pope sent a Bull to the
University of Oxford, upbraiding them with suffering and countenancing Wickliff
and his Doctrine, and charging them on pain of being deprived of all their
Privileges and Indulgences, that they should no longer tolerate the same. But
the Heads of the University were so well satisfied with Wickliffe's Integrity,
that they were at a stand whether they should receive the said Bull, or reject
it with Contempt: However the Pope plied both the King and the Archbishop, and
Bishop of London, with several other Letters and Bulls to the same effect; So
that at last, Wickliff was again Convened before them; but on the Day assigned
for his Examination, Sir Lewis Clifford came into their Court, and in the Name
of the Princess Joan, the Kings Mother, peremptorily Commanded them to proceed
no further in that Affair; with which being terrified, they desisted their
prosecution, and once more he got out of their Clutches.

But now by reason of the beforementioned Articles offered to the King and
Parliament, the Bishops soon after summoned him again before them, but whether
he appeared or not, is uncertain: However they proceeded against the Opinions
and Conclusions following, as His, which as they are related by the Historians
of those Times, I shall recite; some of them being Branded as Heresies, others
only as Errors; Viz.

Heresy I. That the Substance of Bread or Wine remains after Consecration in
the Sacrament of the Altar. Heresy II. That Accidents do not remain without a
Subject after Consecration in the same Sacrament. Heresy III. That Christ is
not in the Sacrament of the Altar Identically, truly and really in his proper
Corporal Person. Heresy IV. That if a Bishop or Priest whilst he is in mortal
sin, should Ordain, Consecrate, or Baptize, it would be nothing available.

[Note, this is falsely charged, Wickliffe's words whence this is wrested, are
in his book. De Veritate Scriptu^arum, p. 138. Nisi ^hristianu, etc. Un^ess the
Christian Priest be united unto Christ by Grace, Christ cannot be his Savior,
neither can he speak the Sacramental words without lying; Licet pro^^^t
c^pacibu, though yet they are profitable to fit Receivers. Which last Clause
they spightfully omit.]

Heresy V. That if a Man be duly Contrite, all outward Confession is
superfluous and to him unprofitable. Heresy VI. That he has Obstinately
asserted, that it is not founded in the Gospel, that Christ ordained the Mass.
Heresy VII. That God ought to obey the Devil.

[This Position the Devil himself would scarce dare to utter, much less this
godly man* who on the quite contrary in his Comment on the Psalms p. 112 says,
the Devil is clepid God's Angel: for he may do nothing but at Gods suffering,
and serves God in tormenting sinful men, it is true in his Book against the
Friars, Cap. 28 he complains of their Blasphemy, in accusing the Holy
Scriptures of Falsehood, which, says he, is to put falsness upon God himself,
who is the Author thereof, and yet they would have in believe what they
themselves say is true. Alas (says he) who may suffer this Blasphemy, that
Christ in whom is all Treasure of Wit, Wisdom, and Truth, could not, or would
not say true words, and sentence, but yet sinful fools have true manner of
speaking, contrary to the speech of our Lord Jesu Christ, for if this be sinful
fools, yea Devils of Hell, been wiser and t^uer than Jesu Christ. From these
words, or some such Argument ab Ab^urdo, against them, that which he proves to
be their wicked consequence they make his D^ctrin, just as if one should charge
David with asserting, there is no God, leaving out, The Fool has said in his
Heart.

Heresy VIII. That if the Pope be a wicked Man, and consequently a member of
the Devil, then he has no power given him over faithful Christians by any,
unless perhaps by Caesar. Heresy IX. That after Urban the Sixth, [Pope at that
time] none ought to be chosen Pope, but we ought to live after the manner of
the Greeks, under our own Laws.


Errors.
[That is only for offenses against Gods Law.]
1. That no Prelate ought to Excommunicate any, unless first he know such
person to be Excommunicated of God. 2. That if any shall otherwise
Excommunicate, he thereby becomes an Heretic, or Excommunicated person
himself. 3. That a Prelate Excommunicating a Clerk that has appealed to the
King and Council of the Kingdom, is thereby a Traitor to God, the King, and
Kingdom. 4. That those who forbear to Preach, or hear the Word of God, or the
Gospel, for the Excommunication of men, are Excommunicated, and at the day of
Judgment shall be accounted Traitors to God. [This is wrested to a worse sense
than Wickliff intended.]
5. That it is contrary to the Scriptures, that persons Ecclesiastical should
have Temporal possessions. 6. That it is lawful to any Deacon, or Presbyter, to
Preach the Word of God, without Authority from the Pope, or any Catholic
Bishop. [This is the same Calumny with the Fourth Heresy.]
7. That none, whilst in mortal sin, is to be accounted a Bishop or Prelate. 8.
That Temporal Lords may at their pleasure take away Temporal Goods from the
Church habitually offending. 9. That Tithes are pure Alms, and Parishioners may
for the sins of their Curates detain the same, and confer them at their
pleasure upon others. 10. That special prayers applied by Prelates or Religious
persons to one particular person, do not more profit him, than general prayers,
all things else being equal. 11. That any one entering into any Private
Religion, is thereby rendered more unapt, and incapable of observing the
Commandments of God. 12. That Holy Men, that instituted Private Orders of
Religion, whether of Mendicants, or such as are endowed with possessions, did
sin in so doing. 13. That those called Religious, living in private Orders of
Religion, are not of the Christian Religion. 14. That Friars Mendicant, are
bound to live by the Labor of their Hands and not to get their living by
Begging. 15. That Friars Begging after their Sermons, do thereby incurr the
Crime of Simony, and all that bestow Alms on them are Excommunicate, as well
the giver as receiver.


About these Positions the Bishops first met at Oxford (where they had taken
such impression, that Riggs the Vice Chancellor, and many others had embraced
them) and after that at the Gray-Fryars London, on the Seventeenth of May,
1382. on which day after Dinner, about Two a Clock, just as they were going to
proceed in this Business, happened a Wonderful and Terrible Earthquake
throughout all England; whereupon diverse of the Suffragans being affrighted,
would have desisted, but the Archbishop otherwise interpreting the Omen, they
went on, and at last solemnly Condemned all the said Propositions, there being
present Eight Bishops, Nineteen Monks and Friars, Fourteen Doctors of Law, and
Six Batchellors of Divinity.

However Mr. Wickliff himself (whether because they could not find him: or that
they were afraid to meddle with him) or rather because they were much
distracted by reason of the Feuds between two Popes then in being at once,
escaped their malice; and in the Year 1385. dyed peaceably in his Bed, having
been Doctor of Divinity above Thirty Years, and of such industry and learning,
that he Translated the whole Bible into Engglish; one Copy whereof written with
his own Hand, lately was, and I suppose still is extant in Saint John's
College in Oxford: He lived in a time, when the Friars Orders by their
manifold disorders were become exceeding odious, and the Popes jurisdiction by
provisions, Reservations, and Collations very intolerable, which made way for
those excellent statute Laws about this time enacted, of Premunice, against
Provisors, and the abuses of Begging Friars; which so bridled and restrained
the Popes Rampant Usurpations, that he could but little prevail here in
England, during the Reign of King Edward the Third, and King Richard the
Second: Toward making of which Laws, Wickliffe's Doctrine struck a great
stroke, he maintaining very learnedly and stoutly, the Kings jurisdiction,
Crown, and Dignity, against Papal and all kind of Encroachments, by the Laws,
Civil, Cannon, and Common, of which last especially he made great use, and was
well skilled therein. But for full satisfaction concerning this famous Man, I
shall here add, the Testimonial of the University given in his behalf, after
his Death, as follows, viz.

TO all and singular the Children of our holy Mother the Church, to whom these
presents shall come, the Vice Chancellor of the University of Oxford, with the
whole Congregation of the Masters, wish perpetual health in the Lord: Forasmuch
as it is not commonly seen, that the Acts and Monuments of Valiant men, nor the
praise and merits of good men, should be passed over and hidden with perpetual
silence, but that true report and fame should continually spread abroad the
same in strange and far distant places; both in Testimony thereof, and for the
example of others. Forasmuch also as the provident discretion of Man's nature
has devised this defense against slander, that when ever Witnesses by Word of
Mouth cannot be present, the Pen by Writing may supply the same.

Therefore the special good will and care which we bare unto John Wickliff,
sometime Child of this our University, and Professor of Divinity, moving and
exciting our minds (as his manners and conditions required no less) with one
Mind, Voice, and Testimony, we do witness all his conditions and doings
throughout his whole life, to have been most sincere and commendable; whose
honest manners, good disposition, profoundness of learning, and most redolent
fame, we desire the more earnestly to be notified to, and celebrated by all the
faithful, for that we understand, the maturity and ripeness of his
Conversation, his diligent Labors and Travels tend much to the Praise of God,
the help and safeguard of others, and the profit of truth.

Wherefore we signify unto you by these presents, that his Conversation (even
from his youth upwards, unto the time of his death) was so praiseworthy and
honest, that never at any time was there any note or spot of suspicion noised
of him, but in his answering, reading, preaching, and determining, he behaved
himself laudably, and as a stout Champion of the Faith, vanquishing by the
force of the Scriptures, all such who by their wilful Beggary, Blasphemed and
slandered Christ's Religion: Neither was this said Doctor Convict of any
Heresy, or burned by our Prelates [Note his Bones were not yet, but long after
ordered to be taken up and burnt by the Council of Constance] after his Burial:
For God forbid tha^ our Prelates should have condemned a man of such honesty
(...) an Heretic, who amongst all the rest of the University had Written in
Logic, Philosophy, Divinity, Morality, and the Speculative Art beyond
comparison, the knowledge of all which things we desire to testify, that the
fame and renown of this said Doctor may be more evident, and had in repute
amongst those into whose hands these present Letters Testimonial shall come.

In Witness whereof we have caused these our Letters Testimonial, to be Sealed
with our Common Seal, dated at Oxford, in our Congregation House, the 15. of
October, in the Year of our Lord, 1406.

About the same time, several of Wickliffs followers, as Nicholas of Hartford,
John Aston, John Purney, and other Priests, were much troubled for the same and
the like Opinions; among the rest our Author Henry de Knyghton, tells us; that
on Palm Sunday, he heard one at Leicester Preaching these horrible Heresies and
Errors (in his Opinion) following, viz.

That to Blabber with the Lips, and multiply Words in Prayer signified nothing.

That to give Money for Celebrating of Masses would not avail any body, unless
he led a good Life.

That Christ never commanded any Body to Beg.

That no Man is bound to give Alms to any that has better Cl^athes and outward
accommodation: than himself.

That none is truly a Prelate, nor capable of a Bishopric, unless he be a
Teacher and Preacher.

That Money got by Confessions is accursed, and as well the giver as receiver
Excommunicate.

That Preachers carrying about Baggs and Scripps, are false Teachers, since
Christ in his Gospel Commands the contrary, and the true Disciples of Christ
never practiced it.

That for those to Beg, who are able to work is Condemned by the Law Civil,
and no where approved by the Law Evangelical.

That Christ Converted many of diverse States and Conditions to the Faith; but
we do not find in the Holy Scripture that ever he converted a Priest.

These Opinions spreading so fast, and the Bishops perceiving that yet they had
not sufficient Authority by any Law, or Statute of this Realm, to proceed unto
Death or Imprisonment, against any for matters of Religion, they therefore
solicited the King for the power of the Temporal Sword, who overcome with their
importunity, or perhaps incited by hopes of some Subsidy to be given him by the
Clergy was content to give his Assent to an Ordinance, bearing the name of an
Act, made in the Parliament holden at Westminster, Anno Quint. R. 2. Ca. 5. in
these Words.

ITem, forasmuch as it is openly known, that there be diverse evil Persons
within the Realm, going from Country to Country, and from Town to Town, in
certain Habits under dissimulation of great Holiness; and without the License
of the Ordinaries of the places, or other sufficient Authority, Preaching
daily, not only in Churches and Churchyards, but also in Markets, Fairs, and
open Places, where a great Congregation of People is, diverse Sermons containing
Heresies, and notorious Errors, to the great emblemishing of Christian Faith,
and Destruction of thr Laws, and of the Estate of Holy Church, to the great
Peril of the Souls of the People, and of all the Realm of England, as more
plainly is found, and sufficiently proved before the Reverend Father in God the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishops, and other Prelates, Masters of
Divinity, and Doctors of the Canon, and of Civil Law, and a great part of the
Clergy of the said Realm, specially assembled for this great cause; which
Persons do also Preach diverse matters of slander, to engender, discord, and
dissension betwixt diverse Estates of the said Realm, as well Spiritual as
Temporal, in exciting of the People to the great Peril of all the Realm, which
Preachers cited or summoned before the Ordinaries of the places, there to
answer to that whereof they be impeached, they will not obey their Summons and
Commands, nor care not for their Monitions, nor Censures of the Holy Church,
but expressly despise them. And moreover by their subtle and ingenious words do
draw the People to hear their Sermons, and do maintain them in their errors by
strong hand, and by great routs. It is ordained and assented in this present
Parliament, That the Kings Commissions be made, and directed to the Sheriffs,
and other Ministers of our Sovereign Lord the King, or other sufficient persons
learned, and according to the Certifications of the Prelates thereof, to be
made in the Chancery from time to time, to arrest all such Preachers, and also
their Fauters, Maintainers, and Abetters, and to hold them in Arrest and strong
Prison, till they will justify to them according to the law and reason of Holy
Church. And the King wills and commands, that the Chancellor make such
Commissions at all times, that he by the Prelates, or any of them shall be
certified, and thereof required as is aforesaid.

This was the first pretense of Statute against the true Professors of
Religion, and indeed was no Act of Parliament duly made, but only by the King
and the Clergy, for at Michaelm. following, in the sixth year of the King, a
Parliament being assembled complained thereof, and having recited the same --
Add -- The which was never agreed nor granted by the Commons; but whatsoever
was moved therein, was without their Assent; and therefore prayen the Commons,
that the said Statute be disannulled, for it is not in any wise their meaning,
that either themselves or such as shall succeed them, shall be further
justified, or bound by the Prelates, than were their Ancestors in former times.
Whereunto it is answered, Il plaist au Roy, The King is pleased.

Yet though the supposed Law of the Fifth were hereby so repealed, and the
fraud thereof discovered, the Prelates ordered matters so, that this Act of
Repeal was never published, nor since printed in the Statute Book with the rest
of the Acts of that Parliament, as Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments well
observes.

The Year 1383 was famous for a Warlike Expedition undertaken by the English
Clergy, called a Croisado, or going forth to fight the Lords Battles (as they
pretended) under the Banner of the Cross. The occasion thus:

After the death of Pope Gregory the Eleventh, which happened in the Year of
our Lord 1378, one Bartholomew Bishop of Barri in Apulia, by the undue acts
hereafter mentioned got into the Chair, by the name of Urban the Sixth; who as
he entered by force, so he proceeded with so much pride and insolence, that
most of the Cardinals forsook him, and retiring to Avignion in France, chose
one Robert Bishop of Cibbo in his stead, who took upon him the style of Pope
Clement. Now to destroy him, and all that owned and took part with him, was the
meritorious design. And that the Reader may the better perceive the nature of
the Quarrel, and what mighty reason people had to venture their Lives, and
murder their Neighbors, for this Vrbans Interest, I shall insert a Copy of the
Cardinals Letter to him, as Walsingham recites it.

THe Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, by Divine Merit Cardinals, during the
vacancy of the Apostolical See, to Bartholomew late Archbishop of Barri, wish
the Spirit of founder counsel. The sanctity and purity of the Catholic Faith,
and the wholesome devotion of Christian People, the clear profession of the whole
Ecclesiastic State, and Salvation of all the faithful, do require, That those
things which may occasion a scandal unto our faith, the subversion of the
Worshippers of Christ, the weakening of the State of the Church, and the evident
danger of souls, should be openly notified to all, declared amongst the people,
and according to the Doctrine of the Gospel preached upon the house-tops, lest
by indiscreet silence those be left in error who might be reclaimed, and they
to whose office it belongs should lie under the reprehension of the Prophet,
saying, Thy Prophets and Preachers shall prophecy unto thee things false and
foolish, and shall not lay open thine iniquity, that they might provoke thee to
penance. Whereas therefore the Apostolic Seat being empty by the death of Pope
Gregory XI, of pious memory, who in March last departed this life; we for the
Election of another Pope, acc^rding to Law and Custom, had assembled our selves
in the Conclave, for that purpose assigned, in the Apostolical Palace, the
People of Rome gathered together by the sound of a Bell and in hosti^e manner,
surrounding the place, almost filling the Palace both without and within, did
with vehement Terror threaten, that unless without any delay, we choose a
Roman, or Italian, they would presently cut us into bits: And so there being no
due space afforded, wherein we might deliberate of a fit Person; they against
our will and intention, suddenly and abruptly by violence and bodily fear,
compelling us to choose an Italian, We thereupon merely to avoid the otherwise
inevitable Peril of Death, as at the same time we openly declared amongst our
selves, did think fit to nominate Thee for Pope, not doubting but thou to whom
as well as to all the Clergy, and People, that accursed violence was well
known) had had so much Conscience, as in no sort to accept of the same. But
thou forgetful of thine own Salvation, laying aside all pure Conscience, and
being otherwise ambitious, wast so far inflamed with the Ardor of Worldly
Honor, upon the presentation of that Election (though extorted also by Fear,
and against the Canonical Sanctions, from those who carried it from us into the
^ity) that thou to the greatest Scandal of the Christian Clergy and People and
to the pernicious Example of others in such cases, did consent to the said
Election, though the same in Law were absolutely null and void, and also out of
fear (as we well hope) did suffer thy self to be enthroned in the City, and
Crowned de facto, and so have taken upon thee the name of Pope, who by the holy
and wise Fathers, and by Right and Law, are rather and deservedly to be called,
An accursed Apostate, Antichrist, and the Invader, and Destroyer of all
Christianity. Since therefore such thy wicked Intrusion into the Papacy is now
divulged throughout the World, grown notorious, and cannot any longer be hid,
as being done just before Easter, when from all parts of Christendom there were
multitudes of People at Rome; and whereas many Errors have already began to
creep abroad, and the Consciences of the Faithful to be entangled; and that
thou being long expected, and charitably admonished in secret, regardest not to
amend thy folly, but rather do desire to draw the whole Clergy and People
into a Precipice, and preferring the empty transitory Glory of the World,
before the Salvation of thine own, and other Christians Souls, obstinately
endeavourest to hold the Popedom by Tyranny, into which thou did not enter by
the Door; We therefore not being able with safe Consciences any longer to
dissemble the Premises, laying forth the same, and giving notice thereof to
thee and all faithful Christians, though the same be already notorious to thy
self, and almost all the Clergy and People, do publish and denounce thee
accursed and (as having intruded into the Papacy without any Canonical
Election) an Invader of all Christianity, since thou dreadest not to invade the
very Head of Christianity it self, and such a Destroyer, as seek by thy
tyrannical Usurpation, to cause almost all the Sacraments to fail, and the
universal People of Christ to run astray on Precipices, as wanting a true
Shepherd; Exhorting nevertheless, and entreating by the Bowels of Mercy, of our
Lord Jesus Christ, whose Spouse the Church, thou have not blu^ht to commit a
Rape upon; that thou would think of the end, to which fullness of days is
hastening thee* that thou would direct the Eyes of thy mind to God and a
pure Conscience; and that thou would quit, and leave empty and free, that
most Holy Seat of S. Peter, which without title thou do occupy; and that thou
would lay aside the Papal Ensigns and Ornaments, and without delay abstain
from the Administration of any the Spirituals or Temporals of the Papacy and
Roman Church, and study to satisfy God and the Church to thy utmost power, by
the fruits of true repentance; which if thou shall perform, thou may deserve
to obtain the grace of God, and the applauses of the World, and the praises of
the Clergy and People, and a remission of those sharp penalties by the Canon
Laws inflicted, and to be with all diligence inflicted upon thee; but otherwise
art sure deservedly to incur the indignation of Almighty God, and of S. Peter
and Paul, and all other Saints; and we will invoke Divine and Human counsel
with the Spouse of Christ, and of all Christians, whose Mother without doubt is
in this behalf violated; and shall use all other remedies granted by the
Canonical Sanctions hitherto, that before thou have so resigned, thou may
have no hope of mercy.


But Vrbanus (whom some that were fond of a Quibble were wont to call Turbanus,
because he was the Disturber of Christendom) would neither be wheedled nor
hectored out of the Popedom, and therefore he gets together the Bishops that
still took his part, and makes diverse of them Cardinals, who soon returned a
thundering answer to this Epistle of the Schismatical Cardinals and Bishops,
(for so they called them that disowned Urban;) which (to show the meek spirits
of the men, and how notably they argue) I shall presume so far on the Readers
patience, as here likewise to insert.

WE the Universal Faithful of Christ, honored with this sacred Character,
founded so upon the firm rock of Truth, that the Lord upholding and watering
the root of our Holy Faith, by no whirlwinds of Heretical or Schismatical
persuasion, we can be extirpated or overthrown; to John Bishop of Praenest,
William with the title of S. Stephen in the Celian Mount, etc. not (as you call
your selves) Cardinals by Divine Mercy of the Holy Roman Church, but accursed
and most ravenous Wolves, Invaders of the whole Flock of Christ, and most
subtle Foxes, desiring to lay waste the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, send not
Greeting but Grief, not Joy but Sorrow, and that you may be clothed with
Confusion as with a Garment. The insipid tenor of your Letters, which by the
Devils instigation you rashly have sent throughout all the Provinces of
Christendom, has wounded our hearts, and all that is within us, not by
startling our Faith, but with a godly compassion for so horrid a scandal as
lately is raised in the Holy Church of God; but Woe unto you by whom these
scandals come, for the Face of our Mother the Church is made pale, pale with
unspeakable trouble, for the error of your wickedness (the like not heard of
for many ages) who would be esteemed zealous of the Laws, when in truth you are
sacrilegious, though scon she is rendered ruddy again with modest blushes,
seeing by your ill deeds all the Borders of Christianity to be inflamed. O
detestable and unhappy Ambition of yours, which endeavors to rend our Lords
seamless Coat, and part that which suffers no division, but rather rejoices in
unity. Wicked Servants, Out of your own mouths you shall be judged, by your
Letters, you have declared the manner of the Election of the Pope by you lately
celebrated, alleging that an unruly multitude of armed people beset the
Conclave, terribly and mortally threatening you, unless you should choose an
Italian or Roman, but not limiting any certain person whom they would force you
to elect.

It Is therefore manifest, as to the person, that you do grant he was freely,
and not by compulsion, chosen; and so we firmly do and will hold, that the
Election by you then made was rightfully and canonically celebrated; and to him
so elected, enthroned, and crowned, as Head of the Holy Church, Peter's
Successor, and Vicar of Christ on earth, we do faithfully adhere, and promise
humbly to obey his Admonitions, Words, and Acts, as becomes true and faithful
Catholics; not taking a damnable example from your pernicious rebellion, and
sacrilegious and heretical stubber^ness.

And furthermore, we detest your folly, and baseness of your pretense; for how
should sear invade you, who are placed in the ^ore front of the Churches
Troops* as Champions and Defenders of the Ortho^ox Faith, and we^^ing ^n your
head^ the Red Caps, Ensigns of Ecclesiastical Liberty, for a token that you
(...) to strive for Righteousness and Justice even to death? Now I say, could
the dread of death make you depart from Righteousness? Or how were you that
call your selves Pillars of the Church become so weak and feeble, as not to be
able to uphold the building from tumbling on your heads? Was there any Sampson
there? No alas, he died long since. But to excuse your selves in your sins, you
will perhaps say, That Peter the Rock of Faith, and after Christ the prime
foundation of the Church, was so affrighted at the words of a poor
Servant-maid, as to deny Christ himself, and that too with an Oath, of whose
infirmity you are Partakers and Followers. Oye Generation of Vipers, ye crafty
Serpents nourished with poison, if ye taste the bitter herb, taste also that
which is sweet and wholesome; and after this damnable denial of the Head, return
with Peter to confession. We truly build upon the Rock, whilst your abominable
obstinacy makes you Consorts of a Traitor, whose iniquity relies on Lead,
Sands, and Rubbish. Nor let your foolish blindness and blind foolishness
imagine, that those words in your Letters, which seem to carry a show of piety
and zeal for the House of God, shall move us and persuade us in any thing to
consent with you; for we most evidently perceive, that those words are fall of
the Leaven of the Pharisees, of which Christ in the Gospel admonishes his
Disciples to beware. And by your leaving Rome, and naming another place for
perpetrating your wicked designs, you clearly show us that you have left the
true Head of the Church, and are become Members of the Devil, and gone out into
the Desert with Judas the Traitor, where fitly with an Haltar you may be ready
to hang your selves; that that of the Prophet may be verified of you, -- Let
their habitation be desolate, and let none be left to dwell in their tents. As
also it is written further of each of you, -- Let his days be few, and his
Bishopric let another take. Furthermore, you do but blacken the clear f^^me of
the Count of Fundi, (a Town in Italy, whose ^arl harbored the Cardinals) when
you so load him with your Commendations throughout Christendom; since as the
Poet says, Idem est laudari a turpibus and ob turpia, To be praised by bad men
is all one as to be praised for bad things. Consider therefore, O Count! that
whereas heretofore thou wast unknown in diverse Christian Countries, which thou
thoughtest an unhappiness; now thou have gained not a Name but Shame throughout
the World, for inviting to thy self the Enemies of Christ, the Breakers of the
Churches Unity, and the Disturbers of the peace and tranquillity of all
Christendom, and cherishing their detestable perfidiousness; so that thou
seem to have built an Asylum against Christ and all Catholic people. Arise
therefore, O Count! throw these Mice out of thy Budget, chase these Serpents
from thy Tabernacle, and shake these coals of Brimstone out of thy Bosom, lest
they bring thee to everlasting burnings; so shall thou obtain the grace of God,
the blessings of all Christians, and the commendation of all the World, and
shall merit to escape the Divine Vengeance.

Dated at Rome, etc.

Both Parties being thus hot, and Christendom divided between two Popes at
once, each damning the other for a Schismatic and Villain; France, Flanders,
Scotland, and several other Countries joined with Pope Clement; insomuch that
the French King proclaimed throughout all his Realm, that none should own or
obey Urban on pain of being Beheaded, and all his Goods forfeited to the Kings
use. But by means of Vrban's Complemental Letters to King Richard and the
Parliament, and his honoring our Bishop of London with a Cardinals Cap,
England was altogether at his devotion; for in the second year of King Richard
an Act was made, declaring him to be lawful Pope, and that the Livings of all
Cardinals and others that were Rebels to him, should be seized into the Kings
hands, and the King to be answered of the profits thereof; and that whosoever
within this Realm should procure or obtain any Provision or other Instrument
from any other Pope than the same Urban, should be out of the Kings Protection.

And this year 1382, the said Urban sent over his Bull to Henry Spencer Bishop
of Norwich (a young bold Prelate) to raise a Croisado, that is, to levy Forces
who should be all marked with the Cross, as engaged in an Holy War, to fight
with and subdue his Enemy the said Clement, the Antipope, and all his
Followers and Favorers, whom thereby he did excommunicate and depose from all
Honors, and forbid any Conversation with them living, and burial of their
bodies when dead, etc. In which Bull were (amongst other things) granted the
Powers and Privileges following.

1. That the said Bishop of Norwich may use the Sword against the Antipope and
all his Adherents, Favorers, and Counselors, and with violence put them to
death.

2. That he has full power to inquire of all and singular such Schismatics,
and put them in prison, and to confiscate all their Goods moveable and
immovable.

3. That he has Power and Authority to deprive all Laymen that are such
Schismatics, of all manner of Secular Offices whatsoever, and to give their
Offices to other fit and convenient Persons.

4. To deprive all such Schismatic Clerks, and bestow their Benefices either
with or without Cure, their Dignities, Parsonages, or Offices to other Persons
more meet for the same, having power over Lay-persons that are exempt, Clerks
both Secular and Regular, yea though they be Friars Mendicants.

5. That he may dispense with any Dignified or Beneficed Clerks, so that they
may be absent from their Cures or Benefices, under the ^tandard of the Cross,
without leave of any of their Prelates, and yet take and receive the entire
Profits, as though personally resident.

6. There is granted to all that pass the Seas in this Cause, either at their
own Expenses, or at the Expenses of any others, Full Remission of all their
Sins, and besides as large Privileges as to any that pay their Money, or go to
Fight for the Holy Land.

7. That all such as shall with their proper Goods and Substance give
sufficient Stipend to able Soldiers at the discretion of the aforesaid Bishop
mustred, or by any other his Deputy, although themselves be not personally
engaged, yet shall they have the like Remission and Indulgence, as they which
in person go to the Expedition.

8. That all they shall be Partakers of this Remission, who shall give any part
of their Goods to the said Bishop, to Fight against the said Schismatics.

9. That if any shall chance to die in the Journey, or be killed, that are
Soldiers under the said Standard of the Cross, they shall fully and wholly
receive the said Grace, and shall be Partakers of the aforesaid Forgiveness and
Indulgence.

10. The said Bishop has Power to Excommunicate, Suspend, and Interdict all
persons whatsoever that shall be Rebellious, or Disturbers of him in the
Execution of the Powers and Authority hereby committed unto him, of whatsoever
Dignity or Condition they be, whether Kings, Queens, Emperors, or of any other
Quality Ecclesiastical or Temporal.

Lastly, That he may compel and enforce any Religious Persons whatsoever, to go
in this Expedition, and send them over Sea, if he think good so to do, and this
although they be Professors of the Friars Mendicants.

Being thus furnished the Bishop to spread his Authority, and the more
effectually carry on the Work, published the Ordinances following.

1. IT is Ordained for the Honor, the Establishment of Holy Church, and the
Salvation of the Realm, that sufficient Preachers be sent into all the Country,
to Declare and Publish the Croisado, and the Right Estate of Holy Church, and
of our most Holy Father Pope Urban, whom God (of his benign Grace) pity and
redress, according to his good pleasure.

2. That to every such Preacher or Confessor throughout England, there shall be
joined a Clerk, who shall receive and register the Names of all such as shall
offer their persons to this Holy War; and also all money that shall be given,
over whom the said Confessors shall be Controllers.

3. That no Woman shall presume to go this voyage without special License from
the Bishop of Norwich under his Seal.

4. That no man by the way shall rob, or by any kind of Extortion take the
goods of any till they come upon the Enemies, where they may do it by right of
War, on pain of losing all share in the said Pardon.

5. That the said Preachers shall press the people to say Prayers and make
Processions for the safety of the Church, and the prosperity of this V^rage.

6. That all Curates on pain of Excommunication shall encourage, and by all
means they can (especially in Confession) press and engage their ^arishioners,
as well poor as rich, to come into and contribute to this pious Expedition, so
much for the good of the Church, and advantage of their own Souls.

7. That every one that will go in person for the Absolution, shall before such
Absolution be given him, swear to come to the said Bishop or his Deputy, and
make his Indentures touching the time that he purposes to serve in the Croisado.

8. That if any will find a man, that is, hire another to go in his name, and
upon his costs and charges, that he must either provide and able sufficient
Soldier that shall nor refuse the Service, or else allow so much for his Pay
to the Bishop, and let him provide one himself.

9. That every one that sends such a Soldier in his own stead, shall enroll in
the Bishops Registry both his own and his Soldiers name before he takes
Absolution, otherwise to lose all benefit of the Pardon.

The form of the Absolution to be given to all that should serve in or
contribute to this Croisado.
BY Apostolical Authority to me in this behalf committed, We do Absolve thee
from all thy sins confessed with thy mouth, and for which thou art contrite in
heart, and of which thou would be confessed, it they did occur to thy memory;
and do grant unto thee full forgiveness of all thy sins, and the Retribution of
the Just, and we do promise thee an increase of Eternal Life. And we do also
grant to thee as many Privileges as are granted to those that go to the Aid of
the Holy Land. And furthermore we do impart to thee the Suffrages and
Advantages of the Prayers and Good works of the whole Catholic Church.



The business being thus published with all the zeal and art of the Clergy, the
Bishop thereupon collected an innumerable and incredible Sum of Money,
besides abundance of Plate both Gold and Silver, Jewels, Rings, Dishes, Spoons,
Bracelets, (they are all our Authors own words, who lived at that time)
Necklaces, and other ornaments, especially of Ladies and others of the Female
Sex; for 'twas said, one Lady gave an hundred pounds, and so others some more
some less, and many even beyond their ability as was believed, so fond were
they to obtain the imaginary benefit of Absolution for themselves or their
Friends; (for by this they might not only save their own Souls, but free whom
they pleased that were dead from pains of Purgatory, or ensure the Salvation of
any Child or Relation living.) And so all the secret Treasure of the Kingdom,
that was in the custody of these foolish weaker Vessels was endangered, for
otherwise they were not to be absolved, if they did not contribute to their
power and ability. Many men went in person at their own charge, others that
were old, or weak, or timorous, sent Soldiers and bore their expenses. For the
Bishop had got most admirable Indulgences both for the quick and dead, and
could absolve and a poena and a culpa, as well from the guilt or offense, as
from all punishment due for sin. And 'twas said, that some of his Commissioners
did assert That at their commands Angels would descend from Heaven, and snatch
Souls from out of the pains of Purgatory, and without delay carry them to
rights into heaven.

Whilst the warlike Bishop was making these Preparations comes a Parliament,
where it was Debated, whether it where safe to hazard so considerable a
strength of the Kingdom, in such an impertinent Quarrel, and under the Conduct
of a rash unexperienced Priest; Those that were for it, besides the Interest of
Religion urged Reason of State That now was the time for the King to recover
his Right in France, and weaken the French King, when he lay under Pope Urban's
Curse, for siding with Pope Clement, during which he could expect no Success on
his Arms. Thus for some time very doubtful it was which way the Parliament
would incline; but at last upon hearing that Antiphone sung, -- Ecce Crucem
Domini, fugite parts adversae, -- Behold the Cross of our Lord, fly ye
Adversaries, they where as with a Charm brought over to Decree in favor of the
Expedition, assigning the Fifteenth given in the last Parliament, to be
employed herein. And now the Project went on more vigorously then ever,
insomuch says Walsingham, That in all this spacious Kingdom there was scarce
one person to be found, that did not either ^ffer his person, or bestow part of
his goods for promoting the same. About the middle o^ May, the Bishop was ready
to put to Sea with his Army lying in Kent waiting for a Wind, the King (whether
designing quite to forbid the Voyage, or thinking the Bishop had got too much
Money, and willing to their with him or what other reason I know not) sent him
a Writ to come back and speak with his Majesty and know his pleasure; but the
proud Prelate mistrusting the worse, was so intent upon the Affair of his Lord
and Master the Pope, that he had no leisure to obey his King and therefore to
avoid any stops, presently hastened over to Calice, leaving his Army to follow
him, which being arrived, he set up the Standard of the Cross, and besiges
Graveling, and takes it and several other places, using great Cruelties, and
destroying all they could Master: For as the Episcopal General was a person
rash and daring, and inflamed with mad Zeal, so his Soulders confiding in their
Absolutions, adventured upon the greatest dangers without fear, esteeming, says
Walsingham, it Glory to overcome, but Gain to die in this Cause* where they
thought themselves sure to go directly to Heaven, and to enjoy so much the
greater Bliss the more they butchered of the Schismatics: But these first
Fervours were quckly cooled by hard Service, and having in vain laid Siege to
Ypres, they are at last forced to quit it, being all in Confusion amongst
themselves, and in great want of Provisions; whence they come back to
Graveling, and therein are besieged by the French King with a powerful Army;
In which Distress our Bishop wrote to King Richard, That if ever he intended to
try his Fortune against the French King, now was the time, or at least that he
should send some Forces to give him Battle, and force him to abandon the Siege:
King Richard was then at Daintry in Northamptonsheire, and on the receipt of
this News being at Supper, instantly arose from Table, and in mighty rage and
fury took Horse, riding Post with such speed, that he came to Sant Albans at
Midnight, where having borrowed the Abbots Guelding (which Walsingham a Monk of
that Abbey complains he never restored) he hastened to Westminster, making show
as if he would never rest till he had Routed the French King and all his Host,
but being somewhat weary with Riding, at Westminster, he went to Bed, and
having taken council of his Pillow, was nothing so fierce next Morning, but
resolved to lay aside the thoughts of going himself, and to send some body
else: To which purpose, the Duke of Lancaster was nominated, but so tedious in
making Preparations, that the Bishop in the mean time was glad to leave
Graveling, having first dismantled and destroyed it, and so returned home to
England, after a vast Treasure dissipated, and many thousand Lives lost, and
more Souls cheated, with as little Glory, as he set forth with mighty
Expectation, the Success of his Arms being suitable to the ridiculous occasion
of them. And what was yet worse for the haughty Prelate, soon after his coming
home in a Parliament, held at London, about Alhallontide, all his Temporalities
were seized into the Kings hands, for his Contempt in disobeying the Kings
Writ, when His Majesty sent to him to come back just as he was putting to Sea
on this piece of Ecclesiastical Knight-Errantry, and he refused to come as
aforesaid.

In this Parliament also was granted to the King half a Fifteenth by the Laity,
and half a Tenth by the Clergy.

In the Year 1384, a Truce was made with France, and the Duke of Lancaster and
his Brother Thomas of Woodstock entered Scotland with a mighty Army, but the
Scots wholly declining to fight, and many of the English being destroyed with
Want and cold Weather, they returned, making very small Advantages by that
expensive Expedition.

Soon after which, an Irish Carmelite Friar made a discovery in Writing to the
King of a Design the Duke of Lancaster had to destroy His Majesty and usurp the
Crown; but the King advising about the same only with certain young Favorites,
the Duke obtained notice of the Charge, and cleared, or seemed to clear himself
so much to the Kings satisfaction, that the poor Friar was committed to
Custody; and it is said, on the Evening before the Hearing should have been, was
most cruely murdered. Whose Information, if real, shows what a^ Opportunity the
King slipped of preventing his after misfortune, and that some times it proves
even more dangerous to discover Treasons, than to act them, which yet should
discourage no good Subject from the discharge of his Duty. But possibly this
whole Accusation, or the Relation of such a thing might be a Contrivance of the
Duke's Enemies, to render him suspected to the King and odious to the People;
for it it is certain they entered not many Months after into a formal-Design
against his Life: the occasion whereof I do not find mentioned by Authors, but
only that the King by the Instigation of his young Cabal-Council had conceived
displeasure against him; and that they had conspired to take away the said
Duke's Life. In order whereunto certain Crimes were suggested, Appellors
prepared, and it was agreed that he should be suddenly Arrested, and brought
before the Lord Chief Justice Trysilian, who had boldly untertaken to pronounce
Sentence upon him according to the quality of the matters to be objected
(though by Law he could not be tried but by his (Peers) and so Execution should
immediately have followed. But the Duke being fore warned of these
Contrivances, hastened to his Castle of Pomfret, and there stood upon his Guard:
And the King's Mother considering the Dangers that would ensue such a Rupture,
took great pains by riding (notwithstanding her Age and corpulency) to and fro
between the King and him, to pacify each side, and at last brought them to
such a Reconcilement, that all appearance of Displeasure on the one part, and
Distrust on the other, was for that time removed.

About the Feast of S. Martin was held a Parliament at London, wherein the Earl
of Nothumberland was Condemned for the loss of the Castle of Barwick Surprised
by the Scots, through the Treachery of one that he had put in there as his
Deputy: But the King after Judgment was pleased to Pardon him, who went
forthwith down and retook the said Castle.

In the Year 1385 the French made great Preparations for the Invading of
England, and to facilitate the Attempt by a Diversion, ^end the Admiral of
France with a considerable Force into Scotland, the Common Backdoor at which
they were wont to Infest us: Of which King Richard having notice, raises a
mighty Army, and by speedy Marches pierces into the Heart of Scotland, and
reduced their chief City Edinburgh into Ashes as a Bonfire, to give the whole
Kingdom notice of his Arrival, and Challenge them to Battle: But they declined
it, and Victuals growing very scarce, the King thought fit to return homewards,
the rather for that the Scots in the mean time had entered Nothumberland, and
besieged Carlisle; but hearing of the Kings approach, fled back into Scotland.

During this Expedition, the Lord John Holland the Kings Brother by the Mother
side, near York, Killed the eldest Son of the Earl of Stafford, for which he
fled, and the King was so highly incensed, that he caused all his goods to be
Confiscated; the King's Mother interceded for him, but could not be heard, and
resented the denial so heavily, that soon after she died.

At a Parliament the latter end of this Year the Laity granted the King one
Fifteenth and an half upon condition that the Clergy would give a Tenth and an
half, who took this Articulating of the Commons in grievous dudgeon,
protesting, that the Laity should not Charge them; and the Archbishop of
Canterbury was so hot, as to declare, he would rather venture his Head in this
Cause, than that the Holy Church of England should thus Truckle: whereupon the
Commons and many of the Temporal Lords began to bid Battle to the Clergies
Temporalities, saying, they were grown to that excess of Pride, that it would
be a Work of Piety and Charity, to clip their Wings, and reduce them to an
Humility suitable to their Profession. The Clergy at this were not a little
Alarmed, and to prevent the worst, make a voluntary offer of a Tenth to the
King, and so the Dispute is rocked to sleep.

Also during this Parliament, the King Conferred several Honors, Creating his
Uncle Thomas of Woodstock (who before was Earl of Buckingham) Duke of
Gloucester, and his other Uncle Edmund of Langley (before the Earl of
Cambridge) Duke of York: With whom too he preferred his pernicious Favorites, as
Robert de Vere Earl of Oxford, to be Marquess of Dublin in Ireland, (the first
man within the Realm that was Enobled with that Title; and Sir Michael de la
Pole (the Son of a Merchant in London) was made Earl of Suffolk, and Lord
Chancellor of England. But these last grew in Hatred faster then they did in
Honor; the Ancient Nobility disdainfully resenting their undeserved (as they
deemed) Advancement. Nor were the People better satisfied, but grumbled
heavily, for they durst not speak out against these Court Ear-wigs, as Seducers
of the King, and occasion of all misadministrations of Affairs.

In this Parliament likewise, the Duke of Lancaster desired Leave of the King
Lords and Commons, to go into Spain to recover that Kingdom belonging to him in
the Right of his Wife; which was granted, and Forty thousand Marks promised him
for his aid therein; and accordingly on Easter Day he came to take his Leave of
their Majesty's: The King commanding that he should be styled King of Spain,
presented him with a Crown of Gold, as the Quen did another to her Sister: A
great number of the Youthful Nobility and Gentry attended the Duke in this
Voyage, who having Matched one of his Daughters to the King of Portugal, with
joint Forces Invaded Castile, and took many strong Towns; but at last on a
Treaty it was agreed, that the King of Spains Eldest Son should marry Katherine
another of the Dukes Daughters, and the Duke receive Two hund^red thousand
Nobles in hand, and the S^m of Ten thousand Marks yearly, during the Lives of
him and his Duchess, and in consideration thereof all Claims should cease.
Walsingham tells us the Duke had such Favor from the Pope, as to be Armed for
the Recovery of this Kingdom, with a Grant of Remission of Sins, to all that
should adventure with him, or aid him with money toward the Voyage: and had
got as as large Indulgences as the Bishop of Norwich lately had as aforesaid;
but he well observes, That the frequency of granting such Pardons and
Relaxations, had now rendered them vile and contemptible to the People, so that
there was scarce any body regarded them, or would give Two pence to this last
Croisad^, though they were so extravagantly fond of the former; whence is
taught this Lesson, That a Cheat though never so religious is not to be played
over twice in one Age.

The Year 1386 ^illed England with great Consternations and frequent A^arms, by
means of an Invasion threatened by the French, who had prepared above Twelve
hundred Sail of Ships, and a mighty Army on that Design, which lay ^overing on
the Coasts, daily waiting an opportunity to pass the Channel; and the better to
secure their men at their first Landing in England, they had framed a wonderful
Wall of Wood, three Miles in length, of great thickness and twenty Foot high,
with which they would have enclosed their Camp, But it happned, that the Lord
Beauchamp Captain of Calice, took three of their Ships laden with part of the
said Enclosure, which King Richard caused to be set up about Whinchelsea, for
securing that Town; and also he took another Ship full of Guns, Gunpowder, and
other Instruments of War: With which Losses, and especialy by the adversness of
the Winds, which from the beginning of August to Alhallontide, stood full in
their Teeth, so that their Ships could not come out, and their Victuals and
provisions, by lying all that time, being spent, they were discouraged from
prosecuting the Enterprise, and nothing was effected.

And now King Richard every day more and more entering upon the Confines of his
Destiny, as if he had not done enough in making his Minion Marquess of Dublin,
Creates him Duke of Ireland, and would (says Walsingham) had Fortune favored
his Wishes, have gone on to make him a King; so strangely was he bewitched to
him, and so excessively he doted on him; Non sina nota (utfertur) fami
iaritatis obscoenae, which I forbear to english out of Respect to Royal
Majesty, as being willing to think it a fulsom Imagination of that Monk that
writes it, rather than charge an English Prince with such a detestable
suspicion: But this undeserved Honor, together with the Exorbitancies of
Michael ae Pole, and other Public Miscarriages had made no small Impressions
on the Minds of many of the Peers of the Land, as well as the Commons.

On Monday the morrow after the Feast of S Jerome, the King held a Parliament at
Westminister, which ended on the Feast of S. Andrew; the Proceedings whereof
Henry Knyghton (who lived at that very time) Relates as follows:

[P. 2680.] The King (says he) for the most part staid lingering at Eltham
whilst the Parliament sat; the nobles therefore of the Realm, and the Commons
with joint Assent, sent this Message to the King; That the Chancellor and
Treasurer ought to be removed from their Offices, because they were not for the
good of the King and Kingdom, and because also they had such matters to treat
of with Michael de Pole, as could not be treated of whilst he remained in the
Office of Chancellor. The King hereat incensed, returned his Command, That they
should mention no more those things, but that they should proceed to the
Business of Parliament, and hasten to a conclusion; adding, That he would not
for them, or at their instance, remove the meanest Scullion boy in his Kitchen
out of his place. For the Chancellor in the Name of the King, had desired of the
Commons Four Fifteenths to be paid in one year, and as many Tenths from the
Clergy; alleging that the King was so much in debt, that he could not
otherwise be freed from his Debts and other Burdens lying upon him, as well
upon the account of war, as of his Household and other Charges; But they by
joint Assent of Lords and Commons, returned this Answer to the King; That they
neiher could, nor by any means would proceed in any Business of Parliament nor
dispatch so much as the least Article, till the King should come and show
himself in his own Person amongst them, and remove the said Michael de Pole
from his office. Upon which the King sent back this Command to them, That they
should order Forty Knights of the most substantial and wisest of the Commons to
come unto him, and declare the Votes of all the rest. But then were they more
afraid, every man for his own safety: For a secret Rumor had privately come to
their Ears, That the death of these Forty was designed by Treachery. For it was
said, as appeared afterward unto them, That as these should be going to speak
with the King, a multitude of Armed Men should set upon and murder them: Or
that being invited to a Feast by the King, some Armed Ruffians should rush in
upon them and kill them, or that they should be murdered in an instant in
their Lodgings in London. But Nieolas de Exon Mayor of that City refusing, and
by no means consenting to so great a wickedness the Villainy was deferred, and
the cursed Contrivance by degrees brought to light. Making use therefore of
wholesome Advice, they by common consent of the whole Parliament, sent the Lord
Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, and Thomas de Arundel Bishop of Ely, to
the King at Eltham, That they should on the behalf of the Lords and Commons of
his Parliament, Salute him, and deliver their Votes or desires to him, under
such a Form or Sense of words.

Sir King! The Prelates Lords, and whole People of the Commons in Parliament,
with most humble submission recommend themselves to the most Excellent [the
word is wanting in our Author] of your Royal Dignity, wishing you a successful
Course of Honor, and invincible against the power of your Enemies, and the
most firm Band of Peace and hearty Love toward your Subjects, as well for the
increase of your owu good and advantage, in respect of God and the Salvation of
your Soul, as for the unspeakable comfort of all the People which you govern.
On whose behalf we intimate these things anto you.

That we have it [Settled, Granted, or Confirmed] by ancient Constitution, by a
Custom laudable and approved, and which none can gainsay or contradict, That
the King can Assemble the Lords, Nobles and Commons of the Kingdom once a year
unto his Parliament, as the highest Court of the Realm, in which all Equity
ought to shine bright without any scrup^e or spot, clear as the Sun when
ascending to the Meridian; where as well Poor as Rich may find a never failing
Shelter for their Refreshment, by restoring Tranquillity and Peace, and removing
all Kind of injuries, where public Grievances or Errors are to be redressed;
where, with the most prudent Council, the state and Government of the Kingdom
is to be treated of: That the King and Nations Foes within, and their Enemies
abroad, may be discovered, and repulsed by such means as most conveniently and
honorably it may be done; and also with wholesome deliberation therein to fore
see and order how the necessary Burdens of the King and Kingdom may with most
ease (the public Want ^onsidered) be supplied: And they conceive also that
since they are to support public Charges incumbent, they should have the
Supervisal too how and by whom their Goods and Fortunes are expended. They say
moreover, that this is their Privilege by ancient Constitusion, that if the
King wilfully estrange himself fram his Parliament, no Infirmisy or necessary
Cause disabling him but obstinately by his ungovernable Will, shall withdrow
himself, and be absent from them the time of Forty days* as not regarding the
vexation of his People (...) nor their grievous Expenses; That then from that
time it shall be or is lawful for all and every of them, without any damage
from the King, to go home, and every one return into his own Country. And Now,
You for a longer time have absented Your Self, and for what Cause they know
not, have refused to come amonst them.

To this, the King.

Now do We plainly discover, that our People and the Commons intend to resist,
and are endeavoring to make Insurrections against us; and in such case nothing
seems better to us, than to [call in] our Kinsman the King of France, and from
him to ask Advice and Aid; nay even to submit Our Self to him, rather than to
Truckle to our own Subjects.

To which they answered thus.

THis Council is not sase for You, but rather tends to inevitable destruction;
For the King of France is your Capital Enemy, and the much greatest Adversary
to your Kingdom, and if be should once get footing on your Land, would sooner
endeavor to dispoil you of it, to invade your Kingdom, and to drive you from
your Throne, than in the lest to lend you his assisting hand, if at any time
(which God forbid) you should stand in need thereof: Rather therefore recall to
your Memory how your Grandfather King Edward the Third, and in like manner your
Father, a Prince of the same Name and Renown, with Sweat and Hazards during
their whole Lives, through innumerable Labors indefatigably contended for the
conquest of the Kingdom of France, which by hereditary Right appertained to
them, and after them to you by Succession. Remember, how many of the Nobles,
what innumerable Troops of the Commons of England, as well as those of France
lost their Lives, and underwent the peril of Death in that Quarrel: Remember
the inestimable Treasures the People of England freely parted with for the
maintanance of that War.

And yet what is more to be lamented, they have in your time sustained so many
Taxes for the support of your Wars, as that now they are reduced to such
incredible Poverty, that they can neither pay their Rents for their Livings,
nor assist their King, nor afford themselves even the Necessaries of Life. Thus
The Royal Power is impoverished, and an unhappy condition brought upon all
Great Men and Nobles of the Kingdom, as well as the Commons weakened and undone;
For a King cannot be poor that has a rich People nor that King be rich whose
Subjects are Poor. Nor do these Ills redound alone to the King, but to all the
Nobility and Great Men, every one in his Rank and degree. And all this is
brought to pass by the evil Ministers of the King, who have ill-Governed both
King and Kingdom to this day; and unless we do quickly set our helping hands to
the Work and raise the healing Prop, the Kingdom of England, will in less time
then we think of, be miserably subverted.

But there is yet one part more of our Message remaining on the behalf of your
People to be imparted to you, That we have an ancient Constitution, and it was
not many Ages since experimented; it grieves us that we must mention it, That
if the King through any evil Council whatever, or through a weak Obstinacy or
Contempt of his People, a perverse froward Will or irregular Course, shall
alienate himself from his People, and refuse to Govern by the Laws and Statutes
of the Realm, by the laudable Ordinances and and faithful Advice, If he shall
throw himself headlong into wild Designs, and stubbornly exercise his own
singular Arbitrary Will; That from that time it shall be lawful for his People
by their full and free Assent and Consent, to Depose that King from his Throne,
and to establish some other of the Royal Stock upon the same in his stead.
Which grievous and unhappy Dissension, That it may never spring up amongst your
People; That your People by no such lamentable Divisions (pleasing only to your
Enemies) may ever through your evil Counselors be subvered. That this Kingdom
so honorable, and above all the Nations in the World, from your Fathers days
hitherto, most famious in War, may not now in your time (through the
Distractions of ill Government) he miserably laid waste: That the Title and
Inscription of these Miseries may never be placed as a scandalous Mark upon
your Reign and this unhappy Age. Recall we beseech you, your Royal Mind from
such foolish and pernicious Councils; and whatsoever they are that suggest such
matters to you, do not only not hearken to them, but totaly remove them from
you: for in a time of danger it will be found, that they can no ways effectual
serve you etc.

By these and such kind of Speeches, the King laying aside his Anger, was
reduced to a better Temper, and being pacified, promised, That after Three days
he would come to the Parliament, and with Mature Advice willingly Acquiesce to
their Petitions. The King then came as he had promised, and John de Fortham
Bishop of Durham was removed from the Office of Treasurer, and the Bishop of
Hereford made Treasurer: The Lord Michael de Pole Earl of Suffolk was with much
disgrace turned out of the Office of Chancellor, and Thomas de Arundel Bishop of
Ely by Consent of Parliament put in his stead.

And sometime afterward the said Michael de Pole was Impeached of several High
Crimes and Misdeme^^ors by the Commons, as follows.

The Impeachment or Articles made by the Commons in full Parliament against
Michael de Pole Earl of Suffolk, late Chancellor of England, in the Term of S.
Michael, in the Tenth Year of the King; and the Judgment upon them following,
from Point to Point.
IMprimis, That the said Earl being Chancellor, and Sworn to Act for the just
Profit of the King, has Purchased of Our Lord the King, Lands, Tenements, and
Rents to a great Value, as appears by the Record-Rolls of the Chancery: And
against his Oath, not regarding the great Necessity of the King and Realm,
being Chancellor at the time of such Purchase made, did cause the said Lands
and Tenements to be Extended at a much smaller value than really they were
worth by the year, and thereby deceived the King.

And for that he purchased the said Lands when he was Chancellor, against his
Oath, the King shall have the said Lands again entirely, and the said Earl
shall make Fine and Ransom to the King, with all Profits received since the
Purchase.

2. Item, Whereas Nine Lords were Assigned by the last Parliament, to View and
Examine the Estate of the King and Realm, and to deliver their Advice how the
same might be Improved, Amended, and put into better Order and Governance, and
thereupon such Examination to be delivered to the King as well by Word of
Mouth, as in Writing: The said late Chancellor did say in full Parliament, That
the said Advice and Ordinance should be put in due Execution; which yet was not
done, and that by the default of him who was the principal Officer.

To this Article and the Third, and the Seventh, the said Earl shall answer, if
he have any thing to say against the same in special.

3. Item, Whereas a Tax was granted by the Commons in the last Parliament, to
be laid out in a certain Form demanded by the Commons, and assented to by the
King and Lords, and not otherwise; yet the Moneys thence arising, were expended
in another manner: so that the Sea was not Guarded as it was ordered to have
been; whence many Mischiefs already have happened, and more are like to ensue
to the Realm; and all this by the default of the said late Chancellor.

4. Item, Whereas the Tydeman of Limbergh having to him and his Heirs of the
Gift of the King's Grandfather Fifty pounds per annum, out of the Customs of
Kingstone upon Hull, which the said Tydeman forfeited to the King; and also the
payment of the said Fifty pounds per annum was discontinued for Five and thirty
years and upwards: The said Chancellor knowing the Premises, purchased to him
and his Heirs of the said Tydeman the said Fifty pounds per annum, and
prevailed with the King to confirm the said Purchase, whereas the King ought to
have had the whole Profit.

For this Purchase the said Earl was adjudged to Fine and Ranson, and the said
Fifty pounds to go to the King and his Heirs, with the Manor of Flax^^ete, and
Ten Marks of Rent which were exchanged, etc. with the Issues, etc.

5. Whereas the high Master of S. Antony is a Schismatic, and for that Cause
the King ought to have the Profits which appertain to him in England; the said
late Chancellor, who ought to advance and procure the Profit of the King, took
to Farm the said Profits of the King at Twenty Marks per annum, and so got to
his own use above a Thousand Marks. And afterward when the said Master in
England which now is, ought to have had the Possession and Livery of the said
Profits, he could not obtain the same, till he and two persons with him became
bound by Recognizance in Chancery, of Three thousand pounds, to pay yearly to
the said Chancellor, and his Son John One hundred pounds for the term of their
two Lives.

For which it is adjudged, That the King shall have all the Profits belonging
to the said S. Anthony's at the time of the Purchase; and that for the
Recognizance so made, the said Earl shall be Awarded to Prison, and Fined and
Ransomed at the pleasure of the King.

6. Item, That in the time of the lat^ Chancellor there were granted and mad^
diverse Charters and Patents of Pardon for Murders, Treasons, Felonies, etc.
against the Laws: and before the Commencement of this present Parliament, there
was made and sealed a Charter of certain Franchises granted to the Castle of
Dover, in Disinherison of the Crown, and to the subversion of the Pleas and
Courts of the King, and of his Laws.

The King Awards that those Charters be Repealed.

7. Whereas by an Ordinance made in the last Parliament, that Ten thousand
Marks should be raised for the Relief of the City of Gaunt; by the default of
the said late Chancellor, the said City of Gaunt was lost, and also a Thousand
Marks of the said Money.

Upon all which Articles the Commons demand the Judgment of Parliament.

WAlsingham tells us, That all these Articles were so fully proved, that de
Pole could not deny them; insomuch that when he stood upon his Answer, and had
nothing to say for himself, the King Blushing for him, shook his Head, and
said, Alas! alas, Michael, see what thou have done! And when the King desired a
Supply, the Commons answered, That he did not need the Tallage of his Subjects,
who might so easily furnish himself of so great a sum of Money, from him who
was his just Debtor. But at last, upon his Majesty's yielding to have him
turned out of the Chancellorship, and admitting the Articles, (which he was
very unwilling to suffer) they freely gave him half a Tenth, and half a
Fifteenth; only providing, that it might be necessarily Expended: To which
purpose it was to be deposited in the hands of the Earl of Arundel, who was
then going to Sea with a Fleet, to secure the Coasts.

They likewise gave the King on every Pipe of Wine Imported or Exported, Three
shillings; and on every Twenty shillings worth of all sorts of Merchandise
Foreign or Domestic, brought in or carried out, one shilling; Wool, Hides, and
Pelts, only excepted. And also at the King's Instance granted, that the Heirs
of Charles de Bloys should for Thirty thousand Marks be permitted to sell
Bretaigne in France to the French, and that Robert de Vere the new Duke of
Ireland, the Kings most dangerous Favorite, should have the said Thirty
thousand Marks, (a prodigious sum of Money in those days) wholly to his own
use; provided he would be gone before next Easter into Ireland, and there make
use of it to recover the Dominions that the King has given him in that
Kingdom: so passionately did both Lords and Commons desire his Absence, that
they would rather want so much Treasure, than have him here to Seduce and
Infatuate the King. As for Michael Pole, he was committed to Windsor-castle.

Furthermore, the Parliament observing that by the Covetousness of the King's
Ministers, the public Revenue was vainly consumed, the King insufferably
defrauded and abused, the Common People of the Realm by continual and grievous
Burdens miserably impoverished, the Rents and Profits of the Nobles and Great
Men much impaired, and their poor Tenants in many places forced to abandon
their Husbandry, and leave their Farms empty and desolate: And yet still by all
these things the Kings Officers only becoming unmeasurably Rich; They therefore
chose Fourteen Lords of the Realm, and gave them leave and power to Inquire
into, Treat of, and Determine all Affairs, Causes, and Complaints arising from
the Death of King Edward the Third, to that present time: As also of the King's
Expenses and his Ministers, and all other matters whatsoever happening within
the time to them Assigned; and caused the said Lords so chosen to be sworn on
the Holy Evangelists, well and truly to regulate all Burdens and other Affairs
incumbent on the King and Kingdom, and to do Justice to every one requiring the
same, according to the Grace and Understanding given them by God. And also the
King took an Oath to stand to their Ordination, and to encourage them in their
Actings, and not to revoke any Article of their Power, but to confirm and hold
good and stable whatsoever the said Counselors should do or order during such
time; of whom Six, with the Three Officers of the King appointed by consent of
Parliament, viz. The Chancellor, the Treasurer, and the Lord Privy Seal, should
at any time make a Quorum. And it was also Ordained by Act of Parliament, That
if any one should Advise the King to make any Revocation of their Power, though
the King should not Revoke it, yet the Person probably Convicted only of such
ill Counsel, should for the same forfeit all his Lands and Goods; and if he
attempt it a second time, be drawn and hanged as a Traitor.

Whereupon the King issued forth his Commission under the Great Seal of
England, Confirming the said Lords in such power, in the words following;
Translated from the Original French.

RIchard, King, etc. To all those to whom these Letters shall come to be seen
or heard, Greeting. We being duly Conscious of the grievous Complaints of the
Lords and Commons of our Realm in this present Parliament Assembled, That our
Profits and Rents, and the Revenues of our Realm, by private and insufficient
Council, and the Ill-governance as well of certain our late Great Officers, as
of diverse other persons being near Our Person, are so much consumed, wasted,
embeziled, given away, granted, and aliened, destroyed, and evilly disposed of
and expended; That We are so much impoverished and stripped of Treasure and
Means, and the Substance of Our Crown so diminished and destroyed, that We are
neither able to Sustain Honorably as We ought the State of Our Household, nor
maintain and manage those Wars wherewith Our Realm is Environed, without great
and outrageous Oppressions and Charges on Our People greater than they can
bear: And also that the good Laws, Statutes, and Customs of Our said Realm, to
which we are bound by Oath, and obliged to maintain, are not, nor have been
duly observed nor executed, nor full Justice or Right done to Our said People;
but many Disinherisons and other most great Mischiefs and and Damages have
happened, as well to Us, as to our People and whole Realm.

Now We, for the Honor of God, and for the good of Us and our Realm, and for
the quiet and relief of Our People, willing against the said Mischiefs to
establish a good and meet Remedy, as We have already of Our free Will, at the
Request of the Lords and Commons Ordained and Assigned such Persons for Our
great Officers, that is to say, Our Chancellor, Treasurer, and Keeper of Our
Privy Seal, as We esteem good, faithful, and sufficient for the Honor and
Profit of Us and Our said Realm; so also of Our real Authority, certain
knowledge, good pleasure, and free will, and by the Advice and Assent of the
Prelates, Lords, and Commons in full Parliament, in Aid of the good Governance
of Our Realm, and the well and due execution of Our Laws, and for the Relief in
time of that miserable Condition under which both We and Our Subjects have long
labored* having full confidence in the good Advice, Sense, and Discretion of
the most Honorable Fathers in God, William Archbishop of Canterbury, Alexander
Archibishop of York: Our most dear Uncles, Edmund Duke of York, and Thomas Duke
of Gloucester; the Honorable Fathers in God, William Bishop of Winchester,
Thomas Bishop of Exeter, and Nicholas Abbot of Waltham; Our beloved and
faithful Richard Earl of Arundel, John Lord Cobham, Richard le Scroop, and John
Devereux, Have Ordained, Assigned, and Deputed, and do Ordain, Assign, and
Depute them to be of Our Great and Continual Council, for One whole Year next
after the Date hereof, to Survey and Examine together with our said Great
Officers, as well the Estate, Condition, and Government of Our whole Realm, and
of all Our Officers and Ministers of whatever Estate, Degree, or Condition they
be, within Our Household or without; and to Inquire and take Information by all
such ways as they shall think meet, of all Rents, Revenues, and Profits
belonging to us, or which are du^ and ought to appertain to us either within
the Realm or without: And of all Gifts, Grants, Alienations, and Confirmations
by Us made, of any Lands, Tenements, Rents, Annuities, Profits, Revenues,
Wards, Marriages, Escheats, Forfeitures, Franchises, Liberties, Voidances of
Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Abbeys, Priories, Farms of Houses, Possessions of
Aliens, etc. And also of all Revenues and Profits, as well of Our said Realm,
as of Our Lands, Lordships, Cities, Villages, and other Possessions beyond the
Sea; and of the Benefices and Possessions, and other Revenues of all that are
in Rebellion against the Pope: And of the carrying Moneys out of the Realm by
the Collectors of the Pope, or the Procurators of Cardinals, Lumbards, or other
persons; And likewise of the Profits of Our Customs, and all Subsidies granted
to Us by the Clergy and Laity, since the day of Our Coronation, to that time:
And of all Fees, Wages, and Rewards of Our Officers and Ministers great and
small, and of Annuities and other Rewards granted, and Gifts made to any
persons in Fee or term of Life, or in any other manner: And of Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Revenues, and Forfeitures, bargained or sold to the prejudice
and damage of Our Crown: And also touching the Jewels and Goods which were Our
Grandfathers at the time of his Death, and of Charters and General Pardon; and
how General Payments have been levied and expended; how Garrisons and Forts
have been maintained: And of all Defaults and Misprisions as well in Our
Household, as in our Courts, and all other places of Our Realm: And by what
persons Our Revenues and the substance of Our Crown have been withdrawn or
diminished, or the Common Law interrupted or delayed, or any other Damage that
has happened to Us. Giving, and by these Presents Granting, of Our Authority,
and by the Advice and Assent of Our said Subjects, unto Our said Counselors,
or any Six of them, and to Our Great Officers aforesaid, full Power and
Authority, General and Special, to enter Our Palace and Household, and to call
before them all Our Officers, and to command all Rolls, Records, and other
Minuments and Evidences; and all Defaults, Wastes, and Excesses found in Our
said Household, and in other Courts and Places; and all Deceits, Extortions,
Oppressions, Damages, and Grievances whatsoever, that are to the prejudice,
damage, and distress of Us and Our Crown, and the Estate of Our said Realm in
general, (though not herein particularly expressed or specified) To Amend,
Correct, Repair, Redress, Reform, and put into good and due Order and
Establishment: And also to hear and receive the Complaints of all Our Liege
People, as well for Us and themselves, against our said Officers and
Counselors: And all Oppressions, Wrongs, and Injuries, which cannot so well be
amended and determined in the Courts of the Common Law: And to discuss and
finally determine all the Matters aforesaid, and full Execution thereof to
Award, as to them shall seem most meet, for the Honor and Profits of Us and
Our Estate, and the Redintegration of the Rights and Profits of Our Crown, and
the better Governance of the Peace and Laws of Our Kingdom, and the Relief of
Our said People. In which Proceedings, if difference of Opinion happen amongst
Our said Counselors, the same shall be concluded by Majority of Votes. And We
Command and Charge all Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Sheriffs, the Treasurer,
and Controller, and all other Officers of Our Household, Justices de Banco, and
other Officers, Ministers, and Liege Subjects whatsoever, That to Our said
Counselors and Officers in manner aforesaid, they be Obedient, Aiding. and
Assisting.

In Witness whereof, etc. Given under Our Great Seal the 19th day of November.

BUT notwithstanding all these Provisions, no sooner was the Parliament
Dissolved, but the King looked upon all they had done to be Dissolved likewise;
or at least De facto he esteemed as nothing all their Complaints against de
Pole, the Duke of Ireland, the Archbishop of York, and the rest; for he soon
received them into greater Favor and Confidence (if it might be) than ever
before: Who being full of Revenge themselves, were not wanting to blow their
Poison into his Royal Breast; for thus their fatal Whispers and Suggestions are
expressed by Trussel, in his Continuation of Daniel's History of England, Fol. 9.
-- These Triumvirs (says he) incensed the King against the Nobles that were
best deserving, partly upon Disgraces desertfully done unto them; partly upon
malicious Emulation to see others so generally Beloved, (except of the King)
and themselves so Contemptible. And that their private Spleen might carry some
show of Public Respect, they suggested to the King, he was but half, yea, not
half a King: For (said they) If we respect matters of State, you bear the
Sword, but they sway it; you have the Show, but they have the Authority of a
Prince; using your Name as a colorable Pretext to their Proceedings, and your
Person as a Cipher to make their Number the greater by the Addition thereof,
without which they could be nothing; neither are you any thing more by being so
placed. Look to the Duty of your Subjects, and you shall find it is at their
Devotion: For you cannot Command nor Demand, but with such Limitations and
Exceptions as they please to propose. And for your private Actions, your Bounty
(the most to be Celebrated Virtue in a Prince) is restrained, your Expenses
measured, and your Affections confined, to Frown or Favor, as they shall
please to prescribe you. What Ward is so much under Government of his Guardian?
Wherein will, or can they more abridge you, except they should take from you
the Place, as they have done the Power of a Prince? etc.

Thus these Scycophants whispered their venomous Suggestions to exasperate the
King against his best Subjects, whose Youth and Weakness rendered him too much
disposed for such Impressions, and framed his conscious Mind to a full but
needless fear. He was much incensed at the Removal of his Chancellor and
Treasurer out of their Offices, and that the Duke of Ireland (rather than part
with whom he would hazard All) must go out of the Realm; supposing it a
Restraint to his Regal Authority, not to have Absolute Power in all things, to
give and forgive at his pleasure.

Now when these private Incendiaries perceived the King's Humor once sharpened,
they so plied him with plausible persuasions, that (though naturally he was not
of any cruel Disposition) yet they drew him into many violent and indirect
courses, partly through negligence to search out the Truth, partly through
delight to be flattered, and a vain resolute humor to support those beyond
Reason, whom he had Advanced without Merit.

In the beginning of March, 1387. the Earls of Arundel and Nottingham (pursuant
to the Order of the late Parliament) put to Sea with a Fleet, which they
managed with such Courage and Conduct, that before Midsummer-day (besides other
famous Exploits) they had taken about One hundred and sixty French Ships richly
laden: But the Court-Ear-wigs, the Duke of Ireland, and the rest, enviously
misrepresented all their Services unto the King, whispering, That they had
only undone a few Merchants, which it would have been more for our Honor and
Interest to have let alone; so that at their Return, instead of Respect and
Thanks, the King (whose equal unhappiness it was to grace undeserving men, and
disgrace the deserving) looked upon them but ill; and the Duke of Ireland would
not look upon them at all: Whereupon the Earls in discontent retired from Court
to their own Country-houses.

And still more to exasperate both Nobles and People, the said Duke of Ireland
would now needs be divorced from his Wife Philippa (Granddaughter to King
Edward the Third, by his Daughter Isabel and the Archduke of Austria) a Lady
of sufficient Beauty, and irreproachable Virtue; and in her stead preferred to
his Bed one Lancerona, a mean Bohemian that waited on the Queen, Daughter (some
say) of a Vintner, or (as others will have it) of a Joyner. The King took no
notice of this Affront offered to his Cousin-german, but the Duke of Gloucester
her Uncle. resented it highly, and waited for an opportunity to Revenge it;
which the other well perceived, and was resolved to strike first. Easter was
now come and past, the time limited by Parliament for the Duke of Ireland's
being gone; but he (though so largely hired to it as aforesaid) cared not for
that Voyage; Only to wheedle the People, the King went down with him into
Wales, on pretense of seeing him take Shipping, but in truth, that being there
remote, they might more securely consult how to circumvent and destroy the Duke
of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundel, Warwick, Derby, Nottingham, and other
faithful Subjects of the Kingdom: For there were with the King, Michael de la
Pole, Tresylian the Chief Justice, and many others that were conscious of their
own Deserts, and feared to be brought to Justice, as well as the said Duke of
Ireland, and therefore readily conspired with him against the Lords. Having
thus laid their Plot, and agreed the manner of putting it in execution, back
comes the King to Nottingham, and as if Ireland's Voyage had been quite forgot,
brings him and the rest of the Cabal with him. Thither they summon diverse
Citizens of London, the Sheriffs of the several Counties, and all the Judges of
England. The Londoners, because several of them having lately confessed
themselves guilty of Treason, had been pardoned by the King, were called; that
in return of that Favor, they might accuse the Lords of such Crimes as the
King with his Counselors in Wales and contrived against them. The Sheriffs
were advised with, what Forces they could raise for the Kings Service against
the Barons; and also commanded, that they should not permit any to be returned
as Knights of the Shire, or Burgesses for the next Parliament, but such as the
King and his Council should direct, or nominate: To which the Sheriffs replied,
That the Commons generally favored the said Lords, so that it was not in their
power to raise an Army in this Case; and as for Parliament Men, the People
would hold their ancient Customs, which require that they be freely chosen by
the Commons: Nor could the same be hindered. These Answers were not very
agreeable to the Court-designes. But the Judges were more compliant; for not
only Tresylian the Chief Justice had about the same time indicted two thousand
persons at Coventry, and he and John Blake an Apprentice of the Law, perused
and approved under their Seals, the Indictment against the Lords; but also the
better to color Proceedings with a Form of Law, several Questions were
propounded to them touching the late Act of Parliament, giving the fourteen
Lords power to inspect and punish miscarriages of the Kings Ministers as
aforesaid: To the end (as Sir W. Chapter p. 247.
modern Author observes) That what the Duke of Ireland and the rest thought
fit, might pass for Law out of the Judges mouths; the Questions being so framed
and proposed, as it was easier to understand what the King would have to be
Law, than what in truth was so. For it seems they proceeded against their
Consciences, in that several of them, and particularly Belknapp Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas, did (as Knyghton, Col. 2694. assures us) very earnestly
refuse to sign the Resolutions, till Ireland and de Pole forced him to it, by
threatening him to kill him if he refused: Whereupon having put to his Seal, he
burst forth into these words before them, -- Now want I nothing but a Ship, or
a nimble Horse, or an Halter to bring me to that death I deserve: If I had not
done this, I should have been killed by your hands; and now I have gratified
the Kings pleasure and yours in doing it, I have well deserved to die for
Treason against the Nobles of the Land. -- Which last words were like to have
proved fatally Prophetic; for not long after in the next Parliament he was
indeed condemned to die, though not executed for the same. Some Authors say,
That all the Judges of England, (except William Skipwith absent by reason of
sickness) joined in answering these Questions; which seems probable, because
they were afterward all questioned and punished for the same: yet in the
Record there are but five named; possibly the others might consent, though only
these set their Seals to it.

The Questions so proposed to the Judges, and their Answers, were as follow:
BE it remembered, That on the 25th day of August, in the 11th year of the
Reign of King Richard the Second, at the Castle of Nottingham, before our said
Lord the King, Robert Tresylian Chief Justice of England, and Robert Belknappe
Chief Justice of the Common Bench of our said Lord the King, John Holt, Roger
Fulthorp, and William de Burgh, Knights, Justices, and Associates of the said
Rob. Belknappe, and John de Lokton the Kings Sergeant at Law, in the presence
of the Lords and other Witnesses under written, were personally required by our
said Lord the King, on the Faith and Allegiance wherein to him the said King
they are bound, to answer faithfully unto certain Questions here-under
specified, and to them then and there truly recited, and upon the same to
declare the Law according to their discretion; Viz.

1. Imprimis, It was demanded of them, Whether that new Statute and Ordination,
and Commission, made and published in the last Parliament held at Westminster,
be not derogatory to the Royalty and Prerogative of our said Lord the King?

To which they unanimously answered, That the same are derogatory thereunto,
especially because they were against his will.

2. Quaery of them, How those are to be punished who procured that Statute and
Commission?

To which they unanimously answered, That they were to be punished with Death,
except the King would pardon them.

3. Quaery of them, How those are to be punished who moved the King to consent
to the making of the said Statute?

Whereunto they answered with one accord, That they ought to lose their Lives,
unless his Majesty would pardon them.

4. It was asked them, What punishment they deserved who compelled, straightened,
or necessitated the King to consent to the making of the said Statute and
Commission?

To which they all answered, That they ought to suffer as Traitors.

5. Quaery of them, How those are to be punished who hindered the King from
exercising those things which appertain to his Royalty and Prerogative?

To which Question they unanimously answered, That they are to be punished as
Traitors.

6. Quaery of them, Whether after in a Parliament assembled, the Affairs of the
Kingdom, and the cause of calling that Parliament, are by the Kings Command
declared, and certain Articles limited by the King, upon which the Lords and
Commons in that Parliament ought to proceed; if yet the said Lords and Commons
will proceed altogether upon other Articles and Affairs, and not at all upon
those limited and proposed to them by the King, until the King shall have first
answered them upon the Articles and Matters so by them started and expressed,
although the Kings Command be to the contrary; whether in such case the King
ought not to have the Governance of the Parliament, and effectually overruled
them, so as that they ought to proceed first on the Matters proposed by the
King: or, whether on the contrary, the Lords and Commons ought first to have
the Kings Answer upon their Proposals before they proceeded further?

To which Question they answered unanimously, that the King in that behalf his
the Governance, and may appoint what shall be first handled, and so gradually
what next in all Matters to be treated of in Parliament, even to the end of the
Parliament: And if any act contrary to the Kings pleasure made known therein,
they are to be punished as Traitors.

7. Quaery of them, whether the King when ever he pleases can Dissolve the
Parliament, and command the Lords and Commons to depart from thence, or not.

To which they unanimously answered, That he can; and if any one shall then
proceed in Parliament against the Kings will, he is to be punished as a Traitor.

8. Quaery of them, Since the King can when ever he pleases remove any of his
Judges and Officers, and justify or punish them for their Offenses; Whether
the Lords and Cemmons can without the will of the King Impeach in Parliament
any of the said Judges or Officers for any of their Offenses.

To which they unanimously answered, That they cannot; and if any one should do
so, he is to be punished as a Traitor.

9. Quaery of them, How he is to be punished who moved in Parliament, that the
Statute should be sent for, whereby Edward the Second (the Kings great
Grandfather) was proceeded against and deposed in Parliament; by means of
sending for and imposing which Statute, the said late Statute, Ordination, and
Commission, were devised and brought forth in Parliament.

To which they answered, That as well he that so moved, as he who by pretense
of that Motion carried the said Statute to the Parliament, are Traitors and
Criminals to be punished with Death.

10. It was demanded of them, Whether the Judgment given in the last Parliament
held at Westminster, against Michael de Pole Earl of Suffolk, was Erroneous and
Revocable, or not.

To which Question they unanimously answered, That if that Judgment were now to
be given, they would not give it; because it seems to them, that the said
Judgment is Revocable, as being Erroneous in every part of it.

In Testimony of all which, the Judges and Sergeant aforesaid, to these
Presents have put their Scals, in the presence of the Reverend Lords, Alexander
Archbishop of York, Robert Archbishop of Dublin, John Bishop of Durham, Thomas
Bishop of Chichester, and John Bishop of Bangor, Robert Duke of Ireland,
Michael Earl of Suffolk, John Rypon Clerk, and John Blake Esquire: Given the
Place, Day, Month, and Year aforesaid.

But though they had thus resolved the Law to their Minds, there was a greater
Difficulty how to arm themselves with Power enough for Execution. In order to
which, they privately sent abroad to Levy Men, but found them come in very
slowly, because the Lords were generally beloved, and these Favorites of the
King equally hated. Nor could they manage their Designs with such secrecy, but
the Lords had notice; whereupon, to take off all ill Impressions made against
them in the Kings Mind, his Uncle the Duke of Gloucester (chief of the Lords
against whom the Courtiers had combined) voluntarily before the Bishop of
London, and many Nobles of the Realm, did make Oath, That he had never imagined
any thing to the prejudice of the King, but had studied and performed to his
power, what tended to the Kings Honor and Advantage, and what also was well
pleasing to him; except only that he could not kindly regard the Duke of
Ireland, whom the King immoderately loved, and who had dishonored one that was
not only a near Relation of him the said Duke of Gloucester, but also of the
King's, which it was fit should be revenged, etc.

With the Contents of which Oath, the Bishop acquainted the King, who seemed
inclinable to credit the same; till Michael de Pole began to exasperate him
against the Duke: To whom the Bishop smartly replied, -- Be silent, Sir, it
becomes not you to talk, who stand condemned in Parliament, and are now alive
only by the Kings Grace and Favor. Which so offended the King, that he
commanded the Bishop out of his presence, bidding him be gone home to his
Church; who at his return informed the Duke what had passed, and how much the
King was swayed by those wicked Counselors: So that it was high time for him
to provide for his own safety, and obviate that destruction which was prepared
for him.

Hereupon the Duke of Gloucester, with the Earls of Arundel, Warwick, and
Derby, (who were all designed to the same Condemnation, if not prevented)
advising together, resolve to stand upon their Guard, and Treat with the King
concerning the premises, and that favor which he afforded to them, who were
Traitors both to him and the public, and the imminent hazard of the Kingdom
thence arising. The King endeavored to have surprised them singly, before they
had united their Retinues, but failed therein; so that with a very considerable
force they assembled together at Haryngey-Park. The King was just then
preparing (as it was said) for a Journey to Canterbury, to pay, as was
pretended, his Devotions at the Shrine of S. Thomas Becket, but indeed from
thence to have passed into France, and delivered up to the French King Calice,
and several other important Places, which by the fatal Counsel of his
pernicious Flatterers, he had sold unto that King. But this News of the Lords
being in Arms, diverted that Voyage, and put King Richard into great Confusion,
not knowing what measures to take: Some of those about him were for reconciling
the Lords with fair promises; others were for raising the Londoners, and what
other Forces could be procured, and fighting them; of which opinion especially
was the Bishop of York: But this the more prudent disapproved, alleging the
Dishonor and Damage would accrue to the King if worsted.

Whilst these wise men could not agree what course to take, there was a Fool
stumbled on an Expression, which if duly considered, might have done the King
more Service than all their Debates: This was a certain Knight called Hugh de
Lynne, who had been bred in the Wars, but by an accident lost his
Understanding, and now as a Natural was maintained by the Charity of several of
the Nobles and Retainers to the Court: The King meeting him during these
Consultations, and being willing to divert himself by hearing his foolish
discourse, asked him jocularly, What he should do with the Lords that were
Assembled together in the beforementioned Park. To which the said Hugh very
melancholy answered, -- March forth, Sir! and let us fall upon them, and kill
every Mothers Son of them: which being done, by God's Eye you will gallantly
have destroyed all the faithful Subjects you have in your Kingdom.

In the mean time, Mediators for Peace posting to and fro between the King and
the Lords; it was at last by their Intercession concluded, that the Lords
should come before the King at Westminster, and receive the Kings Answer to
their Grievances: The Bishop of Ely and diverse other persons of Honor and
Credit, giving their Oaths on the Kings behalf, That no Treachery or ill
practice should be used, but that they might come and go with safety; and if
any were designed, that they would admonish them of it. A Caution that in the
Event proved not unnecessary: For on the day they should appear, they had
Intelligence that there was an Ambuscade laid for them about the Mews;
whereupon they delayed their coming; and the King (who had waited an hour or
two for them beyond the time appointed) enquiring the reason, was told by the
said Bishop of Ely, that it was because he did not keep his word, for there was
secretly planted above a thousand Armed Men to cut them off in their passage.
The King seemed much offended at this Treachery, and swore that he was not
privy to it, and therefore commanded the Sheriffs of London to search the Mews;
and if they found any persons assembled there for such a purpose, to kill them.
But in truth, the Contrivance was not there, but in a place at Westminster,
where Sir Thomas Trivet and Sir Nicholas Bramber had to this intent got
together great numbers of their Faction in Arms, whom upon this discovery they
dismissed, and retired into London. And now the King promising again safe Conduct
to the Lords, they soon after arrived in his Royal presence, whom they found in
Westminster Hall in his Robes of State, and with his Crown on his Head, and
Scepter in his hand; To whom they presented themselves on their Knees; and the
Bishop of Ely Lord Chancellor on the Kings behalf made a Speech, blaming them
for their raising Forces, and demanding the Cause; withal, recommending the
Kings Goodness, who chose thus graciously to Treat with them, rather than to
Chastise them by Arms; which he told them his Majesty wanted not power easily
to have done.

To this the Lords answered, That they had Assembled together for the good of
the King and Kingdom, and to remove Traitors from the King: Naming particularly
Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, Alexander Nevil Archbishop of York, Michael de
Pole Earl of Suffolk, Robert Tresylian the false Chief Justice, and Nicholas
Bramber the false Knight of London; whom they averred to be Traitors, and
(flinging down their Gloves) that they were ready to prove them to be such by
Battle; [a manner of Trial not unusual in those times.] To which the King
himself answered, That it shall not be determined in that manner, but in the
next Parliament, which We appoint to be the Morrow after the Purification of
the blessed Virgin next; where both Parties coming, should have Justice done
according to Law: And in the mean time all of them to be in the Kings
protection, without injuring one another. -- And so after some friendly
Discourse, and Drinking with the King, they departed thence. And two days
after, the King (the more to appease the Lords, and satisfy the people) caused
Proclamation to be made in London, seeming in Excuse of the Duke of Gloucester
and his Associates, but indeed to amuse them, and preserve his dear Favorites
from threatened Violence; the Tenor whereof was to this effect.

RIchard, KING, etc. We hereby make known to all our Liege and faithful
Subjects throughout our whole Kingdom of England, Knyghton, Col. 2701.
That whereas Tho. Duke of Gloucester, Rich. Earl of Arundel, Tho. Earl of
Warwick, have been by certain persons who little understood the truth of
Affairs, Defamed as Traitors to Us and Our Kingdom; We therefore having as
becomes us, with the highest Deliberation and greatest Diligence weighed the
cause of such Scandal, and most diligently to our utmost Power, searching to
the bottom for the Truth, with the assistance of our Council, do not find any
thing done or acted by them worthy of the blot of Suspicion, much less any
scruple of Evidence of their being guilty: Whereupon we have Decreed to declare
the said Defamation to be false, unjust, wicked, and wholly void of all Truth:
And we do testify the said Duke and Earls to be worthy of good Fame, and
Innocent, and not so much as suspected of any Crime; and as much as in us lies,
and as we are able, we will approve and maintain them so to be, and do take
them hence-forwards into our Special Protection. Farthermore, We are willing to
make known to all Persons by these Presents, who are their Defamers; Viz.
Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert Duke of Ireland, Michael Earl of Suffolk,
Robert Tresylyen Our Chief Justice, and Nicholas Brembre of London, Knight. whom
also We take into Our Protection, that they may Answer whatever shall be
objected against them in Our next Parliament, Commanding that none on any
pretense whatsoever, shall either to Them, or the forenamed Lords, openly or
secretly, offer any kind of disturbance, grievance, or obedience, till such
prefixed time of Our Parliament.


But for all these fair words, the Popular Lords knowing the Kings Mutability,
and as well the Influence those his ill Counselors had over him, as their
malice and perfidiousness, thought it the safest course not to separate
themselves, but with a vigilant Eye to observe the Motions of Affairs.

The Duke of Ireland and the rest accused, did not appear with the King at this
Meeting, and 'twas their wisest course to be absent; for it is believed the
Kings Presence would scarce have been able to protect them: Nor had they any
mind to hazard themselves on the Justice of the next Parliament; but rather
resolved, if they could, to secure themselves by Arms. To which purpose the
Duke of Ireland was all this while raising of Men in Cheshire and Wales, either
by the Kings Commission or Connivance; and that it was more than the latter,
may justly be suspected, because when he had made considerable Levies, the King
commanded Thomas Molineux, a man of great Courage and Conduct, Constable of the
Castle of Chester, to accompany and safe conduct the said Duke with all the
Forces he could make, to his Majesty's Presence. The Adverse Lords being
Advertised of these Preparations, and that they were upon their March, beset
the Ways by which the Duke should pass to London, resolving to encounter him
before he should have increased his Power, and countenanced his Actions with
the Name and Presence of the King.

Accordingly Henry Earl of Derby, Son of the Duke of Laneaster, met them at a
place called Babbelak^ near Burf^rd in Oxfordshire; whom the Duke no sooner
saw, but contrary to the Resolution of most of those that were with him, he
prepared for flight; however Molineux prevailed with him to join Battle; but
scarce ten Ounces of Blood was lost on both sides, before the Duke (who had
been so good at raising Quarrels, showed himself as bad at stinting them, and)
set Spurs to his H^rse, and forsook the Field; whereby all his Men being
disheartened, and Sir Thomas Molineux slain, the Earl of Derby obtained a
cheap, but entire Victory, allayed with nothing but the escape of Ireland; who
having mounted a fleet Nag, and being to pass a River, cast away both Gauntlet
and Sword to be the lighter, and so swam over, and got first into Holland;
where finding but cold Entertainment, he went to Vtrecht; and after two or
three years rambling up and down as a Fugitive, died at Lov^^n in Brabant.
Though his War-horse and Armor being found on the Brink of the River, raised a
general Report that he was Drowned; which probably might facilitate his escape.
Amongst his Baggage was taken a very considerable sum of Gold, and (what was of
greater value) the Kings Letters, ordering his present Repair to London, and
promising to live and die with him against all Opposers.

But this Disaster Thunderstruck the whole Cabal; The Earl of Suffolk in
disguise flies to Calice, where his own Brother being Governor of the Castle,
refused to harbor him without the consent of the Lord William Beauchamp
Governor of the Town, who returned him back as a Prisoner into England to the
King: But the King not only let him go at large, but sent for over, and for
some time Committed the said Beauchamp for such his honest diligence: The
rather, it is supposed, because he had formerly, for the Kings Interest,
thwarted his pleasure: for on the late Bargains and private Intrigues with
France, King Richard having as aforesaid, sold Calice to the French King,
Knyghton, Col. 2698.
sent a Knight with Letters under his Privy-Signet, commanding Beauchamp to
deliver up the Town to him, and one Sir John Golofre with other Letters to the
French King: but he knowing the vast Importance of the place, and believing the
King imposed upon by wicked Council, resolutely answered, That the Custody and
Government of the Town was committed to him in the Presence and by the
Authority of the King and the Nobles of the Realm openly and publicly, and he
would not surrender it in Huggermugger, nor part with his Command but in their
presence. And also he took Golofre's Letters to the French King from him, and
privately transmitted them to the Duke of Gloucester. For which Affronts fronts
the King waited an opportunity to be revenged, and had proceeded it is thought
more severely, but that the said Beauchamp was a person extremely beloved, and
the King was not at present in a condition to use rigours; and so by the
Mediation of Friends he was quickly discharged.

The rest of the hated Faction, as the Archbishop of York, Justice Tresylian,
and others, ran every man like Coneys to their Covert, and were not to be heard
of: Nay the King betook himself to the Tower of London, and there made
Provision for his Winter Quarters; all his Designs being frustrated, first by
Rashness in taking Arms, and afterward by Cowardice in using them. And to add
to his Confusion, about the same time an Envoy from the French King was taken
with Letters, whereby the French King Licensed King Richard, the Duke of
Ireland, and some others, with Attendants to such a number, to come into
Boloign, where he would be ready to receive them with great Pomp, and from them
receive the Possession of Calice, and other strong Holds; for which he had
(says Walsingham, fol. 332.) already paid King Richard.

The Lords therefore perceiving such considerable Territories ready to be lost
abroad, as well as Extravagancies practiced at home, hastened their March first
to S. Albans, and next to London, where with an Army of Forty thousand men,
they Arrived on S. Stephen's day; the Citizens furnishing them with Victuals;
and whether more out of Fear or Love. I cannot say, offered to let them into
the City; but they chose rather to quarter in the Suburbs* pro^^sting not to
depart without personal Conference with the King, which at last he granted;
permitting them first to search the Tower, to prevent any Surprise. The Duke
and Earls then waited upon him, and after a few cold Complements laid before
him, the Confederacy against their Lives at Nottingham, his Letters to the Duke
of Ireland, contrary to his Royal Word, together with his dishonorable Treaty
to deliver up Calice to the French King, etc. The King heard them at first with
silence and patience, and afterward with a dejected Countenance, and not
without some Tears, seemed to acknowledge that he could neither deny or
justify what they complained of; and certainly the Stomachs of the Lords must
needs more Relent to those lukewarm drops, than they would to his greatest
violence. So agreed it was, that he would meet them next day at Westminster,
there to treat of these and other necessary Affairs of the Realm. But no sooner
were they gone, but some Abusers of the Royal Ear suggested, that his going
thither would be neither Honorable nor safe, but bring both his Person into
present danger and contempt, and occasion a future Abridgment of his Authority:
Whereupon the Kings Mind turned, and began to Retract his promise. This heated
the Lords so much, that being flusht with opportunity and power, they sent him
peremptory word, That if he did thus faulter with them, and would not appear to
Consult the good of the Realm, they would take other measures: Intimating no
less than the Election of another. This so worked upon the King, that he was
pleased to meet them, and to consent (though not without some Reluctance) that
several of his Minions should be banished the Court; as Nevil Archbishop of
York, the Bishop of Durham, Friar Rushok the Kings Confessor, and Bishop of
Chichester; (but both he and York had already showed them a fair pair of
Heels:) The Lords Souch, Harmyworth, Burnel, and Beamont; and several Knights,
as Sir Alberick Vere, Sir Balwyne Bereford, Sir John Worth, Sir Thomas
Clifford, Sir John Lovel, etc. Together with certain Ladies, Quae non tantum
inutiles, sed infames; Who were (says Walsingham) not only unnecessary,
useless, and unprofitable at Court, but likewise scandalous and infamous: And
these were the Lady Mowen, the Lady de Molyng, and the Lady Ponyngs, Wife to
the said Sir John Worth; who all were obliged to appear next Parliament. There
were likewise actually taken into Custody, Sir Simon Burley, Sir Thomas Trivet,
Sir Nicholas Brember, and diverse other Knights; Clifford, Lincoln, and Motford,
Clerks; John Beauchamp de Holt the Kings Steward, or Privy-Purse, Nicholas Lake
Dean of the Chapel, and John Blake Barrister at Law, who were all disposed in
several Castles.

After Candlemas, 1388, the Parliament began at London, (though the King used
many means to dash or defer the same:) The Lords came attended with sufficient
Strength to suppress any Rebelli^n, or Tumult that might happen; and contin^^d
their Sitting till Whitsuntide, to the great Fear of some, Hope of others, and
Expectation of all: Part of their first Work was for several days to Summon the
Duke of Ireland, the Archbishop of York, Michael de Pole Earl of Suffolk,
Tresylian the Chief Justice, and Sir Nicholas Brember Citizen of London, to
answer to the Treasons wherewith they stood charged: but none of them
appearing, they were all Out-lawed, and their Lands and Goods forfeited and
seized into the Kings hands, with a provision by common consent in Parliament
that they should never be pardoned or permitted to appear again in England.

The Appeal or Charge exhibited against them in Parliament though long, is yet
remarkable; and not being extant in English, I shall so far presume on the
Reader's Patience, as to insert it, Translated from the Original, as we find it
in Knyghton de Eventibus Angliae, Col. 2713. as follows, viz.
TO our Most Excellent and redoubted Lord the King, and his Council, in this
present Parliament, do show Tho. Duke of Gloucester, Constable of England, Henry
Earl of Derby, Richard Earl of Arundel and Surry, Thomas Earl of Warwick, and
Tho. Earl Marshal; That whereas they the said Duke and Earls, as Loyal Subjects
of our Lord the King, for the profit of the King and Realm, on the Fourteenth
day of November last past, at Waltham-Cross in the County of Hertford, did
before the most Reverend Fathers in God William Bishop of Winch^ster, Thomas
Bishop of Ely, late Chancellor of England, John Waltham. then Lord Privy Seal,
John Lord Cobham, the Lords Richard le Scrope, and John Denross, then
Commissioners of our Lord the King, Ordained and made in the last Parliament,
Appeal [Accuse or Charge] Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert de Vere Duke of
Ireland, Michael de Pole Earl of Suffok, Robert Tresylian the false Justice,
and Nicholas Brember the false Knight of London, of several High Treasons by
them committed against the King and his Realm, and did offer to prosecute and
maintain the same, and sufficient Sureties to find, praying the said Lords to
certify the same to their said Sovereign Lord; which the same day the said
Commissioners did accordingly certify to the King at Westminster, where most
of the said persons so Appealed being present, were fully informed and
certified of such Appeal.

And whereas shortly after, by the Assent of the King and his Council, the said
Thomas Duke of Gloucester, etc. coming to Westminster, in presence of the King,
and of his Council there, for the profit of the King and his Realm, did again
Appeal the said Archbishop of York, and other false Traitors, his Companions,
appealed of High Treasons by them committed against the King and his Realm, as
Traitors and Enemies to the King and Realm, in affirmance of their former
Appeal, offering to pursue and maintain it as aforesaid. Which Appeal our Lord
the King did accept, and thereupon assigned a day to the said Parties at his
first Parliament which should be holden on the Morrow after Candlemass next
ensuing, then to have and receive full Justice upon the said Appeal; and in the
mean time took into his safe and most special protection the said Parties, with
all their people, Goods and Chattels, and caused the same to be then proclaimed
and published.

And whereas also on Monday next after the day of the Nativity of our Lord
Christ next after, the said Duke of Gloucester, etc. in the presence of the
King, in the Tower of London, as Loyal Subjects of the King and his Realm, did
appeal the said Archbishop of York, etc. as false Traitors, etc. Whereupon the
King assigned them a day in the next Parliament to pursue and declare their
Appeal, and by the advice of his Council did cause Proclamation to be made in
all the Counties of England, by Writs under his great Seal, That all the said
persons so Appealed, should be at the said Parliament to answer thereunto.
Which Appeal the said Duke of Gloucester, etc. the Appealors, are now ready to
pursue, maintain, and declare, and do by these Presents, as loyal Subjects of
our Lord the King, for the profit of the King and Realm, Appeal the said
Archbishop, etc. of High Treasons by them committed against our Lord the King
and his Realm, as Traitors and Enemies of both King and Kingdom; which Treasons
are declared, and fully specified in certain Schedules hereunto annexed: and
they do pray that the said persons Appealed may be called, and Right and
Justice done in this present Parliament.

Imprimis, Thomas Duke of Gloucester Constable of England, Henry Earl of Derby,
etc. do Appeal and say, that Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert de Vere Duke
of Ireland, and Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, false Traitors to the King
and Realm, seeing the tender Age of our said Lord the King, and the Innocence
of his Royal Person, have by many false Contrivances, by them without Loyalty
or Good Faith imagined and suggested, endeavored wholly to Ingross his
Majesty's Affection, and to make him entirely give Faith and Credence to what
they should say, though never so pernicious to himself and his Realm, and to
hate his Loyal Lords and People, by whom he would more faithfully have been
served; Encroaching and assuming to themselves a power to the endefranchising
our Lord the King of his Sovereignty, and imparing his Royal Prerogative and
Dignity, making him so far obey them, that he has been sworn to be governed
and counseled only by them; by means of which Oath, and the power they have so
traitorously usurped, great inconveniences, mischiefs, and destructions, have
happened, as by the subsequent Articles will appear.

2. Item, Whereas the King is not bound to make any Oath to any of his
Subjects, but on the day of his C^ronation, or for the common profit of him and
his Realm, the said Bishop. Duke, and Earl, false Traitors to the King and
Realm, have made him swear and assent to them, that he will maintain and defend
them, and live and die with them. And so whereas the King ought to be of a free
condition above any other in his Realm, they have brought him more into
Servitude and Bondage, against his Honor, Estate, and Royalty, contrary to
their Allegiance, and as Traitors unto him.

3. Item, The said Traitors, by the Assent and Council of Robert Tresylian the
false Justice, and Nicholas Brember the false Knight of London, by their false
Covin would not at all suffer the great Persons of the Realm, nor the good
Subjects of the King, to speak to, or approach the King, to give him wholesome
advice, nor the King to speak to them, unless in the presence and hearing of
them the said Duke of Ireland, etc. or two of them, at their will and pleasure,
or about such things as they thought fit, to the great disgrace of the Nobles
and good Counselors of the King, and to the preventing of their good will and
service toward the King, thereby encroaching to themselves the Royal power,
and a Lordship and, Sovereignty over the person of the King, to the great
dishonor and peril of the King, his Crown and Realm.

4. Item, The said Archbishop, etc. by such their false devices and pernicious
Councels, have diverted the King from showing due countenance to his great
Lords, and Liege People, so that they could not be answered in their Suits and
Rights, without the leave of them the said Archbishop, etc. Thereby putting the
King besides his Devoir, contrary to his Oath, contriving to alienate the Heart
of our Lord the King from his People, that they might engross amongst
themselves only the Government of the Realm; whereby they have caused our Lord
the King, without the Assent of the Realm, or any desert in them, to have given
away by their Abetment many Lordships, Castles, Towns, and Manors, as well
annexed to his Crown, as others: As particularly the Land of Ireland and Okam,
with the Forest and Lands which did belong to the Lord Dandelegh, and great
quantities of other Lands, to the said Duke of Ireland, and diverse others,
whereby they unworthily are vastly enriched, but the King rendered, poor, and
unable to sustain and defray the Charges of the Government, unless by
Impositions, heavy Taxes and Tributes laid upon his People, to the disinherison
of his Crown, and the destruction of the Realm.

5. Item, By such Encroachment of the said Archbishop, etc. and by the Counsel
of that false Justicer Tresylian, and Brember the false Knight of London, they
have caused our Lord the King to have given away diverse Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Offices, and Bailywicks, to diverse other persons their Creatures,
and such as they could confide in, and to others, of whom they have taken great
Gifts by way of Brokage for that purpose, and to stand by them in their false
Suits and ill purposes, to the great prejudice of the King and Realm, such as
Sir Robert Mansel Clerk, John Blake, Thomas Vsk, and diverse others.

6. Item, The said Duke, etc. Encroaching to themselves the Royal Power, have
caused the King to give very great Gifts of Gold and Silver, as well of his
proper Goods and Jewels, as of the Goods and Treasure of the Realm; as Tenths,
Fifteens, and other Taxes granted by diverse Parliaments to be expended for the
defense and safeguard of the Kingdom, which yet to the value of One hundred
thousand Marks have been lavisht away upon the said Duke of Ireland, and
others. And though many good Ordinances and Laws have been made in Parliament,
as well for maintaining and carrying on of Wars, as for the defense of the
Realm; yet they have been by them disturbed and defeated, to the great
dishonor and damage of the King and Realm.

7. Item, By such Encroachment, and the great Gifts and Brokages taken by the
said Duke of Ireland, etc. it came to pass that diverse unfit and insufficient
persons were preferred to, and entrusted with the keeping and government of
diverse Garrisons, Castles, and Countries involved in War, as in Guyen and
elsewhere, both beyond and on this side the Sea; whereby the said Strongholds
have been lost, the Countries wasted, and the People, faithful Subjects to the
King, destroyed, and great Seigniories newly rendered into the hands and
possessions of Enemies, without the Assent of the Realm, as the Marches of
Scotland, etc. to the disinherison of the Kings Crown, and the great loss of
the Kingdom, as in Harpeden and Craddock, and diverse others.

8. By the same means, the said Archbishop and his Fellow-Traytors have caused
diverse people to be disturbed and deprived of Right, and the Common Law of
England, and put to intolerable delays, losses and costs; and the Statutes and
Judgments which rightfully for necessary Causes have been made and given in
Parliament, have been reversed and annulled by the procurement of the said
Malefactors and Traitors; and all this because of the great Gifts and Brokages
by them received of Parties, to the grand mischief of the King and Realm.

9. Item, The said Archbishop and other Traitors have caused and counseled our
Lord the King to grant Charters of Pardon of horrible Felonies and Treasons, as
well against the State of the King, as of the Person injured and prosecuting;
which thing is against the King, and the Oath of the King.

10. Item, Whereas the said Seignories of the Land of Ireland are, and time out
of mind have been parcel of the Crown of England, and the People of Ireland,
Liege Subjects to our Lord the King, and his Royal Progenitors Kings of
England, who in all their Charters, Writs, Letters Patents, and in their Seals,
have for the Augmentation of their Renown and Royalty, been entitled, Lords of
Ireland; yet the said Archbishop, etc. as false Traitors, by their said
Encroachment, have caused and counseled our Lord the King as much as in him
lies, to have granted and fully assented and accorded, that the said Robert de
Vere Duke of Ireland, should be made King of Ireland. And to complete such
their ill purpose, have advised and excited our said Lord the King to send his
Letters to our Holy Father the Pope, to grant, ratify, and confirm this their
traiterous Design, without the privity or assent of His Realm of England, and
of the said Land of Ireland, to the dividing the Liegance of the King between
his Realm of England, and the said Land of Ireland; in diminution of his
Majesty's honorable Style, and open disinherison of the Crown of England, and
full destruction of the lawful Liege Subjects of our Lord the King, and of the
said Land of Ireland.

11. Item, Whereas by the Great Charter, and other good Laws and Vsages of the
Realm of England, No man is to be taken, nor any Prisoner put to death, without
the due process of Law; The said Nicholas Brember the false Knight of London,
did take by night, certain Prisoners, to the number of 22, out of the Gaol of
Newgate, some of them being Indicted and Appealed of Felony, and some Approvers
in cases of Felony, and some on suspicion of Felony, and carried them out of
London into Kent, to a place called Foulhoke; and there encroaching on the
Royal Power, and in Defiance of the said Laws, as a Traitor to the King, did
without any Process of Law, cause them all to be Beheaded, except one who was
Appealed of Felony by an Approver, whom he set at large the same time.

12. Item, The aforesaid Archbishop and other Traitors have in small Causes
taken great Gifts in the Name of the King, of diverse Parties, to maintain and
abet them in their Suits and Quarrels, and sometimes have played the
Ambo-dexters, and taken Money of both sides.

13. Item, Whereas diverse of the great Lords, Loyal Subjects to the King, in
diverse Parliaments, seeing the dangers, and apprehending the destruction
threatening the King and Realm, by means of the Mischiefs of these Malefactors,
have moved to have good Governance under the King, to avoid the said Perils;
The forenamed Archbishop and other Traitors by their Encroachment and fatal
Influences have so ordered Matters, that the King has not only been deaf to
all such Persuasions, but also has Commanded some of those that moved it, to
depart from his Council, and to speak no more of such Matters; Nor touching the
good Governance of the King and Kingdom, on pain of Death, to the great
prejudice of the King and Kingdom.

14. Item, Whereas in the last Parliament, all the Lords and other Sages there
assembled, seeing the loss and destruction of the King and Realm, and the
perils and mischiefs aforesaid: and that the King was departed from the Council
of the Realm, and wholly abandoned himself to the Counsels of the said
Malefactors and Traitors: By means whereof the French King had Ships, and a
Royal Power on the Sea, ready to have arrived in England; and the said Realm,
and the very Language of England to destroy: And yet no Provision was made, or
good Governance taken for the safety of the King, nor of the Realm. Finding no
other Remedy, did Remonstrate to the King very fully, how he was Ill-advised,
and Affairs most perniciously managed by the aforesaid Traitors and
Malefactors, declaring to him their wicked Conditions; and most humbly
beseeching him for the safety of himself, and of all his Realm, and avoiding
the said impending dangers, to forsake and turn these Traitors from his
Presence and Company, and no longer to conduct himself after their evil
Counsel; but to hearken to the sage, loyal, and discreet persons of his Realm.
Whereupon the said Archbishop and other Traitors, to defeat this wholesome Advice
of the Parliament, by their false Counsel did then cause the King to command
the Mayor of London suddenly to levy a great Power of the People of that City,
to attaque and put to death all the said Lords and Commons, except such as were
of their Cabal: At the Execution of which Villainy, the said great Malefactors
and Traitors should be present and Parties, to the scandal and great disservice
of the King and his Realm.

15. Item, When the said Archbishop and other Traitors perceived that the said
Mayor and good People of London had openly refused in the presence of the King,
to accomplish such their Treachery and lewd purposes, touching the Murder of
the said Lords and Commons: They then by such their traiterous Encroachment
falsely Advised the King, and so far prevailed, that our Lord the King did
absent himself from his Parliament for many days, and did certify them, That
he would never Approach the said Parliament, nor Commune with the said Lords
and Commons touching the Affairs of the Realm, for any danger, loss, or
mischief that might happen to him or his Realm, unless he were first assured by
the said Lords and Commons, that they would not say or act any thing in that
Parliament against any of the said Malefactors, save only in the Process which
was began against Michael de la Pole: All which was to the great disservice of
the King and of his Realm, and contrary to the Ancient Ordinance and Liberties
of Parliament.

16. Item, The said Lords and Commons of the Realm, after they found the Kings
Will by the malignant Counsel and excitement of the said Archbishop and other
Traitors to be such, that he would not suffer any thing to be commenced,
prosecuted, or done, against the said Malefactors and Traitors; were pleased to
acquiesce, and not proceed therein any further against his pleasure. And
afterward in the said Parliament, taking the Advice and Counsel of all the
Lords, Judges, and other sage Commons of the said Parliament, how the Estate of
the King and his Royalty might best be preserved from the Perils and Mischiefs
aforesaid, could not find any apter Expedient, than to ordain, that Twelve of
the Loyal and sage Lords of the land should be of Council to the King for one
year then next ensuing: And that there should be made during that time, a (...)
and Commission, whereby they should have (...) and sufficient Power to order
Matters for (...) Government of the King, and of the Realm, and what
appertained to the King, as well on this side as beyond the Seas; And to repel,
repair, and redress what ever should have been ill done against the Estate,
Honor, and Profit of the King and Kingdom, and to do diverse other things
necessary for the King and Realm, as in the Commission thereupon issued, and
remaining of Record in Chancery, is contained. And that no person should
presume to Counsel the King, or any way move him against the said Ordinance and
Statute, on pain of forfeiting for the first Offense, all their Goods and
Chattels; and pain of Death for the second: such Expedient and Ordinance to be
made, if it would so please the King, and not otherwise. To which Ordinance or
Statute, all the Judges of the Land agreed, and gave their consent unto, and
Advice for the same, as well in presence of the King, as of the Lords. And
also, our Lord the King did fully give his Assent to the same; and thereupon
the said Ordinance, Statute, and Commission, were made and accorded unto by the
Assent of the King, and of the said Lords and Judges, and other Sages and
Commons Assembled in that Parliament, for the Saf^^y of the King, his Royalty
and Realm. And yet after the end of the said Parliament, the aforesaid Tr^y^^rs
and Malefactor, by such their evil (...). falsely and traitorously did inform
the King, That (...) Statute, and Commission were made in Derogation of his
Royalty; and that all those who procured or advised the making thereof, or
counseled the King to assent thereunto, were worthy of Death as Traitors to
the King.

17. Item, That after this the said Traitors, the Archbishop, etc. caused the
King to Assemble a Council of certain of the Lord-Justices and others, without
the Assent or Presence of the said Lords of the great Council, to whom they
made many Demands, and very much suspicious, touching diverse Matters whereby
the King, the Lords, and the Common People have been involved in most grievous
trouble, the whole Realm disquieted, and the Hearts of many withdrawn from the
King, saving their Allegiance.

18. Item, To accomplish their said High-Treasons; the said Traitors, the
Archbishop, etc. caused the King to go with some of them throughout the midst
of his Realm, and to make the Lords, Knights, Esquires, and other good people,
as well in Cities and Boroughs, as in other Places, to come before him, and
there to become bound, by some Obligations, others by their Oaths, to our said
Lord the King, to be with him against all people, and to accomplish the purpose
of the King, which at that time was to accomplish the will and purposes of the
said Malefactors and Traitors, drawn in thereunto by their false Contrivances,
Flatteries, and Deceits: Which Securities and Oaths were made against the good
Laws and Vsages of the Land, and contrary to the Oath of the King, to the great
dishonor of the King and Kingdom: By means of which Oaths so enforced, the
whole Realm was Embroiled in great Murmurs and trouble by the said Traitors,
and in danger to have suffered diverse important Mischiefs.

19. Item, To enforce their purposes, the said Traitors caused the King to
absent himself in the furthest parts of this Realm, to the intent that the
Lords appointed by the said Ordination, Statute, and Commission, might not
Confer and Advise with Him touching the Affairs of the Realm: to the
interruption and hindrance of the purport and effect of the said Statute and
Commission, and great prejudice of the King and Realm.

20. Item, The said Malefactors and Traitors, after they had Estranged both the
Person and good will of the King from the said Lords so Commissioned, and that
he esteemed them Traitors and Enemies, and that they had obtained the Opinions
of the Judges suited to their wicked purposes, did agree and design, That
several of the said Lords, and also diverse Loyal Commons, should be first
Arrested, and then Indicted in London and in Middlesex, and by false Inquests
Attainted of certain Treasons falsely imagined against them, and so put to
shameful Death: To which purpose they had procured an evil and false person of
their Conspiracy, called Thomas Vsk, to be Undersheriff, by whose means the
said false Inquests were to be taken, and the wicked Design accomplished by
color of Law. And for the more complete effecting thereof, they caused the
King to send his Letters of Credence by John Rypon a false Clerk, and one of
their Cr^w, directed to the Mayor of London, That he should seize the said Duke
of Gloucester, and others therein named, to be Indicted for certain Treasons,
in such manner as the said Nicholas Brember the false Knight, and John Blake,
who were thereof fully informed, should direct: By virtue of which Letters of
Credence, Brember and Blake carried to the Mayor the said false Indictment,
commanding him on behalf of the King, that to his power he should promote the
same. And also they ordered, that a strong Watch should be set to seize my Lord
Duke of Lancaster upon his first Arrival.

21. Item, The said Traitors having traitorously informed the King, that he
should believe that the said Ordination, Statute, and Commission, were made in
derogation of his Royalty and Prerogative; did further persuade him, that the
same was made with an intention to degrade, and finally to depose our Lord the
King: And perceiving that thereby he looked upon his Loyal Lords as Traitors and
Enemies, They yet further advised Him, that by all means possible, as well by
the power of his own Liege People, as by the force of his Enemies, the French
and others, he should destroy and put to death the said Lords and others that
assented to the making of the said Ordinance, and that the same might be done
so privily that none should know of it till it was done.

22. Item, In order to these Treasons, by their Counsels, they caused the King
to send Letters to his Enemy the French King, some by Nicholas Southwell Groom
of his Chamber, and others by other persons of base condition, as well Aliens
as Denizons, requiring and praying the said French King, that he would with all
his Power and Counsel Aid and assist our Lord the King, to destroy and put to
Death the said Lords and others, whom they had so falsely represented as
Traitors, to the great Disturbance of the whole Realm.

23. Item, That usurping to themselves Royal Power, they caused the King to
promise the French King by his Letters Patents and Messages, for such his
Assistance to accomplish the said Treason and Murder, to give and surrender to
the said French King the Town and Castle of Calice, and diverse other Forts and
Places; as Breast, Chirburgh, and others, etc. to the great dishonor, trouble,
and prejudice of the Realm.

24. Item, That after this traiterous Contrivance, it was agreed between our
Lord the King and the French King, by the instigation and influence of these
Traitors, that a Parley or Interview should be had in the Marches of Calice,
and a Truce of five years between the Realms of England and France: At which
Interview, by Treachery, the said Lords and others whom the King took for
Traitors, attending him thither, should there by Treachery be slain. In order
to which, they procured several Letters of safe Conduct from the said French
King, for the said Duke of Ireland's going into France, to accomplish this ill
purpose and Treason; which Letters are ready to be shown.

25. Item, That the said Brember, by the Assent and Counsel of the said other
Traitors, did come into London, and without the Assent or knowledge of the
King, did cause all the Companies of the City to be sworn to hold and perform
diverse Matters, as they are contained in the said Oath, which is of Record in
Chancery: And amongst other things, That they should hold with and maintain the
Will and purpose of the King to their power, against all that are or shall be
Rebels, or contrary to his Person, or Royal pleasure: And that they should be
ready to destroy all those which do or shall purpose Treason against our said
Lord the King, in any manner; and be ready with their Mayor to resist during
life, all such Traitors, etc. At which time the King, by the Misinformation of
the said Evildoers and Traitors, and by the false Answers of the Justices, did
firmly hold the said Lords and others, who assented to the making of the said
Ordinances, Statute, and Commission, to be Rebels, Traitors, and Enemies unto
him: By all which, the said Traitors endeavored to stir up the said People of
London to destroy the said Lords and other Loyal Subjects.

26. Item, The said Brember and other Traitors to the King and Realm, usurping
to themselves Royal Power, Did of their own Authority, without any Warrant from
the King or his great Council, cause Proclamation to be made through the City
of London, That none of the Liege Subjects of our Lord the King, should
Sustain, Comfort, or Aid, Richard Earl of Arundel and Surrey, (one of the Lords
of the Kings Great Council, during the said Commission;) nor sell him any
Armor, Victuals, or other Necessaries, on pain of being preceeded against as
Rebels; carrying about and showing a Patent of the Kings, but of another Tenor,
the better to compass such their false Proclamation.

27. Item, They also caused it to be Cried and Proclaimed in the said City of
London, That no person should be so hardy as to presume to speak any ill, or
utter any word or expression against them the said Malefactors and Traitors, or
any of them, on pain of forfeiting all they had; Which was an Encroachment on
the Royal Power.

8. Item, The said Archbishop, Chief Justice, and other Traitors, caused the
King to command his Council to make certain persons throughout England
Sheriffs, who were named [or recommended] to him by them the said Traitors,
with an intent to get such persons as they should name returned for Knights of
the Shire to serve in Parliament; And to keep out from thence Gentlemen good
and loyal, against the good Laws and Customs of the Land.

29. Item, The said Traitors during the time that the King had so taken both
Parties into His Protection as aforesaid, did falsely counsel and prevail with
the King to command by His Letters diverse Knights and Squires, Sheriffs, and
other Ministers of several Counties, to Levy Men and assemble all their Power
to join with the said Duke of Ireland, against the said three Lords now
Appealing, suddenly to make War upon and destroy them.

30. Item, During the time of the same Protection, they caused the King by His
Royal Letters, to signify to the said Duke of Ireland, Not only that he and
others were Appelled of Treason as aforesaid; but also that he should have
sufficient Power to guard him, and come with him to the King. And afterward
caused Him to write again to the said Duke of Ireland, That he should take the
Field with all the Forces he could assemble; And that the King would meet him
with all his Troops, and would expose and venture his Royal Person: And that
the King was in great peril for Himself and his Realm, unless succor'd and
aided by the said Duke: And that the said Duke should show and declare to all
the people assembled with him, That the King would bear and pay all Debts and
Costs of the said Duke of Ireland, and all that joined with him. By virtue of
which Letters, and the evil and traiterous Instigation as well of the said
Duke, as of his Adherents and other Traitors, The said Duke of Ireland did
actually Levy and Assemble great numbers of Men at Arms, and Archers, as well
of the Counties of Lancaster, Cheshire, and Wales, as of other places of the
Realm, in Warlike manner, to destroy and put to death the said Lords, who had
consented to the making the said Ordinance, Act of Parliament, and Commission,
in Defense of the King and Realm.

31. Item, That having thus Traitorously Levied Forces, the said Duke marched
with them through the midst of England, and usurping the Royal Power, did cause
the Kings Banner to be Displayed before him, contrary to the Estate of the
King, and of his Crown. In which March the said Duke and his Accomplices were
by the Grace of God disturbed, and prevented from their evil purposes.

32. Item, That the said Duke of Ireland, by the Counsel and Abetment of the
rest of the forenamed Traitors, encroaching to himself the Royal Power,
without the usual Commission of the King, or other sufficient Warrant, Did make
himself Justice of Chester, by him and his Deputies to hold there all manner of
Pleas of the Crown, and thereupon to give Judgment, and Award Execution: And
also caused diverse Original and Judicial Writs to be Sealed with the Great Seal
of the King in that behalf used: And thereby compelled a great part of the
people of those Counties to join with him, or otherwise put some of them to
grievous and tormenting Death, Imprisoned others, and Seized the Lands of
others, etc. And all this to make War, and destroy the said Lords, and other
Loyal Subjects of the King, and against the Defense of the Realm.

33. Item, That the said Traitors have caused the King to grant great Retinues
to diverse people, and give them Badges and Ensigns otherwise than ever was used
in the time of any of his Progenitors; and this with design to gain greater
power to accomplish their Treasons.

34. Item, Fully to complete all such their beforementioned and other
Treasons, and to make the King wholly confide in, and rely upon them and their
Councels, they caused the King to call before him diverse Justices and People of
the Law, that is to say, Robert Tresylian, Robert Belknap, John Care, John
Holt, Reger Fulthorp, William Burgh, six Justices, John Lockton Sergeant at
Law, and John Blake: Of whom he did by the contrivance of the said Traitors
demand, Whether the beforementioned Act of Parliament and Commission were made
in derogation of his Royalty and Prerogative, or not? and several other
Questions; to which they Answered in manner and form before set forth, etc.

These were the Articles Exhibited; but the prime Delinquents, as the Duke of
Ireland, the Archbishop of York, and the Earl of Suffolk, were fled, and the
rest absconded: The Chief Justice Tresylian having disguised himself, lay hid
at an Apothecaries House near the Gate going into the Old-Palace at
Westminster. But on Wednesday the 11th Calends of March, being discovered by
his Servant, he was taken and brought by the Duke of Gloucester to the
Parliament, who immediately Awarded Execution against him; so that he was the
same day drawn from the Tower through the midst of the City of London to
Tyburn, and there hanged: That Judgment having formerly been passed upon him,
when ever he could be found, in the same Parliament. The very next day they met
with Sir Nicholas Brember, whom the King had often before preferred to be Mayor
of London, against the will of the Citizens, and who had been the occasion of
many Oppressions and Seditions in that City: It was reported of him, that
whilst he was in power, he had caused a common Hatchet to be made, wherewith to
cut off the Heads of all that opposed his Exorbitant doings, and caused a List
to be made of a vast number of the Citizens Names whom he designed for
destruction, of whom he had procured Eight thousand five hundred and upwards to
be already Indicted; But was now before he could bring to pass such his
malicious bloody purpose, Himself Beheaded with the very same Instrument; the
King interceding for him with the Parliament, that he might not be Hanged. This
Gentleman if he had lived was to have been made Duke of Troy, meaning thereby
London, which anciently was said to have sometimes been called by that Name.

Shortly after Vske the under Sheriff of London, and the beforementioned John
Blake the Lawyer, were likewise drawn from the Tower to Tyburn, and there
Hanged and Beheaded, and the Head of the said Vske placed upon Newgate.

In the beginning of May, Sir Simon de Burlee was Condemned for High Treason;
but the King dispensing with his Drawing and Hanging, he was Beheaded on
Tower Hill. This person by his ill Practices had in few years increased his
small Patrimony of 20 Marks, to an Estate of above Three thousand Marks per
annum; and was grown to that excess of pride, that at a Christmas he would
give Liveries to a great number of Knights and Squires of the Court, and
others, bestowing therein sometimes an hundred and forty, or an hundred and
sixty, nay sometimes two hundred and twenty Broad Clothes, and these of great
price, as being Embroidered with Gold, and some of Scarlet.

About the same time Sir John Beauehamp was Condemned to be Drawn, Hanged, and
Quartered; but by the Kings Mercy, he had only his Head severed from his Body
on Tower Hill. The same punishment was inflicted on Sir John Berneys, a Knight
belonging to the Court Condemned for Treason and Sedition; but Sir John
Salisbury was drawn from the Tower, and Hanged at Tyburn.

And now the Judges are brought to Judgment, which in the beginning of the
Parliament were taken into Custody; viz. Sir Robert Belknappe, Sir John Care,
Sir John Holte, Sir Roger de Fulthorp, Sir William de Burgh, and John Locton
Sergeant at Law, who were all condemned to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered: But
by the Mediation of the Queen, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Bishops,
the King by the consent of the Lords, against whom they had offended, pardoned
the Sentence of Death: But they were Out-lawed and Banished for ever into
Ireland, Two and two to be kept in a place, limited within certain Bounds,
which if they should presume to go out of, they were immediately to be Executed
on their former Judgment. And for their Maintenance were allowed out of the
Kings Exchequer, as follows; viz. To Fulthorp 40 l. per annum, to Burgh 40
Marks, to Belknappe 30 l. to Holt 40 Marks, and to Care and Locton 20 l. per
annum apiece.

This being done, a General Pardon is passed for all Treasons and Seditions
whatsoever, and an Oath (says Walsingham) exacted not only of all the
Inhabitants of the Land, but of the King too, to stand to the Regulation of the
Lords, (meaning, as I conceive, those so Commissioned and Authorized for one
years space by King and Parliament as aforesaid:) And then the Parliament broke
up in the Month of July.

After Whitsontide the Earl of Arundel again puts to Sea, and burns-sinks, and
takes Fourscore French Ships; And likewise Seizes the Isles of Ree and Oleroon
(the latter famous for the Laws Marine, there said to be Composed and agreed
upon) with the City of Rochel and diverse other places. About the same time the
Scots entered England as far as Newcastle, in which young Peircy, Son of the
Earl of Northumberland, and for his Valor and Fury in Arms, Surnamed Hot-spur,
being them Ingarrison'd, he with a small Party fought with them, and with his
own hand slew W. Douglass their Commander in Chief; but being at last
over-powr'd by the coming in of the Earl of Dunbar, was himself taken Prisoner,
though at the same time he set free his Country: For he had first so weakened
them by the destruction of their Men, that they durst not stay longer, but in
have and disorder retreated into Scotland.

After Harvest a Parliament was again held at Cambridge, in which many wholesome
Laws passed; As against Beggars, Riding Armed, giving Liveries to excessive
Retinues: Touching Laborers, and Apparel suitable to peoples Ranks: And
especially, That none should go out of the Realm to the Pope to procure the
Grant of any Benefices in England without the Kings leave, on penalty of being
put out of the Kings protection. Also a Tax was granted to the King, being a
Tenth of the Clergy, and a Fifteenth of the Laity.

In the Year 1389, a grievous Discord happened at Oxford between the Welsh and
the Northern Scholars, wherein several were slain, and further mischief
threatened; but by the Mediation of the Duke of Gloucester, the Broil was
composed, and diverse of the Welshmen dismissed the University.

In May the King held a Great Council at Westminster, and on Holy-Road-day,
being led by the Advice of certain Whisperers, entered suddenly into the
Council Chamger, and taking his Seat, Demanded, How old they took him to be?
Being answered, Somewhat upwards of One and twenty years: Then (replied He) I
am of full Age, and capable to manage my Inheritance my self; for sure it is
unjust that I should be in a worse condition than any other in my Kingdom; for
every Heir after the death of his Ancestor, comes to his Estate, and takes it
into his own hand at one and twenty years of age. This the Lords perhaps might
be unwilling to Grant, but more unable and afraid to deny: And therefore the
King went on with his Speech; -- It Is well known, that for many years I have
lived under your Tutelage and Governance, and for the pains therein We thank
you; but now having attained to Our Legal Age, We are resolved to be no longer
in Ward, but to take into Our hands the Government of Our Realm, and to appoint
such Officers and Ministers as We think fit, and remove others at Our pleasure.

Accordingly he forthwith commanded the Bishop of York, then Lord Chancellor,
to Resign the Seal; which being done, the King put it up in his Bosom and went
away, but soon after returned, and gave it to William of Wickham Bishop of
Winchester, making him Lord Chancellor: He likewise turned out the Bishop of
Hereford from the Office of Treasurer, and put in another in his room; and
changed several other chief Ministers of State, partly to show his Authority,
partly to satisfy his Displeasure; As particularly he suspended his Uncle the
Duke of Gloucester, and the Earl of Warwick and others from his Privy Council,
and admitted others in their stead, that Humored him more, but Honored him
less. The Earl of Arundel likewise was removed from the Admiralty of the Sea,
wherewith he had been entrusted by the Parliament, and the same given to the
Earl of Huntington.

Soon after this, certain Detractors circumventing the King, had so far
prevailed, as to make him believe, That the Duke of Gloucester was contriving
some Designs against him: But upon the Dukes Examination, the falsehood and
Malice of those Reports did appear; And the King blushed to consider his own
Credulity against so near and eminent a Relation; yet though some of the
Spreaders thereof were there present when the Duke would have questioned them
for the same, the King charged him, as he loved him, not to stir farther in the
matter.

This Summer the King being at his Manor of Sheen, in July, on a sudden there
appeared such innumerable Swarms of Gnats, that all the Air was darkened with
them, who skirmisht and fought one with another, till the Slain fell down in
heaps, and being swept together with Brooms, amounted to the quantity of many
Bushels-full, and the rest who seemed to come off, and were reckoned about a
third part of the whole, flew away; which was by many esteemed as an ill-boding
Prodigy.

About the same time the Disciples of Wickliff (in those days called Lollards)
being very numerous, their Presbyters took upon them after the manner of
Bishops, to confer Holy Orders, Asserting, that every Priest had as much power
of Binding and Loosing, and Administering other Ecclesiastical Functims, as the
Pope himself either had, or could bestow: And though the Prelates had notice
hereof, yet out of negligence, or rather fear, they did not much concern
themselves to suppress them; save only the stout Bishop of Norwich, who swore,
That if any of that Sect should presume to Preach in his Diocese, he would
either Burn or Behead them.

In November, the Duke of Lan^aster after three years absence returned into
England from Spain, having matched his Daughter to the King of Castile's Son.
And the King of England having summoned a Council at Reading, the said Duke
understanding that his Majesty had conceived Displeasure against diverse great
Lords, to prevent the Mischiefs that might thereby arise, immediately after his
Arrival, posted thither; by whose good Offices the King's Resentments were
diverted, and Matters for the present pacified.

In the Year 1390, (being the 13 year of King Richard's Reign) on Monday after
the Feast of St. Hillary, a Parliament was called at London, wherein amongst
other things it was Enacted, That the King should not extend his Pardon to any
persons convicted of Murder, and a Penalty Awarded against any that should
importune the King thereunto; viz. That if it were a Duke or Archbishop, he
should forfeit to the King 100 l. If an Earl or Bishop, 100 Marks, etc. There
was also granted to the King 40s. of every Sack of Wool, of which 10s. to go to
the Kings present occasions, and the other 30s. to be reserved in the hands of
Commissioners appointed by Parliament, Not to be expended unless necessity of
War required. About St. James^yde, Henry Earl of Derby, eldest Son to the Duke
of Lancaster, with a choice Company of a thousand Knights and Squires, and
their Servants, went into Prussia, where they signalized themselves by several
brave and valorous Actions; and returned again with Honor in April following.

In the Year 1391, the French Courted King Richard very earnestly to a Treaty
of Peace; and in order thereunto, desired that there might be an Amicable
Interview of the two Kings near Calice: To which King Richard seemed
inclinable; and that he might appear more splendid on such an occasion, sent to
most of the Abbeys to furnish him with the best Horses they had: Amongst whom
the Abbot of S. Albans sent him One, which (Walsingham tells us) was worth Four
and twenty Marks, no small price in those days; and yet not content, he
demanded 50 Marks besides in Money: Likewise from most of the Cities and
Buroughs of England, he got diverse considerable Sums to Equip him for this
Voyage.

But about the same time, by order of the King and Council, there was a
Proclamation set forth, Requiring all those that had any Benefices in England,
and were then beyond the Seas, as in the Roman Court, (it being a thing not
infrequent in those days, for the Pope to gratify his Favorites and Followers
with the best Preferments, though perhaps never in England in their lives)
immediately to repair into England, to live upon such their Benefices, and not
suck away the Treasure of the Realm, by expending their Revenues in other
Nations, on pain of forfeiting all their said Benefices. This, together with
the late Statute of Provisors and Praemunire, and the Overture of a Peace like
to advance with the French King, (who at that time joined with the Antipape,
Benedict the 13th) much troubled Pope Boniface the 9th: (For now, and for near
the space of forty years together, there were two Popes in being at once, each
Cursing the other; and part of Christendom acknowledging One, and part his
Adversary.) Therefore the said Boniface (whom the English owned for their
Ghostly Father) forthwith sent a Nuncio to King Richard, with great Complements
to commend his Devotion, and that of his Predecessors toward Holy Church, but
withal to complain of these Invasions (as he was pleased to call them) of the
Ecclesiastical Liberties; and to urge him as well to Repeal the said Laws, as
by no means to make Peace with the French King, unless he would disown and no
longer assist the Antipope, etc.

The King received the Nuncio kindly, and heard his Tale, but for Answer put
him off to the Meeting of the Parliament, which was in November, and then the
Business was bandied about; and though the King and Duke of Lancaster seemed
willing to gratify the Pope, the Commons would by no means consent that people
should go to Rome to acquire any Benefices in England; only that they might not
seem too much to slight his Holiness, they yielded that it might be suffered,
but not without the Kings License, and no longer than till the next Parliament.
But though they held their Pope to hard Meat, they were not wanting in
expressing their kindness to their King, giving him a Half-tenth, and an
Half-fifteenth; which they offered to make whole Ones, on condition the King
would next Summer make an Expedition against the Scots.

Anno 1392. The Duke of Lancaster is sent over into France, and most
magnificently entertained by the French King: But instead of a Peace, brought
back only a Truce for a year; to the intent, says Walsingham, That during that
time, the collected wisdom of England might consider whether it were more
expedient to conclude a final Peace, or prosecute the War.

About this time, a certain Matron in London having one only Daughter, had
instructed her to Cele^rate the Mass, and built an Altar with all its Furniture
in a private Room, and there for many days caused her to Accouter herself in
Priestly Habit, and Officiate; only when she came to the words of the
Sacrament, she Prostrated herself, and durst not Consecrate; but rising again,
would go on with the rest of the Mass to the end, her Mother helping her and
encouraging her Devotion. But at last a Neighboring Gossip whom she had called
to this private Mass, discovering her Practice, the Bishop of London heard of
it, and being much grieved (as he had reason, to see his Trade usurped by the
other Sex) called her before him, and made her show her Crown shaven exactly
like a Priest, before all the people, and caused both her and her Mother to do
Penance.

The Duke of Guelderland, a most active Prince, and related to King Richard,
sent him a Letter full of great Complements, (but in one expression too
profane) stirring him up to War and Military Actions becoming his Royal
Dignity, and particularly dehorting him from the designed dishonorable Amity
with France: The Tenor whereof, was as follows.

MAgnificent Prince! Both your Innate Generosity, and the prudent Counsels of
your Ministers will we conceive effectually provide, that all your Hereditary
Rights, which by your Birth render your Royal Majesty Great and Glorious, may
by the foresight of your deep Wisdom be preserved Inviolable; And that if any
unjust Force does Invade or offer to Diminish them, your Kingly Industry will
valiantly defend the same with the Shield of Military Prowess: And since we
have the Honor to be Related to your Royal Person by Affinity, God himself
cannot hinder, but that we will ever be ready to assist you in defending such
your Rights with Two thousand Lances, when and as oft-soever as you shall be
disposed to engage in a War: Nor ought you to decline the same to your
prejudice, for any Words or Promises that may be made you, from the restless
subtilty of the French. It Is certain, most Serene Prince, your Fame is spread
throughout the World: Nor is it doubted, but for your great plenty of Wool, and
innumerable other Commodities (without which neither the East or South can
subsist) all Kingdoms daily salute you with their Treasures; so that God
himself has conferred upon you Wealth an hundred fold more in comparison, than
on other Kings. Besides the tried Valor of your people, and the sharpness of
their Victorious Bows, have so far advanced the Fame of your Magnanimous
Nation, above any of the West, that Terror and Dread cannot but Invade your
Adversaries; for evermore to this day, as often as the Gallant English have
fought the French, so often have they carried Victory with them from the Field.
Let not therefore, most Potent Prince! the Heart of the Lion slumber longer
against Nature in Pusillanimity: But vouchsafe to apply that matchless Strength
which Nature has conferred upon you, to warlike Actions, in defense of your
Commonwealth, the maintenance of your Hereditary Rights, the increase of your
Merit, and perpetuating the Renown of so incomparable great and Magnanimous a
King.

Walsingham says, That this Prince came also in person into England, to
persuade the King against making Peace either with the French or Scots, and
that he was very honorably entertained. But it seems his motion was not much
regarded, for the time was spun out in further Truces, and nothing done.

And now the Citizens of London fall into the Kings grievous displeasure, the
Causes whereof are said to be Two: The first, Their not only denying to lend
the King a thousand pounds (which he desired) themselves; but also affronting a
certain Lombard, who was willing to accommodate him: and abusing him (some
Authors say, they beat and half killed him) for his forwardness. The other an
Accident which happening just in the neck of this, seemed, or perhaps was made a
far greater Offense than otherwise it need have been reputed, viz.

A Baker carrying his Bread along the Street, one of the Bishop of Salisbury's
Servants took a loaf out of his Basket; which the Baker demanded to be
restored, but the Bishop's man instead thereof broke his head; for which Injury
the people would have seized him, but he fled into his Masters house: Thither
the Constable came, and peaceably desired he might be surrendered up to Justice.
But the Bishop's Servants shut the Gates, and made resistance. This more
exasperated the people, (who though sometimes they may be deceived b^ Fi^^sses
and Craft, are yet generally shrewd Guessers at Right and Wrong in Matters of
Fact, and (...) of common life) insomuch, that many threatened to fire their
way, and began to use violence. Of which the Mayor and chief Officers having
notice, they immediately repaired thither, and by their Presence and Authority,
suppressed the Multitude, and preserved the Kings Peace; so that hitherto the
harm was but small: and all this Combustion might easily have been quenched and
forgot, had not the Bishop (whose ill-govern'd Servant was the Beginner and
Cause of all the Broil) kindled the Fuel afresh: And it is said, he the rather
stirred in it, out of an old grudge which he had against the Citizens, because
they were generally looked upon to be Favorers of Wickliffs Doctrine. But
whatever the Motive was, a loud Complaint was made by him and other Prelates to
the King, affirming, That if upon every paultry pretense the Citizens should be
suffered thus to Affront the Bishops without Chastisement, they would endanger
not only the Dignity, but the Liberty of the whole Church. The King was so
incensed hereat, (being prepared by former Provocations) that he was once
resolved to have raised an Army, and utterly destroyed the City, and made spoil
thereof. But being persuaded by more moderate Councils, he only sent for the
Mayor and two Sheriffs, and Four and twenty Aldermen, and Four and twenty
others of the ablest Citizens, to his Court then held at Nottingham, where the
said Tumult and diverse other Offenses were laid to their Charge; As that they
had forfeited their Obligations formerly given to the King, etc. They at first
resolved to justify their Innocence, and faithfully engaged to stand by one
another: But it seems there was falsehood in Fellowship, and as it often happens
in such Cases, some timorous persons hoping to curry favor, Impeached the
rest, who again recriminated upon them, and so all were liable to be undone,
and therefore left themselves wholly to the Kings Mercy, who committed the
Mayor to Windsor Castle, and the rest to several other places of Confinement,
seizes the Liberties of the City into his own hands, and Annuls all their
Privileges, commands there should be no more any Major be chosen, but that he
would himself appoint one who should be called Keeper of the City; and
accordingly did qualify one Sir Edward Dalyngrygge, (other Authors call him
Balerygge) with that Title, who being thought too favorable to the Citizens,
was quickly removed, and Sir Baldwin Radington, a person of a rougher temper
put in his place; And also the Terms and Courts of Justice, were removed to
York.

In the mean time, the Duke of Gloucester and others were not wanting to
Intercede with the King on behalf of the Londoners, of whom the Principal, on
Sunday next after the Assumption of S. Mary, waited on him at Windsor, and
submitted to him, Themselves and their Fortunes: With which he seemed somewhat
well pacified, and on the Wednesday following came toward London, being met
from the City with four hundred Men on Horseback, clad all in one Livery, an
innumerable multitude on foot, a solemn Procession of the Clergy, and Five
hundred Boys in Surplices: The Fronts of the Houses adorned with Tapestry and
Pictures, the Conduits freely running Wine, etc. Besides, they presented the
King with a Crown of Gold of great value, and another of the same Metal to the
Queen; together with a Picture of the Trinity worth 800 l. and several other
great Gifts: And so they obtained their Privileges restored and confirmed to
them, the Election of a Mayor, and all things as before: And having been at all
this Charge, doubted not but to be quiet and free from further Fine or Penalty.
But herein they were deceived; for notwithstanding all their Presents, the King
yet upon such submission before made, demanded and forced them to pay after all
this, Ten thousand pounds, or else they must have ventured the Effects of his
new Displeasure.

The Duke of Gloucester having been furnished with Money to raise an Army, for an
Expedition into Ireland, (of which the King had lately created him Duke) when
his Troops were now just ready to march, and all things prepared, was on a
sudden without any cause Recalled, and the Voyage Countermanded, to the great
Detriment as well of England as Ireland: For upon the Report of his Coming,
almost all the petty Irish Kings had advised one with another, and resolved to
submit themselves to the English.

The Year 1393, a Parliament at Winchester gave the King half a Tenth for the
Clergy, and half a Fifteenth for the Laiety, toward the Expenses of the Dukes
of Lancaster and Gloucester, who were going into France, to Treat of a Peace
between the two Crowns. The French King sometime before had lost his Senses,
but was now pretty well recovered, yet at this time narrowly escaped with his
life, from the Treachery of the Duke his Brother, who over-greedily Aspired to
the Crown. For the King and several other Persons of Quality dancing a Rural
Mask, to make themselves appear more like those Savages which they were to
represent, had got on strait Garments close to their Bodies, covered over with
T^we, which was fixed on with Rosin and Pitch to make it stick the faster: Now
when they were busy in the midst of their Dance by Torch-light, a Villain
suborned by the Duke, clapped a Flambeau amongst them, as if done by Accident,
whereby in an instant the Tow and other Combustibles took fire; but a Lady
seeing the danger, snatched away the King before the flames seized him, whilst
Four of the other Maskers, notwithstanding all the help imaginable was used,
were immediately burnt to Death.

In England the Lord Tho. Pierey is made the King's Steward, and Sir William
Scroop Chamberlain, a Person (says our Author) than whom, in all Mankind,
there could not be found one more wicked or cruel.

The year following, 1394, was chiefly remarkable for Funerals. First the
Duchess of Lancaster Daughter to the King of Castile, was snatched away; then
the Countess of Derby her Daughter-in-Law; next Queen Anne her self, whose
Obsequies were magnificently and at vast Expenses Celebrated by the King; and
soon after died Isabella Duchess of York: Nor was Death only content to
Triumph over the Ladies, but also mowed down the Noble Sir John Hawkwood, a
Knight whose Valor had rendered him Famous in many foreign Nations, and no less
dear to his own.

About August iss^ed a Proclamation throughout England, That all the Irish
should forthwith return home, and wait the Kings coming thither at Lady Day
next following, on pain of death. And indeed it was but time to send them
packing; for such multitudes were come over in hopes of gain, that they had
left the English Pale in Ireland almost quite desolate: So that the natural
wild Irish not yet Conquered, taking thereby an advantage, destroyed or
pillaged the few Subjects the King of England had remaining there, at their
pleasure. And whereas King Edward the Third, when he settled his Courts of
Justice, etc. in that Country, received from thence to his Exchequer Thirty
thousand pounds per annum; the same by reason of the want of Inhabitants, was
not only lost, but on the contrary, the King forced to be out of Pocket Thirty
thousand Marks every year in the necessary defense of his Territories there.
Effectually to redress which, the King in Person about Michaelmas sailed into
Ireland, attended with the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of March, Nottingham,
Rutland, etc. The Irish unable to Cope with so great a Force, endeavored only
to weary him with Alarms, Ambuscades, and Skirmishes; but at last, diverse of
their petty Princes were glad to submit to King Richard; of whom some he kept
as Hostages for security, others he dismissed upon Parole. And for the better
settlement of Affairs, Assembled a Parliament for Ireland at Dublin, and
continued in that Kingdom till after Easter.

In the mean time, Anno 1395, the Duke of York, Guardian of England during the
Kings absence, called a Parliament at London, eight days after Twelfth-tide;
unto which was sent from Ireland the Duke of Gloucester, who so zealously
represented the Kings Necessities, by reason of the vast Expense he had been at
in this necessary and no less advantageous than honorable Expedition into
Ireland; that the Clergy were content to present his Majesty with a Tenth, and
the Commonalty with a Fifteenth: But not without a Protestation first made,
That they were not bound to grant the same De stricto jure, but did it purely
out of their Affection to their King.

The Lollards (so called, as Tritemius says, from Walter Lollard a German, who
flourisht about the year 1315. Or as others think from Lolium, signifying
Darnel or Tares; for being Followers and Disciples of Wickeliff, the Clergy,
and especially the Monks and Friars, were not wanting to brand them with ill
Names, and reputed them as the Tares sown by the evil One in the Field of Gods
Church;) did about this time publicly affix on the Doors of S. Paul's Church,
Accusations of the Clergy, charging them with sundry Abominations, and also
diverse Conclusions touching Ecclesiastical Persons, and the Sacraments of the
Church. At which the Bishops were much disturbed, and according to their usual
Method, instead of clearing themselves, and confuting their Adversaries by
Scripture or Reason, endeavored to silence them by Club-law, dispatching away
the Archbishop of York, and Bishop of London, into Ireland to the King,
entreating him to hasten his return, to succor Faith and Holy Church, that
were both like to be undone by the Heretics, who were contriving how to take
away the Possessions of the whole Church, and overthrow all the Canonical
Sanctions. Upon this News, back comes the King from Ireland, and takes several
of the Chief Favorites of the Lollards to task, threatening most terribly if
they showed them any Countenance for the future. But the Heretics were not the
only Afflicters of the Clergy at this time; but Birds of their own Nests began
to pluck their feathers too: for William Archbishop of Canterbury got a Bull
from the Pope, Impowering him to levy throughout all the Diocesses of his
Province, Four pence in the pound of all Ecclesiastical Goods and Revenues, as
well of those Exempt, as not Exempt; and this without so much as pretending any
true or lawful Cause for the same. However, the Execution of this Bull being
committed unto the Archbishop of York, and the Bishop of London, though many of
the inferior Clergy grumbled not a little, and complained thereof as
unreasonable, yet they were generally forced to submit unto it.

Anno Domini 1396, the Duke of Lancaster, to whom the King had given the Duchy
of Aquitain, and who had been at inestimable Charges in those Parts, to
Conciliate to himself the Affections of the Inhabitants; no sooner had obtained
the same, but he was suddenly recalled from thence by the Kings Command. To
which, though it seemed no less hard than unexpected, the Duke paid a punctual
Obedience, and was received if not with love, yet at least with a show of
honor by the King; from whom having obtained License to depart the Court, he
hastened to Lincoln, and there to the admiration of all the World, (by reason
of the disparity of their Qualities) was married to Katherine Swinford, who for
diverse years before had been his Mistress.

This year also the Pope wrote to the King, entreating him to assist the
Prelates of the Church in the Cause of God, and of him the said King and his
Kingdom, against the Lollards, whom he declared to be Traitors not only to the
Church, but likewise to the King; and therefore did most earnestly press him,
That whomsoever the Bishops should declare to be Heretics, he would forthwith
Condemn by his Royal Authority. But it seems the King was too busy otherwise
to attend his Holiness's Commands, and to do his Prelates drudgery in
butchering of Heretics; for he was making mighty Preparations for a Voyage,
not of War, but of Galiantry, into France; where by agreement, the two Kings
were to have a Personal Conference.

In order to which, King Richard passes over to Calice, and the French King
came down to Arde; between which two Towns was the place appointed for their
Interview, and M^gnificent Tents erected for their Entertainment. But first
they interchangeably took an Oath, truly and religiously to observe the Sacred
Laws of Amity at this Congress, and that neither by themselves or any of their
Subjects, Friends, Allies, or any other to their privity, or with their
Allowance, there should be contrived or practiced any Hostility, Surprise,
Damage, or Disturbance by the one Party to the other. And for further security,
the Space between the two Royal Tents was Guarded on either side with Knights
Armed, and drawn Swords in their hands; Four hundred English on the one hand,
and Four hundred French on the other.

The Twenty seventh of October the two Kings met, Four French Dukes waiting on
the King of England, and Five English Noblemen, viz. the Dukes of Lancaster and
Gloucester, and the Earls of Derby, Rutland, and Northumberland, attending the
French King.

After an Enterchange of Complements between their Majesty's, it was first by
mutual consent ordered, That a Chapel at both their equal Charge should in the
place of their Interview be Erected, which should be called, The Chapel of our
Lady of Peace: And on Saturday the Feast of S. Simon and Jude, on further
Treaty, it was accorded, That there should be a Cessation of Arms between the
Two Crowns for the term of Thirty years; and that King Richard should Espouse
Isabel the French Kings Daughter, then not above Eight years old. On Sunday the
two Kings dined together in King Richard's Tent, and on the Monday the French
King brought thither the young Lady, who was entrusted to the Tuition of the
Dutchesses of Lancaster and Gloucester, and other English Ladies, who conveyed
her with a Glorious Retinue to Calice. And soon after the two Kings in a most
amicable manner took their Leaves of each other.

Walsingham tells us, That besides the Presents made by King Richard to the
French King and his Nobles, amounting to the value of Ten thousand Marks and
upwards, he spent in this Amorous Voyage above Three hundred thousand Marks.
And Trussel relates, That the Duke of Gloucester was not a little offended both
with the Match and the Truce, alleging, That it was more meet to be in Arms
than Amity with the French, who being inferior to the English in Courage, did
ever overreach them in Craft, and being too weak for War, did oft-times prevail
and get Advantages by Treaties of Peace. That the French Lady (being but a
Child) was a very unfit Match for King Richard, as well by reason of the
Disparity of their Years, as for that he had no Issue by his first Wife, and
was not like to have any by this, unless perhaps in his old Age. But these
Arguments not prevailing, the Londoners however took the Confidence to petition
the King; That seeing there was Peace with France, he would Release them of the
Subsidy, granted in the last Parliament, toward maintaining the Wars against
that Crown. This Suit being by them so importunately followed, as much
perplexed the King, until at length the Duke of Lancaster assured them, That
the procuring this Peace, had spent and lost the King Three hundred thousand
pounds, wherewith they were pacified, though it is probable not very well
pleased.

The King being returned safe into England with his Baby-Bride, though not
without the loss of his Tents, and a great part of his ri^h Furniture cast away
by a Tempest in crossing the Channel: The Earl of S. Paul was soon after sent
by the French King to Complement the young Queen, who having understood how
earnestly Gloucester had inveighed against this French Alliance, was ('it is said)
an eminent Instrument in contriving and occasioning the destruction of that
Duke; advising the King, that he was too dangerous a Subject to be suffered,
and that it concerned His Majesty both in Honor to revenge the Disgr^ces which
he had by him formerly received, and in Policy to prevent the Dangers which he
had cause to fear. Hereupon the King grows jealous of the Duke, and as that
passion is restless, and apt to be fed with the slightest Imaginations, so he
began to pry more narrowly into his Deportment, watch his Words, and interpret
both Them and his Actions to the worst, framing to himself many vain
Apprehensions and needless Disquiets.

To which another Accident not a little contributed; viz. the King having been
paid the Money lent the Duke of Britain upon Breast, Redelivered the Town, and
thereupon the English Soldiers that were there in Garrison, were sent home;
who at a Feast which the King kept at Westminster, coming in great numbers into
the Hall: As soon as the King had Dined, the Duke of Gloucester asked him, If he
observed those men that stood in such Troops in the Hall? Yes, marry (said the
King) Who were they? They were (said the Duke) those Soldiers, who by your
Surrendering up of Breast, are sent home, and must now either steal or starve.
And so went on to tax the King of an unadvised Deed, with words much mere
unadvised: Insomuch, that the King in great anger replied, -- Why, Uncle! Do
you think me either a Merchant, or a Fo^l, to sell my Lands? By S. John
Baptist, No; but could I refuse to render the Town, when I was tendered the
Money lent upon it? And certainly it shows either great weakness in the Duke,
if Breast were but a Mortgage, and he did not know it; or much Injustice if
knowing it, he would yet have had the King to detain it against manifest
Equity. Upon th^s and the beforementioned Provocations, there was ^^dled in
the King such a Displeasure against the (...) as could never afterward be
quenched but by ^his Blood. And first he would often complain to the Dukes of
Lancaster and York, of the Duke of Glocesters perverseness in Actions and
crosness in Speech; who endeavored to excuse him, and pacify His Majesty;
alleging, That their Brother indeed was more vehement than they could commend,
but they durst assure His Majesty, That his Heart was dutiful and faithful; and
that such his vehemence proceeded from a zealous regard lest His Majesty and
his Kingdom should suffer either in Honor or Revenue, and therefore His
Majesty had no cause either to fear, or be offended with him. The King herewith
seemed to be satisfied; but however, the said two Dukes not knowing how far
they might be involved in that Displeasure which they still perceived he
retained against their Brother, thought fit, for avoiding the worst, to retire
from Court, thereby giving the Duke of Glocester's Enemies the greater
opportunities to incense the King against him. Nor was it long before this
black swelling Cloud of Royal Indigna^^ b^rst forth into actual Thunder. But
first,

In the Year 1397, a Parliament being summoned at London, the Duke of Lancaster
caused the Issue he had before Marriage begot on Katherine Swynford to be
Legitimated; and at the same time was granted to the King half a Tenth by the
Clergy. S^^n after which, King Richard, contrary to the Oath he had fo^merly
taken, recalled the Judges from Ireland, whom by his consent, the Nobles in the
other Parliament had for their Dem^^its ba^isht. And certain idle Reports being
spread, That he was, or was like to be chosen Emperor: The King thereupon
began to take upon him a greater Port and Magnificence than ever before: To
maintain which, he fleeced the Common people, and borrowed almost of every body
great Sums of Money; So that there was no Prelate, City, or Citizen of Estate
in the whole Kingdom, but furnished the King out of their Stock.

And now the Duke of Gloucester being retired to his House at Plashey in Essex,
the King, with the Earl of Nottingham Lord Marshal, and the Earl of Huntington,
one day on a sudden rode thitherwards, but left the Earl Marshal with a
selected Troop in Ambuscade in the Forest, whilst the King and his Retinue rode
directly to the Dukes House, who with all dutiful respect, and heartily
welcome, receives and entertains them: Which Treat being over, the King desires
the Duke to accompany him toward London, who with a very small Company waited
on him accordingly; but being come into the Forest, on a sudden the King clapped
Spurs to his Horse, and the Duke was stopped by the Earl Marshal, and by violence
hurried to the Thames, there blindfolded, and against his will shipped, and
carried to Calice, (then an English Garrison) where he was kept close Prisoner,
till afterward privately put to death.

The next day the King invites the Earl of Warwick to Dinner, and showed him
very good Countenance; but upon his Return caused him ^o be Arrested and sent
to prison. At the same time the Ear of Arundel was apprehended, and the Lord
Cobham, and Sir John Ch^ney sent to the Tower.

These strange Proceedings Alarmed the whole Nation, therefore to quiet the
people, a Proclamation is issued, setting forth that these Noblemen were seized
not for any of their old Offenses, but for n^w Crimes which should be
discovered, and fairly proceeded against in the next Parliament. Accordingly
soon after He caused them to be Indicted, suborning (says Walsingham)
Appealers to accuse them in Parliament at Nottingham, viz. The Earl of Rutland,
the Earl Marshal, the Earl of Kent, etc. In the mean time the King draws out a
great power of Armed-men, [Multos Malefactores, our Author calls them] from
Cheshire and Wales, whom he kept about him as a Guard for his Person.

About the Octaves of the Feast of the Virgin Mary's Nativity, a Parliament
began at London, whereof one Sir John Bushy was Speaker, and Sir William Bagot,
and Sir Henry Green, chief Sticklers, Persons of whom the Historians give this
Character, That they were Proud, Ignorant, Covetous, and withal Ambitious: To
which might be added, that they were most notable Flatterers too, if it be true
that Bushy in all his Speeches did not attribute to the King, Titles of Honor
due and accustomed; but such as were fitter for the Majesty of Almighty God,
than for any earthly Prince. By the Importunity of these men and others, all
the Charters of Pardon formerly granted by the King, were called into question;
the King protesting they were drawn from him against his Consent: The Clergy
first gave their Opinion, but somewhat sparingly, That they thought then they
might be revocable; and the Temporal Lords showed themselves of the same
opinion, but the Judges and Lawyers opposed it, How it was carried according to
the King's Inclination, and all the said Pardons vacated and annulled.

Having thus removed all Obstacles, they next fall roundly to work, only the
Prelates pretending a Scrupulosity, that they might not be present at Judgments
of Blood, chose Sir Henry Peircy their Procurator, and departed the House.
First, Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury was accused for executing the Commission
against Michael de Pole, for which his Temporalities were seized, his Lands and
Goods forfeited, and he himself adjudged to perpetual Banishment, and to depart
the Realm within six Weeks. In whose place the King caused to be preferred his
Treasurer Roger de Walden, who, because (says our Author) he presumed to
ascend to the Bed of his living Father; (that is, to take the Archbishopric
whilst the said Thomas survived) was two years afterward turned ou^ by the
Authority of the Pope. Sir R. Bak^r tells us, That when this Archbishop was
first accused of Treason, he offered to make his Defense, but Sir John Bushy
besought the King, That he might not be admitted to Answer, lest by his great
Wit and Cunning, he might lead men away to believe him. If all their
Proceedings were like this, we may easily guess at the Justice of the rest.

In the next place, They proceeded to Judgment against the Earl of Arundel, who
in vain pleaded the Benefit of his Pardon, for he was notwitstanding sentenced
to be Drawn, Hanged and Quartered, which was mitigated by the King into to the
favor of Beheading. The Earl when called to Answer, Condemned, and at his
Death betrayed not the least symptoms either of Guilt or Fear; But observing
the Earls of Nottingham and Kent; (of whom the first was his Son-in-Law, the
second his Nephew) to be bery busy at his Execution: He calmly said to them,
-- Truly it might have beseemed you at least rather to have been absent; but
the time will come ere-long, that as many shall marvel at your Misfortune, as
they do now at mine. This Earl was wonderfully beloved by the Commons; and
Walsingam affirms, That the King was afterward haunted with an Imagination of
his Ghost, not being able to close his Eyes, but strait he fancied Arundel
stood before him: And the more to disturb him, a Miracle was reported, That his
Head of it self was grown to his Body: Which was asserted with so much
Confidence, that the King caused his Tomb to be opened, to disprove the
Fiction; and understanding that still the People went on Pilgrimage thither as
to the Shrine of a Saint, or Martyr, caused the Augustine Friars in London,
amongst whom he was buried, to take down his Scutcheons, and abscond his Grave,
by laying a new Pavement over it.

The Lord Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, upon his Arraignment, did not carry
himself with so much Courage and Gallantry, but confessed with Tears he had
been a Traitor in joining with the Duke of Gloucester, and other Lords formerly
acting against the Kings pleasure: Therefore though condemned to Die, the King
remitted that Punishment, and only ordered him to perpetual Imprisonment in the
Isle of Man. The Lord Cobham was also banished, though there was no new Matter
against him: But only that he had been appointed by Parliament, to be one of
the Commissioners of Inspection before mentioned, in the tenth year of his
Reign.

As for the Duke of Gloucester, having so great an Interest in the Affections of
the People, it was not thought safe to bring him to a public Trial, but
concluded with more Policy than Justice, to put him to death secretly, without
either Conviction or Examination: And therefore being a close Prisoner as
aforesaid at Callice, he was by certain Ruffians ordered thereunto by Nottingam
Earl Marshal, suddenly one Night strangled or stifled to death between two
Feather Beds. Thus fell this Great, and (for ought we find in Writers of those
times) Good Prince, the Son of One, and Uncle of another King, and so beloved
of the People, that with him (says Walsingham) the general Hope and Comfort of
the Commonalty of the Land expired.

And now the King caused the Parliament to be Ajourn'd till after Christmas,
and then to sit again at Shrewsbury.

Where in the beginning of the Year 1398, they met accordingly; and the King by
the Interest he had made amongst them, caused not only all the Proceedings of
the Parliament in the Tenth Year of his Reign, to be Condemned and Annulled;
But also obtained a Concession from them, That after the present Parliament
should break up, Its whole Power should yet be Conferred upon and remain in
certain Persons by them particularly named, or any Seven or Eight of them. Who
by virtue of such Power granted, did afterward proceed to Act and determine
many things concerning the Public State of the Nation, and properly the Work
of a Parliament, to the great prejudice of the Realm.

And to six himself more firm with Friends, or Illustrate his Triumphs over
those he thought his Enemies: The King about this time was most liberal in
Conferring of Honors, Creating no less than Five new Dukes, of whom one was
the Earl of Derby, made Duke of Hereford; and an other the Earl of Nottingham,
(probably for his good Service in dispatching the Duke of Gloucester) raised to
the Title of Duke of Norfolk; One Duchess, One Marquess, and Four Earls:
Amongst whom he made a Distribution of a great part of the Lands of the Duke of
Gloucester, and of the Earls of Arundel and Warwick; imagining by this double
Bounty of Honor and Estate to support it, to have tied them with a double
Obligation of Duty and Affection: Not considering that hired Friends for the
most part are seldom either satisfied or sure; but rather like some Ravens that
Naturalists tell of in Arabia, which being full-gorg'd, have very sweet
tuneable Notes; but empty, scriech most horribly.

Furthermore, to gratify the Cheshire-men, who had chieflly assisted him and
his late Favorites, he qualified that County with the Name* and Dignity of a
Principality, and added to the rest of his own Titles, that of Prince of
Chester.

A General Pardon was also granted for all Offenses to all the Kings Subjects,
but clogged with a strange Clause of Exception, exempting Fifty Persons in
number, from the Benefit thereof, whose Names were not expressed, but left to
the Kings own knowledge and pleasure; to the end, that if any of the Nobility
should happen any way to displease, he might nominate him or them to be of the
Number excepted, and so still keep them within his danger. By which Reservation
the General Pardon became no Pardon at all, since no man in England could
assure himself that he was included in it.

Lastly, To Corroborate and add the greater esteem to the Acts and Proceedings
of this Parliament, King Richard purchased the Popes Bulls containing grievous
Censures and Curses on all that should presume to break or oppose them: Which
were solemly published at Paul's Cross, and other places throughout England.

All things succeeding thus suitable to the Kings pleasure; the Heads of the
Party that opposed his Will, having lost their Heads: the Nobles afraid, and
the Commons unable to express their Resentments, any otherwise than in Sighs,
or whispered Murmurs and Complaints: His Officers of State, His Laws, nay His
very Parliament, all modeled to His Designs, He could not but sing Requiems to
His Soul, and look upon himself in a Condition altogether happy and secure.
When yet to show that there is still an overruling Providence that can blast
all Projects, though never so subtlely laid, if not sounded on Equity, and
carried on with Justice: A Monarch Paramount, who confounds the Councils of
Princes, and is terrible to the Kings of the Earth; when once they become
disobedient unto, and forgetful of him: Behold on a sudden, all his Affairs by
unexpected Means and unlikely Instruments, are embroiled more than ever, and
this great Prince left so destitute of Power, or Friends, as to be forced,
without striking one stroke, to surrender his Crown; and (which was yet more
grievous to a generous Mind) acknowledge himself both unworthy and unfit to
wear it any longer.

This Wonderful Catastrophe has since been thought to have been fore-shewn by
some prodigious Tokens, that happened about this time: As that in this Year
1398, when almost throughout all England, all the Bay-trees withered, and
afterward beyond all expectation, grew green again. And another perhaps more
remarkable, on New Years Day following, When a very deep River running between
the Villages of Suelleston and Ha^^wod near Bedford, on a sudden stopped its
Course, and divided it self, so as that for three Miles space the Channel
remained dry.

But waving such uncertain Presages, if we consider the several Steps that led
to this grand Mutation: The first both in order of time, and Influence, may be
reckoned that of the Banishment of the Duke of Hereford, Son of the Duke of
Lancaster: This was occasioned by means of a Quarrel between Him and Moubray
Duke of Norfolk, but what the grounds were of that Quarrel, is somewhat
differently reported by Authors, for though all agree, 'twas about certain
words spoken to the Kings dishonor, yet of what nature those words were, is
not so certainly related. But the best, that is, most probable account thereof,
that I can meet with, is as follows.

The Duke of Hereford, either disdaining the undes^rved Favors and Advancement
of some Persons about the King, or disliking that his Sovereign should be
abused, and his Country oppressed by such ill Instruments; or perhaps to show
his owm skill and sufficiency in the Art of Government, happened one day in
familiar Conference with the Duke of Norfolk; to complain, that the King too
much undervalued the Princes of the Blood, and much discouraged the rest of the
Ancient Nobility from intermedling in Public Affairs: That instead of using
their able Advice and Service, He was engrossed by a few Vpstart Favorites of
base Birth, and baser Qualities; having no sufficiency either for Council in
Peace, or Courage in War: And whose dishonest Conditions had deservedly
contracted an Odium and Contempt of the whole Realm; whereby the Honor of the
Kings Person was much obscured, the safety of his Estate endangered, and the
Dignity of the English Nation not a little impaired: And that it was high time,
that the King should provide some Redress herein. And all this ^e protested he
mentioned not out of a Picque to ary particular person, but out of Compassion
for so public Grievance, and zealous Duty to his Sovereign. And therefore
desired the said Duke, that he being one of the Kings Cabinet-Council, would be
pleased to discover unto His Majesty, these Enormities and Dangers, that by
removing the One, he might happily prevent the Other.

To these, or some such discourses, the Duke of Norfolk seemed much to adhere,
assuring Hereford, that in these Apprehensions he had but Copied his own
Thoughts, and seemed not only to approve of what he said, but promised to
improve his Interest toward a Regulation of the Matters Complained of. And
perhaps had the words been afterward by him but as faithfully related, and by
the King as heartily taken, as they were freely and (...) intended, many
Mischiefs might have been avoided. But on the contrary, they were maliciously
mis-recited, and much mis-construed: For the Duke of Norfolk had formerly sided
with the Lords, yet it seems Preferment had taken him off, and he was now
become wholly addicted to humor the King: And therefore to s^rue himself yet
further into favor, acquaints him with these Complaints of the Duke of
Hereford, but so exaggreated, and intermixed with reflective Additions, that the
King was highly incensed, and calling Hereford before him, charged him
therewith, who denying a great part thereof, and N^rfolk as stoutly asserting
it, the former challenged the latter to the Combat, who readily accepted
thereof, which at last the King allows, assigning Coventry the place, and
August following for the time of decision.

And though it be not much material to our History, yet to gratify the vulgar
Readers Curiosity, it will perhaps be no unwelcome digression, to relate the
Formality of the intended Duel, between these two Puissant Peers. On the day
therefore appointed, each of them attended with a splendid and numerous
Retinue, appears: The Duke of Albem^rl^ was pro Tempore, made High Constable;
and the Duke of Surry, High Marshal: who came to the Lists Honorably attended
with Rich Liveries; suitable to their greatness, each of their Servants
carrying Tipstaves for clearing the Field. Where, first the Duke of Hereford as
Challenger, mounted on a White Courser, in Caparisons of Green and Blew Velvet,
Embroidered thick with Swans and Antilopes, armed Cap-a-pe, with his Sword
drawn, approached the Lists: of whom the Marshal demanding who he was! received
this Answer, -- I am Henry of Lancaster, Duke of Hereford, that am come hither
to do my Devoir, against Thomas Moubray, Duke of Norfolk: as a false Traitor to
God, the King, the Realm, and me. And then taking his Oath, that his Qurrel was
true and just, desired liberty to enter the Lists, which being granted, he put
up his Sword, pulled down his Beaver, signed himself on the Forehead with the
Cross, took his Spear, and passing the Barriers, dismounted, and sat down in a
Chair of Green Velvet, placed in a Travers of Green and Blew Velvet, at one end
of the Lists.

Then King Richard enters the Field with great Pomp, accompanied with the Earl
of S. Paul, who came out of France on purpose to be a Spectator of the Combat,
and attended with most of the Nobles of England, and a Guard of Ten Thousand
men in Arms, to prevent any sudden Tumult, or disorders. His Majesty being
seated in a Chair of State: one of the Kings at Arms made Proclamation, That
none but such as were appointed to Marshall the Field, should touch any part of
the Lists, upon pain of Death. Which ended, another Herald cries, -- Behold,
here Henry of Lancaster, Duke of Hereford Appellant, who is entered into the
Royal Lists, to do his devoir against Thomas Moubray, Duke of Norfolk: upon
pain of being counted false and Re^reant.

Immediately upon this, appeared the Duke of Norfolk bravely mounted, his Horse
barbed with Crimson-velvet, embroydered with Lions of Silver, and Mulberry
Trees proper, and having taken a like Oath before the Constable and Marshal,
that his Quarrel was Right and Just, entered the Field; crying aloud, God aid
the Right; and then lighted from his Horse, placing himself in a Chair of
Crimson Velvet opposite to Hereford, at the other end of the Lists, the Marshal
viewed their Spears, to see that they were of equal length, and carried the one
himself to the Duke of Hereford, and sent the other by a Knight, to the Duke of
Norfolk. This done, Proclamation was made, to mount, and address themselves to
the Combat. Upon which the Dukes instantly mount their Horses, closed their
Beavers, casting their Spears into their Rest, when the Trumpet sounded, and
the Duke of Hereford put his Horse forward, but before Norfolk stirred, the
King cast down his Warder, and the Heralds cried, stay! stay! Then the King
causing the Spears to be taken from them, they returned to their Chairs, whilst
he retired to Council, to debate what was fit to be done in so weighty a cause:
where after two Hours debate, their doom was agreed upon without fighting, and
one Sir John Bouray, by the Kings Command, after silence proclaimed, read their
Sentence, which was thus: That forasmuch as the Dukes Appellant, and Defendant,
had honorably appeared in the List Royal, and were not only ready but forward
to entertain the Combat, therefore it being an Affair of great consequence, for
avoiding the Effusion of Christian Blood, the King by the advice of his Council
had decreed: That Henry Duke of Hereford, should within 15 days depart the
Realm; not to return within the space of Ten Years, on pain of Death: without
the Kings special License; and after a Second Proclamation, Sentence of
Banishment was also read against the Duke of Norfolk, but with these several
aggravations. First that the same was for Life; Secondly, that the Cause
thereof was expressed to be, for having urtered Seditious words, whereof he
could not produce any proof; And Thirdly, it was added as part of his further
punishment, That the ^ing should receive the Revenues of his Lands until he
were satisfied, all such Sums of Money, as the said Duke had taken out of the
King's Coffers, on pretense of paying the Garrison of Callice.

And further it was proclaimed, That no person from thenceforth should presume
to Petition, or Intercede with the King, in the behalf of either of these
Dukes, to alter this sentence, on pain of his Majesty's high displeasure: which
being so declared, the King called them both before him, and took of them a
Solemn Oath, That they should never Converse together beyond the Seas, nor
willingly come into each other's Company.

The Duke of Norfolk soon after, in great grief and trouble of mind, departed
into Germany, and from thence to Venice, where in a short time he died with
sorrow, leaving this cautionary Lesson to all Courtiers, That greatness abused
by whispering untruths, draws, if discovered, certainty of destruction. And
observable it is, that his Banishment was pronunced on the very day Twelve
Month, on which the Duke of Gloucester, had by his order been Murdered at
Calice, so just is the Divine Nemesis: not only in revenging ill actions, but
causing the punishment to be attended with such circumstances as may make the
world take notice of it.

The Duke of Hereford took his leave of the King, at Eltham, behaving himself
so respectfully, that his Majesty was there pleased to declare, he would abate
4 Years of his Exilement: yet could not that pacify the Murmurs of the people,
who could not be persuaded that there was any cause for his being Banished at
all. Exclaiming that it was against the Law of Arms, the custom of the Realm,
and all Justice; that he should be Exiled, who had so honorably offered to
mantain his Appeal according to the Law of the Field. He directed his course
from England to Paris, where he was nobly received by the French King, and
found such favor in that Court: That he was offered in Marriage, the only
Daughter of the Duke of Berry: the said Kings Uncle. But King Richard having
notice thereof, used means to stop the prosecution of that Treaty.

He had not been gone many Months, but his Father, the Duke of Lancaster, pays
Nature her Debt; his Death perhaps being hastened by those Impressions of
grief, which this disgrace of his Son might occasion on his Spirits. The
Character given this Duke by Historians, speaks him a man well advised and
wary, an approver of safe Councils with reason, rather than Fortunate Exploits
with hazard: One that was neither negligent, nor ambitiously tender of Glory,
and therefore deported himself toward the King his Nephew, in terms honorable
and respective enough for a moderate Prince, and yet not so plausible as an
uncollected greatness, and the depravity of the Court might desire, whereby
little happened unto him Extraordinary: either in Prejudice or Preferment.

By his Death, the Duchy of Lancaster, did lineally descend to his Eldest Son,
the said Duke of Hereford. But (as the Nature of Man is very Prone to hate
those whom he has injured) the King forthwith seizes all the Lands and Goods
of the deceased Duke, endeavored to perpetuate the Banishment of the Young
Duke, and revoked the Letters Patent he had granted and consented unto, for
enabling the said Dukes Attorneys to sue out his Ouster Le Main and Livery of
those Lands, which during his Exile, should descend to him, his Homage being
formerly concluded upon to be Respited at a reasonable Fine. And all this
without any Crime alleged (that we can hear of) against the Father, whereby
he should have forfeited his Estate: or new Provocation given by the Son,
whereby a Cloud might arise for his being deprived of it.

This severity could not but enrage the Duke, who was already sufficiently
discontented at his Banishment, nor were the People sparing to Exclaim (where
they durst) against these proceedings as unjust, and thence to contract, first,
a Pity, and afterward an high esteem for this Exiled Nobleman, who though not
the Immediate Heir presumptive to the Crown, (for Edmund Mortimer, Earl of
March, was therein before him, the Right having by Parliament (the common
Arbitrator in that case in those days,) been formerly declared to be in his
Father, as being Son of Phillipa, the Daughter of Lionel, the Third Son of King
Edward the Third, whereas, the late Duke of Lancaster, was but the Fourth Son
of that King.) Yet being so near it, and thus exasperated, they thought he
might step over that Obstacle. Si jus violandum Regni causa violandum est. They
knew him to be an active Prince, and of great Courage; and therefore generally
fixed their Eyes on him, as the man that must be their deliverer from those
grievances and pressures, under which they lay gasping. And indeed their
condition could not but be very uneasy, for the King having got rid of two of
his Uncles, viz. Gloucester and Lancaster, (one murdered, the other naturally
deceased) and the Third, which was York, either in disdain for the Indignity
offered to his Nephew Hereford, or in distrust of his own safety, being retired
with his Son, the Duke of Albemarle, to his House at Langley, looked upon
himself as absolutely Horse de Page, free from any Control, with which their
unwelcome gravity was wont sometimes to check his irregular Appetite; and
therefore now took a greater Liberty than before, to disoblige and harass his
People. For thus we find the condition of those times described.

That the King abandoned himself to sloth, and lay plunged in the soft, but
destructive Charms of pleasure; by whose example the Nobility too much gave
themselves up to Ease and Luxury; whereby Cowardice and Effeminacy crept in,
and Shipwreck was made both of Manhood and Reputation. The chief Affairs of
State had long been Bias'd by private respects, which made the Nation decline
as well in Riches as Honor: and all things being out of due Motion, the
Commonweal seemed not so much by degrees, as with a main Course, and at once
precipating into inevitable Ruin. The Northern parts by frequent losses,
almost consumed by the Scots, who had taken several important Posts, and
defaced all the Country with Slaughter, and Devastations Toward the South,
the Merchant Ships were daily surprised by the French, who likewise frequently
pillaged the Seacoasts: And of the Kings Hereditary Dominions in France, many
strong holds were lost by negligence, or sold by ill advise and Treachery.
Forces sometimes were often pretended to be sent over for their defense, but so
scatteringly, at such unseasonable times, so ill accommodated, or under such
indiscreet conduct, that they were occasions rather of loss, than help. Affairs
were managed by such as neither Nature had designed, nor Education prepared,
nor Experience qualified for Politicians; but corrupt or ignorant Ministers by
flatteries and base Arts swai'd in the Kings affections, and disposed of all
things at their pleasure, keeping him as it were beseiged from any better
advise. The profits and revenues of the Crown; nay, the whole Kingdom was let
to farm, the King making himself only ^ Landlord, and challenging no greater
privilege by his Reign, than a dissolute and uncontroled Life. Great Sums of
Money, were by newfound and unwonted means every day rather extorted from, than
voluntarily granted by the subject, whereof no advantage accrew'd to the
Kingdom, only private pleasures were maintained at an extravagant Rate, and
unworthy Favorites advanced. To these, the King was so excessively Liberal,
that he was forced to borrow, beg, and extort in many places, to supply this
vain lavish humor, undoing many without cause, to Enrich a few without desert.
Over and above the Tenths, and Fifteenths, and such usual Taxes, which were
many times gathered double in one Year, strange Impositions were devised and
put in practice, sometimes exacting 12d. per poll, of every Subject, 6s. 8d. of
every Priest, and Religious Person: great Sums drawn from the People under the
favorable Term of Benevolence, and so much borrowed upon Privy-Seals, that no
Man of Ability could escape his Loan, though very seldom any repayment was made.

And to add to all former burdens this present Year, 1399. He charged 17 whole
Counties with taking part against him heretofore with the Duke of Gloucester,
and the rest of the Lords, and threatened with Armed force, to spoil and destroy
them as public Enemies. And having thus affrighted them, sent certain
Commissioners, Bishops, and Lords Temporal, to all the said several Shires, to
let them know his heavy displeasue: And that without due acknowledgment of the
Offense, and Submission to his mercy, he could not receive them into his Grace
and Favor: whereby they were prevailed upon, to own themselves Traitors under
their Hands and Seals. Which was no sooner obtained, but they were compelled to
pay insupportable Sums of Money, for the Redemption of their Lives and Estates,
and procuring their Peace, whereby they were all so impoverisht, that few were
able to subsist, none at present to resist. And yet further to make Conscience
it self accessory to slavery: New Oaths were imposed, not warranted by any Law,
and the People constrained to Seal Blank Charters, and Obligations, and deliver
them to the Kings use, wherein whatsoever he pleased might afterwads be
inserted.

The King bearing so heavy an hand over his People, it is no wonder if they bear
an hard Heart toward him; who being shallow in Judgment, and not able to cover
his Vices, but with a Cloak of seeming terrible and powerful, became first
hated, and afterward contemptible, and drove many of his Subjects to an
Inclination to Revolt, as resolved rather to run the hazard of a speedy ruin
by Rebellion, than to perish by such a lingering Death of slavery.

In order hereunto, there had been some overtures very privately made by
Letters to the Duke of Hereford, importuning his speedy return into England:
remonstrating, that as well for the public good of the Realm, as for their own
particular safeties they should be forced to use force for their deliverance
from these intolerable oppressions, and therefore soliciting him to be
pleased, but to make the Head, and they would furnish the Body, with an able
Army, and not only help him in bare wishes and advice, but would join Hearts
and Hands to adventure their Lives and Fortunes in his Quarrel, which was also
their own, so that the danger should be common to all, the Glory only his.

The Duke entertained these Adresses with great wariness, and such moderation:
that he seemed rather worthy of a Kingdom, than desirous of it. But to Whet him
to an Edge, and settle his Resolutions for the Enterprise, there wanted not an
apt and politic Instrument. This was Thomas Arundel, late Archbishop of
Canterbury, who being with the other Bishops in the Parliament, when his
Brother the Earl of Arundel, together with the Earl of Warwick, etc. were
called into question, because Clergymen by the Canons are commanded, not to be
present at any Judgment of Blood: He and the rest of that Order, departed the
House. Upon which occasion being absent, not only his Brother was condemned for
high Treason, and Executed, as you have heard, but he himself Banished the
Realm, his goods seized as forfeit, and his Archbishopric conferred on
another. This Prelate after this Disaster, did with diverse of his Confederates,
by several ways, and in strange disguises, come to Paris, and in the House of
one Clomigey, where the Duke had taken Lodgings, had frequent Conferences with
his Grace touching the Affairs of England; Their debates you may Imagine, were
managed with the strictest secrecy. And I have always been of Opinion, that it
better becomes a Romance, than a serious History, for the Author to forge set
Speeches on such occasions: wherein, though he may please, he does but deceive
the Reader, for how suitable soever he may contrive them, yet it is forty to one
but the parties themselves, might make use of very different Topics; Without
guessing therefore at their word, let it suffice to say, their Consultations
terminated in a Result, that the Duke should adventure himself over into
England, and try his Fortune, upon the first convenient opportunity; Which soon
presented it self the most invitingly that could be imagined.

The Earl of March, appointed by the King to be his Lieutenant in Ireland,
exposing his person too adventurously, was slain by the Wild Irish, which so
exasperated King Richard, that he resolved in person to revenge his Death. In
order to which he raised a great Army, but not without grievous Charge to his
Subjects, and about Whitsontide, set forwards, accompanied with the Dukes of
Albemarle, and Exeter, diverse of the Nobles, and many Mitred Prelates, amongst
whom, was the Abbot of Westminster, a chief Favorite; and taking with him, not
only the Sons of the Duke of Gloucester, and Hereford, (whom he pretended to
instruct by that expedition in the Rudiments of War: but indeed secured them as
Hostages, to prevent any attempts, that might be made in his Absence by their
Relations, of whom he was most apprehensive.) But also all his Treasure,
Jewels, Plate, and Royal Robes: as if he had designed, (as in the event it
effectually proved) to have taken a final leave of his Kingdom, and Dignity
here in Enland.

Besides these general discontents of the People, occasioned by the former
ill-conduct, and oppressions of Corrupt Ministers of state, he just upon his
departure, stumbled upon another Error in Politics; for being at Bristol, it
was suggested to him; That Henry Piercy, Earl of Northumberland, with others
his Partisans, intended some disloyal attempt, and therefore did not tender
their service in this Expedition: whereupon by a pursevant, he commanded the
said Earl with all the Forces he could raise forthwith to repair to him:
whereunto, the Earl by a Letter returned an excuse, instead of Compliance,
entreating his Majesty to consider, how little necessary it would be for the
Irish Service, and indeed dangerous to the whole Realm, to draw men from such
remote places, in regard those Rebels were neither so many, nor so mighty, but
that the King had already sufficient Forces, to reduce them to Obedience; and
to disfurnish the Northern parts of their strength, would but give an
opportunity to the Scots, to Invade us. And therefore begged his Majesty, that
he would be pleased in such a juncture, to Excuse him from attending. This
Answer the King interprets as an Affront, to his Authority, and in an unadvised
Heat, proclaims the Earl, and all that should take his part, Traitors: and
orders all their Lands, and Goods to be seized to his Use. The Earl resenting
this disgrace, and forced (as it were by necessity) does then in earnest make
good the Original Information, by standing upon his Guard: or rather in a
posture of open Hostility.

In the mean time the King pursues his voyage for Ireland, whose Arrival
Fortune courted with some treacherous smiles; for the petty Irish Kings
terrified with the Fame of his Power, and not daring to trust each other in a
joint Defense, endeavored rather singly to make each one the best Bargain for
himself, by being the first that should submit to the disproportionate force of
the Invader. But these Triumphs cost King Richard dear in the sequel; for
whilst he is thus engaged, and absent from his discontented Kingdom of England,
the Duke of Lancaster thinks it the only proper time to put in execution what
he and others his Confederates had been consulting of: Wherefore dispatching
some of his trusty Emissaries over to acquaint his Friends, and provide Arms
and all necessaries for his Arrival; He addresses himself to the French King
with a Complement, That he intended to pay a Visit to his Kinsman John Duke of
Britain, and therefore desired his Majesty's Royal Letters of safe Conduct;
which being granted, he there very privately levied a few Soldiers, with whom,
hiring three Ships of the Duke of Britain, he put to Sea for England,
accompanied with the forementioned Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, Tho. Heir
to Richard late Earl of Arundel, the Lord Cobham, Sir Thomas Erpington, and Sir
Thomas Ramstone Knights, John Norbury, Robert Waterton, and Francis Coynt
Esquires, having not in all above twenty Lances, and his whole Retinue besides
consisting not of above sixty persons; so that it is hard to judge which was the
greatest wonder, that he durst attempt, or that he did succeed in the Conquest
of a Kingdom, with so inconsiderable a Company. But his Confidence was not so
much in the People he brought with him, as in the strength he should find here,
relying altogether on the favor and assistance of the people of the Realm,
whom he knew to be generally male-contented, and eager to change their present
Governors for any that would but promise them a Melioration of their Condition
for the future.

Yet being wary not to push things on beyound Possibility of a Retreat; As he
did not presently Land, but lay cruising up and down, sometimes appearing on
one Coast, and sometimes on another; that he might the better discover how the
Inclinations of the people stood, and what Forces were ready either to receive
or resist him, till at last being satisfied therein, he put on shore without
any opposition about the biginning of June, at Ravenspurre in Yorkshire; So did
he not then make any pretensions to the Crown, but gave out very solemnly, that
he came only to regain possession of the Duchy of Lancaster, and the rest of
his lawful Inheritance, which all the Nation knew was wrongfully detained from
him, and so were the more ready to pity and favor him in a Cause notoriously
just, and against which there was no objection.

His Arrival was no sooner known, but there repaired to him the Lords,
Willoughby, Ross, Darcy, and Beaumout, and shorly after at Doncaster, the Earl
of Northumberland, and his Son Sir Henry Piercy, with the Earl of Westmorland,
and great numbers of the Gentry and common people.

Intelligence hereof being soon conveied to the Duke of York, the Kings eldest
Uncle, and with whom during his absence he had entrusted the Governance of the
Realm: He calls together the Bishop of Chichester Lord Chancellor, Scroop Earl
of Wiltshire Lord Treasurer, Sir John Bushy, Sir Henry Green, Sir William
Bagot, and Sir John Russel, chief Favorites of the Kings Privy Council, to
consult what was to be done in this Exigency of Affairs. Amongst whom, whether
designedly by some, or ignorantly by others, I cannot say; but I am sure by all
perniciously for King Richards Interest; It was concluded to abandon London,
and appoint the Rendezvous for levying Forces against the Duke at S. Albans.
But when the people out of sundry Counties were drawn thither to be mustered,
they declared, They would not act any thing to the prejudice of the said Duke,
who they affirmed was unjustly expelled his Country, and unlawfully kept from
his Inheritance.

This Refusal of the Commons to serve, being looked upon as a very ill Omen to
the Kings Cause; The Earl of Wiltshire, Sir John Bushy, Sir William Bagot, and
Sir Henry Green, forsook the Duke of York, and fled to Bristol, intending to
pass the Seas into Ireland to the King: And time it was, (especially for them)
to take their Heels, for these Four were those that were said to have taken of
the King his Kingdom to Farm, and on that account and other Greivances and
Oppressions, which they had occasioned, were become so odious to the People,
that their very presence turned away many of the Subjects hearts from their
Sovereign, it being the displeasure against them, rather than any
disatisfaction to the Kings Person, that caused this general Revolt. The Duke
of York seeing their flight, and the Humor of the Generality favoring
Lancaster, and loath to run the adventure of an improbable Resistance, gave
over the Cause, and thereupou the rest of the Counselors either openly
declared for the said Duke, or secretly held Correspondence with hm, resolving
to swim with the general Torrent, in hopes of greater safety thereby, than by
stemming that impetuous Tide which bore down all before it.

For never did Snow-ball increase so fast by rolling, as the Duke of
Lancaster's Forces were augmented by his March, so that they were quickly grown
sixty thousand strong, and he resolving to ^ollow the Channel whilst the
Current was fierce, hastened with his Troops to London, that possessing himself
thereof, being the chief place within the Kingdom for Strength and Store, he
might best there make the Seat of War, and be easiest accommodated both with
Provision and Ammunition In his whole March no Opposition was seen, no
Hostility shown, but all along Gentlemen of the best quality out of Affection
or Fear, or hope of Reward resorted to his Tents; and where ever he stayed rich
Presents were mad him, and his Army supplied with necessaries even to
superfluity, and particularly at London he was received with Triumphant
Pageants and Shows, solemn Processions of the Clergy, and loud Acclamations of
the People.

But he was more regardful of his Affairs than to stay long there, and
therefore having fixed the Citizens firm to his Interest, and knowing all the
danger that could threaten him, must be from King Richard's return out of
Ireland. To obviate that, and overtake the fugitive Favorites, who were fled
to Bristol, he with speedy Marches pursued them thither: where finding the
Castle fortified against him, he assaults it so briskly, that in Four days
time he forced it to a surrender, and taking therein the Earl of Wiltshire Lord
Treasurer, Sir John Bushy, and Sir Henry Green, he the very next day Sacrificed
them to the importunate rage of the incensed People, causing them all Three to
be beheaded. But as for Sir William Bagot, he was got to Chester, and from
thence shifting over into Ireland, alone, escaped the present vengeance; This
Execution, if it had not been just, must yet be accounted Politic; for partly
because it was so grateful to the People, and partly because it excluded all
hope of the Kings Pardon; It became a great engagement to all the Dukes
followers, to adhere more firmly to him for the future.

The Duke had now been Six Weeks in England, and the whole Land in effect had
submitted to him; during all which time, there was no news of King Richard,
whether it were that by reason of contrary Winds he had no Intelligence, as
some write; or that on the first advice, he slighted it, according to the
Humor of some weak Spirits; who contemn dangers remote, but are astonished at
them, when they approach too nigh; However, at last upon certain news, in what
an hazardous condition his affairs stood, he caused the Sons of the Dukes of
Gloucester, and Lancaster, to be imprisoned in Trim Castle, and determined
forthwith for England; but the Duke of Aumerle his Principal Counselor,
persuaded him to stay till all his preparations were ready: Which fatal Council
it was King Richard's ill Destiny to follow, yet presently sent over the Earl
of Salisbury to raise him an Army in Wales and Cheshire against his own coming,
which he solemnly promised should be withing six days at furthest. The Earl
employed his pains so well that he had soon gotten together Forty thousand men;
but the six days and more being elapsed, and the King not appearing, made them
murmur and suspect he was dead, or come to some disaster: but the Earl
persuaded them to have patience some few days longer, which being likewise
expired, and no tidings of him, they then in discontent broke up and retired to
their respective homes.

At length, eighteen days after he had sent away the Earl, the King took
Shipping attended with Aumerl, Exeter, Surry, the Bishop of London, Exeter, and
Carlisle, and others of the Nobility, and landed in Wales, having about him a
Competent number of Cheshire men: But when he understood that the other Forces
he expected to join with him were balked and disbanded: that most of his
Fortresses from Scotland to Bristol, had surrendered to Lancaster; that the
Londoners espoused his Interest; that the greatest number of the Nobility and
Commons almost in general took part with him; and especially that his principal
Counselors had lost their Heads at Bristol, he was so far from retaining the
Magnanimity of a King, that he almost left off to be a Man, and totally
abandoned himself to despair. Perplexed in uncertainties, either where to stay,
or whither to stir, destitute both of Knowledge and Resolution in himself for
such amazing Difficulties, and obnoxious to weak, wavering, and unfaithful
Counsels from others; some advised him to march further into the Land, before
those Forces he had fell from him, alleging that Fortune seconds Valor: That
in all places he should find some, who out of duty or affection, or for hire,
would follow his Standard, which was illustrated with Majesty, and guarded with
Right: Others persuaded him to go back into Ireland, or over to his
Father-in-law of France, and thence to return when the Paroxism was a little
over, and himself better strengthened. But the King unacquainted with Marshal
Affairs, rejected both Counsels, and taking a middle course (which always in
Extremes of that kind is the worst) resolved to stay in Wales to attend to what
Head this Humor would rise.

His Soldiers Endeavored to encourage him to venture a Battle, vowing they
would live and die with him; but this could not at all raise his drooping
Spirits, but in the Night he stole away from his Army, and with the Dukes of
Exeter and Surry, The Bishop of Carlisle, Sir Stephen Scroop, and half a score
more, retired to the Castle of Conway, where the Earl of Worcester Steward of
His Majesty's Household, seeing his Masters Affairs in that desperate state, or
to revenge the Proclaiming of his Brother the Earl of Northumberland Traitor
(as before was mentioned at the Kings going for Ireland) did openly in the Hall
before all the Kings Servants break his white Staff of Office, and forthwith
repaired to the Duke of Lancaster; and the rest of the Royal Retinue by his
Example scattered and shifted every one for himself. Such Court-flies and
treacherous Attendants being but like Crows to a dead Carcass, who flock to it,
not to defend it, but to devour it; for no sooner have they picked off the flesh
to the bones, and find no more sustenance, but they are upon the wing to be
gone.

The Duke of Lancaster upon Advice of King Richards Arrival out of Ireland,
left the Duke of York (who was now joined with him) at Bristol, and marched in
the Head of his Troops to Gloucester, then to Ross, afterward to Hereford,
(where repaired to him the Bishop of that See, and Sir Edmund Mortimer) on the
Sunday following he went to Leymster, and there the Lord Carleton came to him,
from thence he went to Ludlow, and the next day to Shrewsbury, and thither came
to him Sir Robert and Sir John Leigh, and other persons of quality, being sent
from Chester to offer him their Service; as also the Lord Scales and the Lord
Bardolph out of Ireland.

From Shrewsbury he repaired to Chester, where he dispatched an Express into
Ireland, to fetch over his Son and Heir, and likewise the Duke of Glocester's
Son and Heir; both whom King Richard had left in Custody there: but it seems
their Keepers durst no longer detain them after Lancaster commanded them
thence, for his Son soon after arrived here, but the other young Gentleman was
unfortunately cast away at Sea.

About this time, the King seeing himself so beset and straightened, that he could
neither Resist, nor Escape, desired a Conference with the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Earl of Northumberland, from whose Negotiation he could
certainly hope for little good, since the one he had formerly banished, and
proclaimed the other a Traitor; however they upon safe Conduct coming to him,
declared, That if it might please his Majesty to promise that a Parliament
should be Assembled, and in the same Justice done, and the Duke of Lancaster
and his followers receive a General Pardon, since what they had done was for
the public Weal of the Realm; the Duke would be ready to cast himself at his
feet, and as an humble Subject obey him in all dutiful Services. But the King
whether perceiving that all this was but Complement, and thinking more to
oblige them by an early Voluntary offer of what he saw he must be forced to
part with; or whether confounded in himself he grew weary of wearing a Crown,
that he was not able to support; required only that himself and eight more whom
he would name, might have an honorable Allowance, with Assurance of a private
quiet Life, and then he would Resign the Crown; which was readily condescended
unto, and the King also desiring to speak with the Duke, was removed to Flint
Castle.

Soon after the Duke arriving there with his Army, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Duke of Aumerle, and the Earl of Worcester, were sent before to
the King, who spying them from the Walls where he stood, went down to meet
them, and observing that they did their accustomed Reverence to him upon their
knees, courteously took them up, and had some private discourse with the
Archbishop.

After a small space, the Duke of Lancaster himself all Armed, approached the
Castle, and being within the first Gate, he there reposed himself, till the
King attended with the Bishop of Carlisle, the Earl of Salisbury, and Sir
Stephen Scroop, who bore the Sword before him, came forth and sat down in a
place prepared for him. As soon as the Duke saw his Majesty, he came toward him
bowing his Knee, and advancing forward, did so a second, and a third time, and
then the King took him by the hand and lift him up, saying, -- Dear Cousin,
thou art welcome; the Duke humbly thanking him, answered, -- My Sovereign Lord
and King, the Cause of my coming at this present is (your Honor saved) to have
Restitution of my Person, my Land and Inheritance. To which the King replied,
-- Dear Cousin, I am ready to accomplish your will, so that you may enjoy all
that is yours without exception. After this coming forth of the Castle, the
King called for Wine, and having drank, they mounted and rod to Chester, and so
by several Stages, he was carried directly and with great Expedition to London,
and lodged on pretense of State, but in truth for better security, in the
Tower; having not in all that Journey changed his Apparel, but wore only one
Suit, and that but an ordinary one, whereas he was wont to be extraordinary
profuse in his Clothes, having one Coat valued at Thirty thousand Marks.

The King yielded himself the Thirtieth day of August, being but the Seven and
fortieth day after the Dukes Arrival in England, so that he might well assume
Caesar's Motto, Veni, Vidi, Vici: For considering his Marches from Holderness in
the North up to London, and from thence to Bristol, and so into Wales, and back
again to Chester; a man can scarce travel over so much ground in the space that
he Conquered it: Nay so indulgent was Fortune to him, that all the Kings Jewels
and Treasure (amounting as a late Author asserts, to Seven hundred thousand
pounds) with his Horses and Baggage fell into his hands.

The King being thus safely lodged in the Tower, the Duke of Lancaster (but in
King Richards Name) caused Writs to be issued forth for summoning and choosing
a Parliament to be held at Westminster on the last day of September following.
And in the mean time consults with his nearest Kindred and Friends how to steer
his Proceedings, so as to bring his Affairs by prudence to a lucky end, which
had hitherto even beyond his hopes been favored by Fortune. In order to which,
the Duke of York, who but a little before had been Governor of the Realm for
the King, but now his the said Lancasters great Director, must be his best
Oracle, who after diverse Debates proposed it as very expedient, that King
Richard should both voluntarily Resign, and also be solemnly Deposed by the
Estates of the Realm; For otherwise Resignation would be imputed only to his
Fear: and Deprivation only to their Force, whereof the one is always apt to
move Pity, and the other stir up Envy: But if both concur, and his desire be
combined with his deserts, being willing to forsake that which he is adjudged
worthy to forfeit, then it will appear that he is neither expelled his Kingdom
by mere Constraint, nor leave it without just Cause.

This Advice was generally approved, and accordingly pursued; a Solemn
Renunciation being tendered unto the King, and by him Signed on Michaelmas Day
then next following, being the day before the Parliament was to meet. The Words
Order, and Ceremony whereof, and of the Articles exhibited against Him, and his
Deposition thereupon following in Parliament, appear in the Records thereof
remaining in the Tower, Authentic and Attested Copies wherefore are Printed in
the Book, Entitled, Historiae Anglicanae scriptores december; beginning Col.
2743. From whence the same are word for word Translated, as follow.

The Roll of Parliament Summoned and Holden at Westminster, in the Feast of S.
Fide the Virgin, in the first year of the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, after
the Conquest, Membrane the 20th.
The Record and Process of the Renunciation of King Richard the Second, after
the Conquest, and likewise the Acceptance of the same Renunciation, with the
Deposition of the same King Richard afterward ensuing.

BE it remembered, that on Monday the Feast of S. Michael the Archangel, in the
Three and twentieth year of the Reign of King Richard the Second, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and other Persons of note; that is to say, the Lord
Richard le Scroop Archbishop of York, John bishop of Hereford, Henry Earl of
Northumberland, and Ralph Earl of Westmor land; the Lord Hugh le Burnel, Thomas
Lord de Berkley Prior of Canterbury and Abbot of Westminster, William Thyrning
Knight, and John Markham Justices; Thomas Stow and John Burbache Doctors of
Laws, Thomas de Erpingham, and Thomas Gray, Knights, William de Feryby, and
Dionisius Lapham, Public Notaries, first deputed to the Act under written, by
the Assent and Advice of several of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of
the Judges and others skilful, as well in the Civil and Canon Law, as in the
Law of the Realm, Assembled at Westminster in the usual place of Council; did
about Nine of the Clock come to the Presence of the said King, being within the
Tower of London: And it being Recited before the said King, by the said Earl of
Northumberland, in the behalf of all the rest before named, so as aforesaid
joined with him; How the said King heretofore at Coneway in North-VVales, being
at Liberty, did promise unto the Lord Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Earl of Northumberland, that he would yield up and renounce the Crown of
England and France and his Regal Majesty, for Causes of his Inability and
Insufficiency there by the said King himself confessed, and that in the best
manner and form as the same could be done, as Council learned should best
order. The said King before the said Lords and others above named, hereunto
benignly answering, That he would with Effect accomplish, what before in that
behalf he had promised. But desired to have some discourse with his Cousins,
Henry Duke of Lancaster, and the said Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, before he
fulfilled such his promise.

Afterward the same day after Dinner, the said King much affecting the coming
of the said Duke of Lancaster, and having long waited for him; at last the said
Duke of Lancaster, the Lords, and others above named, and also the said
Archbishop of Canterbury, did come to the Presence of The said King in the
Tower aforesaid; The Lords de Roos, de Willougby, and de Abergeny, and very
many others being then there present; and after the said King had had discourse
with the said Duke of Lancaster and Archbishop, exhibiting a merry Countenance
here and there amongst them to part thereof, as appeared to those that stood
round about; at last the said King calling to him all that were there present,
did publicly say before them, that he was ready to make the Renunciation; and
to renounce and recede, according to the Promise by him made, as aforesaid. And
so forthwith, although, as was said unto him, he might have made some Deputy to
have served as the Organ of his Voice, for avoiding so tedious a labor as the
reading of the said Cession and Renunciation, reduced by others into a Schedule
of Parchment. Yet the said King, very willingly as appeared, and with a
pleasant Countenance, holding the said Schedule in his hand, said, that he
himself would read it, and distinctly read the same through: And also did
absolve all his Liege People, and renounce, and recede, and swear, and other
things did say and pronounce in Reading, and did Subscribe it with his own
hand, as is more fully contained in the said Schedule; the Tenor whereof is
such.

THE RESIGNATION OF RICHARD II.
IN the Name of God, Amen. I Richard by the Grace of God, King of England and
France, and Lord of Ireland, do Absolve the Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Prelates of Churches Secular or Regular, of whatsoever Dignity, Degree, State,
or Condition they be; The Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, Vassals, and
Valvasors, and all and every my Liege People whatsoever, Ecclesiastics or
Seculars, of all the said Kingdoms and Dominions, by what Name soever they are
known; from the Oath of Fealty and Homage, and other Oaths whatsoever to be
made, and from all Bond or Tie of Legiance, Royalty, and Dominion, whereby they
have been or are obliged or otherwise in any manner bound unto me. And I do
Free, Release, and Acquit them and their Heirs and Successors for ever, from
the said Oaths and other Obligations whatsoever. And I do dismiss them free,
unloosen, quit and in full Immunity, as far as relates to my Person, to every
effect of Law which may follow from the Pr^mises, or any of them. And I do
purely of my own Accord simply and absolutely in and by the best manner, way
and form that may be, in these Writings, Renounce and totally Resign all Kingly
Dignity and Majesty, and the Crown and Dominion and Power of the said Kingdoms
and Dominions, and all other my Dominions and Possessions, or any way belonging
or appertaining unto me, by what Name soever they may be reckoned up within the
aforesaid Kingdoms, or elsewhere; And all Right and Color of Right and Title,
Possession and Dominion, which at any time I have had, now have, or by any
means shall have in or to the same, or any of them, with their universal Rights
and Appurtenances, or any Dependences however, on them or any of them: And also
the Rule and Government of the said Kingdoms and Dominions, and their
Administration, and all manner of mere and Mixed Empire and Jurisdiction to me
in the said Kingdoms belonging, or that may be belonging; and to the Name of
King, and the Honor, Regality, and Celsitude Royal, purely, voluntarily,
simply, and absolutely by the best manner, way and form that the same can be
done in these Writings, I do Renounce, and them do totally Resign, and in Deed
and in Word dismiss and quit the same, and from them do recede for ever. Saving
to my Successors Kings of England, the Rights to them or any of them belonging,
or that shall any way belong, in the said Kingdoms and Dominions, and all other
the Premises for ever. And I do confess, acknowledge, repute, and truly and
out of certain knowledge, do judge my self to have been and to be utterly
insufficient and unuseful for the Rule and Government of the said Kingdoms and
Dominions, with all their Appurtenances: And that for my notorious demerits I
deserve to be Deposed; And I do swear upon these Holy Gospels of God, by me
corporally touched, That I will never Act contrary to the said Resignation,
Renunciation, Dismission, and Cession; nor any way oppose the same in Deed or
in Word, by my Self or any other or others: Nor will as much as in melies,
permit the same publicly or privately to be contraried or opposed: But the
said Renunciation, Resignation, Dismission and Cession, will for ever esteem,
ratified, and well-pleasing, and firmly hold and observe the same in the whole
and in every part; So God me help and these Holy Gospels of God.

I the before named King Richard do here subscribe my self with my own Hand.

And presently to the said Renunciation, and Cession, the said King added by
word of mouth, That if it lay in his power, the said Duke of Lancaster should
succeed him in his Kingdom. But Because (as he said,) this did not depend on
his pleasure, he did request the said Archbishop of York and Bishop of
Hereford, (whom he for that time had constituted his Procurators, to declare,
and imitate such his Cession and Renunciation to the States of the Kingdom,)
That they would be pleased to signify to the People, his will and intention in
that behalf. And in token of such his will and intention, did then and there,
openly pluck off the Golden Ring of his signet, from his own finger, and put it
upon the finger of the said Duke of Lancaster, desiring as he affirmed, that
the same might be made known to all the States of the Kingdom. Which being
done, taking their leaves on both sides they all went out of the said Tower, to
return to their Lodgings.

But on the Morrow, viz. Tuesday the Feast of S. Jereme, in the great Hall at
Westminster, in the place honorably prepared for holding the Parliament, the
said Archbishops of Canterbury, and York, and the Duke of Lancaster, and other
Dukes, and Lords, as well Spiritual as Temporal, whose names are under written,
and the Commons of the said Kingdom, Assembled in a great multitude in
Parliament, being present, and the said Duke of Lancaster, being seated in a
place, due to his Quality, and the Chair of State [or Royal Throne,] being
solemnly adorned with Cloth of Gold, but then empty, without any body presiding
therein; the above named Archbishop of York, in the name of himself, and of the
said Bishop of Hereford, according to the order of the said King, did publicly
declare the Cession, and Renunciation, to have been so made by him as
aforesaid, with the subscription of his Royal Hand, and delivery of his Signet.
And the said Cession, and Renunciation, did there cause to be ready by another,
first in Latin, and then in English.

Immediately after which, it was demanded of the Estates and People their
present, (to wit, first of the Archbishop of Canterbury, to whom by reason of
the dignity, and prerogative of his metropolitan Church of Canterbury, it
belongs in this behalf, to have the first voice amongst the rest of the
Prelates, and Nobles of the Realm,) whether for their interest and the utility
of the Kingdom, they would be pleased to admit such Renunciation, and Cession.
And the said States, and People, judging from the Causes by the said king
himself, in his Renunciation, and Cession aforesaid, signified, that the same
was very expedient, did each man singly by himself, and in Common with the
People, unanimously Admit the said Cession, and Renunciation.

After which Admission, it was then and there publicly declared, that besides
such Cession, and Renunciation, so as aforesaid admitted, It would be very
expedient and profitable to the Kingdom, for the removing of all Scruples, and
taking away sinister suspicions, That very many Crimes, and Defects by the said
King, (about the ill Governance of his Kingdom) very often committed, reduced
into writing by way of Articles, by reason of which (as himself affirmed in the
Cession, by him made) he was deservedly to be deposed, should be publicly
read, and declared to the People. And so the greatest part of the said Articles
were then and there read through. The Tenor of all which Articles is such.

[But yet in the Roll before the Articles, there are first these words,] Here
follows the form of the Oath, used and accustomed to be taken by the Kings of
England at their Coronation: which the Archbishop of Canterbury has used to
require and receive from the said Kings, as in the Book of the Pontifical
Archbishops, and Bishops, more fully is contained.

Which Oath, Richard the Second, after the Conquest of England, did take at his
Coronation: and the same was administered by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
the very same Oath, the King afterward repeated, as in the Rolls of the
Chancery, may more fully be found of Record.

Thou shall keep to the Church of God, and People, Entire Peace and Concord in
God, according to thy power. The King shall answer, I will keep them.

Thou shall in all thy Judgments cause to be done, equal and right Justice,
and discretion, in mercy, and in Truth, according to thy power. -- He shall
answer, I will do so.

Thou do grant the just Laws and Customs, as shall be held, and do promise
the same shall by thee be protected, and for the Honor of God Corroborated,
quas vulgus elegerit, which the People shall choose, to the utmost of thy power.
-- He shall answer, I do so grant and promise.

To the aforesaid Questions, such others are added as shall be just, and all
things being so pronounced the King by his own Oath on the Altar, before all
the Assembly, Confirms and Promises, that he will (...) and observe the same.

[Then follow] THE OBJECTIONS or ARTICLES Against the King, touching his
Deposition.
IMprimis, It is objected against King Richard, that whereas by reason of his
ill Government, viz. His giving away the Goods and Possessions belonging to his
Crown, and that to Persons unworthy, and his indiscreet squandering the same
away otherwise, adn to that end, imposing without cause Collections and other
grievous burdens on his People, more than they were able to bear, and also
innumerable other Evils by his assent and Command perpetrated, there were by
the whole Parliament certain Prelates, and others, Temporal Lords, Elected and
Assigned, who might with all their power, and at their own Charges, faithfully
labor about the just Government of the Realm. Yet the King causing a
Conventicle to be held by him, with his accomplices, the said Lords, as well
Spiritual, as Temporal, so occupied about the safety and profit of the Kingdom,
did propose to impeach of High Treason; and did violently draw the Judges of
the Kingdom, for fear of Death, and Corporal Tortures, to such his wicked
purpose, most vigorously striving to destroy the said Lords.

II. Item, The said King lately at Shr^wsbury, caused several, and the greater
part of the Judges, to come before him and his Favorites privately in a
Chamber, and by Menaces, and Various Terrors, as such affrightments as might
fall even upon men of constant Resolutions, did induce, cause, and compel them,
severally to answer certain Questions there propounded, on the behalf of the
King; concerning the Laws of his Kingdom, besides, and against their will, and
otherwise than they would have answered, had they been at Liberty, and
unforced. By color of which answers, the said King purposed to have proceeded
afterward, to the destruction of Thomas Duke of Gloucester, and the Earls of
Arundel, and Warwick, and other Lords, against whose deeds and behavior the
said King was much incensed, chiefly because they desired the said King to be
under good Guidance; But Providence withstanding it, by the resistance and
power of the said Lords, the King was not able to bring such his design to
effect.

III. Item, When the Lords Temporal defending themselves, had withstood his
malice and fraud, and the said King had prefixed a day for holding his
Parliament to do them, and other Inhabitants of the Realm, Justice in that
behalf, and the said Temporal Lords, were quietly and peaceably gone home, and
at Rest in their houses, in hope and confidence of the said Parliament, the
King secretly sent the Duke of Ireland with his Letters and Standard toward
Chester, and there gathered multitudes in Arms; and caused them to rise against
the said Lords, the Nobles of the Kingdom, and Servants of the State, publicly
erecting his Standard, against the Peace which he had Sworn to keep. From
whence slaughters of men, Captivities, Dissentions, and other infinite
mischiefs, did ensue throughout the whole Kingdom, By which Act he became
Guilty of Perjury.

IV. Item, Although the said King had in full Parliament, and by the assent
thereof, Pardoned the said Duke of Gloucester, and Earls of Arundel, and
Warwick, and all their Assistants, and others, all offenses, and had for many
years shown Signs of Peace and Love, to the said Duke and Earls, and to the
rest appeared with a pleasant and benign Countenance, Yet the said King always,
and continually bearing Gall in his Heart, did at last, taking an Opportunity,
cause the said Duke of Gloucester, the Uncle of him the said King, and also the
Son of Edward late King of England, of happy memory, and Constable of England,
then humbly going to meet the said King, in solemn Procession; and the said
Earls of Arundel, and W^^^ick, to be taken and Arrested; and him the said Duke
out of the Kingdom of England, to the Town of Callice did cause to be led, and
there imprisoned; and under the Custody of the Earl of Nottingham, (and of the
Appellors of the said Duke,) detained, and without answer, or any lawful
process whatsoever, did inhumanely, and cruelly cause to be suffocated,
strangled, and murdered. And the Earl of Arundel though he pleaded as well the
General Pardon, as a Pardon afterward to him specially granted, and desired
justice to be done him, yet in his Parliament, encompassed with armed men, and
innumerable Archers of the People by him gathered to that purpose by Pressing,
did damnably cause to be Beheaded. And the Earl of Warwick, and Lord Cobham,
did commit to perpetual Imprisonment: wickedly and against Justice, and the
Laws of his Kingdom and his express Oath, confiscating their Lands and
Tenements, as well Fee-simple, as Fee-tail, from them and their Heirs, and
giving the same to their Appellors.

V. Item, At the same time, that the King in his Parliament, caused the Duke of
Gloucester, and Earls of Arundel, and Warwick, to be adjudged; that he might
more freely exercise his Cruelty upon them, and accomplish his injurious will
in other matters, he gathered to himself a great multitude of Malefactors of
the County of Chester, of whom some passing with the King through the Kingdom,
as well within the Kings Palace, as without, did cruelly kill the Liege
Subjects of the Kingdom, and some they beat and wounded, and did plunder the
Goods of the People, and refuse to pay for their Victuals, and did Ravish and
Violate their Wives, and other Women; and though their were grievous
Complaints, of such their excesses brought to the hearing of the said King; Yet
the said King did not regard to cause Justice to be done, or any Remedy
thereupon^, but did favor the said Troops in such their evil doings, trusting
in them and their Guard, against all others of his Kingdom; for which cause,
the faithful People of his Kingdom, had great matter of Commotion, and
Indignation.

VI. Item, Although the said King by his writs, caused Proclamation to be made
throughout the whole Kingdom, that he had caused his Uncle the Duke of
Gloucester, and the Earls of Arundel and Warwick, to be taken and Arrested, not
for any Assemblings or Troopings by them, formerly made within the Kingdom of
England, but for very many Extortions, Oppressions, and other things by them
afterward done, and perpetrated, against his Royalty, and Kingly Majesty; And
that it was not his Intention, that any of the Family of the said Duke, and
Earls, or of their followers at the time of such Assembling, and Trooping,
should for that occasion be molested, or aggrieved; Yet the said King at last,
in his Parliament, did not Impeach the said Lords for Extortions, Oppressions,
or any such matters, but for the Assemblings, and Troopings aforesaid, did
adjudge them to Death, and very many of the Family of the said Lords, and
others, who were following them at the time of such their Assembling, and
Trooping, he did, for fear of Death; force to make Fine and Ransom, as
Traitors, or Rebels, to the great destruction of a great Number of his People.
And so he did subtily, fraudulently, and maliciously, deceive the said Lords,
and their familiars, and the People of his Kingdom.

VII. Item, After very many of those Persons so making Fine and Ransom, had
obtained of the King, his Letters Patent of full Pardon in the Premises, they
could not reap any Commodity by such Letters of Pardon, till they had made new
Fine, and Ransoms, for saving of their Life, whereby very many were
Impoverished; which was a great Derogation and dishonor to the Name and State
of a King.

VIII. Item, In the Last Parliament, held at Shrewsbury, the said King
purposing to oppress his People, subtily procured and caused it to be granted,
that the power of the Parliament by the consent of the States of his Kingdom,
shall remain in certain Persons, to determine (after the dissolution of the
Parliament,) certain Petitions in the said Parliament exhibited, but then not
dispatched. By Color of which grant, the Persons so deputed, proceeded to
other things generally touching that Parliament. And this with the will of the
King; in Derogation of the state of Parliament, and the great damage of the
whole Kingdom, and pernicious Example. And that they might seem to have some
Color and Authority, for such their doings, the King called the Parliament
Rolls to be altered and blotted at his pleasure, against the Effect of the said
Grant.

IX. Item, Notwithstanding the said King in his Coronation had sworn, that in
all his Judgments, he would cause to be done equal and right Justice, and
discretion, in mercy and truth, according to his power; Yet the said King
rigorously without all mercy did (amongst other things) Ordain, under grievous
penalties, that none should sue for any favor, or intercede with the said
King, for Henry Duke of Lancaster, being Banished, whereby the said King did
act against the Bond of Charity, rashly violating his Oath aforesaid.

X. Item, Although the Crown of the Kingdom of England, and the Rights of the
said Crown, and that Kingdom it self, have in all time past been so free, that
our Lord the Pope, nor any other without the Kingdom, ought to concern himself
about the same; Yet the aforesaid King, for the Corroboration of such his
erroneous statutes, did make supplication to our Lord the Pope, that he would
confirm the statutes ordained his last Parliament, whereupon our Lord the King
obtained the Apostolic Letters, in which grievous Censures are denounced
against any that should presume in any thing to act contrary to the said
statutes; all which are well known to tend against the Crown, and Royal
dignity, and against the Statutes and Liberties of the said Kingdom.

XI. Item, Although the Lord Henry now Duke of Lancaster, by the Kings Command
had preferred his Bill touching the State and Honor of the King, against the
Duke of Norfolk, and the same had duly prosecuted; so that according to the
Kings Order, he had exhibited himself in all Points prepared for the Combat.
And the said King had declared, that the said Duke of Lancaster had honorably
performed his Devoir, as much as in him lay, and this by a Decree publicly
Proclaimed before all the people Assembled at the said Combat: Yet the said
King without any Legal Reason whatsoever, did cause and command the said Duke
to be Banished for ten Years, against all Justice, and Laws and Customs of his
Kingdom, and the Law of War in that behalf, thereby damnably incurring Perjury.

XII. Item, After the said King had graciously granted by his Letters Patents,
to the Lord Henry now Duke of Lancaster, that in his absence whilst he was
banished, his General Attorneys might prosecute for Livery to him to be made of
all manner of Inheritances or Successions belonging unto him, and that his
Homage should be respited, paying a certain reasonable Fine; he injuriously did
revoke the said Letters Patent against the Laws of the Land, thereby incurring
the Crime of Perjury.

XIII. Item, Notwithstanding that it was Enacted, that every Year the Officers
of the King with his Justices and others of the Kings Council, should choose
Sheriffs for all the Counties of England, and name them to our Lord the King,
according as to their Discretion and Conscience should seem expedient, for the
good and utility of the Kingdom; the said King has caused persons to be made
Sheriffs, not so nominated or elected, but other according to the Capricio's of
his pleasure, sometimes his Favorites or Creatures, and sometimes such as he
knew would not oppose his humor, for his own and others private advantage, to
the great grievance of his People, and against the Laws of his Kingdom, thereby
notoriously incurring Perjury.

XIV. Item, At such time as the aforesaid King requested and had of very many
Lords and others of his Kingdom, diverse Sums of Money by way of Loan, to be
paid again at a certain term, notwithstanding the said King faithfully promised
by his several Letters Patent to the several persons of whom he borrowed the
said Moneys, that at the term limited as aforesaid, he would repay the same,
yet he did not fulfill such his Promise, nor are they yet satisfied the said
Moneys, whereby such Creditors are much agrieved, and not only they, but many
others of the Kingdom repute the King unfaithful.

XV. Item, Whereas the King of England by the Revenue of his Kingdom, and the
Patrimony belonging to his Crown, is able to live honestly, without the
oppression of his People, as long as the Kingdom is not burdened with the
Charge of Wars; yet the said King in a manner for his whole time during the
Truces between the Kingdom of England and its Adversaries, has not only given
away a great, yea indeed the greatest part of his said Patrimony, and this to
unworthy Persons: But also has further imposed on his Subjects so many Burdens
of Moneys granted, as it were every year of his Reign, that thereby he has
extremely and too excessively oppressed his People, to the Impoverishment of
his Kingdom; Not converting the Goods so levied to the Commodity and profit of
the Kingdom of England, but prodigally squandering it away for the Ostentation
of his Name, and in Pomp and Vainglory: Whilst great Sums of Money are owing
in his Kingdom for the Victuals of his Household, and other things bought,
though he has abounded with Riches and Treasures more than any of his
Progenitors.

XVI. Item, The said King not willing to keep or Protect the just Laws and
Customs of his Kingdom, but according to his Arbitrary Will, to do whatsoever
should occur to his Desires, sometimes and very often, when the Laws of his
Kingdom have been expounded and declared to him by the Judges and others of his
Council; and that they have desired that he would do Justice according to those
Laws, has expressly and with an angry and haughty Countenance, said, That his
Laws were in his Mouth, and sometimes, That they were in his Breast: And that
he himself alone could make and change the Laws of his Kingdom. And being
seduced with that Opinion, did not suffer Justice to be done to very many of
his Liege People, but by Threats and Terrors has forced very many to cease
from the prosecution of Common Justice.

XVII. Item, That after certain Statutes had been made in Parliament, which
always bind, till they are specially revoked by the Authority of another
Parliament. The said King desiring to enjoy such Liberty that no such Statutes
should so bind him, but that he might do and execute his pleasure, subtily
procured a Petition to be preferred in his Parliament on the behalf of the
Commonalty of his Kingdom, and to be granted to him in general, That he might
be as free as any of his Progenitors were before him: By color of which
Petition and Concession the said King has very often commanded very many
things to be done against such Statutes unrepealed; acting therein expressly and
knowingly against his Oath taken in his Coronation as aforesaid.

XVIII. Item, Although it was Enacted and Ordained, that no Sheriff should hold
his Office above one year together, but that three years should pass, before he
should be again admitted to that Office: The said King Richard sometimes for
his own single Commodity, and sometimes at the instance of others, for their
advantage, has permitted and caused certain Sheriffs to stand and remain
continually in their Offices, sometimes two, sometimes three Years, against the
Tenor and effect of the Statute aforesaid, thereby incurring Perjury; and this
is notorious, public, and generally ill spoken of.

XIX. Item, Although by the Statute^ and Custom of his Realm in the calling
together of every Parliament, his People in several Countries of the Kingdom,
ought to be free in choosing and deputing two Knights to be present in such
Parliament for each respective County, and to declare their Grievances, and to
prosecute such Remedies thereupon, as to them shall seem expedient. Yet the
aforesaid King, that in his Parliaments he might be able more freely to
accomplish the effects of his headstrong will, did very often direct his
Command to his Sheriffs, that they should cause to come to his Parliaments as
Knights of the Shire, certain Persons by the said King named; which Knights
being his Favorites he might lead, as often as he has done, sometimes by
various Menaces and Terrors, and sometimes by Gifts, to consent to those things
as were prejudicial to the Kingdom, and exceeding burthensom to the People; And
especially to grant to the said King a Subsidy on Wool for the term of his
Life, and another Subsidy for certain Years, thereby too grievously oppressed
his People.

XX. Item, the said King that he might more freely fulfill and follow in every
thing his own Arbitrary Will, did unlawfully cause and command, That the
Sheriffs throughout his whole Realm, besides their ancient accustomed Oath,
should swear that they would obey his commands, as often as they should be
directed to them, under his Great and Privy Seal, and also his Letters under
his Signet. And that in case the said Sheriffs could come to know that any
within their Bailiwicks of whatsoever condition they were, had publicly or
secretly said or spoken any ill, that might tend to the disgrace or scandal of
his Royal Person, they should Arrest and imprison them; there safely to be kept
till they should receive Command from the King to the contrary, as may be found
in the Record; which Fact may probably tend to the destruction of many of the
Liege People to the said Kingdom.

XXI. Item, The said King striving to trample under foot his People, and
subtily to acquire their Goods to himself, that he might abound in superfluous
Riches, did cause the People of Seventeen Counties of the Realm to submit
themselves to the King as Traitors, by Letters under their Seals: By color
whereof he got mighty Sums of Money to be granted him by the Clergy and People
of those Counties, for obtaining his Royal good Will and Favor; And though to
please the People, the King had caused those Obligatory Letters to be restored,
yet the Procurators of the People having full Power granted them to oblige
themselves and their Heirs to the said King; he the said King caused them under
their Seals to be bound to him in the Name of the said People, and so deceived
his people, and Subtily extorted from them their Goods.

XXII. Item, Although the said King in his Cor^nation had sworn to keep the
Liberties granted to the Arglicane Church, yet the said King by reason of his
Voyage into Ireland, did by his Letters command very many Religious Persons,
viz. Abbots and Priors of his Kingdom, strictly requiring, that some of them
should send to him certain Horses, and some of them not only Horses, but also
Wagons and Carriages for his said Voyage, or in lieu thereof great Sums of
Money in the said Letters expressed: By which manner of Writing he forced many
of such Religious out of fear to fulfill his Will and Command, whereby they were
heavily impoverisht and oppressed in manifest derogation of Ecclesiastical
Liberty; by which Pretext the said King Richard did incur Perjury.

XXIII. Item, In most of the great Royal Councils, when the Lords of the Realm,
the Judges and others, being charged that they would faithfully Council the
King in Matters relating to his State, and that of his Kingdom: The said Lords,
Justices, and others, very often in giving Counsel according to their best
Discretion, have been by the King suddenly and so fiercely chidden and
reproved, that they have not dared to speak the Truth, in giving their Advice
for the State of the King and Kingdom.

XXIV. Item, The Treasures, Crowns, Relics, and other Jewels, viz. The Goods
of the Kingdom, which time out of mind have been Reposited in the Treasury of
the Kingdom, for the Honor of the King, and preservation of his Kingdom,
against any sudden Event or Exigency; the said King Going out of his Kingdom
into Ireland, did take away, and caused the same to be carried with him,
without the consent of the States of the Kingdom Whereby this Kingdom had been
vastly impoverisht, if God by the retaking of the said Goods against the said
Kings Will, had not otherwise provided. And furthermore the said King did cause
the Rolls of Records touching the State and Government of his Kingdom uo be
destroyed and rased, to the great prejudice of his People and disinheriting the
Crown of the said Kingdom: And all this, as it is probably believed, in favor
and support of his evil Governance.

XXV. Item, The said King was wont as it were perpetually to be so variable and
dissembling in his Words and Writings, and so contrary to himself and
especially in writing to the Pope, and to Kings, and other Lords out of the
Kingdom, and within it, and also to others his Subjects, that no man living
that knew his Conditions could or would confide in him; nay, he was reputed so
unfaithful and unconstant, that it became scandalous not only to his own
person, but also to the whole Kingdom, and especially amongst Foreigners of all
the World that came to know the same.

XXVI. Item, Although The Land and Tenements, the Goods and Chattels of every
Freeman by the Laws of the Realm used from all time heretofore, ought not to be
taken from him unless they be forfeited: Yet the said King purposing and
longing to weaken such Laws, in the pretense of very many Lords and others of
the commonalty of the Kingdom, has frequently said and affirmed -- That the
Life of every one of his Svbjects, and his Lands, Tenements, Goods, and
Chattels, are his (the said Kings) at his will and pleasure, without any
forfeiture; Which is utterly against the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom
aforesaid.

XXVII. Item, Although it was Fnacted and Ordained, and is hitherto Confirmed,
That no Freeman shall be taken, etc. nor any way destroyed; and that the King
shall not pass, nor send any to pass upon him, but by the Lawful Judgment of
his Peers, or by the Law of the Land: Yet by the Will, Command and Order of the
said King, very many of his Liege People being maliciously accused for having
publicly or secretly said something that might tend to the disyraise, scandal,
or disgrace of the person of the said King, have been taken and Imprisoned, and
brought before the Constable and Marshal of England in the Court Military, in
which Court the said Liege People being accused would not be admitted to make
any other Answer, than that they were no way guilty, and would justify the
same and defend themselves by their Bodies, and not otherwise; notwithstanding
their Appellors were young men, stout and lusty, and those so accused, ancient,
and impotent, maimed or infirm; Whereby not only destruction of the Lords and
grandees of the Kingdom, but also of all and singular persons of the Commonalty
of the same may probably ensue: Since therefore the said King has wilfully
acted contrary to such a Statute of his Kingdom, it is not to be doubted but he
has thereby incurred the Crime of Perjury.

XXVIII. Item, Although the People of the Realm of England, by virtue of their
Leigeance are fully enough bound to their King, and the said King by the Laws
and Customs of his Kingdom, is enabled to Correct and punish his People if in
any kind they Transgress; yet the said King desiring to trample on, and too
much oppress his People, that he might the more freely execute and follow the
Humor of his foolish and unlawful Will, by his Letters to all the Counties of
his Kingdom, did Enjoin and Command, That all his Subjects, as well Spiritual
as Temp^ral, should make certain Oaths in general which were too grievous to
them, and which might probably cause the final destruction of his People; and
that they should confirm such their Oaths under their Letters and Seals. To
which Royal Command, the People of his Kingdom did submit and pay Obedience
that they might not incur his Indignation or Displeasure, and also for fear of
Death.

XXIX. Item, When Parties contending in the Ecclesiastical Court in Causes
merely Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, had endeavored to obtain from the
Chancellor of England, Prohibitions to hinder the lawful Process in the said
Courts; and the said Chancellor had justly refused to grant the same, yet the
said King by Letters under his Signet, has frequently prohibited the
Ecclesiastical judges to proceed in such Causes, thereby evilly infringing the
Liberties of the Church in the Grand Charter approved, to the Conservation
whereof he was sworn, and damnably incurring Perjury, and the Sentence of
Excommunication* against such Violators thereof, by the Holy Fathers pronounced.

XXX. Item, The said King without any reasonable or lawful cause whatsoever, or
any other process of Law, did in his Parliament, encompassed in warlike manner
by armed men, adjudge Thomas of Arundel, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate
of all England, his Spiritual Father, absenting himself by the Treacherous
Counsel of the said King, to Banishment against the Laws of his Kingdom, so by
him sworn to, as aforesaid.

XXXI. Item, By inspection of the Testament of the said King; Sealed with the
Great and Privy Seal, and also with his Signet, among other things there is
contained this clause or Article. -- Item, we will that the residue of our Gold
(the true debts of our Household, Chamber, and Wardrobe being paid, for
payment whereof we bequeath Twenty Thousand Marks, reserving to our Executors,
Five or Six Thousand Marks: which we will by them to be expended toward the
more plentiful maintenance of the Lepers, and Chaplains, to celebrate before
them, by us founded at Westminster, and B^rmondeseye) shall remain to our
Successor, provided always that he approve ratify and confirm, and hold, and
cause to be holden, and firmly observed, all and singular, the Statutes,
Ordinances, and Judgments, made, given, and rendered in our Parliament, begun
at Westminster, the 17th day of the Month September, in the one and Twentieth
Year of our Reign, and in the same Parliament, continued at Shrewsbury, and
there holden, and also, all the Ordinances, Judgments, and Establishments, the
16th day of September, in the 22th Year of our Reign, at Coventry, and
afterward at Westminster, the 18th day of March, in the Year aforesaid, by the
Authority of the said Parliament. And likewise all other Ordinances, and
Judgments, which shall hereafter happen to be made by Authority of the said
Parliament: But otherwise, if our said Successor shall refuse to do the
Premises. (which we do not believe) Then we will that Thomas Duke of Surry,
Edward Duke d' Auamale, John Duke of Exeter, and William le Scrope, Earl of
Wiltshire, (paying first the Debts of our Household, our Chamber, and our
Ward^obe, and reserving Five or Six Thousand Marks, as abovesaid,) shall have
and hold all the said Residue above mentioned, for to support and defend the
said Statutes, Establishments, Ordinances, and Judgments, to their utmost
power, even unto Death, if it be necessary; Upon all which, and every part, we
do hereby charge and burden their Consciences as they will answer in the day of
Judgment. By which Article it may evidently enough appear: That the said King
did obstinately strive to maintain and desend those Statutes, and Ordinances,
which are erroneous and unjust, and repugnant to all Law and Reason. And this
not only during his Life, but after his Death too, neither regarding the Peril
of his own Soul, nor yet the utter destruction of his said Kingdom, or Liege
People.

XXXII. Item, in the 11th Year of the said King Richard, he the said King in
the Chapel of his Manor of Langley, in the presence of the Dukes of
Lancaster, and York, and very many other Lords, desiring (as it has appeared)
that is Uncle the Duke of Gloucester, then there present, should fully confide
in the Good will of him the said King, did voluntarily and of his own accord,
swear before the venerable Sacrament of the Lords Body, there placed upon the
Altar, that thenceforwards he would never endammage, trouble, or grieve him,
the said Duke of Gloucester, for any of his deeds which are said to have been
committed against the Person of him the said King; But did cheerfully and
totally forgive him all his offense if any were. Yet afterward,
notwithstanding such Oath, the said King did horribly and cruelly cause the
said Duke to be murdered, for such the before pretended offenses, thereby
incurring the Guilt of damnable Perjury.

XXXIII, Item, After one of the Knigots of the Shires, of the said Kingdom,
having a voice in Parliament, had Impeached the said Lord Thomas, Archbishop
of Canterbury, upon certain defaults, committed against the Kings Majesty, as
was untruely suggested: And the said Archbishop, presently then and there
offered himself ready to answer the matters charged upon him; and desired that
he might be thereunto admitted by the King, not doubting as he said, but he
shall be able, sufficiently to show his Innocence; Yet the said King,
contriving by all the ways and means he could, to oppress the said Bishop of
Canterbury, and ruin his Estate, (as the Event of the matter has declared)
speaking graciously, and with a cheerful countenance of the said Archbishop,
from his Royal Seat, did advise and very earnestly request him, that at that
time, he would hold his Peace, and expect a better and more fit time to make
his defense; which day being passed, the said King from day to day, for Five
days or more, did fraudulently and treacherously deceive the said Archbishop,
counselling him, and persuading him, that he would not come to the Parliament,
but wait at home without any fear, because, as the said King faithfully did
promise him, there should not in his absence any loss or prejudice be done or
happen to him. Notwithstanding all which, the said King in his Parliament
aforesaid, did in the mean time adjudge the said Archbishop to be banished,
during the Kings pleasure, though absent, and never any way called to answer,
and without any resaonable cause whatsoever; and also voluntarily against the
Laws of the Kingdom, and all Justice Confiscated all his Goods, whereby he
likewise became Guilty of Perjury. But furthermore, the said King being willing
to Palliate his Malice and Subtilty, by flattering discourses which he
oft-times had with the said Archbishop, did endeavor to clear himself of such
injury done, and make as if it were the doings of others; insomuch that the
Archbishop discoursing with the King, and with the Duke of N^rfolk and other
Lords, and great men of the Kingdom, And happening to say by way of Lamenting
his own Condition, That he was not the first that had suffered Banishment, nor
should he be the last; For he thought in a short time the Duke of Norfolk, and
other Lords would follow him, and confidently a^erred to the King, That all the
Rigor of these Proceedings, would finally be returned back on his own Head. To
which the said King as astonished incontinently replied, that he verily thought
it might so happen, and that he himself might and indeed ought to be expelled
his Kingdom by his Liege People. And further the King said, that if the same
should happen, He would convey himself to the same place, where the said
Archbishop should be. And that the Archbishop might the rather Credit his
words, He showed him a certain great Jewel, [M^nile, a Brooch or Tablet,]
Curiously formed, underneath the skirt of his outward ^estment. Intimating for
certain to the said Archbishop, that when ever he should send that Jewel for a
Token, he would not delay to come thither, where the said Archbishop should be
resident: And that the said Archbishop might more confide in him; the said
King sent to him, advising him, that he should Privately send all his Jewels,
and other things of value, belonging to his Chapel, unto him the said King;
For the safe keeping thereof, lest by color of the before mentioned Judgment,
any one should wrongfully seize the same. Which under the greatest confidence
in the World being done, the said King caused him to reposite the said Goods in
certain Coffers: and the said Coffers to be locked up, and sealed by one of the
Archbishops Clerks, and keeping the said Coffers by him, returned the Keys
thereof by the said Clerk to the Archbishop. Yet afterward unknown to the said
Archbishop, caused the said Coffers to be broken open, and disposed of the
goods therein, at his will and pleasure. Furthermore the said King faithfully
promised the said Archbishop, that if he would but repair to the Port of
Hampton, in order to go out of the Realm, he would at least by the Intercession
of the Queen, get him Recalled. And if it should happen, that he the said
Archbishop should go out of the Realm, he should without fail return into
England, before Easter next following nor should in any kind lose his
Archbishopric: And this he faithfully promised, swearing upon the Cross of the
late Martyr S. Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury, by him the said King,
corporally touched; all which promises notwithstanding, the said King forced
the said Archbishop to depart the Realm: And forthwith transmitted special
Letters to the Apostolical See, to have him Translated. And so, and by other
Frauds, and deceitful Tricks of the said King, the said Archbishop being a
well-meaning believing man, was subtily circumvented.

AND because it seemed to all the Estates of the Realm, being asked their
Judgments thereupon, as well severally as jointly, That these causes of Crimes
and Defaults were sufficient and notorious to depose the said King; Considering
also his own Confession of his insufficiency and other things contained in his
said Renunciation and Cession, openly delivered, all the said States did
unanimously consent, that ex abundanti, that they should proceed unto a
Deposition of the said King; for the great security, and tranquillity of the
People, and benefit of the Kingdom. Whereupon the said States and Commons
unanimously constituted, and publicly deputed certain Commissioners, viz. The
Bishop of S Asaph, the Abbot of Glassenbury, the Earl of Gloucester, the Lord
Berkley, Sir Thomas Erpyngham, and Sir Shomas Gray, Knights, and William
Thirnyng, one of the Justices, to pass such sentence of Deposition; And to
depose the said King Richard, from all Kingly dignity, Majesty, and Honor, on
the behalf and in the name, and by the Authority of all the said States, as in
like Cases, from the Ancient Custom of the said Kingdom had been observed. And
forthwith the said Commissioners taking upon themselves, the burden of the
said Commission, and sitting on a Tribunal before the said Royal Chair of
State, having first had some debate of the matter, did on the behalf and in the
name, and by the authority aforesaid, pass the said Sentence of Deposition,
being reduced into writing, and caused such their Sentence to be read and
recited by the said Bishop of S. Asaph, their Colleague, by the Will and Command
of the rest of the said Commissioners: In these words.

IN the Name of God, Amen: We John Bishop of Asaph, John Abbot of Glassenbury,
Thomas Earl of Gloucester, Thomas Lord Berkley, Thomas de Erpingham, and Thomas
Gray, Knights, and William Thirnyng Justice, Commissioners specially deputed to
the matters under written, by the Peers and Lords Spiritual and Temporal of the
Kingdom of England, and the Commons of the said Kingdom; Representing all
Estates (or Conditions) of the said Realm, sitting in Tribunal, and having
considered the multiplied Perjuries, Cruelty, and very many other Crimes of the
said Richard, touching his government conmitted and perpetrated in his
Kingdoms and Dominions aforesaid, during the time of his Governance; and
before the said States openly and publicly propounded, exhibited, and recited;
Which have been and are so public, notorious, manifest, and scandalous, that
they could not nor can be concealed with denial or excuse. And considering
likewise the confession of the said Richard, acknowledging and reputing, and
truly, and of his own certain knowledge, judging himself to have been and to be
utterly insufficient and unmeet for the rule and Government of the said
Kingdoms and Dominions, and their Appurtenances, and for such his notorious
demerits, worthy to be deposed, as by him the said Richard, was before
declared, and by his Will and Command, published before the said States, and
made known and exposed to them in the vulgar Tongue, having already had
diligent deliberation upon these things and all others, transacted in this
Affair before the said States and us: We do on the behalf and in the name, and
by the Authority to us in this matter committed, ex abundanti, and for Caution
Pronounce, decree and declare him the said Richard, to have been, and to be
unfit, unable, and utterly in sufficient for, and unworthy of, the Rule and
Government of the said Kingdoms, and the Dominion, and Rights, and
Appurtenances of the same, and for any by reason of the Premises, to be
deservedly deposed of, and from all Royal Dignity and Honor, if any thing of
such Dignity and Honor were yet remaining in him. And with the same Caution we
do Depose him by this our deffinitive sentence in writing; Expressly forbiding
all and singular the Lords, Archbishops, Bishops, and Prelates, Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Barons, Knights, Vassals, and Valvassors, and other
Subjects, and Liege people of tbe said Kingdoms and Dominion, and other places
to the said Kingdoms and Dominion belonging, that henceforth none of them shall
any way obey or Regard the said Richard, as King or Lord of the said Kingdom
and Dominion.

Furthermore the said States willing that nothing should be wanting which might
be of value, or ought to be required touching the Premises, being severally
interrogated thereupon, did constitute the same Persons that were before
nominated Commissioners, to be their Procurators, jointly and severally to
resign and give back to the said King Richard, the Homage and Fealty to him
before made, and to intimate to him, if it should be requisite, all the
Premises, touching such his Deposition and Renunciation.

And then presently, as soon as it appeared by the Premises, and the occasion
of them, That the Crown of England, with its Appurtenances was vacant, the
aforesaid Henry Duke of Lancaster rising up from his place, and standing so
erected as he might conveniently be seen by the People, and humbly fortifying
himself with the Sign of the Cross on his Forehead, and on his Breast, having
also first called upon the name of Christ, did claim the said Kingdom so vacant
as aforesaid, with its Crown and all its Members and Appurtenances; In this
form of words in his Mother Tongue.

IN the name of Fader, Son, and Holy Ghost, I Henry of Lancaster, challenge this
Rewine of Yndlonde, and the Croun with all the Members, and the Appurtenances,
als I that am descendit, be Right Line of the Blood, coming fro the Good Lord
King Henry Therde, and thorghe that right that God of eis Grace has sent me,
with help of my Kyn, and of my Friends to recover it; The which Rewme was in
point to be ondone for defaut of Governance, and undoyng of the Good Laws.

After which Claim and Challenge, as well the Lords Spiritual as Temporal, and
all the States (...) present, being severally and jointly interrogated, what
they thought of that Claim? The said (...) with the whole People without any
difficulty or delay, did unanimo^sly consent, that the said Duke should Reign
over them. And forthwith, as the said King showed to the States of the Kingdom,
the Signet of King Richard, delivered to him as a token of his will, that he
should succeed him as aforesaid, the said Archbishop taking the said King Henry
by the Right Hand, led him to the Royal Chair of State: And after the said King
kneeling down before it, had prayed a little while, the said Archbishop of
Canterbury, assisted by the Archbishop of York, did place the said King, and
cause him to sit in the said Royal Seat; All the people wonderfully shouting
for joy, and by and by the said Archbishop of Canterbury, having with much ado,
procured silence from the over joy'd multitude, made a short discourse, or
Oration in these words.

Vir Dominabitur populo, A man shall Reign over my people, 1 Samuel 9. 17. These
are the words of the King of Kings speaking to Samuel, and teaching him how a
person should be qualified to Rule, since the people desired to have a King
given. And not unfitly may they be said of our Lord the King whom we behold
this day, and if we but intimately consider these words, they afford us matter
of great Consolation; for God does not threaten us as he did formerly his
people by Isaiah, saying, Isa. 3. I will make Children to rule over them; But
according to his Compassion, who in his wrath remembers mercy, he has visited
his people, and now no more Children (as heretofore) shall Lord it over them.
For the Lord says to them, A man shall Rule: Of the late Rulers of this
Kingdom, or any of them, one might have fitly said that of the Apostle, Cor.
13. I spoke as a Child, I understood as a Child, I thought as a Child. The
Apostle repeats it thrice, As a Child, I spoke, I understood and thought. As to
speech it is certain that a Child is unconstant in speaking, he easily speaks
true, and as easily false, is (...) inwards to promise, but what he promi^^^
pres^ntly forgets. Now these are things very (...) and dangerous in a King; nor
is it possible that any Realm shall stand long in happiness where these
Conditions bear sway. But from such mischiefs a Kingdom is freed, whese Scepter
is sway'dly a Man; for it belongs to a Man to s^t a watch before his Tongue;
and such is our present happiness, over whom not a Child, but a Man is set, and
such an one, as I hope we may say of him That in Eccles 9 Blessed is the man
that has not erred with his Tongue, Th^n says the Apostle, I understood as a
Child: Now a Child (...) nothing but flatteries and pleasing things, and
understands only Bawbles and (...), and loves not (...) that argues according
(...) hates him beyond all (...) amongst us Truth (...) under foot, so that
none durst (...); and therefore it is plain and appar^^^ enough, that He that
th^n Reigned understood as a Child. For a Man is not addi^^^ to such things,
but understands wisdom, so that by the Grace of God it may be said of him,
(...) is written Eccles. 9. Blessed is the man that abides in wisdom. For as a
Child is delighted in Vanity, so a man has regard to Truth and Wisd^m: Truth
therefore shall enter and Vanity depart, which has done so much mischi^f in our
Nation; for now a Man shall Rule, who seeks after Truth, and not Vanity or
Flattery. Thirdly, It is said, I thought as a Child, for a Child thinks and
studies only how to have his humor, and do things according to his own will,
and not according to Reason: Therefore when a Child Reigns, there only
Self-will Reigns, and Reason is banished, and Constancy is put to flight, and
great danger ensues; from which danger w^ are d^l^ver^d; for a Man shall rule
over us, to wit, One that speaks not like a Child, but thus, as one that has
the perfection of Reason -- I come not to do my own will, but the will of him
that sent me; to wit, of God: And th^r^fore of such a man we will say not only
that he will abide in wisdom, but also that as a Man, not a Child, he will
meditate on the Circumspection of God; that is, he will every way d^l^gently
observe that Gods will not his own be done, and so in the stead of a Child
wantoning in fo^lish stubborn humors, a Man shall R^ign, and such a Man, that
it shall be said of him, -- A King shall Reign in wisdom, and he shall e^^ente
Judgment and do Justice in the Earth.

Which Harrangue being ended the said Lord King Henry to appease the minds of
his Subjects, did then and there utter these words.

Sirs, I thank God and owe Spiritual and Temporel, and all the Astates of the
Land, and do owe to wit, it es noght my will that no man think that be way of
Conquest I would disherit any man of his Heritage, Franches, or other Ryghts
that him aght to have, no put him out of that that he has, and has had by the
good Laws and Customs of the Rewme: Except those persons that has been agan the
good purpose and the commune profit of the Rewme.

And forthwith considering, that by the former vacancy of the Royal Throne, by
the Cession and Depos^^ion aforesaid, all power of Justices, Sheriffs, and
other Officers, throughout the Kingdom was ceased, therefore to the end, that
there might be ^^^failure nor delay in the administration of Justice, to the
grievance of the People, he caused principal Officers and Justices to be made
and sworn to him with the usual Oaths. And it was immediately proclaimed by the
Kings Command, that on Monday next, after the said Feast of S. Michael, a
Parliament should be held, and celebrated. And that on the Monday following
that, that is to say on the Feast of S. Edward, should be the Coronation of the
said King at Westminster, and that all those that could claim any service in
the said Coronation, should come to the White hall, of the Palace before the
Steward, Constable, and Marshall of England, on Saturday next, before the day
of the said Parliament, to make their just demands in that behalf, and receive
right therein. But as for the shortning the day assigned to the Parliament,
there was a Protestation made by the King, That it was not his intent that
thereby any prejudice should be brought upon the States of his Kingdom; nor
that the same for the future should be drawn into Example: but that such
Abbreviation of Time was only made for the benefit and profit of the Kingdom,
and especially to save the Labor and Expenses of several of his people, and
that the Grievances of the people might be the sooner remedied.

After which the King arising from his Royal Throne, and beholding the people
with a cheerful and benign Countenance, retired himself from thence, all the
people rejoicing. And the same day in the White Hall aforesaid, made a solemn
Feast to the Nobles and Gentry there in a vast multitude assembled.

And afterward, viz. On Wednesday next following, the before named Procurators
so deputed as aforesaid, did according as they were commanded, repair into the
Presence of the said la^e King Richard being within the Tower aforesaid, and
the said Sir William Thirnyng the Justice, for himself and his Companions and
Fellow-Pro^urators, in the Name of all the States and People aforesaid, did
notify and fully declare unto the said Richard, their admission of his said
Renunciation, and the Manner, Cause and Form of such sentence of Deposition,
and presently did resign and give back to the said late King Richard the
Horiage and (...) formerly to him made as aforesaid: With these words.

The Words which William ^^^nyng spoke to Monsire Richard late King of England
at the Tower of London in his Chamber, on Wednesday next after the Feast of S.
Micha^l the Archangel, were as follow:
SIre, It is well know to ow, that there was a parliament somon'd of all the
States of the Reaume for to be at (...) and to begin on the Tuesday in the Morn
of the Fest of S. Mi^h^el the Archangel, that was esterday; (...) of the which
Summons all (...) of this Land were there (...) the which States (...) made
(...) persons that been conten (...) now, her (...), and (...) Autorite and
Power, and charged hem for to say the words that we shall say to ow in her
Name, and on their behalve; that is to wytten, the Bishop of Saint Assa for
Ersbishoppes and Bishops, the Abbot of Glastenbury for Abbots and Priours,
and all other men of Holy Church, Seculers and Rewelers the Eearle of (...)*
for Dukes and Erls, the Lord of Berkley, for Barons and Laue^ettes, (...)
Thomas (...) Chamberleyn for (...) Bachilers and Commons of this Land be South;
Sir Thomas Gray for all the Bachilers and Commons by North, and my f^lawe Johan
Markham, and me for to come with hem for all these States, And so, Svre, these
words and the doing that we shall say to owe, is not onlych our words, but the
words and the d^yngs of all the States of this Land, and our Charge and in her
Name.

And he answered and said, That he myste well that we would noght say but as we
were charged.

Sire, e remember owe well that on Moneday in the (...) of Sein^ M^ch^^ the
Archan^gel (...) in this Chamber, and in (...) and (...) and of Lordship, (...)
and Wyrship that longed thereto, and assoiled all our Leiges of her Ligeance
and Obeisance that longed to owe uppe the form that is contened in the same
Renunciation and Cession, which e read our self by our mouth, and affermed it
by our Oath, and by our own writing. Upon which e made and Ordained our
Procurators the Ersbishop of York and the Bishop of Hereford, for to notify
and declare in our Name these Renunciation and Cession at Westmynstre to all the
States, and all the People that was there gadyr'd, betause of the summons
aforesaid, the which thus don yesterday by these Lords our Procurators, and well
herd and understouden these Renunciation and Cession ware plenelich and frelich
accepted, and fullish agreed by all the States and People foresaid. And over
this, Sire, at the instance of all these States and People, there ware certain
Articles of Defautes in our Governance read there and tho well herd and
pleine^ich understo^den to all the States foresaid, hem thought hem so true,
and so notorie and known, That by tho Causes, and by mo other, as they said,
and (...) Consideration to our own (...) our own Renunciation and Cession, that
e were not worthy, no sufficient ne able for to Govern, for our own
demerites, as it is more pleinerlich contened therein, hem thought that wos
reasonable and cause for to depose owe, and her Commissaries that they made and
ordein'd, as it is of Record that declared and decreed and adjudged owe for to
be deposed and pryved, and indede deposed owe and pryved owe of the Astate of
King, and of the Lordship contained in the Renunciation and Cession foresaid,
and of all the dignite and wyrshipp, and of all the Administration that longed
thereto. And we procurators to all these States and People foresaid os we be
charged by hem, and by her Auctorite gyffen us, and in her name elde ow uppe
for all the States and People, foresaid Homage Liege, and feaute, and all
Leigeance, and all other Bonds, Charges, and Services that long thereto, and
that non of all these States and People fro this time forward ne bear owe Feyth,
ne de owe Obeisance os to that King.

And he answered and said, that he looked not there after, but he said, that
after all this he hoped that is Cosyn would be good Lord to him.

Thus far the Record word for word Translated out of the Latin and French, and
the English re^^ted in the Old Words, and obsolete spelling as it ^ands in the
Rolls remaining in the Tower, the some being attested to have been Examined and
so^nd to ^gree the^^with.

Thus (...) the series of (...) we have (...) this (...) happy Prince through
all the (...) of (...), and s^e^ ho^ by over-straining at too absolute a power,
he fatally came to be depri^ed of his (...) unquestioned Domin^on, so that on a
sudden he was abandoned, despised, and reduced to the Condition of a private
man, a State so much worse than that of Death, as it s^ffered him to (...) his
Honor, and remain only a Monument of his own Ignominy, and the Iri^mphs of his
Successor.

Yet this (...) not very long, for there (...) many steps between the Prison*
and the (...) of Princes. Though in truth his Fate (...) have been (...) by the
vai^ attempts of pretended Friends to restore him, rather than by any (...) of
these that had dispossessed (...). For at first after his Deposition, he was
carried to ^^eds Castle in Ken^, and there kept under (...) as a Prisoner, but
not in any very close Con^inement, nos yet without Prince^* (...) in some
proportion to his (...).

On Monday, the 20th of September, 1^9^. was the said King Richard's
Resignation; on the next (...) he was Deposed by the Parliament, and Henry
(...)* the said claim to the Crown, and actually began his Reign as King. On
the 6th of October a Parliament meets, that was Summoned by him in his own
Name, and on Monday the 13th of the same October, he was Crowned, being the
same day of the Month on which in the very last year he received Sentence of
Banishment.

The better to establish his new assumed Throne, he began with Acts of
Clemency, as hoping to purchase new Friends, or at least extinguish old
Exmit^es; the Dukes of (...) and Exe^er, the Earl of Sali^bury, and the Lord
Morley (all Priv^^^^ to the late King Richard) he freely pardoned; ye^ could
not this unexpected favor (at which the common people not a little (...), as
being they thought undeserved) restrain these very Noblemen from hazarding
their own Lives, and His too, for whose sake they pretended to venture them, in
attempting fresh (...). For before King Henry had reigned two years, they, with
several others, entered into a Confederacy (first hatched, it is said, by the
Abb^t of Westminster) to destroy him, by surprising him at a T^urnament, or
Martial Exercise, that they appointed to be held at Oxford, and to which they
had solemnly in^ited him, and then to re-establish Richard. A Plet, which
whether it were more justly or imprudently designed, more wonderfully
discovered at first, or more strangely quashed at last, o^ proved more fatal to
the undertakers, or to the said late deposed King Richard, we must refer to the
Reader's censure: For in short so it was, That the Duke of Aameric riding
toward Oxford (...) join the rest of his Associates at their pretend^^ (...),
calling by the way on his Father the Du^^ (...) York, and having in his bosom
an Indenture, containing the Heads of the Conspiracy mutually Signed and Sealed
by the principal Agents therein; the old Duke happening to spy it as they sat
at Dinner, asked what it was? And the Son in some disorder answering, that it
no way concerned him, the Father swore by St. George that he would see it, and
plucked it from him; by which perceiving their Plot, he upbraided his Son, and
told him, he would presently acquaint King Henry. But Aumerle got out of the
House, and rode with such speed, that he got to Windsor (where the Court then
was) before his Father, and begging the King's Pardon, first of all discovered
the whole Intrigue himself.

The King provides for his own safety, retires to London, and the Conspirators
perceiving the business had taken Air, prompted on by despair, betook
themselves to Arms; and having with them one Maudlin a Priest, that very much
resembled King Richard, they attired him in Royal Robes, and gave out, that he
was King Richard, escaped out of Prison. By which Fiction they drew together a
considerable Army and such as might have shockt King Henry's scarce-well-setled
Crown, had not Fortune (always his Friend) scattered them in a moment by the
most unexpected accident in the World. For their Troops being encamped near
Cicester, and the Duke of Surrey, and the Earl of Salisbury, taking their
Quarters within the Town at one end, and the Duke of Exeter, and the Earl of
Gloucester, in another: The Bailiff of the Town (I am sorry his Name is not
recorded, for a stout brave fellow no doubt he was, that durst attack such
mighty Peers, that had so numerous an Army within a Mile or two of the Town)
understanding that they were in Rebellion against the King, gathering a Company
of Townsmen in the night, assaulted the Inn where Surrey and Salisbury lay, who
after a long defense, being in danger of being taken, a Priest of their Party
set diverse Houses in the Town on Fire, hoping thereby to divert the Assailants
from prosecuting the Lords, to save their Houses. But this enflamed them the
more, and so hotly they pursued the Skirmish, that they slew the said two
Noblemen, and cut off their Heads. In the mean time from the other Inn, Exeter
fled to his Camp, intending to bring the whole Army to rescue his Friends: But
the Soldiers having heard a Clamor, and seeing the Town on Fire, imagined King
Henry had been come with all his Forces and so in a pannick fear fled and
dispersed themselves; and the said Duke of Exeter having skulk'd up and down
for some time, was taken and Beheaded at Plashey in Essex; The very place where
by his Council and Contrivance the Duke of Gloucester had been apprehended, and
sent away to Cal^ce to be murdered.

Though King Richard being all this while a Prisoner, cannot be supposed to
have much hand in this Insurrection, yet being undertaken for his sake, it
might possibly hasten his End. He was now removed from Leeds to Pom^ract
Castle, and as we know not the certain time of his Death, so likewise is the
manner of it variously reported. Some write; That he was every day served in
with abundance of costly Dishes, but not suffered to touch or taste one of them,
and so perished with Famine; but such barbarous unnatural Cruelty seems wholly
fabulous. Others relate, That King Henry having at Table been ove^heard to say
with a sigh -- Have I never a Friend that will rid me of him whose Life will
br^ed destruction to me, and disquiet to the Realm? One Sir ^ierce Exton taking
this for a Warrant, goes down to ^ontefract, and first commanded his (...) to
take the Essay of his Meat as formerly (...) at which Richard being offended,
and being told (...) was by K. Henry's Order, said to his Squire, The Devil
take Henry of Lancaster and thee together; upon which Sir Pierce entered the
Chamber with eight Armed Men, which King Richard perceiving, wrung the Bill out
of the hands of the for most, and slew four of them, but was at last himself
knocked down by Sir Pierce with a Pole-Axe: Which Relation likewise seems a
little Romantic. Walsingham tells us, that after the Defeat of his Friends,
the Duke of Exeter, etc. finding all hopes of his Restoration destroyed, he
fell into such a sullen Melanch^ly that he would taste no Food, and so
voluntarily starved himself.

But which way soever he came by his End, King Henry it seems was willing to
let all the World know he was dead, for his Body, Embalmed and covered with
Lead, all save the (...), was br^ught to London, where for three days together
it was exposed at Paul's to public view, and then buried in the Church of
Predicant Friars at Langley in Buckinghamshire; But afterward by King Henry
the Fifth removed to Westminster, and there honorably E^tombed. Yet some
Scottish Historians affirm; That he escaped out of Prison, and led a (...) and
virtuous life in that Kingdom for diverse years, and lies buried (as they say)
in the Black Friars at Sterling. So different i^ the (...) of Fame touching
this unhappy Prince's exit out of the World, who lived therein about 3^ years,
and Rei^n^d 22 years and 3 months.

FINIS.

