A Memorial delivered to his Majesty by the Honorable Edward Howard and
Bernard Howard of Norfolk, the 16th. day of November 1676. of what they demand
from their Brother the Right Honorable Henry Earl Marshal of England; wiih the
Grounds and Reasons of and for their said Demands.
Their Demands are Three.
1. THat his said Lordship will please, pursuant to his own free offer and
promise, waive all Acts by them respectively done, by which they may in
strictness be barred of the Provisions intended them by their late Father, out
of the overplus of such Lands as were appointed to be sold for the payment of
Debts; and of the Provisions intended them out of such Lands, whereof the now
Duke of Norfolk levied a Fine Sur concessit; to be subject to such Trusts as
their said Father should direct; and come to a just Account with them for the
several benefits which ought to accrue to them, upon the said respective
Provisions; in case no Acts had been done by them, to bar them of such
benefits. The said Account to be taken by Referrees to be appointed by an Order
of a Court of Equity, and they to be armed with a Commission to examine upon
Oath, and they to settle all the said Accounts, and their determination to pass
into a Decree, so as to oblige a satisfaction of what shall appear due upon
such Account.

Or if his Lordship shall refuse this, Then
That his Lordship will please to let them have those respective allowances of
200 l. per annum apiece, which his Lordship formerly allowed them for Diet and
Lodgings; the arrears thereof to be immediately paid; and the growing
allowances, together with such Rents-charge as have formerly been granted to
them out of the Manor of Rotherham, to be secured as their Council shall think
safe; so that they may have better securities for the same then bare
Distresses; and may have Lands unincumbred to enter upon and hold, in case what
shall be due be not paid: And all arrears of those Rents-charge to be forthwith
satisfied, together with the charges occasioned by their being enforced to
distrein for the same.

2. That those future expectant Interests, which their said late Father
intended for them out of his Estates in the Counties of Cumberland and
Westmerland, may be so re-settled as that they may not for the future be
barred, but may be secured to come unto them, according to the intentions of
their said Father: So that they may not be compelled to trouble a Parliament to
relieve them in this particular.

3. That they, and their Sister the Lady Eliz. Mac Donnel, (without whose
consent they cannot agree this particular point) may have a just and full
discovery and account of their Grandmothers Cabinet, and all things therewith
delivered unto his Lordship by their Uncle the Lord Viscount Stafford, in Trust
for all the Children of their said late Father, (except their Brother Charles;)
and that they may each of them have their just shares of the same in specie; or
else that they and their said Sister may each of them have the sum of 1000 l.
for such their several share, with Interest for the said moneys from the time
of the delivery of the said Cabinet, and what was so delivered.

The Grounds and Reasons of and for the first before mentioned Demand.
1. There were Provisions designed as a present maintenance for the said Edward
and Bernard, and for some other of their Brothers, by their said late Father:
The first was made by their said Father himself, out of the overplus of a very
great Estate in Lands settled in Trustees for the payment of Debts: Upon this
there was due to each of them from the Lord Marshal 3000 l. to be paid at the
time the said overplus was conveyed to his said Lordship, which was in Anno
Domini 1659. For which they are to have Interest from that time, or else each
of them to have one Twelfth part of the Inheritance in specie of the said whole
overplus, with satisfaction to each of them for the Rents and Profits of such
respective Twelfth part from the year 1659. The other Provision was made by the
now Duke of Norfolk, by the procurement of their said Father, who prevailed
with the said Duke to levy a Fine Sur concessit, for the vesting a very great
Estate in Lands in Trustees for the life of the said Duke, to be subject to
such Trusts as their said Father should direct. Upon this Trust there ought to
have been due to each of them at Michaelmas 1674. above 12000 l. and from that
time during the life of the said Duke above 600 l. per annum. And of this last
Provision they had no particular knowledge until very lately. Yet he did
afterward in the presence of the Right Honorable the Lord Privy Seal, and
others, declare and promise, That if they were not fully satisfied, that the
said Rents of 300 l. apiece by him granted to them, were a full satisfaction in
value for all that was or could be due unto them upon the said Provisions so by
them sold, conveyed or released, (as he affirmed) he would waive all Acts done
by them, which might bar them of any of the said Provisions, and come to a just
and strict account with them in relation to the said Provisions: And that if
upon such account it should appear, that there was or could be more due unto
them then 2100 l. apiece, (which was the price for which the said Rents had
been granted) he would make them a full satisfaction for what upon such Account
should appear to be yet due unto them. This they then believed he would have
done; but they since find, that his Lordship is otherwise resolved; and he has
fully made it appear, that notwithstanding his said promise, he is now resolved
to take the full benefit of the Bargains which he affirms he has gained from
them for 2100 l. apiece.

The Grounds and Reasons of and for the second before mentioned Demand.
2. Their said late Father taking it for certain, that the two Provisions
before mentioned would, during the life of the said Duke of Norfolk, be a
reasonable maintenance for those for whom he intended the same, was pleased by
another Settlement (which was of his whole Estate in the Counties of Cumberland
and Westmerland) to design another Provision for the said Edward and Bernard,
and two other of their Brothers, as an Estate-Tail for the benefit of them and
their Children; to take effect after the descending of the Dignity of Earl of
Arundel upon the Lord Marshal, or (which Mr. Marriot his Lordships Agent
affirms to have been the true intentions of their said late Father) upon any of
his Issue. This Settlement was so drawn, as that the said future Estates were
to come to the said Edward and Bernard, and the said other two Brothers, only
in case the said Dignity should personally descend and come to the said Lord
Marshal. But this was not the sole fault in the penning of it: For
notwithstanding it was the intent of their said Father, that it should never be
in the power of any to bar the said future Provisions; yet the same was so
drawn, that the Lord Marshal has absolutely destroyed and barred all those
future Estates, so that the same can never be revived but by his said Lordships
own Act, if that can do it, or by an Act of Parliament for that purpose.

All the satisfaction which has been given for these respective Provisions
has been, That the said Edward and Bernard, as each of them came to the age of
21 years, were told by the Lord Marshal of the said first Provision
particularly; and that the Debts to be paid were so great, that the overplus
would not amount to near 2000 l. apiece to them. But that his Lordship would
nevertheless give unto each of them a Rentcharge for life of 300 l. per annum
apiece, which he valued at 2100 l. apiece. And having Draughts prepared and
ready Engrossed for that purpose by his own Council, they accepted, and he
executed the Deeds accordingly; by which neither of them have any other remedy
for their said Rents, but barely a Distress upon Lands; so that for every
half-years Rent due and unpaid, they must be driven to a chargeable Suit (which
is their present case) to recover every half-years Rent. And his Lordship was
then likewise pleased to promise, to allow unto each of them Diet and Lodgings,
and other advantages and conveniences, which he did allow for some years in
kind; and afterward for some few years he allowed unto each of them 200 l. per
annum, in lieu of those conveniences: But this is now, and has been for some
time stopped.

As touching the said second Provision, which they expressly aver, (and are
ready to affirm upon Oath) That they did not know any thing in particular of
the same when their said Rents were granted, nor until very lately. They did
lately address to the said Lord Marshal, and prayed to have the benefit of the
same for the future; and an account and satisfaction for what was due for the
same for the time past: Representing that they had never received more upon any
account of any Provisions made for them out of the Estate of their Family, then
as is before mentioned. To which his Lordship answered, that he did own they
had no other satisfaction then as aforesaid: But declared, that the respective
satisfactions of the 300 l. Rents-charge, which he had granted to each of them,
and which he valued at 2100 l. apiece, was in reality of more value then what
could any ways come to them by both the aforesaid Provisions; Averring, that
for the said Rents of 300 l. apiece they had each of them sold, Conveyed, or
Released to him, or others in Trust for him, both the said Provisions, and all
that was or could be due upon the same; and had by their own Acts barred
themselves from demanding any thing farther.

The Grounds and Reasons of and for the said third and last before mentioned
Demand.
3. Upon the death of their Grandmother, there was a Cabinet of Jewels and
Rarities to the value of above 30000 l. part of the Estate of their said
Grandmother, put into the hands of the Lord Marshal by their Uncle the Lord
Viscount Stafford, for the use of the said Lord Marshal, and all the Children
of their Father, (except their Brother Charles) and to be as their share of
their said Grandmothers personal Estate. The reason why their Brother Charles
was to have no share therein being, that their said Uncle had given him 1000 l.
in moneys, which he had accepted as his share of the said personal Estate. For
this they have never as yet received any satisfaction.

The Answer of the Earl Marshal, put in January the 9th, 1676. to a Memorial
delivered to his Majesty, by his Brothers Mr. Edward and Mr. Bernard Howard,
touching their Demands from his Lordship.
The Demands being Three,
TO the first his Lordship says, That he never offered or promised to waive
all Acts by them respectively done, and to come to an Account with them for the
several benefits which ought to accrue to them, upon the respective Provisions
made for them, and by them released and assigned, mentioned in this Demand; nor
was there any ground or occasion for the same, there being no Reference or
meeting at any time touching these Demands, or any Demand made till they lately
exhibited their Bill in the Exchequer, to avoid their own Agreements: Which
upon his Lordships Answer and Plea, they thought fit immediately to dismiss
with Costs: Yet its above 14 years since that the last Agreement was made with
the youngest of them. But (as in his Lordships Answer to the same Suggestion in
their Bill aforesaid) he says, That if an Account could be easily stated, and
they responsible and obliged to answer what should be due thereupon, it would
prove many Thousands of pounds for his Lordships advantage. But his Lordship
(for the reasons aforesaid) neither did or does think fit to put himself to the
trouble thereof, only to gratify them who have so ill deserved it. And his
Lordship does aver, That (at the making of the said Agreement) he did give to
them, as he did to other his Brothers, double the yearly values of what they
could pretend to, eitheir by their Fathers Will, or upon the Trust of the Fine
Sur concessit; which latter being but during the life of the Duke, the Brother
of the said Earl, he made the aforesaid Provision absolutely to them during
their respective lives, to the end that after the death of the Duke they might
not want a subsistency. And herewith they were so well satisfied, that some
time after the said Agreement made and executed, they gave it under their
respective hands and seals, (reciting what they had released and assigned to
his Lordship, and what he had granted to them in lieu thereof) that by the said
Agreement they were much obliged and advantaged, and gratefully acknowledged
the same, contrary to all which they offer to swear in their Memorial.

But now if his Lordship will continue to them respectively 200 l. per annum,
which he sometime formerly out of bounty helped them to, they will be satisfied
to waive the aforesaid matter of Account: So that it is plain, how this first
Demand is only made use of to obtain the latter, which his Lordship can no ways
gratify them in, but by justifying them in their proceedings and Demands, and
the accusing of himself by the rewarding of them for their so great and false
clamours, scandals and proceedings still renewed in the Courts of Judicature
against him, and obstructing the peace and quiet of his Lordship and their
Family.

And for the better securing the payment of the Rents-charge, his Lordship is
advised, That the same is granted to them as all Rents-charge are usually made;
and does averr the Estate is more then sufficient value, and not encumbered, as
they by their Bill and in this Paper suggest: And till these late disturbances
were raised by them, they were punctually paid the same, as by their respective
Acquittances will appear. And notwithstanding their ill carriage toward his
Lordship, there is but half a years Rentcharge at Michaelmas last due to the
elder, and 160 l. to the other, which his Lordship was and is ready to pay,
they giving such Acquittances for the same as Council shall reasonably advise.

To the second his Lordship says, That as to that contingent Estate or
Interest they respectively claim in the Barony of Burgh in Cumberland, viz.
each of them a Third part, to take effect in case the Dignity of Earl Arundel
should descend upon his Lordship: For what Acts he has done to the destruction
of that contingent Interest they pretend to, he was necessitated thereto for
the establishing an Agreement with the Tenants, and therein had the advice of
learned Council; and has done no more then every Tenant in Tail does by
levying a Fine to dock the same, and what in Law and Equity is warranted. But
until the Dignity of the said Earldom descends upon his Lordship, they have no
color or pretense to that Estate. And if herein they conceive themselves
injured, he freely leaves them to take such legal and equitable ways and means
as they shall be advised, for recovery of their pretended right.

To the third and last Demand his Lordship says, That by no Agreement made by
his Lordship with the Lord Viscount Stafford, he is any ways obliged to render
an account or share of the Cabinet mentioned, as they would have found, had
they not suddenly dismissed their Bill which they exhibited in the Exchequer.
But since they having joined in another Bill with Mr. Mac Donnel, to the same
and other purpose, they shall in due time receive such Answer or Plea thereto,
as his Lordship shall be advised. And therefore hopes no further Answer can be
now desired, they having joined with Mr. Mac Donnel, with whom his Lordship
long since and yet might have an end, but that Mr. Bernard, who has no joint
Interest with Mr. Mac Donnel, has conjoined himself with him in the Suit: For
which in due time Mr. Mac Donnel will find how great cause he has had to
complain of Mr. Bernard Howard, and none at all of his Lordship, who for the
present desires to be excused from opening himself, as to what he must stand
upon with Mr. Mac Donnel; and the rather, because things said in confidence
upon former meetings, have been discovered and ill use made of, to continue and
not end these differences. Wherefore his Lordship humbly desires, That his
Majesty will be pleased to believe, that Mr. Mac Donnel, who has given no
Releases, will not be able to get so great advantage as the rest have done,
until it appear otherwise to his Majesty, by the Judgment of the Court. And
then, though his Lordship will never depart from the Releases which he has so
dearly bought of these Brothers, his Majesty will clearly see, that there was
no cause for either of them to complain of these Releases.

And by this time his Majesty cannot but see, how much these Brothers stand
obliged in Honor and Conscience, to retract in all places those unjust
imputations and scandals, which they have taken pains to throw upon his
Lordship, which are a very ungrateful and unworthy return for the kindnesses
showed to them, more particularly then to the rest of his Brothers. Thus having
fully answered as to the respective Demands, the Reasons which they give for
the same being weak, untrue, and contradictory in themselves, his Lordship
conceives not worth any further Answer.

The Reply of the Honorable Edward and Bernard Howard of Norfolk, to the Earl
Marshal's Answer to the Memorial, delivered to his Majesty by them the 17th.
day of January 1676. touching their Demands from his Lordship.
Their Reply to the whole Answer in general.
AS to the said Answer in general, amounting to no more then, 1. A flat denial
of the Truth of a matter of Fact which has been already proved before his
Majesty. 2. A flat denial of the Truth of another matter, which they doubt not
but to prove before his Majesty, by the testimony of his and their Uncle the
Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Stafford, if they may be admitted to make
such proof, and that his Majesty will please to send for the said Lord
Stafford, to attend him at a day to be for that purpose appointed. 3. A flat
denial of all the Demands contained in the said Memorial. And 4. Many undecent
expressions, and much ill language bestowed upon the said Edward and Bernard,
unfit (as they humbly conceive) to be used toward any Gentlemen, much more
unfit to be used toward his Lordship's Brothers, but most of all unfit to be
in writing under his hand in a Paper delivered to his Majesty, and wholly
omitting to take notice of the respective Reasons by them given in their said
Memorial, for their Demands therein contained. They humbly say, by way of
general Reply, That their Memorial was delivered by them upon his Majesty's
particular command for that purpose: To which they humbly conceive his Majesty
was induced, by an opinion which he had of the great Honor and Integrity of,
and of the Interest which his Majesty supposed he had in his Lordship; his
Majesty was persuaded, that his Lordship would not deny any truth: And that if
upon the whole matter, his Majesty should think fit to desire his Lordship to
comply with any reasonable thing, which should be demanded in the said
Memorial, his Lordship would not fail to do the same, without putting the
Demandants to seek or prosecute any farther, either in Parliament, or in any
Court of Equity, for a Relief. This being the original motive which occasioned
the delivering in of their said Memorial, they shall humbly expect the issue of
it, after his Majesty shall have considered of their said Demands, and the
Reasons upon which the same are grounded, together with the said Answer; and
what is here farther replied to all the several particulars thereof, excepting
only what relates to the several undecent expressions, and ill language therein
contained; to which out of respect to his Majesty, and also out of tenderness
to his Lordship, they forbear to reply any thing.

Their Reply in particular to the Particulars of the said Answer.
As to the Answer to the first part of the first Demand, they say,
1. As to the truth of the matter of Fact, whether his Lordship did, or did not
make such promise as is charged in the said first Demand, which the Demandants
affirm, and his Lordship denies in this Answer, and did also upon the Sacrament
of his Honor positively deny, in his Answer to their Bill exhibited against
him in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer; These Demandants say, that they
affirm, as they have affirmed in their said first Demand, that his Lordship did
make such promise as is affirmed in their said first Demand; and that the Right
Honorable the Lord Privy Seal has already personally testified unto his
Majesty, that the said Lord Marshal did make such promise; and they are
likewise ready, for his Majesty's farther satisfaction therein, if required by
his Majesty, to produce farther proof of this matter of Fact. And they humbly
pray, that the proof of this Fact may be admitted and taken by his Majesty, as
a just measure of the truth of such other matters as are affirmed by them in
their said Memorial, and denied by his said Lordship in his Answer. 2. As to
their Bill exhibited against his Lordship in the Exchequer, and the dismission
of the same with Costs upon his Lordships Plea, they say, That true it is, they
did exhibit a Bill in the Exchequer against his Lordship, to have a performance
of his said promise in the said first Demand mentioned; believing that his
Lordship would not have denied, but rather that he would have owned and made
good his said promise; and that he would according to his promise, have come to
an Account with them, waiving all Acts done by them respectively, which might
bar them from demanding such Account: But when they found by his Lordships
pleading several Acts done by them, that he would not perform his said promise,
they then upon their own motion had their said Bill dismissed, with ordinary
Costs of Court in such cases, (viz. 20 s.) 3. As to the Reasons given by his
Lordship for not coming to an Account as demanded, namely, That the Demandants
are not responsible* nor obliged to answer what shall be found due from them
upon such Account, settled as demanded: In case any thing shall be found so
due, and that it will require much trouble to state the Accounts demanded, they
say, That if his Lordship will be so just to his said promise, as to come to an
Account as desired, they are willing that it shall be part of the Order of
Reference, by which such Account shall be referred to be taken by Referrees,
that his Lordship on his part, and the Demandants on their part, shall give
good Security, such as the Court which shall make the said Order shall approve,
to answer what shall be found due to the other, upon such Account settled; and
they desire to leave it to such Account, to determine whether they have
received to the value of what was of right due to them. And they are so far
from being conscious, that their Proposal of making Oath unto what they offered
in their said Memorial to confirm by Oath, was a rash or inconsiderate
Proposal, that they still offer to do the same, if his Majesty shall think it
necessary. And if his Lordship shall please to produce unto his Majesty, the
Instrument of Acknowledgement which he in his Answer glories in, to be perused
and considered of by some of his Majesty's learned Council, the Demandants are
very confident, that the vain and unusual clauses in it, will prevail with his
Majesty's said Council to believe, that if the Demandants did execute the same,
and shall make Oath that they did not advise with Council touching the same,
and that they did not read the same before they executed the same, the said
Council, as well as his Majesty, will believe both parts of such Oath to be
true. And as to the advantage pretended by his Lordship to be given to the
Demandants, in granting to each of them a Rentcharge of 300 l. per annum, for
their respective lives, recoverable only by Distress; which is a Suit for every
half-years Rent, and may be stopped by Privilege of Parliament, as often as a
Parliament shall be sitting; and this for the purchase of 3000 l. due to each
of them from his Lordship before the said Rentcharge granted; and also for the
purchase of their respective Interests in the Twelfth part of the Rents and
Profits of an Estate for the Duke of Norfolk's life, worth about 700 l. or 800
l. per annum; which respective Twelfth parts was not to determine by the
respective deaths of the Demandants, as they have been often told, but on the
contrary, they find by the Deeds it was to accrue to their respective Executors
or Assigns, during the life of the said Duke. Whoever shall consider the said
transaction, will find that there was a considerable advantage gained by his
Lordships granting of the said Rents: But they will see, that the advantage was
so great on his Lordships part, that if his Lordship had granted to each of the
Demandants 600 l. per annum Lands of Inheritance, for what he then prevailed
with them to depart with, he had been a considerable gainer by the bargain, as
his Lordship has managed the affair. As they doubt not but the same would
appear, upon the settling of the Account by them demanded, if his Lordships
Honor would be prevailed with to come to such Account. Which Account these
Demandants say is so far from requiring any trouble from his Lordship, (unless
he esteems it a trouble to do them right, which is a very great trouble to them
to find) that to secure his Lordship from all apprehensions of that nature,
they will be willing to admit the Charge in relation to the Rents of the Lands
in the Fine Sur concessit, and the Fines raised by Leases upon those Lands, to
be as they were charged by his Lordship's Agent, upon the late Reference
between his Lordship and Mr. Mac Donnel, (the Demandants Brother-in-Law;) in
which the Lord Privy Seal, and the Lord Viscount Hallifax, were two of the
Referrees: So that there needs no more trouble, then to add to the said Charge
the value of the Timber felled upon those Lands, and the account of the Rents
and Profits of those Lands, and Fines raised by Leases since the time for which
that account was given, and to leave all those, with the Discharges demanded
upon that account, (which are all ready drawn up and written) to the Judgment
of such Referrees as shall be appointed, pursuant to the said first Demand.

As to the Answer to the second part of the first Demand, they say,
1. As to that of the first Demand which concerns those respective allowances
of 200 l. per annum apiece, which his Lordship formerly allowed them for Diet
and Lodgings, and the Arrears thereof, the reason of that Demand stands thus:
His Lordship was pleased several times, after the death of their Father, to
tell them, that he had promised their Father, to be a Father to them after
their Father's death; And as often as his Lordship acknowledged this, it was
his custom to averr, that he would religiously perform such his promise made
unto their Father: And as a testimony of such performance, his Lordship did for
some time allow unto them Diet and Lodgings for them and their Servants in
Arundel house. After the allowance for some time of those conveniences, his
Lordship having occasion to go beyond the Seas, and give over Housekeeping,
declared that he would allow unto each of them 200 l. per annum, in lieu of
those conveniences; and for some time did so. Having this promise, they
esteemed those allowances secure, and the rather for that his Lordship being
long since desired by his Majehy, to secure unto the said Bernard the aforesaid
allowance by some Land-security, his Lordship was pleased to give unto his
Majesty so great a reason to believe that he would do so, that his Majesty
relying thereupon, has several times pleased to tell the said Bernard, that
his Majesty would be Garranty for his Lordships paying the arrears of the said
allowance, and for securing the growing payment of the same allowance upon
Land-security, for the life of the said Bernard. The Demandants being to
deliver in a Paper into the hands of his Majesty, of what they had to demand
from his Lordship; and finding that his Lordship had solemnly denied in his
Answer to their Bill, that Promise which he made touching his coming to an
Account, as is desired in the first part of this Demand, esteemed it advisable
to demand the continuance and securing of their aforesaid Allowances, to the
end his Majesty might see whether his Lordship would perform any thing. This
was the reason of this part of their Demand, which they will not only freely
quit, (if his Lordship will satisfy the first part of this first Demand) but
they will also each of them be obliged to present his Lordship with 500 l. upon
his Lordships satisfying the said first part of this first Demand, and paying
unto them what upon such Account as is there demanded, shall be found due to
them respectively. And by this they hope that second part of their said first
Demand, stands justified from the construction put upon it by his Lordship. And
as to the better securing of the Rents to which they are at present entitled,
they insist as in their said first Demand, to have better security for the same
then bare Distresses; and that they may have not only their arrears of their
said respective Rents, but also the charges by them respectively expended in
taking such Distresses as they were compelled to take, for the recovery of the
said arrears, from the time his Lordship ordered his Receiver to forbear the
payment of the said Rents. As to the ill language and undecent expressions,
which close up the Answer to the said first Demand, they reply nothing, but
leave the consideration thereof to his Majesty.

As to the Answer to the second Demand, they say,
That it containing no more then a flat denial of the Demand, which craved
relief in a case wherein they can have no relief, in the present circumstances,
(in which they hear (from his Lordship's Agent Mr. Marriot) he has put the
Estate mentioned, by settling the same upon his Lordship's Issue by a second
Venture) but by his Lordship's free Act, or by an Act of Parliament; They
conceive, for the reasons mentioned in their Memorial, in relation to that
Demand, (of which reasons his Lordship is pleased to take no notice) his
Majesty will think it fitting to prevail with his Lordship, to comply with the
said second Demand; the case being (as these Demandants are advised) a case of
a mere Trust, and far differing from the cases of Common Entails; as they
conceive will appear by their Reasons contained in their Memorial relating to
the same, and unto which they refer themselves in this particular.

As to the Answer to the third Demand, they say,
1. As to so much thereof as contains a flat denial of a mere matter of Fact,
viz. his Lordship's Agreement made with the Lord Stafford, they refer
themselves to the first part of their Reply to the said Answer. 2. As to what
is charged on the Demandants, or either of them, touching their joining in a
Bill with their Brother Mac Donnel, and the Lady Elizabeth his Wife, their
Sister, and touching their having no joint Interest with them; These Demandants
and each of them for Reply say, that their joining in the said Bill, for so
much as they did join, viz. to pray an account of the Cabinet mentioned in the
said third Demand, was for the saving of expenses, and because in that
particular their Interests are so joined, that if these Demandants had not been
in that point joined as Complainants with them, they must have made them
Defendants, or have given his Lordship a cause of demurring against their Bill,
as these Demandants were and are advised by their Council. 3. As to what is
charged against one of the Demandants, touching the said Mr. Mac Donnel's
having more cause to complain against the said Demandant, then against his
Lordship; It is replied, by referring to the Printed Case of the said Mr. Mac
Donnel hereunto annexed, not long since presented by the said Lady Elizabeth to
his Majesty; (purporting the causes which the said Mr. Mac Donnel and the said
Lady Elizabeth then had, and (as is believed) still have to complain against
his Lordship.) And until his Lordship can name and prove any one Act done by
these Demandants, or either of them, to the oppression of the said Mr. Mac
Donnel and his said Wife, or either of them, they beseech his Lordship, for his
own sake, to forbear such Charges, since they can serve for no other end then
to give occasion to others to inquire into, and then make discoveries of his
Lordship's actions; which whether it will be of any advantage to his Lordship,
is referred unto his Lordship's better Judgment.

As to the close of the said Answer, they say, That they are not conscious to
themselves of having reported or affirmed any thing of his Lordship, in any
place, or at any time, which was against Justice or Truth, and which they were
not compelled to say in Justification of their own Honor, where endeavors had
been made to weaken their Reputations, and to disable them to have Credit in
the world, after his Lordship had stopped the payment of their Rents: But in
case his Lordship can charge and prove, (which they expect) that they or either
of them, have in any place reported or said any thing in relation to his
Lordship, which they do not prove to be true, the party or parties offending
will own the fault, and submit to any due punishment for the same. And having
offered this, they must expect it as a Justice from his Lordship, to charge and
prove something in particular against them of this nature; or else that his
Lordship will ask his Majesty pardon, for having charged them to his Majesty
under his Lordship's hand, so injuriously without cause.

For a close of all they humbly hope, That upon an exact consideration of their
Demands, and his Lordship's Answer thereunto, together with their Reply, it is
demonstrative, First, That the Account promised and insisted for, is not only
possible, but easy to be made. 2. That his Lordship believes so himself, else
he would never persuade his Majesty to believe, that he has those great
advantages against his Sister, by her being continued still in the Sea of that
Account, by not having given his Lordship Releases upon the said Account, as
his Brothers have done. 3. His Lordship's reasoning seems very mysterious and
intricate, by which he would persuade his Majesty and the world, that he has
done his Brothers a great kindness in bringing them under Releases, and keeping
them strictly to it; when at the same time he pretends he has gained so great
an advantage of his Sister, and done himself so great kindness, by not
accepting a Release from his Sister, who was upon the same account with the
rest of her Brothers in all points, (except the Cumberland Estate.) And his
Lordship seems to be happy in his Council, and wise management of the whole
affair, if things are brought to that pass, that if whether there be Releases
or no Releases in the case, his Lordship has still the disposal of the whole
Interest, settled by the Ancestor for the younger Children, and may yet after
all the Parents cares, give them Bread, or a Stone, at his pleasure: But better
is hoped and expected from the Grace and Justice of so good and gracious a
Prince as we are happy in living under.

A Memorial delivered to his Majesty November the 25th. 1676. by Alexander Mac
Donnel Esquire concerning his Demands from the Right Honorable Henry Lord Marshal
of England, in Right of the Lady Elizabeth his Wife.
WHereas the said Elizabeth being entitled to several Provisions, heretofore
made to her by her late Father, and also by her Brother the now Duke of
Norfolk, by the procurement of her said Father, by virtue of several Trusts,
which by the Trustees who accepted of the said Trusts, but nevertheless left
the management of the said Trusts to the said Earl Marshal; and being likewise
entitled to an eighth part of a certain Cabinet, with the Jewels and Rarities
belonging to the same, the whole being of the value of above 30000 l. parcel of
the Estate of her late Grandfather and Mother, and delivered into the hands of
the said Earl Marshal, to the intent the said Lady Elizabeth should have such
part thereof as aforesaid, they the said Alexander and Lady Elizabeth did
address to the said Earl Marshal for an account and satisfaction, in relation
to all the said respective particulars; and the same being refused, they
exhibited their Bill in the high Court of Chancery, against the said Earl
Marshal and others: whereupon the said Earl Marshal declaring, that he desired
to have all the said Matters settled amicably without expenses, by Arbitrators
to be indifferently chosen to examine all accounts and other things relating
thereunto, the said Alexander and Lady Elizabeth did accordingly consent to
submit all the said matters to be determined; and Referrees being thereupon
chosen on both sides, the said Referrees began in the first place to examine
the accounts in relation to the said Lands and Estate, of which the said Duke
had levied the said Fine; and although there was no other accounts seen or
produced, but what the Lord Marshal pleased to direct his Agents to produce, in
order to the charging of himself; and no liberty given to take any Copies of
any Rentals, in order to examine whether the Rentals which his Lordship
accounted were true: the said Alexander giving reasons why he suspected the
truth of them, and the Referrees desiring that the said Alexander might have
Copies of the same at his own charges; and although it appears that the said
Earl Marshal have by a private Act of Parliament, obtained without the
knowledge of the said Lady Elizabeth, and before her Marriage, barred the said
Lady Elizabeth of about 100 l. per annum during the life of the said Duke, for
which his Lordship would not account, yet by his Lordships own showing; his
Lordship was upon that single Trust to account unto the said Lady Elizabeth for
the twelfth part of 164331 l. 2 s. 6 d. 1/2. due unto her by that Trust only,
besides her Interest in the first Provision before mentioned and her share of
the said Cabinet, but the said Reference taking no effect as to the determining
of all or any of the said matters, submitted, the said Alexander and Lady
Elizabeth were this present Michaelmas Term compelled to endeavor again to be
relieved by a Court of Equity, and must be compelled also at the next sitting
of the Parliament, to apply to Parliament to be relieved against the said
private Act, unless his Lordship will otherwise please to satisfy their just
Demands, and thereby prevent the proving the great oppressions under which the
said Alexander and Lady Elizabeth suffer, from his Lordships detaining their
just right from them. Thath which is Demanded by the said Alexander and Lady
Elizabeth, in order to the preventing of farther troubles, is as follows, viz.

1. That the said Earl Marshal do forthwith pay unto the said Alexander Mac
Donnel and Lady Elizabeth, at least so much of the said twelfth part of the
said sum of 164331 l. 2 s. 6 d. 1/2, with which by his own Accounts the said
Trusts of the said Lands, of which the said Fine Sur concessit was levied,
stands charged, as his Lordship shall himself own to be due unto the said Lady
Elizabeth, leaving the rest to be determined as hereafter is proposed; and the
said Alexander Mac Donnel and Lady Elizabeth to give a Discharge for so much as
shall so be paid.

2. That the said Earl do pay, and continue to pay yearly, until the matters in
difference be determined as hereafter is proposed, such yearly sum out of the
growing Rents of the said Lands comprised in the said Fine, as his Lordship
shall himself own to be due unto the said Lady Elizabeth, leaving the rest to
such determinations as hereafter offered; and the said Alexander and Lady
Elizabeth to give Discharges from time to time, for so much as shall be so paid.

3. That as a foundation upon which to ground a full and final determination of
all the said particular matters in difference, the said Earl do forthwith put
in a full and sufficient Answer, to the present Bill now exhibited by the said
Alexander and Lady Elizabeth, and by her Brothers the Honorable Edward Howard
and Bernard Howard, Complainants, against the said Earl Marshal, and against
the Right Honorable the Lord Marquess of Dorchester, and the Earl of
Peterborough, Defendants, in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer; and their
Lordships the said other Defendants to answer the said Bill in like manner.

4. That upon such Answers put in as is before demanded, the said Earl Marshal,
and their Lordships the said other Defendants, do consent to an Order to be
made by the said Court, for the referring of all the matters contained in the
said Bill, to be determined by Referrees to be appointed by the said Court, at
the nomination of the parties Plaintiffs and Defendants; and the said Referrees
to be armed with a Commission to examine Witnesses upon Oath; and that the
determination of the major part of them, to be made by a day certain to be
limited by the said Order to be before the first day of Hilary Term next, to
pass into a Decree of the said Court, so as to oblige all parties.

To these Demands the Lord Marshal has not as yet made any Answer.


