THE CHARACTER OF THE PROTESTANTS OF IRELAND, Impartially set forth in a
LETTER, In Answer to Seven QUERIES; Their Original, Humor, Interest, Losses,
Present Condition, Apprehensions, and Resolutions. With Remarks upon the great
Charge England is like to be at with those People, and the Destruction of that
Kingdom by Famine, if not prevented.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultrey,
MDCLXXXIX.

THE CHARACTER OF THE PROTESTANTS IN IRELAND, Impartially set forth in a
LETTER, etc.
SIR,
THat I have not sooner performed my Promise, and your Commands, has been the
difficulty of your Injunctions; which were, That I should give a full Account
of these Seven Particulars:

First, the Original. Secondly, the Humor. Thirdly, the Interest. Fourthly,
the Losses. Fifthly, the present Condition. Sixthly, the Apprehensions. And
lastly, the Resolutions for the future Settlement of the Gentlemen of Ireland.

Since I undertook the Work, I thought my self obliged to be as perfect in it,
as some few Weeks would admit; but when I had spent some, and almost as many as
I designed for the whole, I found my Weeks must be turned into Months, and my
Enquiry in London reach to Bristol, and other parts of the Kingdom; for that I
found such different Accounts even in matter of Fact, that I could not well
depend upon any thing: And to say the truth, at my first onset I was much
discouraged by the diversity of Characters I received from them, both of things
and themselves; which after some time, I found might easily be reconciled, as
you will find in the sequel of this Discourse. But to detain you no longer, in
setting forth my Conduct in this Irish Travel, I shall come to your Particulars:

First, As to the Original of those, we most improperly call British
Protestants, who are of all Nations, and might be rather, with St. James, the
twelve Tribes scattered through the Earth. I have discoursed with Dutch,
French, Germans, Scotch, Welsh, and with as many born in our foreign
Plantations, New England, Virginia, Barbados, etc. And to complete this
diversity among them, those of our own Nation being of different Counties, are
so in their Humors, as we know by experience among our selves.

Now these Gentlemen of Ireland being composed, or rather compact of such
variety, I do not wonder, as most do, that they are so dis-joint in their
Affections and Representations of each other. A common Calamity is more equally
considered by indifferent Persons, than by them who lie under it; for though it
be common in the Affliction, yet it is particular in the several Attempts of
each to get out of it; and the frailty of our Nature is apt to lead us beyond
our Charity to our Neighbor, when we want it our selves; a Fault no ways to be
extenuated, yet too common, and I fear too much the practice of some among
these Gentlemen: But I have digressed. These several Nations and People I
before mentioned, are such as they call New Interest-Men, and came into Ireland
by and since Cromwell's Conquest, after the Rebellion of Forty One. These Men,
though of such differing Interests among themselves, yet are a joint Body and
separate from the other Interest of the Protestant Party of that Kingdom, which
they call the Old Interest; and they are the Offspring of the several Soldiers
and Adventurers, since Strongbow's going into that Kingdom. These Men, it
seems, thought their Interest infallible; no questioning of their Title,
because it was the Forfeitures of several Rebellions in the time of Popery, and
of that in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, when the Irish called in the Spaniards: But
the Rebellion of Forty One they palliate with several Concessions and Articles
made, though they were, when the Irish Saint (the then Duke of York) stood
their Champion, found frivolous. But these Gentlemen of the Old Interest, I I
find like our Welsh here, value themselves above the other they call
Cromwelists; and on the other hand, the Cromwelists look on them as mungreliz'd
by the Irish; among whom, many of them have matched, and therefore in Cromwell's
time not much trusted; though now, I think, the New and Old Interest unite
against the common Enemy: I mean without the least respect of Consanguinity or
Affinity, the Irish Papist being odious to them both.

Thus in short (for I presume you expect not the Genealogy of the Protestants
of Ireland) I have given you the present Interest and Place from whence they
derive themselves.

Secondly, For the Humor and Disposition of the People, I find them in their
Religion much like us of England, of different Persuasions, yet not in any
proportion with us for Dissenters: The North of Ireland being generally Scotch,
have most Presbyterians, but in other parts of the Kingdom Dissenters are thin;
insomuch that in some is Counties not one Dissenting Meeting: And however they
use one another in their Characters, they shame us in one thing, that is, in
giving respect to their Clergy.

They are of a generous temper, and even now in their Wants, may be seen to
have been a People of great Hospitality, lived in great Plenty, and therefore
the more unfit to undergo Want; and if my Observation be right, are apter to
starve than complain, and too haughty to undertake that they call a mean way of
earning their living. I have discoursed with some that were but Farmers of Ten
or Twenty pounds sterling a year, whom I questioned how it chanced they were
not gone in the Army for Ireland; their answer was, They could get no Command,
and they knew not how to live upon Sixpence a day; but if they could have of
their own Country to command them, (for none else they think will fight,) they
would go over Volunteers. This Spanish Humor I find in them; but that which
nourished it, is that which the Spaniard wants, plenty of Provisions both for
Back and Belly. Such a Tenant, as I mentioned before, of Ten pounds a year,
lives better than a Freeholder in England of an Hundred pounds a year Estate;
keeps a couple of good Geldings in his Stable, good Drink always in his Celler,
and better clad than our Yeomen of Kent. This may serve to show the Humor and
Disposition of the People, and the cause of it; only this I must add, That I
believe them a very stout and warlike People, which is occasioned by their
being like the Hungarians, in continual Action; the Irish being upon the least
occasion up in Arms, and running out Tories, which the English are in continual
hazard of, and as furiously pursue. Having heard much talk of these Tories, I
made particular enquiry into the Nature and Practice of that set of Men, which
I shall give you a short account of, as they have stood since Cromwell's
Conquest; for no farther I shall look back in all my Relation of Ireland.

These Men, after the reducing of Ireland, and the Lord Musgrave (since Earl of
Clancarty) laying down Arms, had no Commission, and therefore called Tories.
They came not in upon Musgrave's Articles, because there were no Terms for any
guilty of Murder, of which most of them that staid out Tories were in
Cromwell's Government, they were so hunted, and the Irish that were under
Protection so punished for any Robbery they committed in the Parish where it
was done, that they were soon destroyed: But upon every Alteration in England,
some ran out, as if they were immediately to recover the Kingdom: And so they
did upon King Charles the Second's Restoration, expecting, as they then gave
out, to be restored the sooner for being found in their defense against the
English, who they then hoped would be judged the greater Rebels; so after, upon
the Dutch War, several got up, insomuch that the Farmers of the Excise had
Abatements for the Ravage these made in the Country hindering Affairs.

There was one Redmond Hanly, that kept out several years, though great
Attempts of the Army continually made to take him; and another in Munster,
called Colonel Poor, with many others, in all Parts of the Kingdom, who kept
the English in continual Action, and to me seems a Reason for making them bold
and good Soldiers, and most serviceable against the Irish, as having been their
former Masters, and Conquerors: And Trogus Pompeius relates a Story of a
Country, which being overrun with Slaves, was not reduced, till laying aside
other Arms than those of Chastisement, their Masters reminded them of their
servile Fears, and so at last regained their Empire over them, as their ancient
Masters, not Competitors of the Field.

And I find many of Oliver's Soldiers alive, and free enough to go against the
Irish, if they had but English Commanders of their own Country; they
complaining much of some that are sent over, yet modestly expressed; for I find
them of a quiet and obedient Disposition.

Thirdly, For their Interest, I find them unanimous for their Present
Majesty's: and I have wondered in so great a number, as I have personally, and
by proxy conversed with, that I should never find but four Men, so much as
scrupling our present Happiness, and of them three Clergymen.

The Character, I first gave you of their Original, is Argument enough for
their Affection to our present Government, since they are stripped of all by
the late King, of whom they relate such Things, as are not fit to come among
humane, much less Christian Ears.

If the English, or Protestants of Ireland are considered in their personal or
real Estates, their Interest that way, I find to be thus: Few of them had any
thing in England, the Temptation of buying Land cheap, and Rents better paid
than in England, made them lay out all there, and consequently few monied Men
among them. Those that did not purchase, laid out in Improvements. Plate I do
not find they so much affected, as we in England; yet few Families without
some; Jewels were less in use among them. Those of personal Estates had
generally great Stocks of Cattle; and Land being cheap, the Country for these
late Years was over-burthened with them.

But that which is scarce to be credited in so plentiful a Country, situate
beyond any Place in the Christian World for Trade, there should be no
Merchants: In all my Enquiry, I cannot find one that may bear the Character of
a complete Merchant. They tell me, there were two or three in Dublin of
universal Trade; but growing rich, took Honors, and purchased Lands; since
them there appears nothing but Factors, and Home-bred-men, like our Planters in
the West Indies: And this is to me the Reason, why Ireland is so contemptible
in its Trade, that might otherwise be the most flourishing Empire in Europe,
there being so few Dealers resident in that Kingdom. The Interest of those fled
from thence, is comprehended under those already named in Stock and real
Estate; and that brings me to your fourth Head, the Losses of the Protestants
of Ireland.

And here I find both you and I have been not only mistaken, but prejudicate.
The evil Characters of some, and too light Behavior of others, gives, I
confess, too great occasion of censuring that People: But if ten righteous Men
would have prevented Sodom's Condemnation, many tens of ill Men should not
condemn a Kingdom, where there is more hundreds deserving.

Fourthly, Their Losses, and deplorable Condition, seems exceeding any modern
Account; and the more unhappy, since it is scarce perceived. We pitied the
French Fugitives more than these, that are our Bone and our Flesh; and the
Reason seems to be, that every one of them was distinguished by Garb and
Speech, but these from Ireland are by neither, and so in the Crowd not
discerned; nor shall we hear them complain, for the Reasons I have before
mentioned: but to come to their Losses. I need not tell you what the List given
into the House of Commons mentions, to which some have made Exceptions, that
the Returns are favorable; but that will not be believed by those, that
discourse the Gentlemen concerned in them; a more derogating Temper, I confess,
I never saw among a People, not in the least inclinable to favor one another.
I am loath to say, it is giving most of them the Lie, to have honorable
Thoughts of their best Men: But I would not make so general a Reflection, for I
have met with some worthy and intelligent Men among them; and such as complain
of some busy Men, whose Employments of Agency and Soliciting, gave them the
Opportunity and Practice of characterizing Men, in which they were too free, as
well as faulty in possessing great Men with: but to return. The Losses of the
Nobility and Gentry, were most in their real Estates; few of them had Money,
and not considerable in Plate or Jewels; they that had any of the three, did in
time send it over for England.

That which I take to be as considerable, or more than the real Estates, is the
loss of personal Estates in Stock; and that is vastly beyond our common
Estimation, and will, perhaps, be so in Acceptance: But what I shall relate, I
have such good Authority for, that I question not the Truth. It is usual in
that Kingdom for a Tenant that pays but twenty pounds a year, to have from an
hundred to two hundred Head of black Cattle on it; and for others that pay not
two hundred pounds a year Rent, to make more than three hundred a year of their
Wool. I should exceed the bounds of a Letter, to enumerate all on this Head:
but upon the whole, at a moderate Computation, it is believed they have lost in
Stock, and other personal Estates, to the value of more than eight millions
Sterling, allowing but an hundred pounds Sterling for a Family: Now these Men
are more to be pitied than they who are out of their Lands, for that will be
found again, (though they believe of little value;) but those that have lost
their Stocks, are utterly ruined without hopes of Reparation; and under this
Qualification, they compute more than eighty thousand Families, one half of
which are still in Ireland, more to be lamented than those that are here. I
mention nothing of the Clergy's Livings, nor Men of civil Employments, because
they come under the head of Freeholders being for Life; however it is worse
with them than Gentlemen of Estates, in regard they can make no disposition to
purchase Bread, as those of Lands may.

Fifthly, But now to your fifth Query, what their present Condition, and that,
after what has before been related, must be bad, and I doubt worse than we
imagine; for they tell you, most of them came over when they could bring little
with them, but the Cloths on their Backs; they have been here some ten Months,
and most six Months; they acknowledge the Charity of London great, but say
little of the other Parts of the Kingdom; the whole is said not to exceed
thirty thousand Pounds: And a greater Gift than that, they say, was offered by
them in Ireland, viz. thirty thousand Biefs to be given to the distressed of
London, when burnt; of this a Reverend Prelate of theirs has some testimonial
by him, his Grace the Archbishop of Tuam, who is among them of universal
Esteem, and in which he is singular. Now this public Charity is not, as we
thought, dispersed among all Gentry, as well as others, but only to the Poor,
such as had scarce Stocks in the Kingdom, but were poor Mechanichs,
Husbandmen, and Laborers.

Some of the Clergy have also support out of it; and although they that are
entrusted with the disposing this Money, lengthen it out as much as possible,
giving to most not above ten Shillings a month; yet they say about nineteen
thousand pounds of the Money is already gone, and yet all complain, as if there
were not an equal distribution; but I find little ground for it, only one or
two Men are a scandal to the rest; and had they been left out, I believe the
noise you heard in the Country would not have reached so far.

Now all this while, the Men of greatest Quality, and, perhaps, of greatest
want, are put to their shifts; but they most of all, whose Estates lay in
Stock, for that they can have no Credit, there being no expectation for their
Recovery: When I think of these Men, I must confess my Heart aches, they are
the most miserable Men that have been among us, this Age having lived
plentifully, worth thousands, bred to nothing but rural Matters, know not how
to get Bread by any other Employment, and so turned naked into the World, when
they were going, by their Age, out of it; (I wish many of them go not silently
away for want of Bread;) and yet under the Charge this Kingdom lies,
maintaining the Arms of three Kingdom's Forces in Holland, and a great Navy at
Sea, it is not easy to find out an expedient to help them. I have been in
discourse with some of them; and putting the case to one, Whether they could
reasonably expect we should raise Money for them by a Tax, since by Collection
it comes to so little, and is indeed the worst way of raising Money; for that
only the Good Man, not the Rich, pays it any farther than he is charitable;
whereas a Tax imposes according to a Man's Ability. To this I was answered,
That they did believe it reasonable: And more, That it was profitable for us to
do it. I was surprised with the Assertion, and desired to hear his Reasons for
it, which were as follows: First he affirms there were forty thousand Families
fled from Ireland into England; that they had one with another spent at least,
twenty pound a Family, which amounts to Eight hundred thousand pounds sterling:
This was so much added to the Stock of England, and therefore deserved some
return, since it was there all; and had so much Money been spent in Holland,
they would have considered a distressed People that had done it. He illustrated
the Discourse with Mercantine Observations, of which he was Master, and I
foreign too, and therefore can no more relate than understand. His Notions
seemed reasonable, and all terminated in this, That England has had in Specie,
Money, and Plate, more from them than ever was brought in clear, and resting in
the Kingdom in one year; for that he accounted all theirs was lodged here, and
took nothing out of the Kingdom: And when I objected, that our Lead, Tin,
Woollen-Manufacturies, and even the East India Commodities, brought us in five
times the sum he insisted on: He answered, That as it slow*d in, so like the
Tide it had its ebb out, otherwise England would not hold its Treasure; it
would come to an immensity, if but half a Million a year was added to England.

We then come to that part of his Assertion, That it is profitable for England
to raise Money for them; and that he would prove thus: First, that England had
been for many years a Gainer by their Trade, contrary to the common Opinion:
And this point, I confess, he handled beyond my expectation; and it must be
better Heads* than mine that can answer him.

First, he laid down, that Ireland took more of our Manufactories, and Native
Commodities, than Virginia, our Darling Plantation; and that if we pleased, we
might raise as great a Revenue by Ireland, as we do out of our Tobacco.

Then that we made above two Millions Sterling a year of their Wool; that by
the Act of Navigation we had barred them from the use of all foreign Shipping,
and that in effect we had prohibited them from Trade to our foreign
Plantations; by which, whatever the gain of their Trade was, we had it by our
Shipping and Plantation-Commodities: That they were prohibited by our Acts of
Parliament from bringing any of their Commodities but what we stood in need of;
a thing (as they set it out) so severe, as never used but to an Enemy. The
Native Commodities never prohibited a Country in Amity; the most is to lay
heavy Duties on them: But Ireland in its chiefest Commodities made a Nuisance.
And to close all, he affirmed that Ireland added to the Trade of England* three
Millions a year* All this he thought worth their securing.

That the gaining the Kingdom would not do it, if the Inhabitants that were
used to the Country, were not preserved and sent thither again: That many had
already sought Dwellings in foreign parts, and more were on the Wing. This is
as much as I can remember of our Discourse, and I wanted one to oppose him; for
from me he carried his Hypothesis.

Sixthly, As to your sixth Query, What the general Apprehensions of them are? I
cannot give you a single Solution to that, since I find them differing so much
among themselves: One Party, and those that were the latest Planters in that
Kingdom, I find generally resolved to return no more, but rather bend their
Thoughts for Carolina, Virginia, and New England. These believe that Ireland
will not soon be reduced, and that it will never be at quiet; for that the
French lying so near it, and taking upon him the Guardianship of the pretended
Prince of Wales, will ever be infesting that Kingdom; and that the Irish will
be always ready to receive them: so that the quiet of Ireland will depend upon
the success of the French. A successful Campaign with him, will raise a
Tory-Camp in Ireland; for that, they say, they have experience by three several
instances, in less than two years. First, upon the death of King Charles the
Second, they got up in all parts of the Kingdom, not having patience to see
what their Guardian-Angel, the late King, would do for them. That was scarce
quieted with the assurance of his being a Catholic Majesty; but upon
Monmouth's appearing; they got up again; that was soon after pretty well laid
by the arrival of that good Man the Earl of Clarendon, so they term him; and
then up they got again, upon the arrival of Tyrconnel; so they say the Tories
ever do upon the least Change of Government. These are the Apprehensions of
those they call New Purchasers, that came for Ireland since the Act of
Settlement, which was made upon the Restoration of Charles the Second. Another
set of them I find more resolute, and they are those they call Cromwelians:
These are such as were Soldiers in that Conquest, or the Sons of them; a rough
sturdy People, and full of indignation against the Irish, rendering them a
bloody, but cowardly People, easily conquered, if fallen suriously upon. But
the way now taken (they say) will put Courage in the Irish, who never saw
themselves feared or treated like a formidable Enemy before, the English being
more troubled to find than overcome them; and never considered odds, but
thought them brave if they would engage them, being five to one: They instance
the same in the few English that got together. Now those they call
Iniskilling-Men, which were not of that place, but most of Connaught, the
remains and offspring of Oliverians, that were under the former Lord
Kingstone, and headed by the young Lord his Son, who, they say, inherits his
Father's Courage; and had he not been betrayed by Lundy, would have done great
Things in Ireland, as his Men have done since, where less than twelve hundred
half naked Men, routed five thousand of the flower of the Irish Army, posted in
a most inaccessible place. This (they say) was three to one greater odds than
our Army stands upon; and believe if they had been sent over under their own
old Commanders, there would have been a good Account of Ireland by this time.
This is the Opinion they have of themselves, and yet fancy the King will use
them at last, and believe his Majesty would at first, but that they had
Enemies, who gave a false Account of them. For the New Interest-Men, they are
sure not a Man but would venture his Life for their Majesty's in any part of
the World.

But to come to that which has more Authority with it, and that is, they say,
That when Cromwell landed in Ireland, the English and British had the chief of
the Kingdom, Dublin, Cork, Toughall, Kingsale, and all the North, where there
was stock of Cattle, and pretty store of Pillage near the Garrisons.

That Cromwell made quick work, took Drogheda, and several places of moment in
few Weeks after his landing; so that before the Spring, (he landing in August,)
the whole Kingdom was in a manner in Protestants Hands; the Irish pent up in
Garrisons. And yet after all these advantages and opportunities of sowing Corn,
when the War was over in fifty One, the Famine, and its usual Attendent, the
Plague, swept away more than the Sword had done in all the War of the Irish,
and many thousands of the English. In the City of Dublin there died in one year
two and twenty thousand. There is a worse prospect now of the same fate, for
that the Protestants have not an ear of Corn in the Kingdom; nor have the Irish
much, scarce any Winter-Corn, for that at the season for sowing, they have been
imbroil'd in Arms. Nor can there be any Spring-Corn considerable, for the same
reason. From all which they infer, there must inevitably be a Famine next year;
which will in the first place fall upon those Protestants that escape this
Winter, many are perished already; for that the Irish keep the Men Prisoners,
after having robbed them of all they have, and leave the poor Women and
Children starving in their Houses. Upon the whole, they conclude, That the
Kingdom will be in a manner dispeopled, let what will now happen; and that
those few, both of English and Irish, who escape the destroying Angel in War,
Famine, and Plague, and live to see Peace, will yet perish for want of Bread;
the Money of the Kingdom being already sent to France by the late King, and
Brass Farthings left as Half-Crowns in the room of the Silver; so that they
will have nothing to purchase Food.

They farther add, that after the last Rebellion, the Kingdom was suller of
Money than ever it was since; that Corn was much cheaper in England, than it is
like to be now.

That then they had great quantities of Corn from France, now there can be
none; and after all these Helps, (which now they will want,) yet great part of
those left in fifty One perished by Famine; and wanting of People to bury the
dead, infected the Air, and brought the Plague, the Irish scarce covering their
Dead with Earth. Some Objections I made to these desponding Conjectures, which
were chiefly two: First, that it was not to be imagined but the Irish would
keep some Silver-Money; and that in robbing the English they must get some.

To this I was answered, That the Irish are seldom Masters of Money, their
Treasure being Cattle; that the course the late King took, was invincible to
draw out every penny of Silver they had; for at the same time he proclaimed his
Brass Coin to pay his Army, and to pass betwixt Man and Man, it was provided,
That all his Revenue, as Quit-Rent, Hearth-Money, Excise, Customs, etc. should
be paid in Silver, so that as long as there was a penny among them, it came
into the Treasury.

For their having Money of the English's, or Plate, I find they are so
ingenious, most of them, as to confess, they believe the English left little
Money or Plate behind them.

My second Objection was, That though there were no Trade, yet in such a
fertile Country it was easy for the Irish to get Roots, Herbs, Milk, Flesh,
and their great Food, Potatoes, which we see here in England, after once
setting, are never to be got out of the Ground, so that of them they can never
want.

To all which I was answered, That the Irish (for by the way it is granted,
that the English will not be admitted, nor are able to do any of these) are
great strangers to Garden-Stuff; nor is there Garden-Seeds in the Kingdom, the
English always fetching them from England.

Milk, it is true, is one part of their Summer's Provision, but they presume
they will have as great want of Cattle, as Corn, especially Cows; for which
they give me a reason, that carries Probability with it, though it be novel:
They tell me, in Ireland the very English give little or no Fodder in Winter to
their black Cattle, by which means their Cows, which they call Gowneys, that
is, such as had not Calves the last Summer, being with Calf the Winter
following, are best in flesh all the Winter; and being so, the hungry Irish, in
regard there is no command of them, being Soldiers, and rambling where they
please, fall upon these Cows, and by that means they are without Cattle to give
them Milk next Summer; and for demonstration they say, That after the last War
a Milch Cow in Ireland would yield eight pounds, when an Ox as big again, might
be bought for three.

For their Potatoes, they say, it is a mistake to think that after being once
set they need no more labor; they must be every year new dug, and dunged: And
besides, these Potatoes come not in till next Winter, and these Gentlemen here
agree, as is already past, that they will be all starved next Summer, and that
such as do escape, will not be the English, for that they will first perish.

The quantity of Corn and Beer that was brought into Ireland in one year after
the last War, is incredible, as they relate it. A Person of good Quality and
Fortune told me, he was then a Merchant, and lived in England, but traded for
Ireland, that he sent great quantities of Wheat and Malt himself; above Ten
thousand of our Quarters in one Year went to Waterford; that to all Parts there
went not less than One hundred thousand Quarters in one year; and if so much
was wanting when there had been so much of the Kingdom in Pretestant Hands,
What will there be after an universal Ravage and Destruction, for so they
conclude the Condition of that Kingdom?

I cannot omit the Foot of a Discourse I had with the most intelligent man I
met among them; it was this:

Ireland, as it stood at the death of Charles II. he believed had about Two
millions of Souls; a minute computation to that Gentleman's, who in a Pamphlet
makes the British Protestants half that number, who were never accounted a
fifth part of the whole, the Irish being thought near eight for one, but this
Gentleman, who made his computation Two millions, supposes a doleful account,
that Two thirds will, by Flight, the Sword, Famine, and Sickness, be taken off
before Ireland can be reduced, hoping it be done next Summer, there will then
not remain seven hundred thousand Souls in the Kingdom; allow them but two
Bushels a Mouth for a year, which is but about three farthings worth of Bread a
day, which allowance will starve more than feed; yet at this rate, there must
be one hundred and seventy five thousand Quarters of Bread-Corn, to keep their
distressed Remains alive, besides the Army, that must be better provided for. I
was startled at this Computation; and when I went to make some Objection, I was
stopped with this, That if the Deliverance of these poor Creatures happen to be
greater than what he expected, then the Provision of Corn must be greater; and
that for help in the Kingdom, there was no Expectation considerable: it was
more than could be expected, if they could find of any Sustenance to make up a
Living. I find their Apprehensions very remote, as to the re-planting that
Kingdom, grounded upon their Experience in Oliver's time; which is this, That
the reducing of that Kingdom happened to be just after the winding up of that
fatal Catastrophy of the Civil Wars of England and Scotland, which obliged many
thousands of the loyal Party to shift their Habitations, and that brought them
for Ireland: There were also numbers that came from New England, and other
foreign Plantations, having Friends and Relations promoted in Ireland.

There was also such an absolute Conquest, and Power over the Irish, that they
were rather numbered among the Beasts of the Field, than thought on as a People
in a Possibility of disturbing the Government. Not five Men in the Kingdom
restored to their Estates, the most of them transplanted into a Country they
call Connaught, surrounded with the Sea, and a great River; so that it was not
possible to have greater Security, and more Encouragement than was at that
time; and yet after all this, for near five years after the Conquest, Wales,
Scotland, and England, for some Provisions, were their Markets; and Land was
set, some years after the laying down of Arms, for forty Shillings a year, that
in ten years after, was set for two hundreds pounds a year: So then, if with
all the Advantages that then attended Ireland, it was yet so many years in
rising to a bare Living, how will it be now improved, when none of those
Advantages attend it, but just the contrary. They name Particulars, which I
shall not trouble you with, being easily understood.

I have given you the Sentiments of two sets of these People, I now come to a
third; for I find them of three distinct Interests and Affections one to the
other: These last are of the Old Interest, and seem to be more affected to
Ireland, than either of the former, and think it the Paradise of the Earth;
would willingly engage their Lives in that War, but desire to be excused from
the Bravery of the Gentlemen beforementioned.

They have better hopes of Ireland; have, with their own, the Remarks of their
Ancestors; how frequent the Rebellions of Ireland have been, and yet the
Country soon made habitable again. They confess it looks worse now than ever;
and that the Irish were never a formidable Enemy before; and therefore they
fear the Country will be waste before it be reduced. They have the same
Apprehensions with the former, of the French infesting the Western and Southern
Parts of the Kingdom, and fear, above all, the pardoning the Men of Estates,
which they say was ever the ruin of that Kingdom: The Irish Grandees, first by
Bribes, and, in process of time, by Marriage into English Families, got such
Friends in the Court of England, that whatever Rebellion happened, they always
had some of their great Men to head it, and, in the whole, or part, pardoned,
when they had done the like they fear now: And if any one of the great Clanns
does get his Estate, he will be, upon any opportunity a Head to new Rebellions:
But if they be quite extirpate, I mean the Men of Estates, then they fear
nothing, but, in the end, to be the better for this War, which, they hope, will
make a lasting Settlement for that Kingdom.

I had almost forgot a remarkable difference in Opinion I find between these
Gentlemen, and those of the New Interest: They of the New believe nothing will
contribute more to the enriching that Kingdom, than the bringing in Foreigners,
Dutch, French, and of any Nation, that are of the reformed Religion; but those
of the Old Interest, that are the Offspring of the first English that went for
Ireland, have differing Sentiments, and say, they had rather have the slavish
Irish, than the Rhedomontado French, or stubborn Dutch, that they cannot
govern; and I find the old English of Ireland have always been jealous of new
Comers, which makes a division among the People.

Seventhly, I now come to the seventh Query, what the Resolution of them in
general is, and of that I can give no certain Account, since they seem not
fixed themselves; some despairing, others in hopes, and the rest resolute, to
take their Fortunes there: But by the nearest Computation I can make, the
greatest numbers are in condition neither to go, nor stay, having nothing here,
and have lost all there. These are Men, whose Estates lay all in Stock. It
would hardly be credited, how much these Farmers exceed ours in their Stock; it
being common for Men there of not a penny Freehold, to have five hundred Head
of black Cattle, and a thousand Sheep. Many of two and three thousand pounds
worth of Stock, all which being lost, and they being bred to no other
Employment, are in a helpless Condition, their Misfortune such as I never read
any thing like it in Story, exceeding the Cruelty of the most unchristian
Government.

They were no ways engaged against the late King; no not so much as pretenders
to any of the Irish Estates, but many of them Tenants to the Irish, pretended
(as some of them tell me) to be zealous for the late King, in hopes, by that
Means, to keep their Stock, but all would not do: Every thing they had swept
away; and even those that were protected, and stayed there, in Obedience to his
Proclamation, were all alike used. Now what Government under the Copes of
Heaven did ever exert such Authority, that Obedience under it should be no
Security. I had like to have wished those Gentlemen who, under pretense of
Conscience, advocate his Cause that does all this, were under his Government:
But God forbid there should be more Martyrs, or Sacrifices to Moloch; for they
cannot be called Martyrs, that suffer without refusing any so much as pretended
Law. Those Gentlemen that had real Estates, and are here in England, I find
most of them in want of Money, as much as those that had all in Personal
Estates, having spent all they brought with them, which could not be much, by
their own Computation, of having spent eight hundred thousand pounds in this
Kingdom, which is twenty pounds a Family, for forty thousand Families (they
say) are in England; but I take their Computation of Expense to be modest, and
much short of what such numbers must have spent in six and nine Months, as most
of them have been here.

I have no more to add, having given you as impartial an Account to all your
Queries as possible, both of the People, their Humors, and present Condition; I
beg your pardoning my Vanity, if I say, that I believe, you have it in this,
with more Indifferency, than it can be had from any of themselves: Out of them
all I have gathered this Relation, which I presume none of them will arraign.

I know you will expect my Opinion, and Remarks upon the whole of my
Observations, which are more than I could commit to Writing; and this is a
greater Difficulty than all the rest, which is no more than Matter of Fact: But
this of making critical Observations, is a work of Judgment, to which I have
but a slender pretense; however my Thoughts, such as they are, you have as
follows.

For the People, you have their Character in the first Paragraph of their
Original: They are, by all the Account that ever I meet with, from those that
have been among them in Ireland, the most hospitable People in the World, and
that Humor carries them above their Condition in their Expense; they generally
complain of the strait Hands of England, especially in the Country.

What will become of them, is past my Understanding, they seem too many for
England to maintain; yet at the same time, I see no other way to preserve them
from starving. It is true, we have been yet at no Charge with those of best
Quality, and, for ought I see, in greatest want: I wish the Pride of some of
them, and the narrowness of our Hearts, have not already sent some into another
World, that rather pine away than beg; I have heard of one, a Man of five
hundred a year, that did so.

I am loath to censure Men in Affliction; yet why those of the North, whose
Estates are all free and quiet, don't return, is unaccountable: I think them
Enemies to their Countrymen, that have yet no Estates to go unto; for that it
is natural for us to believe, they are not in want, who will not go to their
own Estates; and some may have the same Thoughts of such as cannot.

It would be well for these poor Gentlemen that are in want, if these Men were
distinguished; for while they are in England, the other will be the less
considered.

I confess, it was at first a surprise to me, that Men who talk of hundreds,
and thousands a year, in the North of Ireland, should think themselves
entitled to the Charity of the Parliament; but enquiring into the Matter, I
found these Gentlemen were some of them Livers here before this deprivation,
and that for their Pleasures. Others (I may say most of them) are making
Interest for Employments, and to be privy Counselors; how agreeable this is,
for Men to neglect their common Interest; leave their Brethren there in Misery;
and now they might help, and encourage them by their return, stay here to enjoy
their Pleasure, and make themselves great Men, you may judge.

They put a hard Task on the King, and People of England, to conquer their
Country for them, if they will not at least sit down in it, as fast as it is
recovered; so that the King's Army may pursue their Victories, and not stay to
keep the Country, as they get it; they to whom the Land belongs may sure do
that, or else the King must raise another Army.

There is no comparison to be made with Cromwell's Conquest, and this; he found
three Protestant Armies in the Kingdom, all the North in their Hands, and most
of the chief Cities and Ports in the Kingdom: The Enemy a shabby miserable
People, with very few Arms, and less Ammunition, never appeared in the Field,
but like Tories; so as the Gentlement of Ireland say themselves, their Trouble
was to find them: But now it is not so; they have a numerous Army, their
pretended King in the Head of them, and all the Kingdom in their Hands, but the
North, that his Majesty's Forces have recovered back; so that I doubt they go
too fast, that think we might have regained Ireland last Summer. I most lament
the poor Protestants that are in the Irish Hands, by what I can understand,
they must inevitably perish this Winter, for that they have nothing of their
own: And what can be expected from such barbarous Enemies as the Irish, who in
the last Rebellion, murdered Two hundred thousand Persons, using all manner of
exquisite Tortures, and now have the more accomplished way of the French, their
Masters, to starve the Heretics.

There seems no prospect for the return of any of the People of Ireland until
next Summer, except those of the North go to their Estates; if they do, we
shall still have three fourths left on our hands; and if they at a moderate
Computation could not live these six months past for Six hundred thousand
Pounds, How will they for the future? If they live but with the Allowance of
Prisoners, Fifty thousand Pounds per Month will not defray the Charge: And this
is not all; suppose we keep them alive until next Summer, and then they are
restored to Ireland, there they must have Bread, and considering the Want of
our usual Granary, France, and our great Expense for Naval Provisions, and that
Corn is already rising, I cannot see how England can spare any, Scotland can
give but a small Help; so then our Expectation must be from the East-Sea, and
considering that all Europe is in Arms, the Expense of Corn will be greater
than in the memory of Man, which will raise the Price so, that one Year's
Provision of Grain, allowing but one Third of the People of Ireland to be alive
the next Year, may reasonably be supposed to cost a Million Sterling; all which
must come out of the Treasury of England, or those People will perish by
Famine. This you may think (as I doubt not most do) a remote Prediction, and
may as well not be, as come to pass, I could wish it were so; but methinks, it
is a poor Confutation, only to say, It will not be, and yet give not so much as
Probability for the contrary, when for my Assertion there is plain
Demonstration, and former Experience.

But you will then say, What will be the end of all this, and where the Remedy?

If it were in my Province, I could answer in point the several ways that are
open for it, which they at the Helm no doubt have before them.

To comply with your Desire, and since all I have said is but matter of
Discourse, not Enquiries into Government, much less Dictates to it, I shall
give you my Thoughts in two Particulars.

First, That this Course taken by our Army in Ireland, in that we call delay,
is the best Expedient to preserve that Kingdom from being depopulated, I mean
of the common Irish; for it seems of Consequence to preserve them, and they
will (if former Experience has any weight) soon become demeanable to the
English Government if their Heads are removed from them.

Now had our Army, as soon as they landed, attacked these People, there would
have been in Probability great Destruction of them; and those that were left,
thereby made desperate, and told by their Leaders, nothing but Destruction
would attend them, if they did not fight it out; and nothing makes a Coward
stout like Necessity: If Death attend on all Parts, his only hope is the Death
of his Enemy, and that makes him fight: Now this hazard is prevented, by giving
them time to consider their Danger, and offering them Terms of Peace, and
Enjoyment of all their Properties: I still mean the common People; for the
Landed Men, I find by all Hands, are never to be restored to their Estates: But
the Commonalty are of absolute use in the Kingdom; and they are, as the Mantle
thrown off tells us, Followers of their Lands; whoever commands the one, has
the other. And I have heard the Gentlemen of Ireland say, that their Irish
Tenants would in their common Discourse say, That if the English had an Army to
protect them, swearing the common Oath, by their Souls, they would keep their
Cabins, and not fight to get Land for other Men: They must be Slaves, let who
will have it, and worse used by the Irish than English Landlords. And however
it is generally said, That these poor People go voluntarily into their Army;
the most judicious of the Irish Gentlemen I meet with, say, it is a force upon
the greatest part of them; and that it is so, I believe may be the Reason of
Duke Schomberg's taking the Methods, which vulgar Heads condemn; but in the
end, may be found of great Advantage to that Kingdom: For that it is more than
probable, great part of the late King's Army, will from their Winter Quarters
run home to their Cabins from a Summers, this year's Service having given them
enough of the Discipline of War.

For by the way, I find the Irish marry very young, so that of their Infantry,
there is not one of ten a single Man, from whence I make this Remark, That the
Reason which is usually given for the Irish, not fighting so well in their own
Country, as in foreign Parts, is not all concluded in knowing where to run upon
a Rout, but it seems as much Reason, that they run to their Wives.

Upon the Whole, it then seems to me of weight, that the Irish have this Winter
given them to run away in: And though I am no Prophet, yet do predict we shall
have a slender Account next Spring of the Irish Army; and it seems undeniable,
that this way of bringing in the Irish, will preserve that Kingdom, both in its
Provisions and People; for that the Irish will by this means preserve all they
can, since they will have hopes to enjoy them under their old Masters, the
English.

Secondly, That which will make the Settlement of that Kingdom easy, and
speedy, may be the present Return of those that fled from it; they talk of many
thousands in England, and, no doubt, are Men of Courage, and fit for Action;
and although I cannot see any need of Enlarging His Majesty's Troops there, yet
these Gentlemen would be of great Use in that Kingdom, both to plant, and
secure the Country, as it falls into His Majesty's Hands; they tell me near
half the Kingdom is so already, as to the Acres, though the chief Towns are
not: All Ulster, and a great part of Connaught may be quietly possessed by His
Majesty's loyal Subjects. Now if they were there, all the foregoing Fears were
at an end, and that of the great Charge those Gentlemen would be to England, if
they live upon the Charity of the Kingdom.

I have heard several of them that expect the Benevolence of the Parliament
say, That if they had but a quarter of what they have spent since they came
into England, to carry them back, they would not tarry a day longer. The House
of Commons (they say) are now upon Addressing their Majesty's in their behalf
for Sixty thousand Pounds for a Year; if that were made an Hundred thousand
Pounds, and paid them in one entire Sum, by what I can perceive, they would
give us no farther Trouble: If they have spent eight times the sum here, we
may afford it; and as remote as some think that Kingdom looks, I have the Faith
to believe we shall see that Work done in time, to visit Monsieur next Summer
with greatest part of that Army.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.


