A DISCOURSE ON THE Woollen Manufactury OF IRELAND AND THE CONSEQUENCES OF
Prohibiting its EXPORTATION.

DVBLIN: Reprinted by J. B. and S. P. at the Back of Dick's Coffee-House in
Skinner-Row: And are to be Sold by Jacob Milner, Bookseller in Essex-street.
School.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Woollen Manufactury in IRELAND, etc.
DURING the Session of Parliament in England, the Winter 96, the Project for
suppressing the Exportation of all Woollen Manufactures from Ireland, advanced
so far, that (as I remember) there was some Debate thereon in the House of
Commons. Now we are advised, that the same Design is on foot again.

Wherefore I think in my Duty to God, my King and my Country, (comprehending
therein both England and Ireland) to show (as far as my little Abilities can)
the People of England, the Mighty Wound that thereby would be given, should any
such Prohibitory Act pass, to the Protestant Religion in both Islands; the
great loss of Wealth, (Wealth I say, the chief Object of their aim therein)
particularly to England: And lastly, that England's Peace, Safety, and good
Government would thereby be extremely exposed to new Troubles, both Foreign and
Intestine: That on the contrary, the cherishing the Protestants of Ireland in
their Woollen Manufactures, (the only thing that can well support their Numbers
here) will bring more Gain to England, than the Prohibition proposed.

I am not so conceited as to think that the Truth of these Propositions are not
clear and apparent to very many of both Kingdoms without my help; but in Common
Danger the help and skill of every one is to be admitted.

Proposition I. That the Reformed Religion is much propagated in Ireland, by
the Woollen Manufactures there.
Tho the Doctrines of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, are the most simple,
intelligible and easy to humane Nature of any Religion in the World; and his
Precepts and Examples guide us in the most Delightful, Happy and Wisest Ways of
Life that Mortality is capable of; yet both Doctrine and Precepts are alas! but
too little understood, and less practiced by the Generality of our People; who
though excellently instructed in both by our Ministers, have not so delightful
and clear a knowledge therein, as to be able to give manifest Reason of the
Hope that is in them, yet generally are satisfied of the Truth thereof; like
Men who learn another Language than their own, soon understand more thereof
than they can speak themselves. But tho very many of them cannot in any
tolerable Order, lay down their own Principles, yet ask 'em, What are the
Faults they find in the Romish Persuasion? They Will passionately reply; it is a
False, Base, Cruel Religion. What Popery! to burn and hang People, Inquisition
and Dragoon 'em, if they will not do as they would have 'em? and if they do, then
keep 'em Slaves and Beggars; whilst the Abbey Lubbers, Friars and Priests,
devour their Labors living, and when they dye, make their Posterity pay Money
for the Redemption of their Souls. No, rather than be of that Religion they will
be of none. Thus, tho the Reformation was first promoted by the great Learning,
Wisdom, and Holiness of Life of these whom God of his great Mercy and Grace
strengthened to undertake a Work so difficult and dangerous, the Truth whereof
many sealed with their Blood; yet now it is continued by the generality of its
Professors, not only for its Truths sake, which they take for granted; but far
more sensibly, for its being a Fortress, or Bulwark against all Arbitrary Power
or Violence over their Lives, Liberties and Goods.

Popery they dread as a Monster that would evour 'em, and all that is theirs;
and therefore they had rather die in the Contest, than be eaten up alive.

Of all the Occupations and Trades by which our People get their Living, there
are none so great Enemies to Popery and Papists, as generally our Mariners and
Clothiers; and therefore very rarely admit any Papist Seaman (if he appear to
be such) either to Sail, or Work with them. Several Papists indeed are
Fishermen and Boatmen; but if they use the Sea for any considerable time, they
so long disguise their Faith, that they lose or change it at last. So that tho
the Protestants of Ireland have had a long time a large Commerce by Sea, yet
are there very few Papists, if compared with the others. I think I can only
except the County and Town of Wexford, where there lately were many Papist
Seamen; but the Inhabitants there are of an Old English Stock, and so much more
addicted to a Seafaring-Trade than the Irish; which their great Herring-Fishing
did much encourage and promote. Besides there never was a sufficient Body of
Protestant Merchants, or Mariners, to Discourage or Convert them. However it is
to be observed, that in the late War with the French King, our Coasts were more
Infested, and consequently more injury done us by those Wexford Deserters in
French Privateers, than by all the rest put together; for they knowing all the
Coast, Rocks, Shoals, Harbors, and Rivers, attempted what no Stranger could,
or durst attempt. And this Injury had been far greater, had not our Protestant
Merchants and Seamen by their Aversion for 'em, prevented their Increase in all
other Parts of Ireland.

As our Seamen, so our Clothiers have an invincible Prejudice against
permitting any Papists to be instructed in their Art and Mystery, as they term
it. These People are divided into several parts that compose the whole of that
Trade, viz. The Clothier or Imployer of the rest, the Comber, the Spinner, the
Weaver, the Miller or Tucker, the Dyar, the Racker, Pressers, etc. in all which
parts they admit no Papist any share, The thi^rs Combers Munster, specially
Cork, much (...) cautious Discover their and ^^^r^^s to ^^st^, (...) th^s^ in
^^ster are.
except in the Spinning done by the Women, and a small part of the Weaving: But
should any Papist pretend, as a Master Clothier, to set up the Trade in any
City or Corporate-Town, the Protestants of that Trade would soon humble his
Pride and Arrogance, and no more suffer him, than Rome would suffer the Bible
to appear in Spain and Italy in their Vulgar Tongues. Instead of suffering him
to follow their Trade, as they call it, they would drive him from the place,
especially since by the Laws, no Papist is capable of his Freedom in any
Corporate-Town in Ireland; and so consequently incapable to be Master in any
Trade there. The Combers are mostly English Men, who are so strictly
Confederated against suffering any Papist to intermeddle with their Trade; that
should a Master employ a Papist-Comber, the rest are all dissolved from his
Service; not one will or dare serve him; but instead thereof, if they can
conveniently apprehend his Minion, they will break his Thumbs, so that he shall
never Comb Wool again, but leave him to lament that ever he did. Some very few
Papists are allowed by them to be Tuckers, but rather to serve the Country in
ordinary Milling Frizes, Stockins, and the like, than in any considerable part
of their Trade. I never heard that any Papist here attempted the Dying or
Pressing part: So that in the whole Clothing Trade, none of the Papist
Faction, except the Females, and a very few of the Men are admitted. The Irish
Friars and Priests were in the Reign of the late King James, so sensible
hereof, that on all Holidays they strictly prohibited their Spinners and
Weavers working; and would sometimes enter their Cabbins, and (if they found
'em at it) break their Tools; saying, That Work was good for nothing, but to
Increase and Maintain the Heretics. And so fearful were the Chief of the
Irish, that the Combers would take Arms and Rise; that they were extremely
glad, when they saw 'em, for want of other Work, go off in great Numbers for
England. But besides the Hatred our Clothiers have for Papists on the general
account, they have very particular, and (to themselves) good Reasons for it.

First, That they cannot depend on their Honesty: For such Protestant Masters,
as for a present Reward, or an extraordinary long time of Service, have taken
an Apprentice of Popish Education, (tho his Religion was to lie dormant with
his Friends, till he had learnt his Trade) found to their Cost, that they could
not be kept from stealing the Wool, worsted, Yarn, and what else they could
purloin. Now tho stealing is esteemed a Peccadillo among Papists, Irish
especially; yet in the Clothing Trade it is an Unpardonable Fault. The Offender
is certainly ruined there; the whole Fraternity abhor him; and he must seek new
ground, where a thousand to one but Fame will overtake him; and though he may
wander like Cain, yet his Guilt and Punishment will be in pursuit. But,

Secondly, If this Apprentice serve his Time and learn his Trade, the next
thing he will do, is to lower the Price of his Work, and accordingly do it so
much the more slightly, worse and deceitfully. And what those want to make up
his Gain, he will pinch out of his Back and Belly. For as the Irish Papists
have no other way to out-doe the English Protestants, but doing Cheaper, so
they will not fail to do that, knowing how to live extremely worse, both in their
Houses, Apparel, and Fare. If therefore the Matter come only to that
Competition of Cheapness, and be otherwise equal, the Ca^^e will surely go for
the Papist. For this reason our Clothiers are on their G^ard not to suffer
their Trade to fall into Papists Hands, knowing that must be their own ruin.
For that N^^^on or People, be their Principles never so bad and hu^^^^ to the
Public, sh^^^ have that Trade wherein they can under-do the rest. ^^^se to
note, The making Frizes is not meant or intended as a part of the Cl^^^^^^
Trade: For that can, and is managed in poor Coun^^^ Villages, where our
^^^thiers do not care to dwell; but altogether Inhabit in good Cities and
Corporate Towns, where they find their Safety, Profit, and Plenty. And by this
means our Cities and Towns are now more fully Inhabited by Protestants than
ever, and thinner of Papists. However there is a Remarkable Difference between
the Cities and Towns where the Woollen Manufactures are, and where they are
not. Where they are, there is a very great Trade, and that in the Hands of
Protestant Merchants and Factors; but where the Manufactures are
inconsiderable, the other Trade; as the Exportation of Hides, Tallow, Butter,
and the like gross Commodities, is almost, if not altogether as much managed by
Papists as Protestants. For that the Irish Merchants and Factors abroad, do all
they can to maintain a Correspondence and Trade with their Friends and
Relations that staid in Ireland.

I have considered how it should so happen, that Manufactures should so much
more Thrive, in Protestant than in Papist Countries, and that even where Popery
was Regnant, and Protestantism scarce permitted; the Protestants prevailed
(where not violently hindered) to get the Trade, and consequently Riches and
Reputation to themselves.

One Cause I conceive to be, that the Reformed not being at all delighted with
the Gauderies and pompous Processions of the Romish Church, remain at their
Trades and Occupations, when the Papists of the same Trade are spending their
time, either in attending or assisting those Glorious Shows; the Idleness and
Pri^e whereof, influenced by the many Holidays, makes 'em very unwillingly
return to th^^r Labors; which after that, seems more poor and miserable.

2. That Protestants are generally more honest and punctual in their Dealings,
and no wonder; for if the Mind of a Papist be disturbed by his Fraud or
Injustice, Perjury or Oppression, it can by the Power or Skill of a Priest, be
much, or quite ^^^^ified, appeased and made gentle. Whereas the poor Peccant
Pro^stant ha^ no such Salve for his Sore; he must make Satisfaction and truly
repeat. And tho Protestants, I fear, do not generally perform this part of
their Religion, as they are bound, when they have offended, yet are they not so
ready as the other to offend. Wherefore even Papists themselves may and do deal
more safely with Protestants, than with one another; and this must necessarily
have many great Advantages attending it, according to that Saying, Honesty i^
the best Policy.

3. The Papists, especially the meaner and more Ignorant sort, are extremely
impoverisht by their Begging, but greedy Clergy, by which means they are made
insensible weak, and unable to manage their Trade to that advantage that
Protestants do, who are not so cousned of what they have. The Papist finding
his Condition low, his Hopes and Diligence lessen, whilst the Protestant finds
his Labor prosper in his Hands, and is therefore enabled and encouraged to
continue and increase his Industry.

I remember about the latter end of K. Charles H. Reign, when Popery began to
venture a little out of Doors, that the Prises of Wool and Woollen Goods would
rise and fall, just as the Wind of Hopes and Fear blow. When the Protestant
Cause was seemingly in Favor, then all hands at Work, and every thing sold off
bravely; but when the Roman Party were a little uppish, then all things fell to
the Ground; tacitly implying, That Manufactures and Commerce have Popery for
their Implacable Enemy,

Men that can get their Livings honestly by their own Industry, have a Value
and good Opinion of themselves, and cannot endure the Thoughts that any one may
Rightfully, and yet Arbitrarily, deprive or obstruct them of the Means thereof,
which yet they know Popery must and will do. For if Men be permitted to make
use of their own Sense and Reason, (which nothing but truth will admit of) and
their Property in their Lives, Liberties and Goods be preserved to them, how
can Popery (conscious of their own Fraud) ever subsist? Therefore as the Eagle
( Rome's beloved Bird) first plucks out the Eyes of her Prey, so Popery must
Reason and Sense, the Eyes of our Rational Souls: After that there is no hope
to escape.

Wherefore I conclude that seeing our Manufactures, especially our great and
chiefest the Woollen, cannot thrive, nay scarce subsist without the benign
Influence and Protection of a Protestant Government; that certainly those
Artificers and Traders, from Principles of Self-Interest, Love, and a full
persuasion of its being the best Government, and best Religion in the World,
will immoveably adhere thereto, and propagate the same, by all possible means,
to strengthen and enlarge themselves. And that therefore the Protestants of
Ireland, who gave the Irish Papists (the worst and most inveterate of all
others) for their Enemies, must with one Heart and one Mind love the present
Government of England, that rescued 'em from their insupportable Cruelties; and
gave 'em opportunity to serve God in his own way, and honestly to live by their
Labors and Industry. And therefore the encouraging, increasing, and confirming
of this sort of People, is a very great security to the Profession of the
Protestant Religion. For Men naturally love to choose the Right, when they may
safely do it; but much more when invited by other Advantages also.

It may be objected: Since Protestanism is so great a Patroness of
Manufactures, how comes China so famous for 'em? There is no Protestant
Religion there. I answer, nor Papist Religion, nor any thing like it, for
Fraud, Violence or Oppression: Where there is no Popery, I believe Manufactures
may flourish, but never where it is.

Prop. II. That the Wealth of England is much augmented by the Woollen
Manufactures, and Navigation of Ireland.
A Stranger arriving in England, and should hear many Persons there, of seeming
good Parts and Repute, rail against Ireland; sometimes wishing it under Water,
sometimes Wasted, Deserted, and what not, would think that the People of this
Island were some deadly Enemies, who infested their Coasts with Piracy and
Depredation, were the Subjects of some haughty injurious Prince, who kept no
Faith with 'em, but did them all the Mischief in the World; he would not dream
that we are one and the same People, Parents and Children, Brothers and
Sisters, sometimes dwelling here, sometimes there; that we are of one Religion,
that we are a Province of their Empire, and have neither Laws nor Governors
but of their sending us: What is it then that we have done to provoke such
Indignation? Why we made Serges, Bays, and other Woollen Goods, and sent 'em to
Holland, Flanders, Spain, Portugal, etc. would he not wonder what Crime was
this; and ask what Law or Friendship we violated? None, say we, and hope never
shall; but being instructed there to get our Living honestly, we have
endeavored to do so here.

But our Fault is, that by meddling with the Woollen Manufactures, we have
lowered the Price abroad. I may well deny the Consequence, but for this time I
will grant it. Well then; we have lowered the Price abroad, and so England has
had the less profit; yet our Trade will be found to be a great addition to the
Wealth of England in general: For whatever some West-Country Gentlemen take
Ireland to be, and whatever it was formerly, when in the Hands of the Native
Irish and Papists, it is now an English Protestant Country; and to be reputed
no more separate from the Care of the Monarch of Great-Brittain, than
Yorkshire, Cheshire, or any other part of England. Is it because there is a
little Channel that runs between Wales and Wexford, that when any English dare
cross that Stream, they must be divested of English Privilege, as if they had
transgrest some Law of Nature? Or as if indeed,

Nequicquam Deus abscidit
Prudens Oceano dissociabili
Terras: -- Horat.
God did divide by Seas in vain,
The Islands from the Main,
If impious Ships Unite 'em all again.
Then it is the Fields on the East side of that Water are blessed, and those on
the West are cursed; but neither God, nor the King, will say so: Or is it that
one Nation cannot live in two Islands, as well as two very different Nations
dwell in one Island? But to return to our promised Wealth, from which the
Devonshire Gentlemen are kept too long.

Ireland, if permitted to Ship off her Manufactures, the quantity from both
Kingdoms, will in all probability be very much greater than from one. And although
hereby at first it may something abate the price of each Piece, yet the
proceeds of all will be exceedingly more; for the scarcer and dearer any thing
is, the less is made use of; and on the contrary, the cheaper and more plenty
any thing is, the Consumption will be also so much the more. This will also
discourage the Foreign Manufactures; for when they see how very cheap and
plenty they are brought 'em from England and Ireland, they may incline to
something else, to which they may have more Conveniences and Encouragement. We
will suppose then that Exeter sent 1000 pieces of Serges to Holland, and had
got 2000 Guilders by them; had not 1000 pieces, arrived at the same time from
Cork, and reduced their profit to 1500 Guilders, and those from Cork making the
same Gain, put the Account together, and there is 3000 Guilders profit by both,
instead of 2000 by one. But says the Man of Land and Trade in Devon, What is
your 1500 Guilders to us? I say, as much as if H^ll or Yarmouth got them. For
it is very little or no return of Goods we have from Holland, Flanders, etc. but
our Money is either brought in Specie, or remitted by Bills (which at last
comes to terminate in the same thing) to London. When it is there, both
Principle (which is at least 2500 l more) as well as the 1500 Guilders Profit)
which is about 150 l) are applied to the Payment of Irish Rents, due to the
Nobility, Gentry, and Rich Men of England and others; to Pay the Expense of our
Sons at Study at Oxford, Cambridge, or the Inns of Court; to buy vast
Quantities of Hops, Tobacco, Sugar, Dye-Stuffs, and a thousand other things, so
far as our Money will go. When all this is done, what Money our Trade produces
more than our Rents payable there, the Generous Education of our Children
there, and the Goods we bring thence amount to, is our own to go on with our
Trades, to do so again, and to improve (...) Estates at home. So that every
unprejudiced Man may see that we are a co^^^derable Root of England's Wealth,
and add greatly thereto. And Dev^^ may with as sound reasoning prohibit
Yorkshire to Ship off any ^^rsies, Colch^ste^ challenge the whole Bay-Trade,
and Norwich the Stuffs, and London pretend to prohibit all Out-Ports to Import
or Export any Foreign or Native Commodities, because they lessen her Trade
thereby, and that she mo^^ powerfully than any City in England, supports all
Exigencies of the State. But how much wiser is the contrary or this? Viz. To
encourage all the Members of the same Body, to extend Care and Kindness to all,
that from all they may receive mutual Aid and Benefit.

I pray suppose all Ireland as full of English Protestant Inhabitants as
England is, and as rich; Would not England then have double the Power, both in
Men and Money of what she now has to support her Wars? Would not her Vent of
her own, and her Plantation Goods be vastly greater than if Ireland were Desert
o^ Protestants, or which is worse, be in an Enemies Hands?

But suppose it is objected, Ireland is Peopled by the Depopulation of England,
and gains no more in Trade than she loses; but this is evidently false, English
are not so fond of their own Country, though a good one, but that an English Man
will, as well as a Scot, who has a bad one, Travel abroad, rather than live in
a poor and painful manner at home. If there were no Ireland, he would find the
way to New England, Virginia, Maryland, or some other place; but Ireland lies
rather fit to save them from being carried utterly away, and lost from England,
to which he or his increased Progeny may be restored on any Emergency.

For the Man of Devon may be as well forbid to go thence to York, and say it
depopulates England, as to prevent his going to Dublin; whence he may be as
soon back, or if be think sit to stay here, he is still an Englishman, and
ready for the Defense and Service of his Country, whether it be attempted on
this or that side. And it is very Unnatural to hinder Men to Live, where they
can live best, especially if under the same Government and Polity.

As to the Gain Ireland makes by a Trade so prejudicial to England. This is
indeed a common Topic, whereon many declaim against Ireland, but have very
little cause for it; as appears by what has been said already. Does no Country
make Woollen Goods but England and Ireland? Yes, they do; namely, France,
Scotland, Holland, Flanders, and many more. Well, then all these may as well
rail against Ireland for lessening their Trade also. But the truth of it is,
that Ireland coming into Conjunction with England in this Trade, they mutually
strengthen each other; which may indeed be a great disheartning to Foreign
Nations, but is no less an Encouragement and Support to England; for that she
not only gets her own, but our Money also, and keeps her Sons about her, though
not in the same House, yet planted within Call; whose Voice they must and will
readily Obey. Now that we have seen the good Effects that England will surely
have by cherishing her Children planted in Ireland; let us take a View of the
Damage that would befall her, should she not suffer 'em to dwell there; or which
is all one, not let 'em use that Industry there, which is necessary for their
convenient Support, and this we will chiefly suppose to be done by Prohibiting
our Manufactures.

As Soon as this fatal stroke is struck (which God avert) as deadly to the
Protestant Interest in both Kingdoms; the Poor Widow, and her Helpless
Children, sit down and lament for want of Bread. The Cities then have too many
Houses for their Inhabitants, and are breaking up Housekeeping, and going not
for England, except that in America, but to Pensilvania, Carolina, Holland,
Germany, any where; Scotland it self, rather than be so shamefully and
hopelesly brought back to their Angry Masters in Devon and Summerset.

Well then; this done, here is to be an Army at England's Charge, or to live on
Rapine, who will Intermarry with, and degenerate into Irish; Rebel, and perhaps
not so easily as heretofore, if at all reduced: But suppose it better, How
shall the King's Revenue arise for Payment of the Civil and Military Lists? For
support of the Magazines, and remittance of a considerable Overplus into the
Exchequer of England? For though before the Woollen Manufactures took Root here,
Ireland was a great Charge to England; yet she was paying her Old Debts apace,
when she found a way to Employ her People. How little Tillage and Cattle will
serve this Country, when they who are the chief Buyers and Consumers are gone?
How small a quantity of English and Plantation Goods shall we import, when we
have no way to get Money to pay for them? The Revenue of Ireland will very
soon, if our Woollen Manufactures be encouraged, amount to more than 500000 l
per Annum. Let not this seem strange, for according to the Advances it made
after the Act of Settlement and Explanation in Ireland, although tempered with
extraordinary Lenity to the Irish Papists; it rise as I take it, from 160000,
to 340000 l without any new Grants, or Impositions; nay contrarily, many great
Sums reserved on Papists Estates, were wholly and for ever acquitted and
discharged. This great Improvement of the Revenue, owed its chief Cause to the
Woollen Manufactures, which continually furnished the poor Spinner and Comber
with daily Money to Smoke and Drink: So that in all the Towns, where the said
Manufactures were, the Inland-Excise (as we term the Imposition on Ale, Beer
and Vsquebaugh) advanced incredibly.

Will Taunton, Exeter, and Teverton pay all this Damage? No, they would indeed
rather see Ireland Drowned, Annihilated. Therefore we are lead to hope, that
neither the King, nor his Great Council in Parliament, will think it advisable
to treat the Protestant English Subjects thus severely (so immediately after
having made a Law to encourage their coming hither; as to deprive 'em of the
most proper Means of getting a Livelihood decent, and sit for English
Protestants, To please some mistaken Gentiemen and Clothiers in the West of
England, and the Factors at Blackwell-Hall.

The Poor French Hugonots, that are for the Cause of a Good Con^^^ce Banished
their Native Soil, and Invited here by the Clemency of his Most Gracious
Majesty, and Laws newly made in their favor, will think themselves miserable
indeed, when instead of following their respective Trade, they find themselves
condemned to go to the Mountains to feed Cattle, and to Plow; neither of which
they at all understand. Surely care must be taken to assign 'em Lands in
Shares, as is done in Fez and Morocco: For when the Trade is gone, who will buy
their Corn and Cattle?

But to all this it is answered: You shall have the Linen Trade. We thank you
for your kind intention: If we were sit for it, as we in all the South parts
are not, where are the Foreign Markets? Can England prohibit Holland, German,
etc. to forbear that Trade in favor to Ireland, at least not to under do us?

Now, if it be more prosit for England to receive vast Revenues out of Ireland,
both Public and Private; to receive very great Benefits, by furnishing her
with Native and Pla^^at on Goods; to have her deserting People settle and Plant
so near her, that they cannot properly be said to have left her: to have a
Country that was full of most inveterate Enemies, Enemies to their Religion,
Nation and Government, changed into the most Faithful Friends and Relations
that they can hope for, and to be at no more expense of Blood or Treasure, but
now to reap the full benefit of all their former Costs; be better than to have
Ireland an useless Limb, chargeable, and hazarding the Health of the whole
English Frame, then certainly it is England's great Profit and Advantage to
encourage this Enlarged part of England, (for it is no other now) with all
Natural Affection, Tenderness and Care; and so I cannot believe but England will
do, being thereto obliged by the Laws of God, which take great care of Mankind,
by Natural wisdom and Polity, and true Love even of themselves.

Prop. III. That the Woollen Manufactures of Ireland, are a considerable
Security to the Peace and good Government of England.
Since Ireland after her late almost Mortal Distemper (for whose Body the Devil
and all his Angels fought with Michael and his) is, blessed be God, and praised
be his Glorious Instrument King William, not only restored to her former Health
and Vigor, but her very Youth re-commenc'd, and all the latent Seeds of
Disorder, are irradicated and removed. She may truly boast that her Protestant
Inhabitants are as sound a Body of People to their Prince, Country, Religion
and Laws, as are to be found in the Universe. A Jacobite Protestant is now one
of those Venomous Animals, that will not endure Irish Earth. Wolves indeed we
have and Foxes, but these are now rather Game and Diversion, than noxious or
hurtful. If an Irish Tory or Rapparce prey now but on an English Lamb, we have
our Hounds ready for him, and a full-mouthed Outlawry gives him Chase, and his
Head becomes of more value than a Wolfe's; so that they are forced to wear
Sheepskins themselves, for fear of disturbing our Flocks.

Seeing then that Ireland is so perfectly at Unity in her self, that we have
not the least Faction or Division among us, that our Sun and our Shield, are
the Protestant Religion and King William; we are a very great addition to the
Loyal Party in England, with whom and for whom we must live and die. Would to
God England were so free from Noxious Humors; but perhaps her Cure was too
soon and too easy; and therefore only Time and her Healthy Constitution must
wear 'em off. Ireland now is, without doubt, the Envy of the Jacobites; who out
of pure Malice, would be glad that the Irish Papists were more considerable
than they are, as being on their side; and therefore we do not wonder if under
pretense of England's Interest they desire to have the Protestants recalled, or
banished hence.

This Country would then be a good Meeting place for the French and Irish to
renew their interrupted Projects and Councels, and Correspondencies with the
Highlanders; and they well know that English Protestants will not live, if they
can help it without Employment, whereby to live decently. They cannot live with
a Cow and Potato-Garden on a Mountain side, in a Cabin built in a Days time,
which the Irish naturally do; and there is no other Employment for so great
Numbers of Protestants, as God be praised are now in Ireland, but that of
Woollen Manufactures: Therefore says the Jacobite in England, Cut away that
Root, and they will all wither.

No, no, instead of taking away the Honest Means to get our Bread here, our
Gracious King William will keep a good Protestant Army here, where they will be
welcome, and this Country will maintain 'em without any Charge to England or
prejudice to it self, but will be the better, in having so many the more
Englishmen (especially when the intended Baracks are made) amongst us.

But, suppose the worst, that this Project to put down our Weoken Manufactures,
should prevail, and consequently force the English Protestants to withdraw from
this Island: The best then that could be hoped for, would be that the Scots
would succeed in our rooms. Now pray what better security can England have that
those Industrious and Hardy People will not make Serges and Bays, and through
Scotland, send 'em where they please? Ay, but the Scots are a meek harmless
People, that will not pursue their Interest, their Common and National
Advantages without leave from Mr. C -- y and some other of the West of England;
therefore there is no danger of them. For though Mr. C -- y cannot Bridle nor
Saddle, much less Ride 'em in Scotland, yet if he catch 'em on Irish Ground he
will tie 'em to Rack Staves, and take away their Oats and Meal.

However I hope England will not try his Experiment, least his Notions prove
too Metaphysical to be of any Use, and too sine for Practice.

Then let us conclude that England had even as good foster and cherish her own
Legitimate Issue, as to adopt those of other People, who may perhaps in time
forget that single piece of Bounty, and go on to do themselves all the good
that occasion may present them with.

Or shall we suppose, that in regard Europe is so Cantoned out into petit
States and Principalities, that England (strictly so called) is more than a
Match for any one of them, and therefore scorns to be enlarged by any new
accession of Strength, which the Kingdom of Ireland would (if encouraged in
Woollen Manufactures) surely be to her? But Safety and Victory are never to be
hazarded where they can be got without it.

It Is much more than probable to me, that had Ireland in the Reign of King
Charles I. Been so happy as to have been so fully Inhabited by Protestants, as
blessed be God, she is now; there had been no Massacre of the British Nations
here in 1641; nor had that Dismal and Bloody Rebellion ensued; nor had the Earl
of Strafford thought it good Policy (as he did some time before that) to hold
the English (who had the Artificial) and the Irish (who by their Numbers at
least, had the Natural Strength of the Kingdom) in a Balance; which he held in
his own Hands, that both the one and the other might depend on his Arbitrament.
His vast Ambition of Power, was not less than his very great Parts: To humor
which, as he was resolved to serve his Master without reserve, so he expected
by that Machine to compel Ireland to serve him.

But Story too sadly relates the Unhappy Catastrophy of this Policy: For his
Arbitrary Proceedings, produced a Legal Act of Attainder against his Lordship's
Head.

And the Irish with their Natural, surprised the Artificial Strength of the
English in most places of the Kingdom; using them with ineffable Cruelty, which
mightily increased the Confusion and Flame in England, that ended not till some
Years after.

Neither do I believe that the late King James had ever formed the Design to
Reign Despotically in England, had Ireland been so replete with Protestants, as
(God be praised over and over again) she now is, Tyrconnel then would not have
durst taken the Sword of Ireland into his Romish Paws, in Contempt of our
Manifold Laws against it; he would not have dared to Disband an English Army,
to Enlist Irish Enemies in their room, and to put the Civil and Military Power
into those Hands which the Laws of the Realm had Disarmed of both; nor to have
applied those Revenues to the Ruin of the Protestants. who granted and designed
them for their own Defense.

The Premises considered, the Safety of England and Ireland, under God, are the
great Numbers of Protestants in both Kingdoms. But as England cannot have 'em
without ways to Maintain and Support them, so neither (...) ^^^nd; and there is
no other way (Humanly speaking) than by the Wooller Manufactures. And God has
in his Providence so ordered it, that there is room enough in the World to vent
the Productions of both Kingdoms.

Methinks I hear an Objection; That we have heard of great Bridges built upon
Wooll-sacks, but never of a Church built upon Woollen-Cloth, a^^ this Man
labors to persuade us, that the Reformed Churches of England and I^^^^nd are.

Bantering will not do now. We know that our Church is built upon the Rock
Christ Jesus, Eternal Truth, which nothing in Earth, Rome, or Hell shall ever
prevail against. But seeing she is Militant here on Earth, tho her Foundation
be impregnable, she must take care of her Outworks, and keep good Garrisons
and Armies; whose Common Soldiers are best made up of ^^^^stant Mariners and
Manufactures (which Professions our Savior's own Disciples followed) who tho
often too irregular in their own private Actions, are nevertheless very
Faithful to the General and Common Cause. Of these our Armies can never be too
many, for they will Fight and Work to Defend and Support that which Defends and
Supports them; and all the Pay they desire is, to have that Liberty which even
Nature (not vitiated) bestows on Mankind. The Liberty, I say, to get their own
Living by their Labor and Industry, and Protection of their Goods gotten
thereby. Whilst they are thus rewarded, scarce any will ever Desert, much less
Mutiny or Revolt.

POSTSCRIPT.
IF the Cheapness of a Commodity of Use does increase its Vent, (than which,
nothing is more apparently true) it must undoubtedly be the Interest of England
to render her Woollen Manufactures Cheap at Foreign Markets: For that there is
scarce any State or Kingdom in Europe, that is not her Competiter therein; who
being Vnder-sold, must of consequence lessen, and be discouraged the making the
same Manufactures; would it not then be more fit to allow Ireland, (a Province
absolutely dependent on England) a Share in this Trade, than to give it to
Foreigners, who will enlarge their Manufactures of Wool, when the Exportation
of them from England is lessened, by raising the price there, which seems to be
the chief Design of the intended prohibition on Ireland, that otherwise,
together with England might (by making them Cheaper, and in greater quantities)
become the sole Exporters of Woollen Manufactures?

Besides, there are few, if any Examples wherein Prohibitions and Monopolies in
Trade, have been advantageous to the public; they mostly tend to the
benefiting of particulars, and hurt the Generality; and I apprehend (if it were
thoroughly inquired into) that the Prohibiting the Importing of Irish
Lean-Cattle into England, would be found an Instance of it. For that ever
since, the people of Ireland have fallen into the Trade of Fatting their Cattle
themselves; and have Exported their Beef, etc. in large quantities to the
Plantations, Holland, Flanders, France, Spain and Italy; and English Shipping
frequently Victual with Irish Beef; And thus England has lost a great part of
her Exportations of this kind; which constantly keeping down the price at home,
has much prejudiced the Feeding Lands, and I doubt, has not much advantaged
the Breeding Lands of England, a far greater number of Lean Cattle having been
brought in from Scotland since, than were before that Prohibitory Law was made.

And it is more then probable, that this pretended Mischief of the Increase of
the Woollen Manufactury of Ireland, does arise from this Restraint put upon the
Irish from Exporting their Black-Cattle into England, because they were
necessitated by it, to run upon Breeding a greater number of Sheep; which
furnishing them with vast store of Wool, lead them most Naturally to the
Manufacturing of it; and should the people of Ireland be denied the Privilege
that both Nature and Necessity seems to Entitle them to, of Exporting the
Superfluities of their Manufactures: It will be very happy, if such a Restraint
be not attended with worse Consequences to the Lands and Trade of England, than
those that Prohibiting of Irish Cattle may have occasioned.

FINIS

