The TRUE Interest of a Nation: OR, THE Duty of Magistrates, Ministers, and
People, In order to the further Settlement and Prosperity OF THESE KINGDOMS.

The TRUE Interest of a Nation: OR, THE Duty of Magistrates, Ministers, and
People, In order to the further SETTLEMENT and PROSPERITY OF THESE KINGDOMS.

A SERMON Preached at the Assizes held at BVCKINGHAM, JVLY the 5th, 1692.

By JOHN HOWARD, M. A. Rector of Marston-Trussel, in Northamptonshire.

LONDON: Printed for J. Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultry, 1693.

The TRUE Interest of a Nation: OR, THE Duty of Magistrates, Ministers, and
People, In order to the further Settlement and Prosperity OF THESE KINGDOMS.
Prove. XIV. xxxiv. Righteousness exalts a nation; but sin is a reproach to
any people.


THERE is ordinarily so little either Wisdom or Generosity in most Men, that
they are almost wholly taken up with their own private Interest or Pleasures,
with a Neglect of the Public Safety and Welfare of the Nation. For tho many
enquire much after the State of it, whether to entertain their idle Moments, or
gratify their Curiosity, or because in the general they wish well to it, or
for other ends: yet few comparatively make it a main part of their Business to
promote its Happiness. And even amongst these, how few are there that rightly
understand the true Interest of the Nation, and seriously apply themselves to
those Means that are necessary to advance it! Now what these are, King Solomon,
a Person in the highest Station, and of the greatest Wisdom amongst Men, (and
therefore fittest to judge of the Interest of a Kingdom,) has told us from his
own Wisdom and Experience, and which is more, from the Wisdom of God himself,
including them in one comprehensive word in my Text, Righteousness exalts a
nation. And to assure us that in the want of this, no other Methods can be
sufficient, he adds, But sin is a reproach to any people.

Here are therefore two plain Propositions that fully instruct us, the one what
will make a Nation Happy; and the other what will as certainly make it
Miserable. If we have therefore a Subject of this moment before us, and wherein
we are all nearly concerned, I hope none will blame me, if I handle it with
that Plainness and Freedom which the Consequence of the thing itself, the
present State of the Nation, the Condition of the Times, and the Necessity of
every one of Us here present do call for therefore in speaking to these words,
I shall endeavor to Explain and Confirm both the Propositions in their order,
and then draw such Inferences from them as are most seasonable, bringing the
Matter down to this Time, and the present Occasion of our meeting together.

1. Righteousness exalts a Nation: In relation to which words I shall
endeavor to show you,

1. What is here meant by Righteousness. 2. How it exalts a Nation.
1. Righteousness in a strict sense is as much as Justice; and it is often used
in Scripture to signify Charity, particularly that branch of it which is
exercised in supplying the Wants of poor indigent People: but in my Text it is
to be understood in a greater Latitude, and is the same with Virtue or
Goodness, or Obedience to God in the general; as appears in that it is set in
Opposition to Sin (by which is meant all manner of Wickedness,) in the latter
part of the Verse: And this sense of the Word is so ordinary in the Holy
Scriptures, and so obvious to every one, as well as necessary to the wise Man's
Purpose in this place, that I need not say any thing more in the proof of it.
Therefore I proceed to show.

2. How Righteousness exalts a Nation: That is, raises it higher, in making
it better, and causing it to abound with every thing that may be of real
Advantage to it. But there are so many Respects and Instances wherein a Nation
is advanced, and so many Branches of Righteousness, which conduce to it, that
it would make too great a part of my Discourse to represent them all: therefore
I shall only speak to the chief of them, as briefly as I can, but sufficiently,
I hope, to satisfy all sober and unprejudiced Hearers.

Righteousness is the greatest Endowment that our best Faculties are capable
of, and far more excellent than all earthly Benefits: For (as Solomon says of
Wisdom, which is the same thing under another name, Prove. 3.14, 15.) the
merchandise of it is better then the merchandise of silver, and the gain
thereof then fine gold. She is more precious then rubies: and all the things
thou can desire, are not to be compared unto her. Yea, it raises us above the
State of mere rational Beings, and renews us after the Image of GOD, and makes
us Followers of him in a Divine Conversation. If a Nation therefore be advanced
by a Plenty of Corn and Wine, by the Health, and Strength, and Numbers of the
People, or by Foreign Rarities for Delight and Ornament; how much more then by
the true Riches of the Heavenly Canaan, that Righteousness which comes down
from thence, and at once ennobles the Souls and adorns the Conversation of them
that have it?

But that I may speak more sensibly to those Men who perhaps may receive this
rather as a sine Speculation, then a real Truth; I shall endeavor to
demonstrate that Righteousness produces all those Effects to a Nation which in
the general Opinion of Men do exalt it, as Health and Strength, Riches, Honor,
Friendship, Security, Delight, and Comfort, etc. and that both as a Natural and
a Moral Cause of them.

It is a natural Cause of these Benefits, to which nothing can conduce so much
as that honest and regular ways of living which true Religion requires: We do
not only avoid the Causes of Bodily Distempers and Weaknesses, but much improve
also in Health and Strength by many Habits of Righteousness, as Meekness,
Patience, and Contentation, but especially Temperance in both the Branches of
it, Sobriety and Chastity, and Diligence also in some honest Calling that is
suitable to us. I hope I need not say how much the Vices contrary to these
impair the best Natural Constitution, bring many Diseases upon the Body, and
surprise Men with an untimely Death; since it has been observed, and not
without rational Evidence, that Gluttony itself kills more then the Sword. And
as for Riches, the very same Virtues that improve us in Health and Strength, do
thereby fit us to use the most proper means of increasing in them also, which
seldom fail of attaining their end; for the diligent hand makes rich, Prove.
10.4. Whereas the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty: and
drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags, Prove. 23.21. Industry makes the Earth
and the Waters profitable to us, and fetches home the Fruits and Treasures of
the remotest Countries, to supply what may be wanting in our own: For though
God in much Wisdom and Goodness, has so sutably dispensed his Blessings to the
several Parts of the World, that they ordinarily afford the most convenient
Food, Physic, and Clothing to the Inhabitants; yet he does not so equally
proportion these, but that it is often necessary that the Plenty of some should
supply the Scarcity of others. And there is in every one something peculiar,
that serves, if not the Necessity, yet the Convenience and Delight of other
Countries; that Nations might be sensible of a mutual Dependence on one
another, to encourage Amity between them, and to excite their Industry, by
which each of them may, even from all Parts of the Earth, enrich their own
Country. What shall we say of that Honor with which Righteousness exalts a
Nation? There is certainly nothing can gain it so great a Reputation in the
World as this: It adds such a Luster to all that are endowed with it, as makes
them venerable in the eyes of others: For it is from hence that Men are
deliberate in their Counsels, grave in their Deportment, faithful in their
Dealings, just to their Promises, compassionate to the Miserable, humble and
obliging to all Persons. And these Virtues do naturally gain a Reputation to
those that have them: therefore Moses speaking of God's Commands, exhorts
Israel to keep and do them, from this Motive. That it would be their Wisdom and
Understanding in the sight of the Nations, who on this account would say,
Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people, Deuteronomy. 4.6.

Now the same Virtues that get Honor and Reputation to a People, do also
allure the Affections of the Nations, and cause them to enter into Affinities
and Leagues with them: And indeed what Prince or People would not promise
themselves great Advantages from such an Alliance? They who are observed to
practice Righteousness in all their Relations at home, will never be suspected
of Unfaithfulness toward their Allies abroad; and the more they are improved
by a regular and industrious way of living, the better are they fitted to serve
the ends of such an Union. And then a further Effect of these Things will be
the greater Security of a Nation so endowed with Righteousness, and
strengthened with Alliances on the account of it: besides, those good Habits
and Exercises which naturally improve Health and Strength (as I showed before)
do also sit Men for the Defense of their Country, when any Attempts are made
upon it by their Enemies. And a Love and good Will to our Neighbors, and a
Zeal for the Public Good, as they prevent Civil Breaches and Contentions in a
People among themselves, so they mightily unite and strengthen them against a
foreign Enemy; especially when they are animated also by that true Courage
which is another Branch of Righteousness. To these I shall add, as the Result
of them all, as well as an immediate Effect of Righteousness, that inward Peace
and Satisfaction, that sweet Delight and Comfort which a Nation fearing God,
and working Righteousness are sure to enjoy: for this arises from the very
Nature of Virtue, which consists in a Rectitude that must needs be very
agreeable to a Mind disposed for it; and it is also one of its main Offices to
govern those Passions that interrupt our inward Peace, and direct them to such
Objects as afford a pleasing Conversation to us. And there is no small addition
to these Comforts from a Conscience of those Habits, together with a due
Exercise of them in a virtuous Life; and something also (as was before hinted)
from the several outward Advantages with which Righteousness does exalt a
Nation; which are summed up by Solomon in a few words, that attest all I have
mentioned under this Head, Prove. 3.16, 17. where speaking of Wisdom, he says,
Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honor:
Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.

2. Righteousness exalts a Nation in procuring such Benefits to it as a Moral
Cause, in that it qualifies them to receive these more abundantly by the
Blessing of Almighty God, as the Answer of their Prayers, and a Reward of their
Righteousness, according to the many Promises he has given us, both in the Old
and New Testament. The Lord often assures his Israel, and in them all other
Nations, that if they would be obedient to his Laws, they should be blessed in
all their Temporal Concerns, but most fully and particularly, Lev. 26. Deuteronomy.
28. Our Savior has also assured us of Temporal Blessings upon Condition we
first seek the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, Math. 6.33. And St. Paul
tells us, That godliness is profitable to all things, 1 Timothy 4.8. It is evident
then, if a Nation be righteous, the Lord who loves Righteousness will be with
them, to give them all those Blessings which will make them the Admiration as
well as the Envy and Dread of other Nations, who will have just reason to
confess, That happy is that people that is in such a case: yea, happy is that
people, whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 144.15. I come now to the latter part of
my Text:

II. Sin is a reproach to any people.

Though these words are interpreted with some little difference by learned Men,
yet our Translation agrees well enough with the Original, and is authorized
also by the Chaldee Paraphrase: and whereas the Septuagint and other learned
Versions render it, But sins do diminish the Tribes, or People, or Nations; and
the Vulgar Latin, That sin makes the People miserable. All this gives us a
further Confirmation of the same Sense in different Terms; and therefore we may
without doing Violence to the Text, or perverting the wise Man's Intention in
this place, put them all together, and so they will stand in a more plain and
full Opposition to the former part of the Verse: And if I shall prove to you,
That sin is a reproach to a people, both immediately in itself, and remotely in
its Effects; this will take in all the Differences of the several Versions and
Interpretations of the Words:

1. It is so immediately and in itself: If it be a Shame for an intelligent
Being to act below his Understanding, and subject his noblest Faculties to the
will of his sensual Appetite; then Sin is a Shame and a Reproach to us: Can a
Prince without Dishonor submit himself to the meanest of his Subjects, or the
Master become a Slave to his Servant? No more can the Soul of Man without the
greatest Diminution to its Worth and Dignity, stoop to the vile Servitude of
Carnal Affections. If to choose a little base Profit, or Delight, or
Reputation, and Friendship with the worst of Men, for a few Moments, as if it
were their only Felicity, and thereby venture the loss of true and Eternal
Happiness, which after a short and uncertain time they might otherwise enjoy,
be a Reproach to them who are capable of considering both the one and the
other, who confess they have immortal Souls, and cannot deny but they expose
them to great Dangers by this means, and have also rational Grounds of Belief,
that a Course of Piety would afford them greater Delight and Satisfaction even
in this Life: (for the very Heathens could acknowledge, that Virtue is a Reward
to itself, and even with the meanest and most miserable Condition, is
preferable to all outward Advantages without it:) Then if there be any such
thing as Folly in the World, there must lie a just Imputation of it on such
Persons as thus court their own Misery, and despise their Happiness. Therefore
it is no wonder, that Solomon does ordinarily in this Book of Proverbs call
wicked Men Fools; and yet what greater Contempt can he cast upon them then
this? Forasmuch as Wisdom raises Men's Reputation, and makes them Honorable, so
much does Folly render them Mean and Despicable in the World. And does not Sin
do the same thing also? If we speak of the sense which all Persons that retain
any love for Virtue have of it, the matter is without question. If a Man has
the Reputation of a Drunkard, a Whoremonger, or a covetous Person; if he be
accounted Proud, Deceitful, or Malicious; if he be given to Lying,
Profaneness, or Unseemly Communication, etc. how extremely does this lessen
him in the Esteem of all good Men? Yea, if he has never so excellent Gifts of
Nature and Fortune, (as they are called) if he is possessed of a good Estate,
if he has the best Accomplishments of Body, and the greatest natural and
acquired Endowments of Soul, as Judgment, Wit, Learning, Arts, etc. all these
are so diminished by some ill Habits in his Conversation, that he loses, for
the most part, the Credit of them. Nay, to go further yet, if to all these
Advantages there be added many Moral Qualifications too; if a Person be of a
free and generous Mind, an humble Carriage, a compassionate Temper, and yet
lives in the Sin of Drunkenness, or Uncleanness, or if he appears never so
exactly chaste and sober, but at the same time is known to be covetous and
oppressing, these base Vices do more undermine and betray his Reputation, then
all other Virtues can contribute to it. And they do this not only in the
Opinion of honest and innocent Men, but of those also, in a great measure, who
are guilty of as bad, if not the same Faults themselves; for it is usual with
most Men to censure and despise those very Sins in their Neighbors, which they
indulge in their own Persons: as if they thought a greater Liberty is allowed
to them then to others; or else, because they consider their own Faults with
the most extenuating Circumstances, while they look upon other Men's with the
greatest Aggravations. So that if it should be put to a general Vote, whether
Sin be not a Reproach and Dishonor to any People, they would so universally
agree in the Affirmative, that very few would be found to make any Exception,
unless it were for one single Person? But what reserve soever any may have out
of Partiality to their own Persons, in relation to this matter; yet the
Judgment they pass upon all others would be a concluding Sentence against
themselves.

2. Sin is a Reproach to any People in its Effects also: That many Sins do
naturally tend to the making Men miserable in the World, is so evident, that I
need not spend time in proving it; especially since I have given you already
some Hints of it in speaking to the former part of my Text. The Sins of Pride,
Luxury. Intemperance, and Strife are very great Wasters, and have ruined many
thousands in their Estates, and some of them many more in their Health and
Strength: The former of these Cases does too ordinarily expose Men to Contempt,
even when it comes by the hand of Providence. But when Poverty is the natural
Effect of Men's Sins, it becomes justly a Reproach to them: And so are these
Pains and Diseases also, and whatsoever other Calamities Men bring upon
themselves by a vicious Life. And to these God is pleased many times to add
others, also upon obstinate Sinners, to vindicate his Justice and Holiness in
the World, especially when the Sins become National, and Judgment is not
executed upon them as it ought, by his Vicegerents. And whenever these come
upon a People, they bring a great Reproach with them; according to that
Threatening sent by the Prophet Jeremiah to the Remnant left at Jerusalem in the
time of the Babylonish Captivity, Jer. 29.18. I will persecute them with the
sword, with the famine, and with the pestilence, and will deliver them to be
removed to all the kingdoms of the earth, to be a curse, and an astonishment,
and an hissing, and a reproach among all the nations whither I have driven
them. And indeed in such cases there is no less then a threefold Reproach lies
upon a Nation, Judgment is a Work which God uses as the last Remedy, when all
other Methods fail of accomplishing his gracious Purposes upon a People. And it
is usually a great while, after much Waiting and Forbearance, e're he comes to
this Extremity: whenever therefore any of his Judgments are inflicted upon
Sinners, they are so many Reproaches from him for their great Impieties, most
ungratefully continued in notwithstanding all the effects of his Love and
Mercy, by which he would have led them to Repentance, and obstinately retained
against all tile Patience he had long exercised toward them, and the many
Threatenings of Judgment he had given them both in his Word and Providence, to
draw them to it. And God in his Wisdom does usually send such Judgments upon a
People as are most suitable to their Sins, that they may be more visible
Reproaches to them: As when he punishes a divided and contentious Nation with
open Wars, a luxurious People with Hunger and Nakedness, or the Lascivious that
burn in their Lusts, with the destroying Heats of a Plague, or devouring Fires
in their Towns and Cities. Of all which Cases, and several others, it would be
easy to give many Instances. 2. There is a Reproach also in such cases from
the World, (as was showed before,) because of that Misery a People is involved
in by reason of these Judgments. 3. And if they themselves have any fence, they
must needs be reproached too by their own Consciences, that they have dealt so
unworthily with their God, so treacherously with their own Souls, and so
foolishly undermined also their present Happiness: And then they may well (with
Ephraim) be ashamed and confounded when they thus bear their Reproach, Jer.
31.19.

You have now heard how Sin is a Reproach to any People, both in itself and its
Effects: So that if some read the words, it diminishes or makes them miserable;
this comes all to the same thing, because in these Effects it is a Reproach to
a People, as well as in itself.

Now what has been said upon both the parts of my Text, might abundantly
confirm to you from God's dealing with Men in all Ages: And indeed it would be
hard to find a Nation that has not been an Instance of the truth of it. God has
at all times blessed a People, and made them prosperous so long as they
continued faithful to him in those main Duties of Piety, Justice, and
Temperance, as they are taught by the Law of Nature, where they had no better a
Light to guide them; and on the contrary, when they degenerated from these
Virtues, and sunk into a State of Impiety, Idleness, and Luxury, they have been
conquered and ruined by a more sober and virtuous Nation, whom God had raised
up to execute his Vengeance upon them. This has been so common a case in the
World, that whosoever looks into History, will easily see that from these
Causes have been all the great Revolutions of Empires and Kingdoms, even to
this day. But I shall content myself with instancing particularly in the Case
of the Jews, whose History deserves the greatest Regard from us, not only as it
is very remarkable in itself, but in that it is conveyed to us in Records of
unquestionable Authority; we see therefore in the sacred History of that
Nation, while they served God in the days of Joshua, and of the Elders that
outlived him, they were blessed, with constant Victories over their Enemies,
and enjoyed the Fruits and Delights of a most fertile Country: But when after
this they tell from the Service of God, he gave them up to serve their Enemies
that cruelly oppressed them. And though he still delivered them upon their
Repentance, yet as often as they revolted from him again, he reduced them to
the same Misery; so that they endured many a long and severe Bondage under
several neighboring Princes and People, as we read in the Book of Judges. And
afterward, so long as they were any thing mindful of their Duty to God, and
obeyed his Laws, he blessed them more then any People; their Tribes were
multiplied to a Miracle, and though the Land of their Residence was very small,
and unfit, one would think, to sustain so great a Multitude, yet they abounded
continually with all manner of Provisions, notwithstanding every seventh Year
they received not any Fruits from the Earth: And God inspired them with such
Courage, and gave them such Successes in their Wars, that they became a Terror
to all Nations about them. But when they forget God their Savior, who had done
such great things for them, and fell into the practice of many foul Sins, they
received from his hand one heavy Judgment after another, and several times
became a Prey to their Enemies, who led them into Captivity, first one part and
then another; and at length, when to all their former Sins they had added the
Crucifying of the Lord of Life, and Persecuting his Disciples, they were soon
destroyed from being a Nation, and those small Remains that survived so great a
Slaughter as was everywhere made of them by the Romans, were scattered into
many remote Parts of the World, and are everywhere a Byword and a Reproach
unto this day. All which fell out exactly according to what God had in many
Ages foretold them by his Prophets, and at last by our Blessed Savior; and is
also related by Josephus in his excellent History, who to the Story of that
People in the Scriptures, has added a full and exact Account of their final
Destruction, which in those sacred Writings was only foretold.

I proceed now to draw such Inferences from these Words as are most necessary,
which in the general are but two; the former relating to the latter part of my
Text, and the other to both, under which I shall speak to several particulars:

1. If Sin be a Reproach to any People, then especially to such as have been
best informed of their Duty, and received the greatest Motives to be Righteous:
Now of all Nations in the World, God has most abounded to us in both these
Advantages: The Gospel is most plainly and fully preached among us, and besides
the Holy Scriptures, which are everywhere to be read in our own Language,
there so many excellent Practical Discourses for the explaining and applying
those Sacred Oracles, that none who can either read or hear can pretend
Ignorance of their Duty. And as to our Motives to be Righteous, (to say nothing
of the natural Advantages of our Country which are very great,) I must put you
in mind of the great Deliverance of this Nation from the Darkness and
Oppressions of Popery, and from all the Attempts made to bring it back upon us
for above Eighty Years together, with a constant Peace within our Borders, and
a Prosperity that was envied by our Neighbors during all that time. But when
this would not make us fear God, and love one another, as became good
Christians, our private Animosities were punished with a most Unnatural
Intestine War, and many Miseries that attended and followed it: And when, after
many Years, God had restored us to a flourishing State, and obliged us by new
Favors to be faithful to him; seeing these had not those good Effects upon us
as might be expected, he visited us with a dreadful Plague that very much
depopulated the chief City of our Nation, and destroyed many thousands in other
places; and soon after it, with a devouring Fire that laid the Glory of that
City in Ashes, together with so many other Fires in the Kingdom within a few
Years, as perhaps had not been seen any where before in a time of Peace. And
about the same time God suffered us to be drawn into a War once and again, that
was never like to be much for our Credit or Advantage. And during that Reign
especially, Men were given up to so strange an Infatuation as to suffer
themselves to be exasperated one against another upon very small Grounds, by
the treacherous Insinuations of such Men as knew well enough what Advantages to
expect from our Divisions: But yet the Lord did not bring upon us the Desert of
those Sins, nor deliver us into the Hands of those cruel Men that were for
dividing us only that they might destroy us; but their Plots and Designs
against us were discovered, and prevented from time to time; and though they
gathered Strength and Interest nothwithstanding, through the Easiness of some
amongst us, and the Impotency of others, till at last they seemed to have Power
enough in their Hands to do their Business by open Force, and we saw ourselves
with all our dearest Interests at the Brink of Ruin; and which might strike
coldest to us of any thing, we could see nothing in all this, but the Natural,
or at least the Moral Effects of our own Doings; yet even at this time, when
our Enemies were so confident of finishing their Work, and we had even given up
ourselves for lost, as Men without Hope; our gracious God would not give us up
too, though we had so much provoked him: As if he had the same Relentings for us,
as for Israel of old, when he thus speaks by his Prophet Hosea, How shall I
give thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel? how shall I make thee as
Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine heart is turned within me, my
repentings are kindled together, Hos. 11.8. And, blessed be his Name! we soon
found the gracious Effects of such a Compassion, and by those many Wonders of
Providence which made our late happy Revolution, and the great Successes God
has since given us, we find ourselves a free People, in the Enjoyment of our
Properties and Religion, under the best tempered Government in the World. And
though the neighboring Nations engaged in the same Cause with us, have endured
all the dreadful Miseries of War, yet we have felt nothing of it (in the
general) but the Payment of Taxes toward it; which no good Man will grudge at,
that knows they are the Price of our Estates, our Liberties, our Lives, and
which is more than all our Religion. Now after all that is come upon us for our
evil Deeds, (as Ezra speaks) seeing that our God has punished us less then our
Iniquities deserve, and has given us such a Deliverance as this, should we
again break his Commandments, would he not be angry with us till he had,
consumed us, so that there should be no Remnant nor Escaping? You see therefore
what Motives we have to depart from Sin, and embrace Righteousness. God has
continually enriched us with his Mercies; he has exercised great Patience
toward us, and wrought many wonderful Deliverances for us, notwithstanding our
heinous Sins and Rebellions against him; he has also executed some Judgments
upon us, and threatened us with more amt greater yet, if we do not return to
him: Yea, we have Motives from our very Sins; for is it not yet enough that we
have transgressed the Laws of our God, and rebelled against him? Has the Lord
often repented of the Evil be threatened us with? And shall not we yet repent of
our evil Temper and Practices against him? Certainly it is high time, after so
long a Defection, to return to ourselves, and to our God. And does trot the
present State of our Affairs too loudly call for it? God still gives
usVictories, but yet the finishing part of our Happiness is kept in suspense,
which upon a sincere Reformation of our Lives, we may hope for: but if we come
short of this, we shall not only (in all likelihood) prevent such a Blessing,
but lose the Advantages he has already given us, and become a Prey to the
Malice and Fury of the worst Men in the World: And would not this be an
indelible Reproach to such a People as we are, that of all Nations in the World
should best understand our Duty to God, and have more Obligations to do it than
any others?

2. From both the parts of my Text we see how much it lies upon us to depart
from Sin, and to do Righteousness: And that I may use the fittest way to
persuade you to it, I shall,

1. Apply myself particularly to several Ranks and Orders of Men in the Nation,
of which some are here present. 2. Speak to all in general. 3. Conclude with
what concerns the Business of this time, and the present Occasion of our
meeting together.
1. I shall apply myself particularly to several Ranks and Orders of Men in the
Nation, namely, Magistrates, Ministers, and Gentlemen.

1. I shall with all that Humility and Respect that becomes me, address myself
to Magistrates, whether in an higher or a lower Station, and desire you would
be pleased to consider how much the Honor of your Places, the Trust reposed in
you by Almighty God, and the Princes he has set over us, and the just
Expectations of all good Men do require that ye should be Righteous, both in
your Persons and in your Office. When Jethro advised Moses to choose Magistrates
under him, to assist him in Judging the People, he mentions the necessary
Qualifications of such Men, Exodus 18.21. Able men, such as fear God, men of
truth, hating covetousness. And when Moses speaks to the People about this
Matter, a little before his Death, Deuteronomy. 1.13. he gives another part of the
Character of these Persons, namely, Wise men and understanding, and known among
the tribes.

Magistrates therefore ought to be wise Men, whose Capacity and Knowledge is
above the common Rate, who having furnished their Minds with the best Rules and
Nations, are able to penetrate doubtful and difficult Causes, and discover
Wickedness under all those Disguises by which it is sheltered from common
Observation: And to this Wisdom must be added Understanding too, that is,
Prudence, (in the fence of the Original) not such as would direct them to
consult their own Safety, rather then execute Justice when their persons or
Estates may be in danger by it, (for this is a base Craft that undermines and
betrays a Nation, and therefore deserves not the name of Prudence) but that
which enables Magistrates to judge of particular Cases with relation to Times,
Persons, etc. and to do every part of their Duty with such necessary
Precautions as may best serve the ends of it. Then they must be able Men, that
is virtuous, (in the Original) or more particularly Men of Valor and Courage,
which is always necessary to a Magistrate, That he may break the jaws of the
Wicked, (as Job speaks Chap. 29.17) and pluck the spoil out of his teeth: That
is, deliver them that fusser under the cruel Oppressor, how powerful soever,
and execute Judgment on the proudest and most prosperous Offender. To this must
be added the Fear of God, which is to direct and govern them in all their
Actions, wherein they are to have respect rather to God then Man, and to his
Will and Honor, then to any Temporal Considerations. And then they will be Men
of Truth too, that is of Justice, (as in the Septuagint Version) for Truth is a
branch of Justice, and this, in every part, has so near a Resemblance to Truth,
that it may well enough be called by that name. To this is added hating
Covetousness, (which indeed the former parts of the Character do necessarily
infer,) and without this it is hard to imagine how they should have either
Justice or Courage enough to do their Duty in any tolerable measure, and to be
sure the Fear of God would be far from them: the very name of covetousness is
so provoking to one that has any sparks of Generosity, that it is hard for him
to mention it without the sharpest Invectives: He that can stoop to such a Lust
as this, is not sit to be trusted with any Business of moment, for his Soul is
not capable of those noble Thoughts and Resolutions that make Men honest and
faithful to their Trust; and that greater Affection he bears to his little
Deities, will easily bring him off from the weaker Ties of Friendship or
Loyalty; so that whenever there shall arise a Competition between them, his
nearest Friends, his Prince, and his Country, must become a Sacrifice to his
private Interest. He therefore that loves himself at that rate, as to be an
Enemy to Mankind, is very unfit to be a Magistrate; for every little prospect
of Gain will pervert his Judgment, and make him overthrow the Cause he should
maintain. To conclude the Character, Magistrates should be known among the
People: Not such (ordinarily) as have lived in Obscurity, (though some of them
may be excellent Persons too,) but Men that have more appeared in the World,
because such as they have lived in the Observation of public Business, and are
therefore fitter for it. This is requisite also for the greater Assurance of
their Virtues, and the fuller Satisfaction of those that come to them for
Justice, who will the more readily acquiesce in their Determinations. Every
Magistrate therefore is to be a Person of Wisdom and Prudence, of Virtue and
Courage, one that fears God, a Man of Truth, hating Covetousness, and that is
known among the People. Hoping therefore that I speak to Men of these
Qualifications, with such other particular Virtues as are consequent to the
Fear of God, I do, with the greater Encouragement, beseech you to execute
Righteousness, with all that Wisdom, Courage, and Zeal which is necessary,
(especially at such a time as this) according to the Will of God, and the
wholesome a Laws of the Nation: You are both the Eyes and Hands of our dread
Sovereigns, to find out and punish Transgressors: and which is more, ye are the
Deputies of God himself, (and therefore called Gods in the Holy Scriptures,
Psalm 82.1, 6.) and in his place and stead are to execute Judgment upon Earth:
Which is necessary not only for the Discharge of a good Conscience in
yourselves, and the suppressing of such Sins as are naturally injurious to the
Nation, but also to prevent God's Judgments upon it; for he is not wont to
punish a People himself, till Sins that are committed by some are connived at
by others, and the hand of the Magistrate is slack in doing Justice upon the
Guilty; For what is said of Murder Numb. 35.33. The land cannot be cleansed of
the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it; is a Rule
to us also in respect of other Sins, according to their several Aggravations,
and the Punishments due to them. The Land contracts Guilt and Defilement from
all heinous and open Sins of particular Persons, if they are not duly punished
by those that are authorized to do it: And because a Nation, as such, cannot
receive Punishment in another World, God will, sooner or later, visit them with
his Judgments in this: and nothing can prevent him, but a seasonable
Distribution of Justice by his Vicegerents, and a Reformation among the
People. When Judah were guilty of many Sins, that were too generally allowed
amongst them, such as Idolatry, Fornication, Adultery, Deceit, etc. with a
Remission of Justice also, (as might well be supposed in so general a
Corruption among the People,) and God threatened them no less then three times
by the Prophet Jeremiah in these emphatical words, Shall not I visit for these
things, says the Lord? And shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as
this? As if he challenged the whole World to object against the necessity of
it: Yet he promises at the same time, it there could be found a Man in
Jerusalem that executed Judgment, he would pardon it, Jer. 5.1. Yea, when the
Wrath of God has already exerted itself upon a People, this will put a stop to
the Effects of it. Thus when Israel for their Idolatry, and Whoredom^ with the
Daughters of Moab, had a Plague sent among them, which together with some that
were slain with the Sword, destroyed twenty four thousands of the People; and
the brays and heroic Phineas seeing a great Man of the Israelites bring the
Daughter of a Midianitish Prince to his Tear, in the face of the Congregation,
that were now weeping for their Sins, and the Anger of God that was broken out
upon them, took a Javelin in his hand, and slew them both together in the Act
of Sin: Immediately upon this Execution, the Plague was staid, and God so
pleased with Phineas for it, that he gave unto him the Covenant of an
Everlasting Priesthood, and caused this to be registered to his Honor in all
after Ages, Number. 25. He was indeed possessed of a great Zeal for God, that made
him despise the Dangers he incurred by this worthy Act, which would certainly
procure him very powerful Enemies. But God does usually protect his Servants in
doing his own Work, and preserve them afterward notwithstanding all the
efforts of Malice and Revenge against them: Now though Phineas was no Magistrate,
yet at this time he did the part of one, and by an extraordinary Commission; he
is therefore a great Example to such, so far as they can imitate him in a
regular way. But when they forbear to do it, God will take the matter into his
own hand, and vindicate his Justice by some terrible Effects of it upon a
Nation: Therefore when the Psalmist complains that the Gods upon Earth would
not do Justice, he calls upon the God of Heaven to judge the Earth, Psalm. 82.2,
8. But that the Prophets and righteous Men in this Nation may not have cause to
do so too by your Default, I do again renew my humble Request to you, that you
would endeavor to exalt the Nation by such an Execution of Righteousness as is
required of you: And for your farther Encouragement in this matter, be pleased
to consider that God has done his part for us, in a most gracious manner, in
delivering us from the hand of our Enemies, when we saw ourselves very near
Destruction; and ever since has gone on to perfect our Deliverance. The Princes
whom God in much Mercy has set over us, have done their parts too, not only in
setting us such Examples of Righteousness as are very rare in the World,
especially in so eminent a Station; but in publishing strict Proclamations for
the Punishment of Vice, in requiring Ministers to preach earnestly against it,
and read those Statutes to their People that were made for the suppressing of
it, and in giving a particular Charge to Magistrates under them, to execute the
Laws upon Offenders. The faithful Servants of God in the Nation of all Ranks,
have, in a great measure done their parts also, in sincere Humiliations for the
Sins of the Nation, and praying to Almighty God to reform us, and avert his
Judgments from us; and in order to it, to inspire Magistrates with those
generous and holy Resolutions which are necessary to accomplish so great a
Work: And I cannot but say you have such an Opportunity before you of carrying
on a great Reformation in the Kingdom, as both the present and future Ages will
for ever praise God for, so long as there shall be any Piety in the World, and
will raise to yourselves a lasting Monument of Honor, if you zealously embrace
it.

2. I shall in the next place apply myself to Ministers, and humbly recommend
to their Consideration the present State of the Church of Christ among us; my
Brethren, the Souls of the Nation are committed to our Charge; and though the
Credit of the Ministry is grown so low, (through the Iniquity of the Times, and
the unhappy Divisions that have been in the Kingdom,) that we have not so great
an Advantage, as Ministers generally have in other Nations, to persuade People
to be Religious, either by our Lives or Exhortations; yet if a general Care
were taken among us to do what we can, it would certainly produce considerable
Effects in reforming our People. And what so glorious a Work can we ever be
employed in, as a sincere and constant Endeavor to win Souls to God, and exalt
the Nation in that Righteousness which will exalt it in all other respects? We
have often had Debates amongst ourselves, and with Ministers of other Churches
about the uniting all good Protestants among us into one National Church: a
Blessing which one would think a good Christian, should not only part with a
few indifferent things in the outward Constitution of a Church, but with his
own Blood also to purchase, if that would do it. The Atheism, Profaneness,
Envy, Strife, Hatred, and other horrid Sins that are very much occasioned and
sheltered by our Divisions, should provoke the Zeal of all good Men in every
Party to offer what they can toward an Union: But this is chiefly the Concern
of Ministers; and as our Superiors appear well disposed to so good a Work, I
desire we may contribute what is in our Power also toward it: And if I mistake
not, there is a means to be used by us, which will mightily facilitate the
matter, and do it more to the Advantage of our Church, then any thing that has
been ordinarily proposed, and that is a sincere Reformation of of our own
Lives, and a zealous Discharge of our Ministry; I speak not this as a Reproach
to any, (for I heartily bless God for many holy, learned, and able Ministers
that are amongst us,) but because we might still be much better, and if we
would all seriously endeavor it; this would speak more loudly and effectually
for us then the most learned Books that have been written in our Cause, and
cast such a Luster upon the Church, as would attract the Affections of the best
Men in every Party, and cause them, upon reasonable Terms, to Unite with us.
And in the use of other good Means, let us not cease to pray that God would
give us the Blessing of good Success in so glorious a Work.

3. Having now spoken to public Persons, both Magistrates and Ministers, I
shall next address to the Gentry, and together with them all Persons of
Interest and Estates in what Rank or Order soever: And you are so great a part
of the Nation, and have such a commanding Influence on all below you, that one
would think a general Consent and Endeavor among you would turn almost the
whole Nation which way you please: And indeed there is hardly any Corner of the
Kingdom but looks like an Earnest of it; for wherever Religion is zealously
practiced and countenanced by the Gentry, we see such Effects of it upon
others, that almost every one in that Parish or Neighborhood is a good
Christian, or would seem to be so. But on the contrary, where Looseness or
Irreligion is seen in any of that Rank, how strangely does it corrupt the Minds
and Practices of their Inferiors! If your Power therefore be so great with
others, you can never use it so well as in promoting Righteousness: for this is
to do God and your Country the greatest Service, and get your selves a lasting
Name and Honor in the World.

The very Heathens of old had so great an Affection for their Country, that
they accounted it a brave and desirable thing to die for it, when a fit
Occasion was offered: And your Ancestors have on all occasions signa iz'd
themselves by hazarding their Lives in the same Cause; and I believe many
amongst you would willingly have done so, in the War we are now engaged in,
against a potent Enemy: but perhaps your Presence at Home, for good reasons,
was thought necessary: However, without detracting any thing from our
Commanders and Armies abroad, whose Valor and Conduct deserve very great
Praise, I may affirm, you have as glorious a part to act in order to our
Victories as they, (yea, I would say more, if I did not consider many of them
as righteous and devout Christians as well as Soldiers,) and that is, to
reform your Persons and Families, so far as this is wanting, and encourage
Righteousness amongst your Neighbors. This would prevail with God still to
fight our Battles, and bless us with Victories and Triumphs till all our
Enemies should be subdued under us. And I pray consider how much God expects
this from you: Can any be so gross as to think, that he is born to a larger
Estate, a better Education, and a greater Power and Interest in his Country,
for no higher end then to live as he pleases? The very Law of Nature would
teach us (it the Scriptures were silent,) that our Persons, our Estates, and
whatever other Advantages we have are God's, and are therefore to be employed
in his Service. And by consequence, the more any has received from God, the
greater Returns of Piety and Obedience he is to make to him, (as our Savior
also has plainly told us, Luke 12.48.) And this does much aggravate all the
Sins of such Men, and make them more heinous then those of meaner Persons: And
I cannot but add farther, That the Generosity which seems natural to Men of
your Rank, should make you grateful to God for his Mercies, and zealous in his
Service. If you receive a Kindness from any Man, you think it a mean and
unworthy thing not to make a proportionable Return to him, or at least do what
you can toward it: How much more then should you consider the Author of your
Beings, and of all your Blessings, to return all possible Acknowledgements of
his Goodness to so great a Benefactor? Now if any think it would expose them to
many malicious Censures, Reproaches, and Oppositions, to attempt a Reformation
of Men's Manners, in an Age wherein Sin so much abounds, in all Orders of Men;
these little Discouragements are not to be regarded, when the Honor of God,
the Good of the Country, and the Eternal Happiness of your own Souls are so
much concerned: It is a small matter to bear the Contradictions of ill Men,
while we have the Applauses of all that are good, and, which is a thousand
times more, the Favor of God himself, with true Peace and Satisfaction in our
own Consciences. And indeed the greater Difficulties any Man meets with in the
way of his Duty, the more it recommends his Piety, Courage, and Holy Resolution
in doing it: To dare to practice Righteousness and encourage it in a licentious
Age, when too many live as if they were born only for Ease and Luxury, is
indeed to undergo a lesser Martyrdom, and to stand at least in the place of a
Confessor. But this should rather provoke the Emulation, then move the Fears of
all good Men; for to contribute their Power and Interest toward the Reforming
a Nation, is a greater Service then to hazard their Lives in its Defense: for
they that do this, can save it only from the Cruelties of Men, while the other
so far as they succeed in their pious Attempts, rescue it from the Malice of
Devils, and by a Conquest over those most formidable Enemies, preserve it from
eternal Destruction. These Considerations I hope are of weight with you; and I
desire it may be remembered as a father Motive to you, that the Power of those
two Orders of Men I before spoke to, lies especially in you: Magistrates are
chosen from among you, and depend greatly on your Assistance in doing their
Duty; and indeed without it there is but little comparatively can be expected
from them. Ministers besides the relation they ordinarily have to your
Families, have, very many of them, their Preferments from you: and all of them
do much want your Help and Encouragement in order to the Success of their
Labors: I beseech you therefore to consider the Power God has given you, not
only among yourselves, but all other Orders of Men in the Kingdom, Magistrates,
Ministers, and the common People; and to use it zealously in the Cause of God
and his Church, and you need not doubt of that Success which the Lord delights
to give unto such holy Endeavors. This would make us happy at Home, and
victorious Abroad, and secure very great Blessings to yourselves and your
Posterity.

2. I would say something also to all Persons in the general, and desire you
that every one would do his part toward the exalting of the Nation, by
repenting of your Sins, and doing Righteousness. It is our Country I am
pleading for, that dear Concern to which we owe a thousand times more regard
than to our own Lives; these we should willingly offer up, when the necessity
of our Country requires it; and shall we grudge to part with our Sins for it?
Shall we not embrace true Religion, when it appears to be so necessary to save
the Kingdom? and when the Goodness of God does so much oblige us to it? It is
on this Condition that Victory over Enemies, as well as other Blessings are
promised; and therefore without it we cannot expect God should continue them to
us, for, though he was pleased to turn our Captivity, and has hitherto prevented
us with his Goodness, he can as easily turn our Victories, and with one breath
of his Displeasure blast all that Prosperity he has lately restored to us; and
I know nothing but a Reformation amongst us that can prevent it. It puzzles
many serious and considering Men to see so many strange Acts of Providence for
the delivering and settling a Nation, which they feared had filled up all the
measures of their Sins, and were therefore fitted for an unavoidable
Destruction: But if all there great Effects of God's Goodness, which we have
lately received, added to the former, will not bring us to Repentance; as our
Destruction when it comes will be the greater on the account of them, so we
cannot reasonably expect it should be long deferred. And indeed if we do not
seriously apply ourselves now to the great Duties of Religion, what a Reproach
will it be to us that we have always with so much Heat contended for a Form of
Godliness? Insomuch that I dare affirm, if half that Zeal had been spent for
Religion itself, as has been for the little Appendages of it, or at the most,
for the outside of a Church; we had been, long e're now, the best and happiest
Nation in the World. It is time therefore that we correct our former Mistakes,
and set ourselves to the practice of that pure and undefiled Religion we
profess, that we may contribute what lies in us to the Safety and Prosperity of
the Kingdom. And at this time it becomes all good Men to deny themselves more
then ordinarily, out of a generous Sympathy m our Fleets and Armies abroad. It
was a brave and noble Resolution of Vriah, when David had sent for him from the
Army, that he would not take the Comforts of his own House, but chose rather to
lie at the King's Gate, while the Ark, and Israel, and Judah abode in Tents,
and his Lord Joab and the Servants of the King were encamped in the open
Fields: And are not our Israel and Judah, some of them in Tents too, and others
floating upon the Ocean? And besides them several brave Armies of the
Confederates? And have we not many Joabs (great and worthy Commanders) encamped
in the Field? and which is more, is not our David also with them? And have we
not something in danger there that is greater then the Ark? For our Religion is
very much bound up in the Safety of our Prince and his Armies? It becomes us
therefore to have a real sense of these things, and exercise that Self-denial
and Devotion which will best express it, and will also prevail with God for the
Continuance and Increase of Public Blessings to us.

3. I shall say something very briefly concerning the Business of the present
Time in this Place, wherein some (it may be) of all Orders of Men here are
concerned; and put you in mind of the Righteousness that is necessary for you
to exercise in it. And as to those who are Plaintiffs, I would have them
consider it does not become Christians to go to Law for small matters: Why do
ye not rather take wrong? (says the Apostle,) why do ye not rather suffer
yourselves to be defrauded? 1 Cor. 6.7. Neither should they for greater
matters, if the Difference may be well determined without it: And when the
Difficulty of the Case requires it, the contending Parties are bound to
preserve Charity toward one another notwithstanding, and each of them should
desire that Justice may be done rather then he should gain the Cause: For
Justice is God's, and therefore to be preferred before our own Interest. And as
to Witnesses, I advise them, by all means, to keep a good Conscience, and
neither for Love or Hatred, for the hopes of Gain, or fear of any Man's
Displeasure, to depart from the Truth: For lying lips are abomination to the
Lord, Prove. 12.22. And Lies in this case are dreadful Perjuries, which contain
in them so many horrid Sins against God and our Neighbor, that a Man must be
extremely hardened in Wickedness, before he can deliberately forswear himself.
For in this kind of Perjury there is a most impudent Profanation of the Name of
God, a Violation of the Truth, a perverting of Justice, a Treachery to the King
and the Laws, a bold Affront to the whole Court, that are deceived and
misguided by it, and an Abuse to the Country: Besides, if a Neighbor's good
Name be exposed by it, it is a base Slander; it his Goods, it is Theft; if his
Life, it is Murder. Therefore it is no wonder God has threatened, That a false
Witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies shall perish, Prove.
19.9. And that the curse of God shall enter into the House of him that swears
falsely, Zach. 5.4. And as to Pleaders, I desire they would always (as I hope
many do) have a greater Respect to Truth and Justice, then to any private
Advantages: and though it be their Duty to defend a good Cause, and I think none
will blame them to make the best of one that is doubtful, yet their Business in
both these Cases must be ever managed with that Decency and Gravity which
becomes their Profession, and with that Fairness to Witnesses which the Law of
Justice does require. But when a Cause appears to be bad, to plead this is to
be an Advocate against Truth and Justice, and consequently against God himself.
And then what can be expected by such Men, but the Effects of that Threatening,
Is. 5.20, 23. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil -- Which justify
the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from
him. And I hope they will believe the wise Man when he tells us, He that
justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they both are
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.15. In a word, let those that are to be
Jurors consider what shall be before them with all Sincerity, and determine
according to their Consciences upon good Deliberation, and not suffer
themselves to be biased by any Consideration whatsoever. And let them, with
all others that have any Business in Courts of Judicature, remember always that
excellent Rule of Justice delivered by our Blessed Savior, Mat. 7.12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them.

And now (my Lords) my Discourse would turn to you, if I had not said so much
already to Magistrates in general, of which, notwithstanding, I believe your
Lordships needed very little, or nothing, either to put you in mind of your
great Duty, or to quicken you in it. And I think both myself and others have
great reason to bless God, that he has graciously restored to us Judges as at
the first, and Counselors as at the beginning, from whom we may expect an
Execution of our Laws, according to the true Intention of them: and by whose
means we hope Judgment will run everywhere amongst us as the Waters, and
Righteousness as a mighty stream of Water, and refresh all the Corners of the
Land. And as I question not but your Lordships will use that Power and Interest
you have to promote Righteousness in general: so I do again desire all Orders
of Men here (as my last Request to them) to do their parts also toward it;
remembering, that the same Righteousness which exalts a Nation will at length
exalt us also to the Kingdom of Heaven, where for all the Service we do, and
the Self-denial and Sufferings we endure in the Cause of God and his Church
here, we shall receive a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory.

The END.

