A Calm and Sober ENQUIRY Concerning The Possibility OF A TRINITY in the
Godhead: IN A LETTER to a Person of Worth. Occasioned By the lately Published
Considerations on the Explications of the Doctrine of the Trinity: By Dr.
Wallis, Dr. Sherlock, Dr. S -- th, Dr. Cudworth, etc. Together with Certain
Letters (hitherto unpublished) formerly Written to the Reverend Dr. Wallis on
the same Subject.

LONDON, Printed by J. Astwood for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and 3 Crowns at
the lower End of Cheapside, near Mercers. Chapel, 1694.

A CALM DISCOURSE OF THE Trinity in the Godhead, etc.
SIR,
I Intend not this Discourse shall be concerned in what this Author has said
of the several Explications given by the Persons named on his Title Page. The
only thing it is designed for, is the Discoursing with him that single Point
which he refers to in his 29th. and 30th. pages, and which in this
Controversy, is on all hands confessed to be the Cardinal one, viz. Whether a
Trinity in the Godhead be possible or no?

I put not the Question about three Persons; both because I will not, in so
short a Discourse as I intend to make this, be engaged in discussing the
unagreed Notion of a Person; and because the Scripture lays not that Necessity
upon me, (though I do not think the use of that term, in this affair, either
blameable or indefensible.)

But I shall enquire whether the Father, the Son (or Word) and the Holy Ghost
cannot possibly admit of sufficient distinction from one another to answer the
parts and purposes severally assigned them by the Scripture, in the Christian
Economy, and yet be each of them God, consistently with this most inviolable
and indubitable truth [that there can be but one God.]

This Author concludes it to be impossible in the mentioned Pages of his
Discourse, and thereupon seems to judge it Necessary that two of them be
excluded the Godhead, as many others (some going the Arian, some the Photinian,
more lately called the Socinian way) have done before him. He acknowledges page
30. col. 1. there may be [some Secret revealed by God, because it was above
Humane Capacicity to discover it; and sometimes also to comprehend how it can
be] But adds [there is a vast difference between my not being able to conceive
how a thing should be, and a clear apprehension, and sight that it cannot be.]
What he says thus far is unexceptionable, and I heartily concur with him in it.

But for what he subjoyns, (wherein he might have spoken his Mind of the Matter
in Controversy with as much Advantage to his Cause, without reflecting upon
his Adversaries, as if they considered these things either with no intention,
or with no sincerity, not allowing them even the never so little of the one or
the other) that [three distinct almighty and alknowing Persons, should be but
one Almighty, or but One Allknowing, or but one God, a Man (who considers with
never so little intention and sincerity) clearly sees that it cannot be. In
short, that it is not a Mystery, but (as Dr. South speaks) an absurdity and a
contradiction.] This is that I would consider with him, if he will affix these
words of his [a Man who considers, etc.) clearly sees it cannot be; and it is
an absurdity and a contradiction] to the Question as I have set it down above.
In the mean time he cannot be ignorant that as he has represented the matter,
he has here either not truly, (or at least not fairly) given the sense of any
of them whom he pretended to oppose.

For when by those words, But that three Divine Persons, or that three distinct
almighty and allknowing Persons should be but one Almighty, but one Allknowing,
or but One God, he would slily insinuate to his unwary and less attentive
Reader that the same Men held three Almighties, and but One; He well knows, and
elsewhere confesses (though he might suppose that some Readers would not be at
leisure to compare one place of his Writings with another, but hastily run away
with the apprehension, that such as were not of his mind spoke nothing but
Nonsense and Contradictions) that not only his later Opposers since P. Lumbard,
as he speaks, but diverse much more ancient, as Athanasius, and the rest of the
Nicene Fathers, etc. denied three Almighties, though they affirmed each of the
Persons to be Almighty, understanding Omnipotency (as they do Omnisciency) to
be an attribute not of the person, as such, but of the essence, as such, which
they affirm to be but One, i. e. that they are each of them almighty, by
communication in one and the same almighty essence. And if their Sentiment be
so very absurd, he needed the less to fear representing it as it is.

And the other who seems to grant three Almighties, does never say there is but
one Almighty; though such say too there is but One God, placing the Unity of the
Godhead in somewhat else, as he has himself taken Notice; which is remote from
express Self-contradiction also.

But I shall concern my self no further about the one or the other of these
ways of explaining the Doctrine of the three Persons. Only shall enquire
concerning the possibility of such a Trinity in the Godhead as was above
expressed, requiting the uncharitableness of this Author, in imputing
carelessness or insincerity to all, that think it possible, with so much
Charity, as to believe he would not (against the plain tenor of Scripture)
have rejected the Doctrine of the Trinity (as he professes to do that of the
Incarnation) if he had not thought it every way impossible.

And here I premise

1. That the present Undertaking is not to show that the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost are three, and but One, in the same respect, which I would adventure (in
this Authors words) to say, no Man that considers with never so little
Intention and Sincerity, would offer at. But when they are supposed to be but
One, in respect of Deity, they are thought to be three in some other respect.

2. That what I now design is only to represent this matter as possible to be
some way, and in the way here proposed for ought we know, not as definitely
certain, to be this way or that. The former is enough to our present purpose,
i. e. if any way it can be conceived, without absurdity or contradiction, that
these may be three with sufficient distinction to found the distinct Attributes
which the Scriptures do severally give them, so as some things may be affirmed
of some one, and not be affirmed of the other of them, and yet their Unity in
Godhead be conserved, our Point is gained; and the clamor of this (and every
other) Opposer ought to cease, for our asserting what every one that considers
clearly sees cannot be.

Now, so much being forelaid, that we may proceed with clearness and
satisfaction of mind [If we would understand whether it be possible that these
three may be sufficiently distinguished for the mentioned purpose, and yet be
one in Godhead, or in Divine Being; we are to recollect our selves, and
consider what we are wont, and find our selves indispensably obliged to
conceive of that ever blessed Being, and what is with less certainty or
evidence said or thought of it. Therefore,

I. We cannot but acknowledge that whereas we do with greatest certainty and
clearness conceive of it as an intellectual Being, comprehensive (with that) of
infinite and universal perfection, so we do (most expressly, though this be
implied in universal perfection) conclude it a Being most necessarily existent;
which God has himself been pleased to signify to us by the appropriated Name
I am, or I am what I am.

Hereby is this most excellent of Beings infinitely, distinguished from all
Creatures, or from the whole Creation. All created being is merely contingent,
i. e. (according to the true Notion of Contingency) dependent upon will and
pleasure. So he has himself taught us to distinguish; and with such
distinction to conceive of the Creation, Rev. 4. 11. Thou have made all things,
and for [or by, (...)] thy pleasure [or Will (...)] they are, or were created.
Whatsoever being is necessarily existent, the excellency of its Nature being
such, as that it was necessary to it to exist, or impossible not to exist, is
God, or is Divine being. [Notwithstanding what some have imagined of necessary
matter, we might adventure to affirm this universally of all necessary being
that it is Divine, taking it to be plainly demonstrable, and to have been
demonstrated beyond all contradiction, by the learned Dr. Cudworth, and many
others long before him. And doubt not to evince (though that is not the present
business) that supposing the imagination of necessary matter were true, this
sensible World could never possibly have been made of it, by any power
whatsoever; the only pretense for which it is imagined. But if any have a mind
to make this a Dispute, to avoid being unseasonably involved in it at this
time, it will serve my present purpose to assert only, whatsoever intellectual
Being is necessarily existent is divine.

And on the other hand, whatsoever being is contingent, i. e. such as that it
depended on a mere intervening act of will, (viz. even the sovereign and
supreme will) whether it should be or not be, is created, or is creature.

II. Whatsoever simplicity the ever blessed God has by any express Revelation
claimed to himself, or can by evident and irrefragable Reason be demonstrated
to belong to him, as a Perfection, we ought humbly and with all possible
reverence and adoration, to ascribe to him. But such simplicity as he has not
claimed, as is arbitrarily ascribed to him by over-bold, and adventurous
Intruders into the deep and most profound arcana of the divine Nature, such as
can never be proved to belong to him, or to be any real Perfection, such as
would prove an imperfection, and a blemish, would render the divine Nature less
intelligible, more impossible to be so far conceived as is requisite, as would
discompose and disturb our Minds, confound our Conceptions, make our
apprehension of his other known Perfections less distinct or inconsistent,
render him less adorable, or less an Object of Religion, or such as is
manifestly unreconcileable with his plain affirmations concerning himself, we
ought not to impose it upon our selves, or be so far imposed upon, as to
ascribe to him such simplicity.

It would be an over-officious and too meanly servile Religiousness to be awed
by the Sophistry of presumptuous Scholastic Wits, into a Subscription to their
confident determinations concerning the Being of God, that such and such things
are necessary or impossible thereto, beyond what the plain undisguised reason
of things, or his own express Word do evince. To imagine a Sacredness in their
rash Conclusions, so as to be afraid of searching into them, or of examining
whether they have any firm and solid ground or bottom. To allow the Schools the
making of our Bible, or the forming of our Creed, who license (and even sport)
themselves to Philosophize upon the Nature of God with as petulant, and
irreverent a Liberty, as they would upon a Worm, or any the meanest Insect,
while yet they can pronounce little with certainty even concerning that, has
nothing in it either of the Christian or the Man. It will become as well as
concern us, to disencumber our Minds, and release them from the entanglements
of their unproved dictates; whatsoever authority they may have acquired, only
by having been long, and commonly, taken for granted. The more reverence we
have of God, the less we are to have for such men, as have themselves expressed
little.

III. Such as have thought themselves obliged by the plain Word of God to
acknowledge a Trinity in the Godhead, viz. of Father, Son, and H. Ghost, but
withal to diminish the distinction of the one from the other, so as even to
make it next to nothing, by reason of the straits into which unexamined Maxims
have cast their Minds, concerning the Divne Simplicity; have yet not thought
that to be absolute or omnimodous. For the allowing of three somewhats in the
divine nature (and what less could have been said?) cannot consist with
absolute Simplicity in all respects, inasmuch as they cannot be three without
differing, in some refpect, from one another.

Since therefore there is a necessity apprehended of acknowledging three such
somewhats in the Godhead, both because the Word of God (who best understands
his own Nature) does speak of three in it so plainly, that without notorious
violence, it cannot be understood otherwise, and because it affirms some things
of one or other of them, which it affirms not of the rest; it will therefore be
necessary to admit a true distinction between them, otherwise they cannot be
three, and safe to to say there is so much, as is requisite to found the
distinct affirmations, which we find in Gods word, concerning this or that,
apart from the other; otherwise we shall, in effect, deny what God affirms; and
modest to confess that how great the distinction is, with precise and
particular limitation, we do not know nor dare be curious to determine or
enquire: only that as it cannot be less, than is sufficient to sustain distinct
predicates or attributions; so it cannot be so great, as to entrench upon the
Unity of the Godhead. Which limits, on the one hand, and the other, God has
himself plainly set us.

IV. Therefore since we may offend very highly by an arrogant pretense to the
knowledge we have not, but shall not offend by confessing the ignorance which
we cannot (and therefore need not) remedy. We should abstain from confident
Conclusions in the dark, and at random, especially concerning the Nature of
God; and for instance from saying, we clearly see a sufficient distinction of
Father, Son, and Spirit, in the Godhead cannot be, or is impossible. It
expresses too little Reverence of God, as if his being had any, or so narrow,
limits as to be presently seen thorough; an over-magnifying Opinion of our
selves, as if our Eye could penetrate that vast and sacred darkness, or the
glorious light (equally impervious to us) wherein God dwells; too great
rudeness to the rest of Men, more than implicitly representing all Mankind
besides as stark blind, who can discern nothing of what we pretend clearly to
see.

And it is manifest this cannot be said to be impossible, upon any other
Pretense, but that it consists not with the Unity of the Godhead, in opposition
to the multiplication thereof, or with that simplicity, which stands in
opposition to the concurrence of all Perfections therein, with distinction
greater than has been commonly thought to belong to the Divine Nature. For the
former we are at a certainty: But for the latter how do we know what the
Original, Natural State of the Divine Being is, in this respect? or what
simplicity belongs to it? or what it may contain or comprehend in it,
consistently with the Unity thereof; or so, but that it may still be but one
Divine Being? What distinction, and unity (conserved together) we can have,
otherwise, an Idea of, without any apprehended inconsistency, absurdity or
contradiction, we shall rashly pronounce to be impossible (or somewhat
imperfectly resembled thereby) in the Divine Being, unless we understood it
better than we do. Some prints and characters of that most perfect Being may be
apprehended in the creatures, especially that are intelligent; such being
expressly said to have been made in the Image of God. And if here we find
Oneness, with distinction, meeting together in the same created intelligent
being, this may assist our Understandings in conceiving what is possible to be
(in much higher Perfection) tho not to the concluding what certainly is, in the
uncreated.

V. Waving the many artificial Unions of distinct things, that united, and
continuing distinct, make one thing, under one Name, I shall only consider what
is natural, and give instance in what is nearest us, our very selves; tho the
truth is, we know so little of our own Nature, that it is a strange assuming
when we confidently determine what is impossible to be in the divine Nature,
besides what he has told us, or made our own Faculties plainly tell us is so;
(and what he has made any man's Faculties to tell him, he has made all men's
that can use them.)

But so much we manifestly find in our selves, that we have three Natures in us
very sufficiently distinguishable, and that are intimately united, the
vegetative, sensitive, and the intellective. So that notwithstanding their
manifest distinction, no one scruples when they are united, to call the whole
the humane nature. Or if any make a difficulty, or would raise a Dispute about
the distinction of these three Natures, I for the present content my self with
what is more obvious, not doubting to reach my mark by degrees, viz. that we
are made up of a mind, and a body, somewhat that can think, and somewhat that
cannot; sufficiently distinct, yet so united, that not only every one (without
hesitation) calls that thing made up of them one man; but also every one that
considers deeply, will be transported with wonder by what more-than-magical
knot or tie, two things so little akin, should be so held together, that the
one that has the power of will and choice cannot sever it self, and return
into the same union with the other at pleasure. But,

VI. Since we find this is a thing actually done, the making up of two things
of so different Natures into one thing, that puts the matter out of doubt that
this was a thing possible to be done, 'twas what God could do, for he has done
it. And if that were possible to him, to unite two things of so very different
natures into one thing; let any colorable reason be assigned me why it should
not be as possible to him, to unite two things of a like nature. i. e. If it
were possible to him to unite a spirit and a body, why is it less possible to
him to have united two spirits? And then I further enquire, If it were possible
to him to unite two, would it not be as possible to unite three? Let Reason
here be put upon its utmost stretch, and tell me what in all this is less
possible than what we see is actually done! Will any man say two or three
spirits united, being of the same nature, will mingle, be confounded, run into
one another, and lose their distinction? I ask, supposing them to pre-exist
apart, antecedently to their Union; are they not now distinguished by their own
individual essences, let them be as much united as our Souls and Bodies are,
why should they not as much remain distinct by their singular essences? There
is no more hazard of their losing their distinction, by the similitude of their
natures, than of our Soul and Body's transmuting one another by their
dissimilitude.

I know not but the dictates of so vogued an Author with many in this Age, as
Spinosa, may signify somewhat with some into whose hands this may fall; who
(with design bad enough) says, that, from whence one might collect the
remaining distinction of two things of the same nature in such a supposed
union, were the more easily conceivable of the two, i. e. than of two things of
different natures. For in his Posthumous Ethics, de Deo, He lays this down in
Explication of his second Definition, [Cogitatio alia cogitatione terminatur.
At corpus non terminatur cogitatione, nec cogitatio corpore.] Some may regard
him in this, and it would do our business. For my patt, I care not to be so
much beholden to him; for it would, at the long run, overdo it; and I know his
meaning. But I see not but two congenerous natures are equally capable of being
united, retaining their distinction, as two of a different kind, and that
sufficiently serves the present purpose.

However, let any man tell me, why it should be impossible to God so to unite
three spirits, as by his own power to fix their limits also, and by a perpetual
Law inwrought into their distinct beings to keep them distinct, so that they
shall remain everlastingly united, but not identifyed; and by virtue of that
union, be some one thing (which must, yet, want a name) as much, and as truly,
as our Soul and Body united do constitute one man. Nor is it now the question,
whether such an union would be convenient or inconvenient, apt or inept; but
all the question is whether it be possible or impossible; which is as much as
we are concerned in at this time.

But you will say, suppose it be possible, to what purpose is all this? How
remote is it from the supposed Trinity in the Godhead? You will see to what
purpose it is by and by. I therefore add,

VII. That if such an Union of three things (whether of like, or of different
Natures) so as that they shall be truly one thing, and yet remain distinct, tho
united, can be effected, (as one may with certainty pronounce, there is nothing
more impossible, or unconceivable in it, than we find is actually done) then it
is not intrinsecally impossible, or objectively; it is not impossible in it
self. No power can effect what is simply, and in it self impossible. There is
therefore no contradiction, no repugnancie, or inconsistencie, as to the thing,
nor consequently any shadow of absurdity in the conception hereof. Whereupon,

VIII. If such an union with such distinction be not impossible in it self, so
that by a competent power it is sufficiently possible to be effected, or made;
we are to consider whether it will appear more impossible, or whether I shall
have a conception in my own mind any thing more incongruous if I conceive such
an union (with such distinction) unmade, or that is original and eternal, in an
unmade, or uncreated being. For we are first to consider the thing in it self,
abstractly from made or unmade, created or uncreated being. And if it pass
clear of contradiction or absudity, in its abstract notion, we are so far safe,
and are not liable to be charged as having the conception in our minds of an
impossible, absurd, or self-repugnant thing. So that clamor and cry of the
Adversary must cease, or be it self absurd, and without pretense. This now
supposed Union with such distinction, must if it be judged impossible, as it is
in our thoughts introduced into unmade being, can no longer be judged
impossible, as it is an Union of distinct things, but only as it is unmade, or
is supposed to have place in the unmade eternal Being.

IX. This is that then we have further to consider, whether, supposing it
possible that three spiritual beings might as well be made or created in a
State of so near Union with continuing distinction, as to admit of becoming one
spiritual being, to be called by some fit name (which might easily be found
out, if the thing were produced) as that a spiritual being, and a corporeal
being may be made or created in a state of so near union with continuing
distinction, as to become one spiritual-corporeal being, called by the Name of
Man; I say, whether supposing the former of these to be as possible to be done,
or created, as the latter, which we see done already; we may not as well
suppose somewhat like it, but infinitely more perfect to be original, and
eternal in the uncreated Being? If the first be possible, the next actual, what
pretense is there to think the last impossible?

X. I might add, as that which may be expected to be significant with such as
do seriously believe the Doctrines both of the Incarnation, and the Trinity
(though I know it will signify nothing with them, who with equal contempt reject
both) that the union of the two Natures, the humane (made up of an humane Body
and an humane Soul, which are two exceedingly different Natures) with the
divine (which is a third and infinitely more different from both the other) in
one Person, viz. of the Son of God, cannot certainly appear to any considering
Person more conceivable or possible, than that which we now suppose (but assert
not) of three distinct Essences united in the One Godhead, upon any account,
but this only, that this is supposed to be an unmade, eternal union, the other
made and temporal; which renders not the one less conceivable than the other,
as it is union, but only as in the several terms of this union it is supposed
eternally to have place in the Being of God; whereas that other union, in
respect of one of its terms is acknowledged de novo to have place there.

In short, here is a spiritual created being, an humane Soul (setting aside for
the present the consideration of the humane body, which united therewith made
up the Man, Christ) confessed to be in hypostatical union with the uncreated
spiritual being of God, not as that being is in the Person of the Father, nor
as in the Person of the Holy Ghost, for then they should have become Man too;
but as it was in the Person of the Son only; why shall it be thought less
possible that three uncreated spiritual beings may be in so near an union with
each other as to be one God, as that a created Spirit (and Body too) should be
in so near union with one of the Persons in the Godhead only, as therewith to
be one Person? will it not hereby be much more easily apprehensible how one of
the Persons (as the common way of speaking is) should be incarnate, and not the
other two? Will not the Notion of Person it self be much more unexceptionable,
when it shall be supposed to have its own individual Nature? And why is a
natural, eternal union of uncreated Natures (with continuing distinction, or
without confusion) sufficient unto the Unity of the Godhead, less supposable,
than a temporal contracted union with created Natures (without confusion too)
that shall be sufficient to the Unity of a Person? will it be any thing more
contrary to such simplicity of the Divine Nature as is necessarily to be
ascribed thereto? or will it be Tritheism, and inconsistent with the
acknowledged inviolable Unity of the Godhead?

XI. That we may proceed to speak to both, let these things be considered with
seriousness and sobriety of mind, as to our selves; with all possible reverence
toward the blessed God, and with just candor and equanimity toward other
Men. And first we must leave it to any ones future representation (not being
hitherto able to discern any thing) what there is in all this that is here
supposed any way repugnant to such simplicity, as God any where claims to his
own being, or that plain reason will constrain us to ascribe to him, or that is
really in it self any Perfection. We are sure God has not by his Word taught
us to ascribe to him universal absolute simplicity; or suggested to us any such
Notices as directly and evidently infer it to belong to him. Nor has seemed at
all intent upon cautioning of us lest we should not ascribe it. The word we
find not among his Attributes mentioned in the Holy Scriptures. The thing, so
far as it signifiies any general perfection, we are sure belongs to him; but
the Scriptures are not Written with visible design to obviate any danger of our
misconceiving his Nature, by not apprehending it to be in every respect most
absolutely simple. It does teach us to conceive of him as most powerful, most
wise, most gracious; and does not teach us to conceive all these in the
abstract, viz. Power, Wisdom and Goodness to be the same thing. Yet we easily
apprehend by reflecting upon our selves, that, without multiplying the subject,
these may all reside together in the same man. But our difficulty is greater to
conceive what is commonly taught, that these, without real distinction, or with
formal only (as contradistinguished to the difference of thing from thing) are
in the abstract affirmable of God, that he is Power, Wisdom, Goodness. That to
his Being belongs so absolute simplicity, that we must not look upon these as
things really distinguishable, there, from one another, but as different
conceptions of the same thing. We must conceive of things as we can, not as we
cannot; and are only concerned to take heed of unreveal'd, and undemonstrable,
and peremptory conceptions concerning that glorious most incomprehensible and
ever-blessed Being; to beware of too curious prying into the Nature of God
(when it was so Penal to look unduly into, or even to touch that
only-hallovved Symbol of his Presence, his Ark!) beyond what he has revealed
expressly, or we can most clearly, by generally received light, apprehend. When
we know there is a Knowledge of him so reserved from us, whereof our Minds
are so little receptive, that it seemed all one, whether he told us, he did
dvvell in thick darkness, or in inaccessible light. 'Twill be a reproach to us,
if we shall need to be taught reverence of him by Pagans; or that such a
document should need to be given us for our Admonition, as that very ancient
Inscription in one of their Temples imported, I am whatsoever was, is, or shall
be, and who is he that shall draw aside my Vail?

XII. If we should suppose three spiritual necessary beings, the one whereof
were mere Power (or furious might) destitute of either wisdom, or goodness;
another mere wisdom (or craft rather) destitute of either goodness or power; a
third mere goodness (or fond and fruitless kindness) destitute of either power
or wisdom, existing separately and apart from each other. This triple
conception would overthrow it self, and must certainly allow little ease to any
considering mind. Nor could any of these be God. But if we conceive essential
power, wisdom, and goodness concurring in one spiritual necessarily existent
Being, in which are each of these, not only, by the (...), usually acknowledged
in the three Persons, totally permeating one another (which signifying but mere
presence, as we may express it, is in comparison, a small thing) but really and
vitally united, by so much a nearer, and more perfect union than has ever come
under our notice among created beings, of partly corporeal, partly incorporeal
natures, by how much beings of purest Sprituality may be apter to the most
intimate union, than when one is quite of a different nature from the other,
and as whatsoever union is suposeable to be, originally, eternally, and by
natural necessity, in the most perfect being, may be thought inexpressibly more
perfect than any other. And if, hereupon, we further conceive the most entire,
perpetual, everlasting intercourse and communion of these three, so originally
united, that what is conceivable of perfection, or excellency in any one of
these, is as much the others, for whatsoever exercises or operations, as his
own; I cannot apprehend what there is of repugnancy, contradiction, or
absurdity in this supposition; nor any thing that, by any measures he has
given us to govern our conceptions of him, appears unbecoming, or unworthy of
God. There is, it is true, less Simplicity, but more perfection ascribed hereby
to the divine Being, entirely considered; and more intelligibly, than if you go
about to impose upon your self the notion of most absolute omnimodous
simplicity therein. There would be yet more absolute simplicity ascribed unto
an eternal Being, if you should conceive in it mere power exclusive of wisdom,
and goodness -- and so of the rest; but infinitely less perfection. And, if
that would avail any thing, I could easily produce more Schoolmen, than one,
of no small note, concurring in this sentiment that [simplicitas, si sumatur in
tota sua amplitudine, non dicit perfectionem simpliciter.] But I count it not
worth the while.

XIII. And let it be here again observed, I speak not of this, as any certain
determination, that thus things are in the Deity; but as a possible supposition
of what, for ought we know, may be. If any say this gives us the Notion of a
compounded Deity, or of a composition in it; I only say the term, composition,
seems to imply a pre-existing component that brings such things together, and
supposes such and such more simple things to have pre-existed apart or
separate, and to be brought afterward together into an united state. Whereupon
I peremptorily deny any Composition in the Being of God. And let any man from
what has been hitherto said or supposed, infer it, if he can. Imagine this of
the Godhead, and you shall, we acknowledge, conceive most untruly, most
unworthily, most injuriously of God; and what is most absolutely impossible to
agree to the Divine Being. And for this Reason only, that I know of, that
carries any shadow of Importance in it, many have been so apt, without the
least warrant from any revelation God has given of himself, to ascribe to him
an unintelligible simplicity; apprehending they must otherwise admit a
composition in his most sacred Essence, i. e. the putting of things together
that were separate, to make it up; which must suppose it a new production, that
once was not, and from an imperfect state by the Coalition of things once
severed, to have arrived to the perfection we ascribe to the Divine Being;
which sort of being cannot, without the most absurd and blasphemous
contradiction, ever admit to be called God. But if we suppose most perfect,
essential, Power, Wisdom, Love, by original, eternal, and most natural
necessity to have co-existed in that being most intimately united, though
distinct; that seemingly important reason, will appear but a shadow, and
accordingly vanish as such.

And indeed this is no more than what, in effect, such as discourse upon this
Subject do commonly say (though perhaps some may less consider the ducture and
sequel of their own professed Sentiments) when they speak of the
incomprehensibleness of God's Essence, and how impossible it is a finite mind
should form or receive a full and complete Idea of it; or when they therefore
say, that any conceptions we can have of the Wisdom, Goodness, or any other
Attribute of the Divine Being, are still but inadequate conceptions; whereby
they must mean, when we consider for instance the Wisdom of God that we not
only fall infinitely short of conceiving all that belongs to the Divine Being,
in that kind, but that there is also infinitely more belonging thereto, in
other kinds, than it is possible that conception can contain or express. And
when we have the conception in our minds of the Divine Wisdom, do we not
apprehend there is really somewhat else in the Divine Being, whereof that term
has no signification? or will we say his Wisdom and his Power are really the
same thing? (as they must either be the same, or diverse things:) If we say they
are the same, we must, I doubt, confess our selves to say what we do not
understand, especially when, in the abstract, we affirm them of one another,
and of God; and accordingly say that Wisdom is Power, and Power is Wisdom, and
the one of these is God, and the other, God. I know a formal distinction is
commonly admitted, i. e. that the conception of the one is not included in the
conception of the other. But are these different conceptions true or false? If
false, why are they admitted? if true, there must be somewhat in the Nature of
the thing corresponding to them. But if we say they are distinct, but most
intimately, and eternally united in the Divine Being, by a necessary, natural
Union, or that it is not impossible so to be, what we say will, I think, agree
with it self, and not disagree with any other conception we are obliged to have
concerning the blessed God.

In the mean time, I profess not to judge, we are under the precise Notions of
Power, Wisdom and Goodness, to conceive of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; nor
that the Notions we have of those, or any other divine Perfections, do exactly
correspond to what, in God, is signified by these Names; but I reckon, that
what relief and ease is given our minds by their being disentangled from any
apprehended necessity of thinking these to be the very same things, may
facilitate to us our apprehending the Father, Son, and Spirit to be
sufficiently distinct, for our affirming, or under standing the affirmation, of
some things, concerning some one, without including the other of them.

XIV. But some perhaps will say, while we thus amplify the distinction of these
glorious three, we shall seem to have too friendly a look toward, or shall say
in effect, what Dr. Sherlock is so highly blamed for saying, and make three
Gods. I answer, that if with sincere minds we enquire after truth, for its own
sake, we shall little regard the friendship or enmity, honor or dishonor of
this or that man. If this were indeed so; does what was true become false,
because such a man has said it? But it is remote from being so. There is no
more, here positively asserted than generally so much distinction betweeen the
Father, Son, and Spirit, as is in it self necessary to the founding the
distinct attributions, which in the Scriptures are severally given them [that
when the word or wisdom was said to be with God (understanding it, as the case
requires with God the Father) in the creation of all things, we may not think
nothing more is said than that he was with himself; that when the Word is said
to be made flesh, it is equally said the Father was made flesh, or the Holy
Ghost; that when the Holy Ghost is said to have proceeded from, or have been
sent by the Father, or the Son, he is said to have proceeded from himself, or
have sent himself.] But, in the mean time this is offered without determining
precisely, how great distinction is necessary to this purpose. It is not here
positively said these three are three distinct substances, three infinite minds
or spirits. We again and again insist, and inculcate, how becoming, and
necessary it is to abstain from over-bold enquiries, or positive determinations
concerning the limits, or the extent of this distinction, beyond what the
Scriptures have, in general, made necessary to the mentioned purpose; that we
may not throw our selves into guilt, nor cast our minds into unnecessary
straits, by affirming this or that to be necessary, or impossible in these
matters.

XV. The case is only thus, that since we are plainly led by the express
revelation God has made of himself to us in his Word, to admit a trinal
conception of him, or to conceive this threefold distinction in his Being, of
Father, Son, and Spirit; since we have so much to greaten that distinction,
diverse things being said of each of these, that must not be understood of
either of the other; since we have nothing to limit it on the other hand, but
the Unity of the Godhead, which we are sure can be but One, both from the plain
Word of God, and the nature of the thing it self; since we are assured both
these may consist, viz. this Trinity, and this Unity, by being told there are
three -- and these three 1 John 5.
(i. e. plainly, continuing three) are (...), one thing; which one thing, can
mean nothing else but Godhead; as is also said concerning two of them,
elsewhere, (there being no occasion, then, to mention the third) I and my
Father are one thing. We are hereupon Joh. 10.
unavoidably put upon it to cast in our own minds (and are concerned to do it
with the most religious reverence and profoundest humility) what sort of thing
this most sacred Godhead may be, unto which this Oneness is ascribed, with
threefold distinction. And manifestly finding there are in the Creation made
Unions, with sufficient remaining distinction, particularly in our selves, that
we are a soul and a body (things of so very different natures) that often the
Soul is called the Man, (not excluding the Body) and the body, or our flesh
called the Man (not excluding the Soul) we are plainly led to apprehend that it
is rather more easily possible there might be two Spirits (so much more
agreeing in nature) so united, as to be one thing, and yet continuing distinct;
and if two, there might as well be three, if the Creator pleased. And hence are
led further to apprehend, that if such a made Union, with continuing
distinction be possible in created being, it is for ought we know, not
impossible in the uncreated; that there may be such an eternal unmade union,
with continuing distinction. And all this being only represented as possible to
be thus, without concluding that thus it certainly is; sufficiently serves our
purpose, that no pretense might remain of excluding the eternal Word; and the
eternal Spirit, the Godhead, as if a Trinity therein were contradictious and
impossible, repugnant to reason, and common sense. Where now is the
coincidency?

XVI. Nor is there, hereupon, so great a remaining difficulty to salve the
Unity of the Godhead; when the supposition is taken in, of the natural,
eternal, necessary Union of these three that has been mentioned.

And it shall be considered, that the Godhead is not supposed more necessarily
to exist, than these three are to coexist in the nearest and most intimate
union with each other therein. That Spiritual Being which exists necessarily,
and is every way absolutely perfect, whether it consist of three in one, or of
only one, is God. We could never have known, it is true, that there are such
three coexisting in this one God, if he himself had not told us. What Man
knows the things of a Man, 1 Cor. 2. 11.
but the Spirit of a Man that is in him? even so the things of God none knows
but the Spirit of God. In telling us this he has told us no impossible, no
unconceivable thing. It is absurd, and very irreligious presumption to say this
cannot be. If a Worm were so far capable of thought, as to determine this or
that concerning our Nature; and that such a thing were impossible to belong to
it, which we find to be in it, we should trample upon it! More admirable Divine
Patience spares us! He has only let us know that this is the State of his
Essence (whereof we should have been otherwise ignorant.) This is its
constitution, (q. d. ita se habet comparatam) thus it is in, and of it self,
that there are three in it to be conceived, under the distinct Notions of
Father, Son and Spirit, without telling us expressly how far they are distinct,
in terms of Art, or in Scholastic Forms of Speech. But he considered us as
Men, reasonable Creatures; and that when he tells us there are three existing
in his being, of each of which some things are said, that must not be
understood spoken of the other, and yet that there is but one God. We are not
incapable of understanding, that these three must agree in Godhead; and yet
that they must be sufficiently distinct, unto this purpose, that we may
distinctly conceive of, apply our selves to, and expect from, the one and the
other of them. And the frame of our Religion is therefore ordered for us
accordingly, i. e. for us to whom he has revealed so much. Others, to whom
such Notices are not given, he expects should deport themselves toward him,
according to the light which they have, not which they have not.

XVII. But an Hypothesis in this Affair, which leaves out the very Nexus, that
natural, eternal union, or leaves it out of its proper place, and insists upon
mutual consciousness, which, at the most, is but a consequence thereof, wants
the principal thing requisite to the salving the unity of the Godhead. If two
or three created Spirits had never so perfect a mutual Perspection of one
another, that would not constitute them one thing, though it probably argue them
to be so; and but probably; for God might, no doubt, give them a mutual insight
into one another, without making them one; but if he should create them in as
near an union, as our Soul and Body are in with one another (and it is very
apprehensible they might be created in a much nearer, and more permanent one,
both being of the same Nature, and neither Subject to decay) they would as
truly, admit to be called one something (as such a Creature might well enough
be called, till a fitter name were found out) notvvithstanding their supposed
continuing distinction, as fitly, as our Soul and Body united, are,
notvvithstanding their continuing distinction, called one Man. And I do
sincerely profess such an union, with perpetual distinction, seems to me every
whit as conceivable, being supposed unmade, uncreated, and eternal, as any
union is among Creatures, that must therefore be a made thing, or a temporal
production.

And whereas necessity of existence (most unquestionably of an intellectual
Being) is a most certain, and fundamental attribute of Deity: The Father, Son,
and Spirit being supposed necessarily existent, in this united state, they
cannot but be God, and the Godhead by reason of this necessary union cannot but
be One; yet so, as that when you predicate Godhead, or the name of God of any
one of them, you herein express a true, but an inadequate conception of God; i.
e. the Father is God, not excluding the Son, and H. Ghost; the Son is God, not
excluding the Father and the H. Ghost; the H. Ghost is God, not excluding the
Father and the Son. As our body is the man, not excluding the soul; our soul is
the man, not excluding the body. Therefore their Union in Godhead being so
strict and close, notwithstanding their distinction, to say that any one of
them is God, in exclusion of the other two, would not be a true predication.
It Is indeed said the Father is the only true God; but that neither excludes the
Son, nor the H. Ghost from Joh. 17. 3.
being the true God also; each of them communicating in that Godhead which only
is true. It had been quite another thing, if it had been said, Thou Father
only, art the true God.

XVIII. The order moreover, is this way also very clearly preserved and fitly
complied with of priority and posteriority (not of time, as every one sees, but
nature) which the names Father, Son, and Spirit do more than intimate. For the
Father (usually called by Divines the Fons Trinitatis) being by this
appellation plainly signified to be First in this sacred Triad; the Son, as
that title imports, to be of the Father; and the Spirit to be of, or from, both
the other. Let these two latter be considered as being of, or from the First,
not by any intervening act of will, by which it might have been possible they
should not have been so; but by natural, necessary, eternal promanation; so as
that necessity of existence is hereby made as truly to agree to them as to the
First, which is acknowledged the most fundamental attribute of Deity. This
promanation is hereby sufficiently distinguished from creation; and these two
set infinitely above all Creatures, or the whole Universe of created beings.
Nor is there hereby any place left for that unapt application of a Son and
Grandson deriving themselves from P. 17. of these Considerations.
the Grandfather, or two Brothers from one Father.

And although it be also true, and readily acknowledged, that there are numerous
Instances of involuntary productions among the Creatures, and which are
therefore to be deemed a sort of natural and necessary productions; yet that
necessity not being absolute, but ex hypothesi only, i. e. upon supposition of
their productive Causes, and all things requisite to those productions, being
so, and so, aptly posited in order thereto, all which depended upon one
Sovereign will at first, so that all might have been otherwise, this signifies
nothing to exempt them out of the state and rank of Creatures, or invalidate
this most unalterable distinction between created being, and uncreated.

XIX. But if here it shall be urged to me that one individual necessarily
existent spiritnal Being alone is God, and is all that is signified by the Name
of God; and therefore that three distinct, individual, necessarily existent,
spiritual Beings must unavoidably be three distinct Gods:

I would say, if by one individual, necessarily existent, spiritual Being, you
mean one such Being, comprehending Father, Son and Holy Ghost taken together, I
grant it. But if by one individual, necessarily existent, spiritual Being, you
mean either the Father, Son, or Holy Ghost, taken sejunctly, I deny it; for
hoth the other are truly signified by the Name of God too, as well as that One.

I therefore say, the term individual, must in this case now supposed (as
possible, not as certain) admit of a twofold application; either to the
distinct essence of the Father, or of the Son, or of the Holy Ghost; or to the
entire essence of the Godhead, in which these three do concur. Each of these
conceived by it self are (according to this supposition) individual essences,
but conceived together, they are the entire individual essence of God. For
there is but one such essence, and no more, and it can never be multiplied, nor
divided into more of the same name and nature. As the body, and soul of a man,
are one individual body, and one individual soul, but both together are but one
individual man: And the case would be the same, if a man did consist of two, or
three spirits so (or more nearly) united together, as his soul and body are.
Especially if you should suppose (which is the supposition of no impossible or
unconceivable thing) that these three spirits which together (as we now do
suppose) do constitute a man, were created with an aptitude to this united
coexistence, but with an impossibility of existing separately, except to the
Divine Power which created them conjunct, and might separate them so as to make
them exist apart; which yet cannot be the Case in respect of three such
uncreated spiritual Beings, whose Union is supposed to be by natural, eternal
necessity, as their Essences are; and are therefore most absolutely inseparable.

XX. Or if it should be said, I make the Notion of God to comprehend Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and a Godhead besides common to these three.

I answer; nothing I have said or supposed implies any such thing; or that the
Notion of God imports any thing more of real being, than is contained in
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, taken together, and most intimately, naturally,
and vitally, by eternal necessity, united with one another. As in a created
being, consisting of more things than one taken together and united; a Man for
instance, there is nothing more of real entity, besides what is contained in
his Body and his Soul united and taken together. It Is true that this term, a
Man, speaks somewhat very diverse from an humane body taken alone, or an humane
soul taken alone, or from both, separately taken; but nothing diverse from both
united, and taken together.

And for what this may be unjustly collected to imply of composition, repugnant
to Divine Perfection, it is before obviated. Sect. 13.

If therefore it be asked, What do we conceive under the Notion of God, but a
necessary, spiritual Being? I answer that this is a true Notion of God, and may
be passable enough, among Pagans, for a full one. But we Christians are taught
to conceive under the Notion of God, a necessary spiritual Being, in which
Father, Son, and Spirit, do so necessarily coexist, as to constitute that
Being; and that when we conceive any one of them to be God, that is but an
inadequate, not an entire and full conception of the Godhead.

Nor will any place remain for that trivial Cavil, that if each of these have
Godhead in him, he therefore has a Trinity in him; but that he is one of the
three who together are the One God, by necessary, natural, eternal Union.

Which Union is also quite of another kind than that of three Men (as for
instance, of Peter, James and John) partaking in the same kind of Nature; who
notwithstanding, exist separately, and apart from each other. These three are
supposed to coexist in natural, necessary, eternal, and most intimate Union, so
as to be one Divine Being.

Nor is it any prejudice against our thus stating the Notion of the Godhead,
that we know of no such Union in all the Creation, that may assist our
Conception of this Union. What incongruity is there in supposing, in this
respect, as well as in many others, somewhat most peculiarly appropriate to the
Being of God? If there be no such actual Union in the Creation, it is enough to
our purpose, if such a one were possible to have been. And we do know of the
actual union of two things of very different Natures so as to be one thing, and
have no reason to think the Union of two or more things of the same sort of
Nature, with sufficient remaining distinction, less possible or less
intelligible.

XXI. Upon the whole, let such an union be conceived in the Being of God, with
such distinction, and one would think (though the Complexions of Men's minds do
strangely and unaccountably differ) the absolute perfection of the Deity, and
especially the perfect felicity thereof, should be much the more apprehensible
with us. When we consider that most delicious society which would hence ensue,
among the so entirely consentient Father, Son, and Spirit, with whom there is
so perfect rectitude, everlasting harmony, mutual complacency, unto highest
delectation; according to our way of conceiving things, who are taught by our
own Nature (which also has in it the Divine Image) to reckon no Enjoyment
pleasant, without the consociation of some other with us therein; we for our
parts cannot but hereby have in our minds a more gustfull Idea of a blessed
state, than we, can conceive in mere eternal solitude.

God speaks to us, as Men, and will not blame us for conceiving things so
infinitely above us, according to the Capacity of our Natures; provided we do
not assume to our selves to be a measure for our Conceptions of him; further
than as he is himself pleased to warrant, and direct us herein. Some likeness
we may (taught by himself) apprehend between him and us, but with infinite (not
inequality only, but) unlikeness. And for this Case of delectation in Society,
we must suppose an immense difference between him an all-sufficient,
self-sufficient Being, comprehending in himself the infinite fullness of
whatsoever is most excellent and delectable, and our selves, who have in us but
a very minute portion of being, goodness, or felicity, and whom he has made to
stand much in need of one another, and most of all of him.

But when, looking into our selves, we find there is in us a disposition, often
upon no necessity, but sometimes, from some sort of benignity of temper, unto
Conversation with others; we have no reason, when other things concur, and do
fairly induce, and lead our thoughts this way, to apprehend any incongruity in
supposing he may have some distinct object of the same sort of propension in
his own most perfect Being too, and therewith such a propension it self also.

XXII. As to what concerns our selves, the observation is not altogether
unapposit, what Cicero treating of Friendship, discourses of perpetual
solitude, that the affectation of it must signify the worst of ill Humor, and
the most savage Nature in the World. And supposing one of so sour and morose an
Humor, as to shun and hate the Conversation of Men, he would not endure it, to
be without some one or other to whom he might disgorge the virulency of that
his malignant Humor. Or that supposing such a thing could happen, that God
should take a Man quite out of the Society of Men, and place him in absolute
solitude, supplied with the abundance of whatsoever Nature could covet besides;
who, says he, is so made of Iron, as to endure that kind of Life? And he
introduces Architas Tarentinus reported to speak to this purpose.

That if one could ascend into Heaven, behold the frame of the World, and the
beauty of every Star, his admiration would be unpleasant to him alone, which
would be most delicious, if he had some one to whom to express his sense of the
whole.

We are not, I say, strictly to measure God by our selves in this; further than
as he himself prompts and leads us.

But if we so form our Conception of Divine Bliss, as not to exclude from it
somewhat, whereof that Delight in Society, which we find in our selves may be
an imperfect faint resemblance, it seems not altogether disagreeable to what
the Scriptures also teach us to conceive concerning him, when it brings in the
eternal Wisdom, saying, as one distinct from the prime Author, and Parent of
all things, then was I by him, as one brought up with him, and daily his
delight. Prove. 8.


XXIII. However, let the whole of what has been hitherto proposed be taken
together, and to me, it appears our conception of the sacred Trinunity will be
so remote from any shadow of inconsistency or repugnancy, that no necessity can
remain upon us of torturing Wit, and racking Invention to the uttermost, to do
a labored and artificial violence (by I know not what skrews and engines) to
so numerous plain Texts of Scripture, only to undeify our glorious Redeemer,
and do the utmost despite to the Spirit of grace! We may be content to let the
word of God (or what we pretend to own for a divine revelation) stand as it is,
and undistorted, speak its own sense. And when we find the Former of all things
speaking as WE or US. When we find Genesis 1.
another [I] possessed by the Lord, Prove. 8.
in the beginning of his way, before his works of old; so as that he says of
himself (as distinct from the other) I was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, or ever the Earth was -- And when he prepared the Heavens I was
there, etc. When we find the Child born for us, the Son given to us, called
also the mighty Isa. 9.
God, and (as in reference to us he fitly might) the Everlasting Father. When
we are told of the Ruler that was to come out of Bethlehem-Ephrata, Mic. 5.
that his goings forth were from everlasting. That the Word was in the
beginning with God, and was God -- That all things were made by him, Joh. 1.
and without him nothing was made, that was made. That this Word was made flesh
-- That His glory was beheld as the glory of the only begotten Son of the
Father, full of grace and truth. Even that same he that above was said to have
been in the beginning with God, and to be God. That when he who was said to
have come down from Heaven, was, Joh. 3.
even while he was on Earth, at that time, said to be in Heaven. That we are
told by himself, he and his Father are one thing. That he Joh. 10.
is not only said to know the heart, but to know all things. Joh. 21.
That even he who according to the flesh came of the Israelites, is Romans 9.
yet expressly said to be over all, God blessed for ever. That when he was in
the form of God -- he Phil. 2.
humbled himself to the taking on him the form of a servant, and to be found in
fashion as a man. That it is said, all things were created by him, Col. 1.
that are in heaven, and on earth, visible and invisible, thrones, dominions,
principalities, powers, -- and that all things were created by him, and for
him; than which nothing could have been said more peculiar or appropriate to
Deity. That even of the Son of God it is said, he is the true God and eternal
Life. 1 John 5.
That we are so plainly told he is, Alpha and Omega, the first Rev. 1.
and the last, he that was, and is, Chap. 2.
and is to come, The Lord Almighty, the beginning of the creation of Chap. 3.
The searcher of hearts. That the God.
Spirit of God is said to search all things, even the deep things of 1 Cor. 2.
God. That lying to him is said to be lying to God. That the Acts 5.
great Christian Solemnity, Baptism is directed to be in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. That it is so distinctly said, there are three
that bear record in Heaven, the Father, 1 John 5.
the Word, and the Spirit, and that these three are one thing.

I cannot imagine what should oblige us so studiously to wiredraw all this to
quite other meanings.

XXIV. And for the leaving out of this last mentioned text in some copies, what
has been said (not to mention diverse others) by the famously learned Dr.
Hammond upon that place, is so reasonable, so moderate, so charitable to the
opposite party, and so apt to satisfy impartial and unprejudiced minds, that
one would scarce think, after the reading of it, any real doubt can remain
concerning the authentickness of that 7th. verse in 1 John 5.

Wherefore now taking all these texts together; with many more that might have
been mentioned, I must indeed profess to wonder, that with men of so good
sense, as our Socinian Adversaries are accounted, this consideration should not
have more place and weight, viz. That it being so obvious to any Reader of the
Scriptures to apprehend from so numerous Texts, that Deity must belong to the
Son of God, and that there wants not Sufficient inducement to conceive so of
the Holy Ghost also; there should be no more caution given in the Scriptures
themselves to prevent mistake (if there were any) in apprehending the matter
accordingly. And to obviate the unspeakable consequent danger of erring in a
case of so vast importance. How unagreeable it is to all our notions of God;
and to his usual procedure in cases of less consequence! How little does it
consist with his being so wise and so compassionate a Lover of the souls of
men, to let them be so fatally exposed unto so inevitable, and so destructive a
delusion! That the whole Christian Church should thorough so many Centuries of
years, be even trained into so horrid and continued Idolatry by himself who so
severely forbids it! I cannot allow my self to think men of that persuasion
insincere in their professing to believe the divine authority of the Holy
Scriptures, when the Leader and Head of their Party, writ a book, that is not
without nerves in defense of it. But I confess I cannot devise, with what
design they can think those Scriptures were written! Or why they should count
it a thing worthy of infinite wisdom to vouchsafe such a revelation to men,
allowing them to treat and use it as they do! And that till some great Socinian
wits should arise 1500 years after, to rectify their notions in these things,
men should generally be in so great hazard of being deceived into damnation,
by those very Scriptures, which were professedly writ to make them wise to
Salvation!

XXV. Nor is it of so weighty importance in this controversy, to cast the
balance the other way, that a noted Critic (upon what introducement needs not
be determined) changed his judgment, or that his Posthumous interpretations of
some texts (if they were his interpretations) carry an appearance of his having
changed it; because he thought such texts might possibly admit to be
interpreted otherwise, than they usually were, by such as alleged them for the
Trinity, or the (disputed) Deity of the Son or Sipirit, or that the cause must
be lost, upon his deserting it, or that he was still to be reckoned of the
opposite party (as this Author calls it) and that such texts as we most relied
upon, were therefore given up by some of our own.

And it is really a great assuming, when a man shall adventure to pronounce so
peremptorily, against the so common judgment of the Christian Church, without
any color of proof, that our copies, are false copies, our translations, our
explications false, and the generality of the wisest, the most inquisitive,
most pious, and most judicious assertors of the Christian cause, for so many
continued ages, fools, or cheats for owning and avowing them; for no other
imaginanable reason, but only because they make against him! How will he prove
any Copies we rely upon to be false? Is it because he is pleased to suspect
them? And is an interpretation false, because the words can possibly be
tortured unto some other sense? Let him name me the Text, wherein any Doctrine
is supposed to be delivered that is of merely supernatural revelation, of which
it is not possible to to devise some other meaning, not more remote, alien, or
unimaginable, than theirs, of most of the disputed Texts.

Nor indeed do we need to except that natural sentiment it self, that there is
but one God, (which this Author takes such Pains to prove, as if he thought, or
would make other men think, we denied it.) For though it is so generally
acknowledged, does he not know it is not so generally understood in the same
sense? Against whom does he write? Does he not know they understand this
Oneness in one sense, he, in another? They in such a sense as admits a Trinity,
he in a sense that excludes it?

But (for such things as did need a superadded verbal revelation) how easy is
it to an inventive, pervicacious Wit, to wrest words this way or that.

XXVI. The Scriptures were writ for the instruction of sober learners; not for
the pastime of contentious wits, that affect only to play tricks upon them. At
their rate of interpreting, among whom he ranks himself, it is impossible any
Doctrine can with certainty, be founded upon them. Take the first Chapter of
St. John's Gospel for instance, and what Doctrine can be asserted in plainer
words, than the Deity of Christ, in the three first Verses of that Chapter? Set
any man of an ordinary, unprepossest understanding, to read them, and when he
finds that by the Word is meant Jesus Christ (which themselves admit) see if he
will not judge it plainly taught, that Jesus Christ is God, in the most
eminent, known sense. Especially when he shall take notice of so many other
Texts, that, according to their most obvious appearance, carry the same sense.
But it is first, thorough mere shortness of discourse, taken for granted, and
rashly concluded on, that it is absolutely impossible, if the Father be God,
the Son can be God too (or the Holy Ghost) upon a presumption, that we can know
every thing that belongs to the Divine Nature; and what is possible to be in
it, and what not; and next, there is hereupon not only a license imagined, but
an obligation, and necessity, to shake Heaven and Earth, or tear that divine
Word that is more stable, into a thousand pieces, or expound it to nothing, to
make it comply with that forelaid presumptuous determination. Whereas if we
could but bend our Minds so far to comply with the plain ducture of that
revelation God has made unto us of himself; as to apprehend that, in the most
only Godhead there may be distinctions, which we particularly understand not,
sufficient to found the Doctrine of a Trinity therein, and very consistent with
the unity of it; we should save the divine Word, and our own Minds, from unjust
torture, both at once. And our task, herein, will be the easier, that we are
neither concerned nor allowed to determine, that things are precisely so, or
so; but only to suppose it possible that so they may be, for ought that we
know. Which will I am certain not be so hard, nor so bold an undertaking, as
his, who shall take upon him to prove, that any thing here supposed is
impossible.

Indeed if any one would run the discourse into the abyss of Infinity, he may
soon create such difficulties to himself, as it ought not to be thought
strange, if they be greater than any humane understanding can expedite. But not
greater than any man will be entangled in, that shall set himself to consider
Infinity upon other accounts; which yet he will find it imposed upon him
unavoidably to admit whether he will or no. Not greater than this Author will
be equally concerned in, upon his doing that right to Truth, in opposition to
the former leaders of his own Party, as to acknowledge the Omnipresence of the
Divine essence, p. 32. which he will find, let him try it when he will. Nor yet
so great, nor accompanied with so gross, so palpable and horrid absurdities, as
he will soon be encountered with, should he retract his grant, or entertain the
monstrously maimed, and most deformed, impious, conceit of a finite, or limited
Deity!

XXVII. Yet also in this present case, the impossibility to our narrow Minds of
comprehending Infinity, is most rationally improveable to our very just
advantage. It ought to be upbraided to none as a pretext, or a cover to sloth,
or dullness. It Is no reproach to us that we are creatures, and have not infinite
capacities. And it ought to quiet our minds, that they may so certainly know
they have limits; within which, we are to content our selves with such notions,
about indemonstrable, and unrevealed things, as they can, with greatest ease to
themselves, find room for.

I can reflect upon nothing in what is here proposed, but what is intelligible
without much toil, or much Metaphysics. As matters, of so common concernment,
ought, to our uttermost, to be represented in such a way that they may be so.
We need not be concerned in Scholastic Disquisitions about Union; or by what
peculiar Name to call that which is here supposed. It Is enough for us to know
there may be a real, natural, vital, and very intimate union, of things that
shall, notwithstanding it, continue distinct, and that shall, by it, be truly
one. Nor do we need to be anxiously curious in stating the Notions of Person,
and Personality, of suppositum and suppositality, though I think not the term
Person disallowable in the present Case. Nor will say what that noted Man (so
noted that I need not Name him, and who was as much acquainted with
Metaphysics as most in his Age) published to the World above twenty Years ago,
that he counted the Notion of the Schools about Suppositum a Foolery. For I do
well know, the thing it self, which our Christian Metaphysicians intended, to
be of no small importance in our Religion, and specially to the Doctrine of
Redemption, and of our Redeemer.

XXVIII. But I reckon they that go the more Metaphysical way, and content
themselves with the modal distinction of three Persons in the Godhead, say
nothing herein that can be proved absurd or contradictious. As to what is
commonly urged, that if there be three Persons in the Deity, each Person must
have its distinct individual Essence, as well as its distinct personality. I
would deny the consequence, and say, that though this be true in created Persons
(taking Person in the strict Metaphysical sense) it is not necessary to be so
in uncreated. That the reason is not the same betvveen finite things and
infinite; and would put them to prove, if they can, that the same infinite
Essence cannot be whole and undivided in three several Persons; knowing there
can be nothing more difficult urged in the Case, than may against the Divine
Omnipresence; which irrefragable reasons, as well as the plainest testimony of
Scripture will oblige us to acknowledge.

But I think, though this Hypothesis abstractly considered, and by it self, is
not indefensible; it does not altogether so well square with the Christian
Economy, nor so easily allow that distinction to the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, which seems requisite to found the distinct attributions that are
severally given them in the Holy Scriptures.

XXIX. To conclude, I only wish these things might be considered, and
discoursed with less confidence, and peremptory determination; with a greater
awe of what is divine and sacred; and that we may more confine our selves to
the plain words of Scripture in this matter, and be content therewith. I
generally blame it in the Socinians (who appear otherwise rational and
considering men) that they seem to have formed their belief of things, not
possible to be known but by the Scriptures, without them; and then think they
are by all imaginable Arts, and they care not what violence, (as Socinus
himself has in effect confessed) to mold and form them according to their
preconceived sense. Common Modesty, and Civility, one would have thought,
should have made Schlictingius abstain from prefixing, and continuing that as a
running Title to a long Chapter: Articulus Evangelicorum de Trinitate cum sensu
communi pugnat, engrossing common sense to himself and his Party, and
reproaching the generality of Christians, as not understanding common sense.
They should take upon them less, and not vaunt, as if they were the Men, and
Wisdom must dye with them.

For this Author, I Congratulate his nearer approach to us, from those who were
formerly Leaders of his Party, in the Doctrines of Gods Omnipresence, and the
perceptiveness, and activity of separate Souls. He writes with sprightliness
and vigor. And, I doubt not, believes really, what he writes with so little
seeming doubt. And because his Spirit appears to be of a more generous, exalted
pitch, than to comport with any thing against his Judgment, for secular
interest and advantage. I reckon it the greater pity it should want the
addition of what would be very ornamental to it, and which he wishes to two of
the Persons, to whom he makes himself an Antagonist, more of the tenderness and
Catholic Charity of genuine Christianity, p. 19. col. 2. to accompany those
his abilities and learning, which would not thereby be the lesser (as he
speaks) nor the less conspicuous.

I believe few would have thought him to see the less clearly, if he had been
content to see for himself, not for mankind. And if he had not talked at that
rate, as if he carried the Eyes of all the World in his Pocket, they would have
been less apt to think he carried his own there.

Nor had his Performance, in this Writing of his, lost any thing of real value,
if in a Discourse upon so grave a subject, some lepidities had been left out,
as that of Dulcinea del Toboso, etc.

And to allude to what he says of Dr. Cudworth, his displeasure will not hurt
so rough an Author as Arnobius, so many Ages after he is dead, if he should
happen to offend him, by having once said, Dissoluti -- est pectoris in rebus
serijs quaerere voluptatem -- etc.

But for all of us, I hope we may say without offense to any, common humane
frailty should be more considered, and that we know but in part, and in how
small a part! We should, hereupon, be more equal to one another. And when it is
obvious to every one, how we are straightened in this matter, and that we ought to
suppose one another intently, aiming to reconcile the Scripture-discovery, with
natural Sentiments, should not uncharitably censure, or labor to expose one
another, that any seem more satisfied with their own Method than with ours.
What an odd and almost ludicrous Spectacle do we give to the blessed Angels
that supervise us (if their benignity did not more prompt them to compassion)
when they behold us fighting in the dark, about things we so little understand;
or, when we all labor under a gradual blindness, objecting it to one another,
and one accusing another that he abandons not his own too weak sight, to see
only by his (perhaps) blinder Eye.

Thus, Sir, you have my sense what I think safe, and enough to be said in this
weighty matter.

To you, these thoughts are not new, with whom they have been communicated and
discoursed heretofore, long ago. And I believe you may so far recollect your
self, as to remember the principal ground was suggested to you, upon which this
Discourse now rests; [viz. necessity of Existence, and Contingencie; emanations
absolutely independent upon any will at all; and the arbitrary productions of
the Divine Will,] as the sufficient and most fundamental difference between
what is uncreated and what is created; and upon this very account, as that
which might give scope and room to our thoughts, to conceive the Doctrine of
the Trinity, consistently with the Unity of the Godhead; and so, as that the
Son, tho truly from the Father, and the Holy Ghost though truly from both, shall
yet appear infinitely distinguished from all created Beings whatsoever.

So much you know was under consideration with us above twenty years ago; and
was afterward imparted to many more; long before there was any mention or
forethought, within our notice, of such a revival of former controversies, upon
this Subject, as we have lately seen.

This occasion, now given, has put me upon revolving anew these former
thoughts; and upon digesting them into some order, such as it is, for public
view. If they shall prove to be of any use, it appears they will not be out of
season; and it will he grateful to me to be any way serviceable to so worthy a
Cause. If they shall be found altogether useless; being evicted either of
impertinency, or untruth, it shall not be ungrateful. For I thank God, I find
not a disposition in my mind to be fond of any Notions of mine, as they are
such, nor to be more adventurous, or confident, in determining of things hid,
not only in so profound, but in most sacred darkness, than I have all along
expressed my self. I ought indeed to be the more cautious of offending in this
kind, that being the thing I blame, the positive asserting this or that to be
impossible, or not possibly competent to the nature of God, which by his own
Word, or the manifest reason of things does not plainly appear to be so. Much
more which his Word does as plainly as it is possible any thing can be expressed
by words, ascribe to him. The only thing I assert is, that a Trinity in the
Godhead may be possible, for ought we know, in the way that I have proposed. At
least it is so, for any thing that I do as yet know. And so confident I am of
the truth, and true meaning of his Word, revealing a Trinity in his eternal
Godhead, that I strongly hope, if ever it shall be proved to be impossible upon
these terms that I have here set down; by the same, or by equal, Light, the
possibility of it some other way, will appear too. i. e. That not only a
Trinity in the Unity of the Godhead is a possible thing; but that it is also
possible that the Father, Son and Holy Ghost may be sufficiently distinguished
to answer the frame and design of Christianity: And that will equally serve my
purpose. For so however, will the Scandal be removed, that may seem to ly upon
our Holy Religion, through the industrious misrepresentation which is made of
it, by Scepticks, Deists or Atheists, as if it were made up of inconsistencies
and absurdities, and were fitter to be entertained with laughter than faith:
And being effectually vindicated, it will be the more successfully propagated,
and more cheerfully practiced; which is all that is coveted and sought by

SIR, Your very Respectfully, Humble Servant, etc.

Postscript,
HAving the Copies of some Letters by me, which I wrote to Dr. Wallis between
two and three Years ago, upon this Subject; I think, Sir, it is not improper,
and perhaps it may be some way useful, to let them accompany this to your self.

And here I shall freely tell you my principal inducement, (taking notice in
some of the Doctor's printed Letters; of others to him, contained in them) to
send him (incognito) one also; but with that reason against printing it, which
you find toward the end of the first Letter.

It was really the apprehension, which had long remained with me, that the
simplicity, which (if the Notion of it were stretched too far) not the
Scriptures, but the Schools have taught us to ascribe to the Being of God, was
that alone which has given us difficulty, in conceiving a Trinity in the only
One God.

It is not the Unity, or Oneliness of the Godhead; but the Simplicity of it, as
the Schoolmen have stated it, that has created the matter of dispute. Unity,
you know, denies more of the same; simplicity denies more in it. Concerning the
former that there could be no more Gods than One, we are at a point; the reason
of the thing it self, and the Holy Scriptures so expressly asserting it, leave
it out of dispute.

All the doubt is about the latter. Not whether such a thing belong to the
Nature of God; but concerning the just explication of it: As it is a real
excellency, not a blemish; and not merely a moxal, but a natural excellency,
there can be no doubt of its belonging to the Divine Nature; but if you
understand it as exclusive of all Variety therein, you find not any express
mention of such an Attribute of God in the Scriptures. They are silent in the
matter. It has no authority, but of the Schools. That and the Reason that can
be brought for it must give it its whole and only support. It is the only thing
that must open, and give way, to admit the Doctrine of the Trinity; and it is
the only thing that needs to do so. For we none of us assert a Trinity of Gods;
but a Trinity in the Godhead. It is the only thing that can to the Adversaries
of the Trinity with any colorable pretense seem opposite to it. And which
therefore I thought the only thing that remained to be sifted and examined, if
they will state it in an opposition thereto. What so mighty and invincible
strength of reason it had, whence alone either to shock the Authority; or
pervert the plain meaning of the Holy Scriptures, discompose the whole frame of
Christian Religion, disturb the Peace of the Church, perplex very thinking
minds, subvertt the Faith of some, and turn it into ridicule with too many.

I reckoned the Dr. (as I still do, notwithstanding the Contempt this Author
has of him) a Person of a very clear, unmuddied Understanding. I found him, by
what he expressed in his first Letter of the Trinity, not apt to be awed by the
Authority of the Schools, nor any Bigot to them, as having declined their
Notion of a Person, and fixing upon another, (less answering, as I apprehended,
the Scheme and Design of Christianity) I thought it easy, and reputable enough
to him to add, what might be requisite in this matter, without contradicting
(directly, or discernibly) any thing he had said. I gave him the opportunity of
doing it, as from himself, without seeming to have the least thing to that
purpose suggested to him by any other. I had my self, I think, seen and
considered the main strength of the School-mens reasonings concerning that
simplicity, which they will have to be divine; and, for ought I do yet know,
have competently occurred to it in this foregoing Letter, and partly in what
you will now find I wrote to him. But what there is of real infirmity, or
impertinencie to this case (as it is, and ought to be represented) in their
arguings, I reckoned he would both see and evince more clearly than I.

Therefore I greatly desired to have engaged him upon this Point; but I could
not prevail. And am therefore willing that what I writ then with design of the
greatest privacy, should now become public. Not that I think it has so great
value in it self; but that perhaps it may furrher serve to excite some others
more able and more at leisure to search and enquire into this matter; and
either to improve, or disprove what I have essayed. And which of the two it is,
it is all one to me. For I have no Interest or Design, but that of Truth, and
the service of the Christian Cause.

I was so little apprehensive of any such future use to be made of these
Letters, that I kept no account of the dates, except that one of the two latter
(which both only refer to the first) I find by the Copy I have in my hands, to
have been sent December. 19th. 1691. I remember it was a long time, and guess it
might be 6 or 8 weeks, e're I heard any thing of the first, after I had sent
it. Probably it might have been sent in October, or the beginning of November
before. I at length heard of it very casually, being in an house in London,
whither the Doctor's Eighth Letter was newly arrived (then no secret) in order
to impression. I then found this my first Letter was lightly touched, but
mistaken; which occasioned (it being a Post-night) my second. That was
followed by the third, the next Post after, when I had a little more time
wherein to express my mind, though I still concealed my Name, as it is yet
fittest to do, my main Business in my Letter to you lying with a Person, who
(blamelesly enough) conceals his.

These two latter of my Letters to the Dr. produced some alteration in that
Paragraph of his 8th. Letter, which relates to my first.

But yet no way answering the Design for which I writ it. You have them now
together exactly according to the Copies I have by me, excepting one or two
circumstantial things fitly enough left out, or somewhat altered.

And they had all slept long enough, if this occasion had not brought them to
light.

But before I give them you, let me suggest some things further to you
concerning the foregoing Letter to yourself.

You may apprehend that some will think it strange (if not an inconsistency)
that I should suppose it possible an absolute onmimodous simplicity may not
belong to the Divine Being, when yet I absolutely deny all composition in it.

And I apprehend too some may think so, at least a while; but such as have
considered well, will not think so, and such as shall, I presume will not long.
For,

1. If I had denied the simplicity of the Divine Nature, had the inference been
just, that therefore I must grant a composition? How many instances might be
given of one opposite not agreeing to this or that thing, when also the other
does as little agree! And most of all does the transcendent excellency of the
Divine Nature exempt it from the limiting by-partitions to which Creatures are
subject.

Take Reason in the proper sense for arriving gradually by argumentation from
the knowledge of more evident, to the knowledge of obscurer things, and so we
cannot say the Divine Nature is rational. But is it therefore to be called
irrational? Faith and Hope agree not to it. Are we therefore to think
Infidelity or Despair do not disagree?

It is indeed more generally apprehended, we can scarce have the notion of any
thing that strictly, or otherwise than by some very defective analogy, agrees
to him, and to us. Some Pagans, and some Christians from them (not in
derogation, but) in great reverence to the high excellency of the Deity, not
excepting the most common notion of all other, even that of being it self; but
making his Being and Substance to be superessential, and supersubstantial. It Is
out of doubt that whatsoever perfection is in us, is not the same thing in him
formally, but in an unconceivable transcendent eminency only. Do therefore
their Contraries agree to him?

2. I am far from denying the simplicity of the blessed Nature of God, which I
ascribe to him in the highest Perfection which it is capable of signifying. I
most peremptorily affirm not only all the Simplicity, which he expressly affirms
of himself; but all that can by just consequence be inferred from any
affirmation of his; or that can by plain reason be evinced any other way.
Whatsoever is any real Perfection, etc. Sect. 11.

It Is true while I affirm such a simplicity as excludes all composition, in the
sense already given, I affirm not such as excludes all variety. Not such as
excludes a Trinity, which he so plainly affirms, and with such distinction, as
his affirmations concerning it imply, and make requisite.

I further judge that tho the Scriptures do not expressly ascribe simplicity to
the being of God, as a natural excellency, they say that which implies it, as
such, to belong to him; as when they bring him in saying of himself I am what I
am. This must imply his nature to exclude every thing that is alien from it
self. I take it, as it signifies (besides a moral) a mere natural excellency,
to import a most perfect purity of essence. And I understand that to be purum,
which is plenum sui, and quod nihil habet alieni. I do therefore take the
natural simplicity of the divine Being to exclude the ingrediency of any thing
that can infer in it, conflict, decay, change, disturbance or infelicity in the
least degree; and to include whatsoever infers the contraries of all these;
serenity, tranquillity, harmony, stability, delight, and joy, in highest
Perfection; as necessity of existence also does; and that for all this, it by
no means needs to exclude a Trinity, but to include it rather.

But I judge humane (and even all created) Minds very incompetent Judges of the
divine simplicity. We know not what the divine nature may include consistently
with its own perfection, nor what it must, as necessary thereto. Our eye is no
judge of corporeal simplicity. In darkness it discerns nothing but simplicity,
without distinction of things. In more dusky light the whole Horison appears
most simple, and every where like it self. In brighter light, we perceive great
varieties, and much greater if a Microscope assist our Eye. But of all the
aerial people that replenish the Region (except rare appearances to very few)
we see none. Here want not Objects, but a finer Eye.

It Is much at this rate with our Minds in beholding the spiritual Sphaere of
Beings, most of all the uncreated, which is remotest, and furthest above, out
of our sight.

We behold Simplicity! and what do we make of that? vast undistinguisht
Vacuity! sad, immense Solitude! only this at first view. If we draw nearer, and
fix our Eye, we think we apprehend somewhat, but dubiously hallucinate, as the
half-cur'd Blind man did, when he thought he saw Men like Trees.

But if a voice which we acknowledge Divine speak to us out of the profound
abyss, and tell us of grateful varieties and distinctions in it; Good God!
shall we not believe it? Or shall we say we clearly see that is not, which only
we do not see? This seems like somewhat worse than blindness!

Now follow the Letters.

LETTERS TO Dr. WALLIS, Sent in 1691.
LETTER I.
SIR,
I Could much please my self in revolving in my own mind the very respectful
Thoughts and Veneration I have long had for you, and in Conversing with the
grateful and entertaining Idea which I have not abitrarily, but by your
irresistible imposition received; and retained of you many Years, on the
account of your former most useful and acceptable Performances, and which is
both renewed and heightened greatly by your late, clear, prudent, and piously
modest Discourses (both Letters and Sermons) of that awful Mystery [the Trinity
in the Godhead.] But as I can neither satisfy my self of the fitness of making
an Encomium of you the matter of a Letter to your self; so nor can I hope to
please you by doing a thing in it self so inept, and so insignificant to you. I
shall better do both, if I shall offer any thing to you concerning this
mentioned Subject, your further consideration whereof may prove a further
benefit to the World.

In what you have already said concerning it, you have used that great Caution,
and so well guarded your self, as not so far as I can apprehend, to give an
adversary in this single point, the least advantage. That which I would in the
general, humbly offer, is, whether you have said so much as with safety might
be said, and as the Case may require, for the gaining of a just advantage to
the common Christian Cause.

We design, in fight, not only to keep our selves safe, but to overcome, and
not in praelio only, but in bello. In Wars, indeed of this sort, both our own
safety and victory, are less to be valued than truth. Which, being of a piece,
can be injured in no part, without some damage to the whole frame of
congenerous Truth. And as it is very possible, while an Enemy is withstood
attacking some one Fort, a greater loss may not be provided against elsewhere;
it may so fall out in Affairs of this kind too, that the Care of defending some
one Truth may be accompanied with a present not attending to the jeopardy of
diverse others.

The nearer we approach an Adversary (within just limits) in these rational
decertations, the less he can have to say against us. But being well resolved
our selves about the main point of disagreement, we then take Care not to come
so near, as to fall in with him, pass into his Tents, and give away our main
Cause.

I am (worthiest Sir) far from assuming so much to my self, or detracting so
much from you, as to give a judgment that this really is done in your
Discourses about the Trinity. I only submit it to your own most penetrating
judgment, what may be further requisite and possible in this matter, to take
away any appearances hereof, and prevent ill consequences that may too easily
ensue.

I have, for my own part, long imposed it upon my self to abstain from any
positive Conceptions concerning the Godhead, beyond what I find expressly
contained in the divine revelation, or what the reason of things, either
antecedently thereto, or consequentially thereupon, does most evidently
persuade and require; and do greatly approve the same caution, which I cannot
but observe with you. But desire it may be weighed whether such measures may
not, and must not lead us further.

As for the word person, you prudently profess not to be fond of it, the thing
being agreed, tho you also truly judge it a good word, and sufficiently
warranted.

For the Notion signified by it, you all along seem to decline that of the
Schools, or the Metaphysical one, which, you know, makes it to be a rational
(or intelligent) suppositum; and to take up with (what I think I may, wanting a
fitter, i. e. a more comprehensive word, call) the Civil Notion of it; which
will allow the same man to be capable of sustaining three or more persons,
supposing his circumstances or qualifications to be such or such, as to that
purpose you speak both in your Letters and Sermons.

Now whereas you have also told us, Letter 1. that by personality you mean that
distinction (whatever it be) by which the three persons are distinguished each
from other; that which, with great submission, and most profound respect to
you, I propose to your further Consideration, will be capable of being resolved
into these two Enquiries.

1. Whether only such a distinction of the Divine Persons, as this amounts to,
will be sufficient to found the several attributions which the Holy Scriptures
give distinctly and severally to them, and to preserve the Scheme of Christian
Religion entire, which is wont to be deduced from these Sacred Writings.

2. Whether some further distinction may not be admitted as possible,
consistently with the salved unity of the Godhead.

As to the former, 1. Whereas you think the word Person to be a good word, and
sufficiently warranted by Scripture, Heb. 1. 3. where the Son is called the
express Image of his Father's Person; alleging that so we render the word
Hypostasis which is there used, and do mean by it what you think to be there
meant; I desire you would please to consider whether the word Hypostasis,
according to the common use of it will admit to be so taken, as you explain
your self to mean by the word Person. For tho the Latin word persona, as you
say, according to the true and ancient sense, may well enough admit to be so
taken, as that the same Man might sustain three persons, I offer it to your
re-consideration, whether ever you have observed the word Hypostasis, in any
sort of Authors, when it signifies any Person at all (for I know that it
frequently signifies somewhat else than a Person) to be taken in that sense.
And whether one Hypostasis so taken as it uses to be when it signifies a
Person, may not be capable of sustaining three of those Persons which you here
describe. And whether, according to this sense you mean not God to be only one
such Hypostasis.

2. Be pleased further hereupon to consider how well it agrees with this
supposition of God's Being but one Hypostasis, or intelligent suppositum, so
frequently to speak, as the Holy Scriptures do of the Father, Son or Word, the
Spirit or Holy Ghost, as three distinct I's or He Is. The Lord possessed me (as
the Divine Word or Wisdom is brought in speaking) in the beginning of his way.
-- I was set up from everlasting, Prove. 8. 22, 23. When he prepared the Heavens
I was there, verse. 27. -- Then was I by him, verse. 30, etc. The Word -- was
with God, Joh. 1. 1. He was in the World, verse. 10. We beheld his glory, verse.
14. And of the Spirit, He dwells with you, Joh. 14. 17. The Holy Ghost whom
the Father will send in my name, He shall teach you all things, verse. 26. And
whom I will send you from the Father, he shall testify of me, Chap. 15. 26.
And when he is come, he will reprove the World -- Chapter 16. 8. And the
observation seems to me as weighty, as it is usual, that, in some of the
mentioned Chapters, the somewhat hard Synthesis of construing (...) with (...)
(even where (...) is not the nearer Suppositum, but, in one place, a very
remote one, (and one would think too remote to be referred to chapter verse. 13,
14.) is rather chosen to be used than that the Spirit should not be spoken of
as a distinct he, or rather than he should be called it, (which could not so
fitly notify a Person.) If the same man were a King, a General, and a Father,
I doubt whether that would give sufficient ground to his being called He, and
He, and He.

2. But the distinct Predicates spoken of the three Sacred Persons in the
Godhead seem much more to challenge a greater distinction of the Persons than
your Notion of a Person does seem to admit. That of sending, and being sent,
spoken so often of, the first in reference to the second, and of the first and
second in reference to the third, as not to need the quoting of places. If the
same man were a King, a General, and a Judge, methinks it would not well square
with the usual forms of speaking among Men (and God speaks to Men as Men) to
say, that, as the first, he sends the two latter, that is himself.

And one would think our being required to be Baptized in the distinct Names of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost should signify some greater distinction.

As also that three are said to bear witness in Heaven. I doubt that in a Cause
wherein our Law requires two or more Witnesses, the same Man that should be a
Father, a Brother, and a Son, would scarce thereupon be admitted for three
Witnesses.

And how the Incarnation of the Son can be understood according to your Notion
of Person, without the Fathers and Holy Ghosts Incarnation also, I confess I
cannot apprehend. Your Notion of a Person contradistinct to the Scholastic
Notion, as was said before, seems to leave the Godhead to be but one
hypostasis, or Person in the latter sense. How then are we to conceive of the
hypostatical union? The assumed Nature will be as much hypostatically united
with the Father, or the Spirit, as with the Son.

3. And does not this civil, or merely respective Notion of a Person, the other
being left, fall in with the Antitrinitarian? Will it not make us Unitarians
only, as they affect to call themselves? Would any of them who (as you are
pleased to take notice Letter 6. p. 1, 2.) say, none but a Madman would deny
there may be three Persons in God, have been so mad (not yet professing
themselves Converts) as to say so, if they had not supposed their Cause not
hurt by this Notion of a Person? For, (as you well say, Letter 1.) we need not
be fond of words, so the thing be agreed, so have they equal reason to say, we
need not be afraid of words, if in the sense you agree with us. And with one
sort of them I only desire you to consider how great an appearance the
asserting only of three Persons, in the one sense, quitting the other, will
carry off an agreement?

And have they not all the advantage left them which they seek in arguing
against the satisfaction made by our Savior from the necessity of an alterity,
that in the business of making satisfaction there must be alter atque alter,
One who satisfies, and another who is satisfied. I do very well know, what
Instances are brought of humane Rulers making satisfaction for Delinquents, but
there is no parity in the Cases. They being themselves Debtors to the governed
Community, as God is not, who has with most undoubted righteousness made all
things for himself.

4. And consider whether by your Notion of a Person you forsake not the
generality of them, who have gone, as to this point, under the repute of
Orthodox? Who no doubt have understood by three Persons, three intelligent
Hypostases; though they have differed in thinking, some of them, that only a
(...) was the genitum or spiratum as to the two latter; (a notion that is
either too fine, or too little solid, for some Minds to grasp, or take any hold
of.) Others that the divine Nature might it self be some way said to be
communicated to them. But I pass to the

IId Enquiry: Whether some further distinction may not be admitted as possible?

The only thing that straitens us here, is the most unquestionable unity or
unicity (as we may call it) of the Godhead. Which, if it cannot be otherwise
defended, I must yet for my part, notwithstanding these hardships (and I know
no man with whom I could do it with more inclination) fall in with you. But I
must crave it of you so far to fall in with you know not who, as to apply your
clearer mind, as, I do my more cloudy one, to consider whether it can or no?

You will here say further than what? and what would I have further?

To the former of these, I only say, further than the asserting, in very deed,
but one Hypostasis in the Godhead, distinguished no otherwise into three, than
by certain relative capacities, like those which may among men be sustained by
one and the same man; and which distinction, as you after add, is analogous to
what, in created beings, is called distinctio modalis.

To the latter, I desire you to observe what I generally propose, not that we
may positively assert any further determinate distinction as certain and known;
but only whether we may not admit some further distinction to be possible, in
consistency with the Unity of the Godhead. I do equally detest and dread to
speak with rash and peremptory confidence about things both so Mysterious and
so Sacred. But may we not modestly say, that if to that Economy which God has
represented himself in his Word, to bear, and keep afoot, toward his
Creatures, any further distinction than has been assigned is necessary, it is
also possible, and may be, for ought we know (if indeed we know nothing to the
contrary.) What is impossible we are sure cannot be necessary. But God himself
best, and only knows his own nature, and what his own meaning is in the
representation he has made to us. If we sincerely aim to understand his
meaning, that we may bear our selves toward him accordingly, he will with
merciful indulgence consider our shortor mis-apprehensions. But we need not
say there is not this or that distinction, if really we do not know there is
not. While we know so little of natures inferior to our own, and even of
our own nature, and how things are distinguished that belong to our selves,
we have little reason to be shy of confessing ignorance about the Nature of
God.

Therefore I most entirely agree to the two Conclusions of the Ingenious W. J.
vvherevvith he concludes his Letter. But in the mean time (and pursuantly
enough thereto) cannot but doubt the concludingness of his very acute
reasonings against, at least, some of the expressions of that learned Person
(Dr. Sherl.) which he animadverts upon, as, I perceive you also do p. 16. of
your 7th Letter. And even W. J. himself: for with a pious modesty he tells us
-- concerning infinite Natures he presumes not to determine. Letter, p. 8.

What he objects against that Authors having said the divine Persons are three
beings really distinct (wherein I instance, not intending to run thorough that
elaborate Letter) that then there must be three distinct Essences -- seems to
me a (...). I doubt not the Author will easily admit it. But what will be the
consequence? That therefore there are three Deities? That cannot be his
meaning, nor be consequent from it, if he only mean that the Deity comprehends
in it three such essences. If indeed he think those three beings are as
distinct as Peter, James, and John; what is said by W. J. against him, I think
irrefragable, that then they are no otherwise one, than Peter, James and John;
and by him against himself; for Peter, James and John are not mutually
self-conscious, as they are asserted to be, which mutual self-consciousness,
since it is supposed to make the three divine Persons one, cannot be supposed
to leave them so distinct, as they are with whom it is not found.

As to what is observed of the defective expression of this unitive Principle
by the word consciousness, that bare Consciousness, without consent, is no more
than bare Omnisciency. Sure it is not so much. For Consciousness does not
signify Omnisciency. We are conscious to our selves, yet are not omniscient.
But I reckon, (as I find he also does) that even consent added to
consciousness, would yet leave the expression defective, and still want the
unifying power which is sought after. For it would infer no more than a sort of
moral union, which in the kind of it, may be found among men, between whom
there is so little of natural union (speaking of the numerical nature) that
they are actually separate.

But now may we not suppose (as that which is possible, and actually is, (for
ought we know) what may be fundamental to both Consciousness and Consent, a
natural union even of the numerical natures? Such an union would not infer an
Unity, or Identity of these Natures, Essences, Substances, or Beings
themselves. For as W. J. has well argued, Letter, p. 5, 6. Substances upon
Union are not confounded or identify'd, or brought to unity of Substance, but
continuing numerically distinct Substances acquire some mutual community or
communication of operations, etc. And deferring the consideration a while what
this would signify toward the unity, notwithstanding, of the Godhead, shall
take notice how accommodately to our present purpose W. J. speaks in what
follows, where instancing in the chief unions that are known to us, he says,
Our Soul and Body are two substances really distinct, and in close union with
one another. But notwithstanding this, they continue distinct substances under
that union. In like manner the humane soul of Christ is in union with the
Logos, or second Person of the Trinity, which we call an hypostatical Union.
But neither does this union make an unity of substance. For the two substances
of the divine and humane natures continue distinct under that union. It Is true,
he adds, which must not be allowed in the Unity of the Godhead, where there
can be no plurality or multiplicity of substhaces. Nor do I say that it must, I
only say Do we know, or are we sure there is no sort of Plurality?

But if we are sure that there are temporal unions (i. e. begun in time) as in
our selves for instance, of two substances that make but one man, and in our
Savior an humane nature and divine that make but one Emmanuel. How do we know
but that there may be three in the Godhead that make but one God? And the
rather, because this being supposed, it must also be supposed that they are
necessarily and eternally united, and with a conjunct natural impossibility of
ever being, or having been otherwise, whereof the absolute immutability of God
must upon that supposition most certainly assure us. And such a supposed union
will be most remote from making the Deity an aggregate. And for any thing of
composition, I reckon we are most strictly bound to believe every thing of the
most perfect simplicity of the Divine Being which his Word informs us of, and
to assent to every thing that is with plain evidence demonstrable of it. But
not every thing which the Schools would impose upon us, without such testimony
or evidence. For as none can know the things of a Man, but the Spirit of Man
which is in him, so nor can any know the things of God, but the Spirit of God.
Nor can I think the Argument concluding from the imperfection of a Being, in
which distinct things concur that were separate, or are de novo united, to the
impersection of a being, in which things some way distinct are necessarily and
eternally self-united. Nor can therefore agree with W. J. that we are to look
(universally) upon real distinction as a mark of separability; or that clear
and distinct conception is to us the rule of partibility. For though I will not
affirm that to be the state of all created Spirits; yet I cannot deny it to be
possible that God might have created such a being, as should have in it
distinct (assignable) parts, all of them essential to it, and not separable
from it without the cessation of the whole. But now, as the accession of the
humane Nature to the divine in the hypostatical union infers no imperfection to
the divine, so much less would what things we may suppose naturally,
necessarily, and eternally united in the Godhead infer any imperfection therein.

I easily admit what is said by W. J. Letter page 8. That we have no better
definition of God, than that he is [a Spirit infinitely perfect] But then,
being so far taught by himself my conception of him, I must include in it, this
trinal distinction, or a triple somewhat which he affirms of himself, and
without which, or any one whereof, he were not infinitely perfect, and
consequently not God, and that all together do make one God. As you most aptly
say of your resemblance of him, a Cube, there are in it three dimensions truly
distinct from each other, yet all these are but one Cube, and if any one of the
three were wanting, it were not a Cube.

Set this down then for the Notion of God, that he is a Spirit infinitely
perfect, comprehending in that omnimodous Perfection a trinal distinction, or
three persons truly distinct, each whereof is God. What will be the
consequence? that therefore there are three Gods? Not at all, but that each of
these partaking Divine Nature give us an inadequate, and all together a most
perfectly adequate and entire Notion of God.

Nor would the Language of this Hypothesis being pressed to speak out (as he says
in his Letter) be this -- these are not fit to be called three Gods; but not
possible (with any truth) to be so called.

And whereas he after tells us these three being united by similitude of
Nature, mutual consciousness, consent, cooperation under the greatest union
possible; and in that state of union do constitute the (...), the entire
all-comprehensive Godhead, and adds, this looks somewhat like a conceivable
thing. To this I Note two things: 1. That he makes it not look like so
conceivable a thing, as it really may do. For he leaves out the most important
thing that was as supposable as any of the rest, and prior to a mere
similitude, viz. a natural union of these (supposed) distinct essences, without
which they are not under the greatest union possible; and which, being supposed
necessary, and eternal, cannot admit these should be more than one God.

2. I note that what he opposes to it (so defectively represented) is as
defective, that the Christian Trinity does not use to be represented thus, etc.
What hurt is there in it, if it can be more intelligibly represented than has
been used?

But his gentle treatment of this hypothesis, which he thought, as he
represents it, not altogether unintelligible, and which with some help may be
more intelligible, became one enquiring what might most safely, and with least
torture to our own minds, be said, or thought in so awful a Mystery. It however
seems not proper to call this an hypostatical union -- much less to say it
amounts to no more. It amounts not to so much. For an hypostatical or personal
union would make the terms united (the unita, the things or somewhats under
this union) become by it one hypostasis or person; whereas this union must
leave them distinct persons or hypostases, but makes them one God. In the use
of the Phrase hypostatical or personal union the denomination is not taken from
the subject of the union, as if the design were to signify that to be diverse
hypostases, or persons, but from the effect or result of the mentioned union,
to signify that which results to be one person or hypostasis. As the matter is
plain in the instance wherein it is of most noted use, the case of the two
Natures united in the one Person of the Son of God; where the things united are
not supposed to be two Persons, but two Natures so conjoined, as yet to make
but one person, which therefore is the Negative result or effect of the union,
viz. that the person is not multiplied by the accession of another Nature, but
remains still only one. But this were an union quite of another kind, viz. of
the three hypostases, still remaining distinct, and concurring in one Godhead.
And may not this be supposed without prejudice to its Perfection.

For the Schools themselves suppose themselves not to admit a composition
prejudicial to the Perfection of the Godhead, when they admit three modes of
subsistence, which are distinct from one another, and from the Godhead, which
they must admit. For if each of them were the very Godhead, each of them (as is
urged against us by you know who) must have three Persons belonging to it, as
the Godhead has. And your self acknowledge three somewhats in the Godhead
distinct, or else they could not be three: I will not here urge that if they be
three somewhats, they must be three things, not three nothings; for however
uneasy it is to assign a Medium between something and nothing, I shall wave
that Metaphysical contest. But yet collect, that simplicity in the very
strictest sense that can be conceived, is not, in your account, to be ascribed
to God, either according to his own word, or the reason of things.

It may here be urged, how can we conceive this Natural Union (as I have
adventured to Phrase it) of the three Persons, supposing them distinct things,
substances, or Spirits? Is such an Union conceivable, as shall make them be but
one God, and not be such, as shall make them cease to be three distinct things,
substances, or Spirits? We find indeed the mentioned unions of Soul and Body in
our selves, and of the two Natures in Christ consistent enough with manifest
distinction; but then the things united are in themselves of most different
Natures. But if things of so congenerous a Nature be united, will not their
distinction be lost in their union?

I answer, 1. That a Spirit and a Spirit are numerically as distinct, as a Body
and a Spirit. And, 2. That we may certainly conceive it as possible to God to
have united two or three created Spirits, and by as strict union as is between
our Souls and Bodies, without confounding them; and I reckon the union between
our Souls and Bodies much more wonderful than that would have been. Why then is
an unmade, uncreated union of three Spirits less conceivable as that which is
to be presupposed to their mutual consciousness?

I shall not move, or meddle with, any Controversy about the Infinity of these
three supposed Substances or Spirits, it being acknowledged on all hands that
Contemplations of that kind cannot but be above our measure. And well knowing
how much easier it is to puzzle oneself upon that Question, An possit dari
infinitum infinito infinitius, than to speak satisfyingly, and unexceptionably
about it to another.

And though I will not use the expressions, as signifying my formed judgment,
that there are three things, substances, or Spirits in the Godhead (as you that
there are three somewhats) yet, as I have many Years thought, I do still think
that what the learned W. J. does but more lightly touch of the Son, and the
Holy Ghost being produced (which term I use, but reciting it, as he does) not
by a voluntary external, but by an internal, necessary, and emanative Act, has
great weight in it.

In short my sense has long lain thus, and I submit it to your searching and
candid Judgment, viz. That though we need not have determinate thoughts, how far
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are distinguished; yet we must conceive them in
the general to be so far distinguished, as is really necessary to the founding
the distinct attributions which the Scriptures do distinctly give them. And
that whatever distinction is truly necessary to that purpose, will yet not
hinder the two latters participation with the first in the Godhead, which can
be but one, because that though we are led by plain Scripture, and the very
import of that word, to conceive of the Father as the Fountain, yet the Son
being from him, and the Holy Ghost from them both, not contingently, or
dependently on will and pleasure; but by eternal, natural, necessary
promanation, these two latter are infinitely distinguished from the whole
Creation. Inasmuch as all Creatures are contingent beings, or dependent upon
will and pleasure, as the Character is given us of created things, Rev. 4. 11.
Thou have made all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. But
that whatever is what it is necessarily is God. For I have no doubt but the
Dreams of some, more anciently, and of late, concerning necessary matter, and
the Sophisms of Spinosa and some others, tending to prove the necessity and
identity of all substance are (with what they aim to evince) demonstrably false.

The Sum of all will be this,

1. That we can be more certain of nothing than that there is but one God.

2. We are most sure the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are sufficiently
distinguished to give a just ground to the distinct attributions, which are in
Scripture severally given to them.

3. We are not sure what that sufficient distinction is (wherein I find you
saying with me over and over) But whereas you rightly make the word person
applicable to God, but in a sense analogous to that which obtains of it with
men; why may it not be said it may be fitly applicable, for ought we know, in a
sense analogous to that notion of it among men, which makes a person signify an
intelligent hypostasis; and so three distinct persons, three distinct
intelligent hypostases.

4. But if that sufficient distinction can be no less, than that there be in
the Godhead, three distinct intelligent hypostases, each having its own
distinct singular intelligent nature, with its proper personality belonging to
it, we know nothing to the contrary, but that the necessary eternal nature of
the Godhead may admit thereof. If any can from plain Scripture testimony, or
cogent reason evince the contrary, let the evidence be produced. In the mean
time we need not impose upon our selves any formal denial of it.

5. If the contrary can be evidenced, and that hereupon it be designed to
conclude that there can be but one intelligent hypostasis in the Godhead, and
therefore that the Son, and the Holy Ghost are but creatures, the last refuge
must be to deny the former consequence, and to allege that tho the same finite
singular nature cannot well be understood to remain entirely to one, and be
communicated entirely to another, and another, the case will not be the same
speaking of an infinite Nature.

SIR,

If what is here said shall occasion to you any new thoughts that you shall
judge may be of common use, I conceive there will be no need of Publishing my
Letter, but only that you be pleased to comunicate your own Sentiments, as from
your self, which will have so much the more of Authority and Usefulness with
them. The most considerable thing that I have hinted, is the necessary
Promanation of the Son, and Holy Ghost, that must distinguish them from
contingent Beings, and so from Creatures; which if you think improveable to any
good purpose, as it has been with me a Thought many years old, so I suppose it
not new to you, and being now resumed by you, upon this occasion, you will
easily cultivate it to better advantage than any words of mine can give it.

But if you think it advisable that any part of my Letter be Published, if you
please to signify your mind to that purpose in one Line to marked -- -- it
will come Sealed to my view, and will give Opportunity of offering my Thoughts
to you, what parts I would have suppressed, which will be such only, as shall
leave the rest the fuller Testimony of my being,

Poirets method of proving a Trinity in the Godhead, though it call it self
Mathematical or Geometrical, is with me much less convictive, than the plain
Scriptural way.

SIR, Your most sincere Honourer and most respectful Humble Servant, Anonym.

LETTER II.
SIR,
YOur Eighth Letter happening to come to my View before it was printed off, I
have the Opportunity of taking Notice to you that it quite misrepresents the
intent of the Letter to you subscribed Anonymous, which it makes to be the
defending or excusing some Expressions of Dr. Sherlock's; which indeed was the
least considerable thing, if it were any thing at all in the design of that
Letter, and not altogether accidental to it. The true design of it was, that
there might be a clearer Foundation asserted (as possible at least) to the
Doctrine of the Incarnation and Satisfaction of the Son of God. Nor can the
forte quod sic, here be solved by the forte quod non, the Exigency of the Case
being such, as that if more be possible, it will be highly requisite; and that
it cannot well be avoided to assert more, unless it can be clearly evinced that
more is impossible. Nor yet is it necessary to determine how much more is
necessary. But not only the commonly received frame of Christian Doctrine, does
sem to require somewhat beyond what the mere civil or respective Notion of the
word Person imports; but also the plain Letter of Scripture, which says Heb. 1.
3. that the Son is the express Image of the Fathers hypostasis, which seems to
signify there are two Hyyostases, and other Scriptures seem to say enough,
whence we may with parity of Reason collect a third. Now that Letter intimates,
I think, sufficient matter of doubt, whether hypostasis does not signify much
more than Person, in your sense.

The principal thing that Letter humbly offered to consideration [i. e.
whether, supposing a greater distinction than you have assigned be necessary,
it may not be defended, by the just supposal that the promanation of the second
or third Persons (or hypostases rather) howsoever diverse they are, is by
natural eternal necessity, not contingent, or depending upon will and pleasure,
as all created Being is and doth] is altogether waved. That Letter was written
with design of giving you the occasion of considering what might be further
requisite and possible to be asserted for the serving of the Truth, and with
that sincerity and plenitude of respect to you that it might be wholly in your
own Power to do it in such a way, as wherein not at all to disserve your self.
Which Temper of Mind is still the same with

Reverend SIR, Your most unfeigned Honourer, and Humble Servant, Anonym.
December. 91.
LETTER III.
Worthy SIR,
I Am very loath troublesomely to importune you. But the very little time I had
for the view of your 8th. Letter, before I wrote mine by the last Post not
allowing me fully to write my sense as to that part which concerned my former
Letter; I take leave now to add, that my design in it (as well as the professed
design of the Letter it self) was to offer you the occasion of employing that
clear understanding, wherewith God has blessed you, above most, in considering
whether a greater latitude cannot be allowed us in conceiving the distinction
of the three in the Godhead consistently with the Unity thereof, than your
notion of a person will extend to. And if it can, whether it ought not to be
represented (at least as possible) to give a less exceptionable ground to the
Doctrines of the incarnation and satisfaction of the second Person, in order
whereto it seems to me highly requisite. This was that I really intended, and
not the vindicating the Sentiments of that Author, which you might observe that
letter animadverts upon. The Scripture seems to allow a greater latitude, by
the ground it gives us to apprehend three hypostases; which so much differ from
the notion you give of persons, that one hypostasis may sustain three such
persons as you describe. The only thing that seems to straiten us in this
matter, is the usual Doctrine of the Schools about the divine simplicity. I
confess I greatly coveted to have had your thoughts engaged in sifting and
examining that Doctrine; so far as to consider whether there be really any
thing in it, cogent and demonstrable that will be repugnant to what is
overtur'd in that Letter. And I the rather desired more room might be gained in
this matter, apprehending the Unitarians (as they more lately affect to call
themselves) might, upon the whole, think you more theirs, than ours; and while
they agree with you concerning the possibility of such a Trinity as you assert,
may judge their advantage against the other mentioned Doctrines, no less than
it was.

My desiring that letter of mine might not be printed, was most agreeable to
what I intended in writing it; that was, only to suggest to you somewhat (very
loosly) that I reckoned you more capable than any man I knew, to cultivate, and
improve, to the great service of the common Christian Cause. And that you might
seem to say, what you might, upon your own search, find safe and fit to be
said, as merely from your self, without taking notice that occasion was given
you by any such Letter at all. Had I designed it for public view, it should
have been writ with more Care, and with more (expressed) Respect to you. But if
upon the whole, you judge there is nothing in it considerable to the purposes
it mentions, my further request is, you will please rather to suppress that
part of your Letter which concerns it (for which I suppose there is yet
opportunity) and take no notice any such letter came to your hands. I am,

Reverend SIR, Your most Respectful, Humble Servant, Anonym.
December. 19. 91.
Summary Propositions, collected out of the foregoing Discourses, more briefly
offering to view the substance of what is contained in them.
1. Of the Unity of the Godhead there can be no doubt, it being in reason
demonstrable, and most expressly, often, asserted in Scripture.

2. That there is a Trinity in the Godhead, of Father, Son, or Word, and Holy
Ghost is the plain, obvious sense of so many Scriptures, that it apparently
tends to frustrate the design of the whole Scripture-revelation, and to make it
useless, not to admit this Trinity, or otherwise to understand such Scriptures.

3. That therefore the devising any other sense of such Scriptures ought by no
means to be attempted, unless this Trinity in the Godhead can be evidently
demonstrated to be impossible.

4. That the impossibility of it can never be demonstrated from the mere Unity
of the Godhead, which may be such, as to admit these distinctions in it, for
ought we know.

5. Nothing is more appropriate to the Godhead than to be a necessarily
existent, intelligent Being; since all Creatures whether intelligent, or
unintelligent, are contingent, depending upon the Will of the necessary,
intelligent, Being.

6. If therefore the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost do coexist in the Godhead
necessarily, they cannot but be God.

7. And if the first be conceived as the Fountain, the second as by natural
necessary (not voluntary) promanation from the first, the third by natural,
necessary (not voluntary) spiration, so as that neither of these latter, could
have been otherwise; This aptly agrees with the Notions of Father, Son, and
Spirit distinctly put upon them, and infinitely distinguishes the two latter
from all Creatures that depend upon will and pleasure.

8. Whatever distinction there be of these three among themselves, yet the
first being the Original, the second being by that promanation necessarily and
eternally united with the first, the third by such spiration united necessarily
and eternally with both the other, inasmuch as eternity, and necessity of
existence admit no change, this union must be inviolable, and everlasting, and
thereupon the Godhead which they constitute, can be but One.

9. We have among the creatures, and even in our selves, instances of very
different Natures, continuing distinct, but so united, as to be one thing; and
it were more easily supposeable of congenerous Natures.

10. If such Union with distinction be impossible in the Godhead, it must not
be from any repugnancy in the thing it self, since very intimate Union, with
continuing distinction, is in it self no impossible thing; but from somewhat
peculiar to the Divine Being.

11. That peculiarity, since it cannot be Unity (which because it may admit
distinctions in one and the same thing, we are not sure it cannot be so in the
Godhead) must be that simplicity commonly wont to be ascribed to the divine
Nature.

12. Such simplicity as shall exclude that distinction, which shall appear
necessary in the present case, is not by express Scripture any where ascribed
to God; and therefore must be rationally demonstrated of him, if it shall be
judged to belong at all to him.

13. Absolute Simplicity is not a Perfection, nor is by any ascribed to God.
Not by the Socinians themselves, who ascribe to him the several intellectual
and moral excellencies, that are attributed to him in the Scriptures, of which
they give very different definitions, as may be seen in their own Volkelius at
large, which should signify them not to be counted, in all respects, the same
thing.

14. That is not a just consequence, which is the most plausible one that seems
capable of being alleged for such absolute simplicity, that otherwise there
would be a composition admitted in the Divine Nature, which would import an
imperfection inconsistent with Deity. For the several excellencies that concur
in it, howsoever distinguished, being never put together, nor having ever
existed apart, but in eternal, necessary union, though they may make some sort of
variety, import no proper composition, and carry with them more apparent
Perfection than absolute omnimodous simplicity can be conceived to do.

15. Such a supposed possible variety even of individual Natures in the Deity,
some way differing from each other, infers not an unbounded Liberty of
conceiving what pluralities therein we please or can imagine. The divine
revelation, which could only justify, does also limit us, herein, mentioning
three distinct I's or He Is, and no more.

16. The several Attributes which are common to these three, do to our
apprehension, and way of conceiving things, require less distinction; no more,
for ought we know, than may arise from their being variously modified,
according to the distinction of Objects, or other extrinsecal things, to which
they may be referred.

We that so little know how our own Souls, and the Powers and Principles that
belong to them do differ from one another, and from them, must be supposed more
ignorant, and should be less curious, in this.

FINIS.
Books printed for, and sold by Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at
the lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel.
A Body of practical divinity, consisting of above 176 Sermons on the Lesser
Catechism composed by the Reverend Assembly of Divines at Westminster: With a
Supplement of some Sermons on several Texts of Scripture. By Thomas Watson,
formerly Minister of St. Stephens Walbrook, London.

Theological Dicourses, in two Volumes: The First, Containing eight Letters and
three Sermons concerning the Blessed Trinity: The Second, containing 13 Sermons
on several Occasions. By John Wallis, D. D. Professor of Geometry in Oxon.

An Account of the Blessed Trinity, argued from the nature and perfection of
the Supreme Spirit, coincident with the Scripture Doctrine in all the Articles
of the Catholic Creeds, together with its Mystical, Federal, Practical uses,
in the Christian Religion. By William Borough, Rector of Cheynis in Bucks.

The confirming Work of Religion, or its great things made Plain by their
primary Evidences and Demonstrations, whereby the meanest in the Church may
soon be made able to render an account of their Faith. By R. Fleming, Author of
the Fulfilling of the Seriptures. Now Published by Daniel Burgess.

The Rod or the Sword, the present Dilemma of the Nations of England, Scotland
and Ireland, considered, argued and improved, etc.

A Family Altar erected to the Honor of the Eternal God; or a Solemn Essay to
promote the Worship of God in private Houses, together with the best Entail, or
dying Parents living Hopes for their surviving Children, grounded upon the
Covenant of Gods Grace with Believers and their Seed. By Oliver Heywood,
Minister of the Gospel.


