A Funeral Sermon On the Decease of That worthy Gentlewoman, Mrs. Margaret
Baxter, Who died the 28th of June, 1681.

By JOHN HOW, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons, over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1681.

To the very Reverend, Mr. Richard Baxter.
SIR,
WHen you assigned unto me that part, not of forming a Memorial for your
excellent, deceased Consort, (which is reserved to the fittest hand) but of
instructing the People upon the occasion of her decease: This Text of Scripture
occurring also to my thoughts, (which I reckoned might sufficiently agree with
the design, you generally recommended to me, tho I am sensible how little the
prosecution did so) it put me upon considering, with how great disadvantage, we
set our selves, at any time, to reason against bodily Inclination; the great
Antagonist we have to contend against in all our Ministerial Labors!

An Attempt, which, if an higher Power set not in with us, looks like the
opposing of our faint Breath to the steady course of a mighty River!

I have often thought of Cicero's wonder; That since we consist of a Mind and a
Body; the skill of curing, and preserving the Body, is so admired, as to have
been thought a Divine Invention: That which refers to the Mind, is neither so
desired, before it be found out, nor so cultivated afterward, nor is approved,
and acceptable to so many; yea, is even to the most suspected, and hateful!

Even the Tyrant Phalaris tells one, in an Epistle, (tho by way of menace) That
whereas a good Physician may cure a distempered Body, Death is the only
Physician for a distempered Mind.

It works not indeed an universal Cure. But, of such, on whom it may, how few
are there, that count not the Remedy worse than the Disease! Yet how many
thousands are there, that, for greater (hoped) bodily advantages, afterward,
endure much more pain and trouble than there is in dying!

We are a mysterious sort of Creatures! Yet I acknowledge the Wisdom of God is
great and admirable, in planting in our Natures so strong a love of this bodily
Life; without which the best would be more impatient of living on Earth, so
long as God thinks it requisite they should. And to the worst, Death would not
be a sufficiently formidable punishment. And consequently humane Laws and
Justice would be, in great part, eluded.

And the same Divine Wisdom is not less admirable, in providing there should so
generally be so much of mutual Love, as does obtain among near Friends, and
Relatives; For thereby their Cohabitation, and mutual Offices toward each
other, are made more pleasant and easy; which is a great compensation for the
concomitant Evil, that, by the same Love, their parting with one another cannot
but be rendered grievous.

But for you, who live so much upon the Borders, and in the pleasant view of
the other State; The one separation, is, I doubt not, much easier to your
sense, and the other to your fore-thoughts, than they are with the most, A
perfect indifferency toward this present bodily State, and Life, is, in mine
eyes, a most covetable thing, and my daily aim. Wherein I entreat your Prayers
may assist,

Your most respectful, though most unworthy Fellow Servants and Expectant, in
the Work and Hope of the Gospel, JOHN HOW.

A Funeral Sermon.
2 COR. 5.8. We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the
Body, and to be present with the Lord.


THe solemn Face of this Assembly, seems to tell me that you already know the
present, special occasion of it: And that I scarce need to tell any of you,
that our worthy, honored Friend, Mrs. Baxter, is dead. You have ('it is like
most of you) often met her in this place; when her pleased looks were wont to
show what delight she took, to have many share in those great Advantages,
wherein she had a more peculiar Interest: You are now to meet her, here, no
more; but are met your selves to lament together, that our World has lost so
desirable an Inhabitant: And to learn (as I hope you design) what so
instructive an occasion shall (of it self, or as it may be improved) serve to
teach us.

It does of it self most obviously teach the common Document, that we, who are
of the same make and mould, must all die too. And our own prudence should
hereupon advance one step further, and apprehend it a most covetable thing,
that the temper of our minds might comply with this unalterable state of our
case. And that we be in a disposition, since we must die, to die willingly, and
with our own consent. Nothing can be more irrational, or unhappy, than to be
engaged in a continual quarrel with Necessity; which will prevail, and be too
hard for us at last. No course is so wise in it self, or good for us, as to be
reconciled to what we cannot avoid; to bear a facile yielding mind toward a
determination, which admits of no repeal.

And the Subject now to be insisted on, may help us to improve the sad occasion
to this very important purpose; And show us that dying, which cannot be willed
for it self, may be joined with somewhat else which may and ought to be so; and
in that conjunction, become the object of a rational and most complacential
willingness.

A Subject recommended to me (though not the special Text) by one, than whom I
know no Man that was better able to make a fit choice; as (in the present case)
none could have that right to choose.

I cannot stay to discuss and open the most fruitful pleasant series of
discourse in the foregoing Verses, though there will be occasion to reflect
somewhat upon it by and by. But, in the Text, the Apostle asserts two things
concerning the temper of his Spirit in reference to Death.

His Confidence, and Complacency, (...)

1. His Confidence; or his Courage and Fortitude. [ We are confident, I say] He
had said it before, Verse. 6. We are always confident; and assigned the Cause,
knowing that while we are present in the Body, we are absent from the Lord. And
declared the kind of that knowledge, (viz. which he had of that presence of the
Lord, whereof he was deprived, by being present in the Body) that is, that it
was the knowledge of Faith, not of Sight, Verse. 7. Now here he adds; We are
confident, I say. It notes a deliberate courage. And the fixedness of it; that
it was not a sudden Fit; a passion soon over. He had said above (...). We are
confident at all times. It was his habitual temper. And here the ingemination
signifies increase; as if he had said, We grow more and more bold, and
adventurous, while we consider the state of our case, and what we suffer by our
presence in the Body. Sense of injury or damage heightens, and adds an edg unto
true valor. We would venture upon a thousand Deaths, if the matter were left
entirely to our own Option, rather than be thus withheld any longer from the
Presence of our blessed Lord; A thing whereof nothing but duty to him could
make us patient. We are not destitute of the fortitude, to enable us even to
rush upon Death without more ado, if he did say the word: But as yet he bids us
stay; and his supreme and holy Will must in all things determine ours.
Therefore it is immediately subjoined in the midst of this high transport, verse.
9. Wherefore we labor, that whether present or absent, we might be accepted of
him, or, well-pleasing to him, ((...)). We less mind the pleasing our selves
than him. We are indifferent to Life or Death, being in the Body or out of it,
in comparison of that. His pleasure is more to us than either. Here the highest
Fortitude yields and submits it self: Otherwise, and for his own part, and as
to what concerned his own inclination singly, and in the divided sense, the
Apostle to his confidence does

2 ly, add complacency. We are better pleased, ((...)) This is a distinct
thing, (a valiant Man will venture upon wounds and death, but is not pleased
with them) but in reference to so excellent an Object, and Occasion, they must
mingle, and the latter runs into the former. We are willing rather (as we read
it) to be absent from the Body, and present with the Lord. The word which we
read willing, signifies to approve, or like well, not a merely judicious, but
complacential approbation: The word, whence comes the (...) often ascribed to
God in Scripture; which signifies the high satisfaction he takes in all his
Purposes and Determinations. The (...) Ephesians. 1.5. is certainly no tautology,
but speaks how perfectly and pleasingly he agrees, and (as it were) consents
with himself in all that ever he had resolved on. This rather, says the
Apostle, is our (...), the thing that would please us best, and wherein we
should most highly satisfy our selves. It would not be the matter of our
submission only, or whereto we could yield, when we cannot help it, but of our
highest joy and pleasure. According as we find it was with the Psalmist in the
same case, Psalm. 16.
(which though it had a further meaning in reference to Christ, had a true
meaning as to himself also); Therefore my Heart is glad, my Glory rejoices, my
Flesh also shall rest in hope. For thou will not leave my Soul in (Sheol) the
state of the Dead, nor suffer thy Holy One to see Corruption, but wilt show me
the Path of Life; and no matter though it lie through the dark shady Vale: It
leads however into that blessed presence of thine (the same with that in the
Text) where is fullness of joy; and unto that right hand (that high and
honorable station) where are pleasures for ever-more.

Both these, the Apostle's courage and fortitude, and his complacency or
well-pleasedness, have express reference to the state of Death, or of being
absent from the Body. The one respects it as a formidable (but superable) Evil;
The other as a desirable and most delectable Good.

But both have reference to it in its concomitancy, or tendency, viz. as
absence from the Body should be accompanied (or be immediately followed) with
being present with the Lord.

The sense therefore of the whole Verse, may be fitly expressed thus:

That it is the genuine temper of Holy Souls, not only to venture, with
confidence, upon the state of absence, or separation from the Body, but to
choose it with great complacency and gladness, that they may be present with the
Lord.

Body] we are not here to understand so generally as if he affected, or counted
upon a perpetual final state of separation from any Body at all. No; the temper
of his Spirit had nothing in it so undutiful, or unnatural; no such
reluctation, or disposition to contend, against the common Lot of Man, the Law
of humane Nature, and the comely Order which the Author of our Beings, and of
all Nature, has settled in the Universe. That, whereas one sort of Creatures,
that have life, should be wholly confined to terrestrial Bodies; Another, quite
exempt from them; Ours should be a middle Nature, between the Angelical and the
Brutal. So as we should, with the former, partake of intellectual, immortal
Spirit; and a mortal Body made up, and organized of earthly Materials, with the
latter. Which yet, we might also depose, and reassume, changed and refined from
terrene dross. The Apostle's temper has in it nothing of Rebellion, or Regret,
against this most apt and congruous Order and Constitution. He had no impatient
proud resentment of that gradual debasement and inferiority; that, in this
respect we are made a little lower than the Angels. When Porphyry tells us, in
the Life of Plotinus, that he blushed as often as he thought of his being a
Body; It was agreeable enough to his Notion, of the pre-existence of the Soul;
i. e. If it were true, that the original state of humane Spirits, was the same
with that of Angels, (which this is no fit season to dispute against) and that
by their own fault, some way or other, they lapsed and slid down into grosser
matter, and were caught into vital union with it, there was just cause of shame
indeed. Apuleius's transformation (which many of you know what it means) if it
had been real, was not more ignominious.

But it appears, the Apostle affected not a state wherein he should be simply
naked, or unclothed of any Body at all; for he longs to be clothed upon with
his heavenly House, Verse. 2.

And whereas he tells us, Verse. 4. That which he groaned for, was not to be
unclothed, but clothed upon: That being unclothed, does not mean the act, but
the state, i. e. that he did not covet or aspire to a perpetual final state, of
being naked, or without any Body at all. For so he speaks, Verse. 3. If so be
(as we read) that being clothed, we shall not be found naked. The Particle
(...), admits to be read, since that, in as much as, or, for truly: and so the
2 d and 3 d Verses will be connected thus: Verse. 2.
In this, i. e. For this, viz. for this cause, as (...) often signifies
causality, (not in this House, for (...) and (...) will not agree) we groan
earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our House which is from Heaven, i.
e. of Heaven, or suitable to Heaven, ((...) denotes here, as often, the Matter
whereof a thing is formed and made) a Body made up of an heavenly material; Or,
(which is all one) an earthly Body refined and transformed into such a One. And
then he subjoins the reason why his desire is so conditioned, and limited, or
runs only in this particular current to have, not no Body at all, but only not
such a Body. He wishes to have a Body made more habile, and commodious, and
fitter for the uses of a glorified Soul, (which has its own more inward
clothing peculiar to it self, in respect whereof that of such a Body would be
an additional one, a superinvestiture, as the word (...) imports) his desire is
thus limited and modified for this reason. In as much as, being thus clothed,
Verse. 3.
we shall not be found naked, or without any Body at all; which the Law of our
Creation admits us not to affect, or aspire unto. And therefore in qualifying
our desire thus, we shall contain our selves within our own bounds, and not
offer at any thing whereof humanity is, by the Creator's pleasure, and
constitution incapable. Verse. 4.
Therefore he inculcates the same thing over again; We groan not to be
unclothed, but only to be clothed upon: Where that unclothed (the thing he
desired not) must signify the state, and not the act only, is evident; in that
being clothed (the thing which he did desire) must plainly be so understood.
For was it only an entrance into Glory he desired, and not continuance in a
glorified state? Nor can this being unclothed (much less) refer as an act to
the present clothing of this earthly Body, as if it were our being divested of
that which he intended in this 4 th Verse. as the thing he desired not, for then
the 4 th Verse would contradict this 8 th, where he tells us he did desire it.
The meaning then is, that he did not desire to be exempted from wearing a Body;
or to be without any at all. He did only covet to be absent from this Body,
(gross and terrene as now it was) that he might be present with the Lord, with
which he found being in such a Body, and in the several accompanying
Circumstances of this bodily state, to be inconsistent.

Wherefore it was a terrestrial Body, (the earthly House of this Tabernacle, as
it is Verse. 1.) which he was now better pleased to quit upon this account.

And, I say, it is the genuine temper of an holy Soul to be like-minded, not
their constant, explicit, discernible sense. We must allow for Accidents, (as
we shall note afterward) but when they are themselves, and in their right
mind; and so far as the holy divine Life does prevail in them, this is their
Temper.

And now that I may more fully open this Matter to you, I shall,

1. Endeavor to unfold, somewhat more distinctly, the state of the Case, in
reference whereto, good and holy Souls are thus affected.

2 ly, Shall show you what is their true and genuine temper, or how it is that
they stand affected, in reference to that case.

3 ly, Shall discover how agreeable this temper is to the general frame and
complexion of an Holy Soul.

And then make such reflections upon the whole, as may be more especially
useful to our selves.

1. We are to take, as much as we can, a distinct view and state of the case.
We see the Apostle speaks by way of comparison, (...), we are willing rather.
We are therefore to consider (that we may comprehend clearly the true state of
this Case) what the things are which he compares. And between which his mind
might be supposed, as it were, to have been before (at least in order of Nature
before) in some suspense, till at last it come so complacentially to incline,
and be determined this one way. Take the account of the whole Case in these
particulars.

1 st, There are here two principal terms between which the motion and
inclination of such a Mind lies, from the One to the Other.

The Lord, and The Body.

Both do as it were attract and draw (or are apt to do) two, several ways. The
Lord strongly draws on the one hand, and the Body hangs on, and holds, and
draws in as strongly to it self as it can, on the other.

The Body as having us present in it. And how? not locally only, but in the way
of vital union and communion with it.

And that shows how we are to understand being present with the Lord too; not
by a mere local presence, but of more intimate vital union and commerce. Where,
as in the union between the Soul and Body, the more excellent communicates
Life, the other receives it; so it must be here.

Though now, The Lord is present, thus, in some measure, (which this attraction
supposes); Yet, speaking comparatively, that presence is absence, in respect of
what we are to look for hereafter.

Both these Unions are very mysterious, and both infer very strong and powerful
drawing, or holding together, of the things so united.

There is no greater mystery in Nature, than the union between the Soul and
Body. That a Mind and Spirit should be so tied and linked with a clod of Clay;
that, while that remains in a due temper, it cannot by any Art or Power free it
self! It can by an act of the Will move an hand, or foot, or the whole Body,
but cannot move from it one inch. If it move hither and thither, or by a leap
upward, do ascend a little, the Body still follows; it cannot shake or throw it
off. We cannot take our selves out; By any allowable means we cannot; nor by
any at all, (that are at least within mere humane Power) as long as the
temperament lasts. While that remains, we cannot go; if that fail, we cannot
stay, though there be so many open Avenues, (could we suppose any material
bounds to hem in, or exclude a Spirit) we cannot go out or in at pleasure. A
wonderful thing! and I wonder we no more wonder at our own make and frame in
this respect. That we do not, with reverent submissive adoration, discern and
confess, how far we are outwitted and overpowred by our wise and great Creator;
that we not only cannot undo his Work upon us, in this respect, but that we
cannot so much as understand it. What so much akin are a Mind, and a piece of
Earth, a Clod, and a Thought, that they should be thus affiix'd to one another?
or that there should be such a thing in Nature as thinking Clay!

But hereupon, what advantage has this Body upon the Soul and Spirit! In the
natural Union is grounded a moral One, of love and affection. Which (on the
Soul's part) draws and binds it down with mighty efficacy.

Again, How mysterious and ineffable is the Union of the Lord, and the Soul;
and how more highly venerable, as this is a Sacred Mystery! And who would not
admire at their proud disdainful folly, that while they cannot explain the
Union between the Soul and Body, are ready to jeer at their just, humble, and
modest Ignorance, that call this other a Mystical Union? Or, because they know
not what to make of it, would make nothing, and will not allow there should be
any such thing, or would have it be next to nothing. Have those words no sense
belonging to them, or not a great sense, 1 Cor. 6.17. But he that is joined
unto the Lord, is one Spirit? And, upon this supernatural Union also (be it
what it will) methinks the binding, and drawing Power of Love should not be
less!

2 ly, We must conceive in our Minds, as distinctly as we can, the peculiar
Adjuncts of each of these more principal Terms, i. e. On the part of the Body
(first) we are to consider a sensible, a grossly corporeal World, to which this
Body does connaturalize us; and whereto we are attempered by our being in the
Body, and living this bodily Life. This Body, while we live in it, is the
terminus uniens, the medium, the unitive Bond between us and it. In this World
we find our selves encompassed with Objects that are suitable, grateful, and
entertaining to our bodily Senses, and the several Principles, Perceptions, and
Appetites, that belong to the bodily Life. And these things familiarize and
habituate us to this World, and make us, as it were, One with it. There is,
particularly, a bodily People, as is intimated in the Text, that we are
associated with by our being in the Body. The words (...) and (...), in this
Verse, (and the same are used Verse. the 6 th and 9 th) signify there is such a
People of which we are, and from which we would be dissociated; (...) is civis,
incola, or indigena, an Inhabitant, or Native among this or that People, as
(...) is peregrinus, one that lives abroad and is severed from the People he
belonged unto. The Apostle considers himself, while in the Body, as living
among such a sort of People as dwell in Bodies; a like sort of People to
himself. And would be, no longer, a home-dweller with these, but travel away
from them, to join and be a dweller with another People.

For also, on the other hand he considers, with the Lord, an invisible World,
where he resides, and an incorporeal People he presides over. So that the case
here is, Are we willing to be dispeopled from this bodily sort of People, and
peopled with that incorporeal sort, the World, and community of Spirits?

3 ly, It is further to be considered in this case, that we are related both
ways; related to the Body, and related to the Lord; to the one People, and the
other; the one claims an Interest in us, and so does the other. We have many
earthly Alliances, it is true; and we have many Heavenly. We are related to both
Worlds, and have Affairs lying in both.

And now what mighty pleadings might the Case admit, on the one hand, and the
other? Were the Body, apart, capable of pleading for it self: To this effect it
must bespeak the Soul: I am thy Body, I was made and formed for thee, and
(someway) by thee. Thou have, so long, inhabited and dwelt with me, and in me.
Thou art my Soul, my Life, my Strength; if thou be absent, I am a Carcass, and
fall to dirt. And thou will be a maimed thing, and scarce thy whole self. But
though it cannot dictate, and do not utter such words. Nature does, it self,
plead more strongly than words can.

And again; How much more potently might the Lord plead for his having the Soul
more closely united, and intimately conversant with himself! Thou art one of
the Souls I have loved and chosen; which were given to me, and for which I
offered up my own Soul. I have visited thee in thy low and abject State, said
to thee in thy Blood, Live, have inspired th^^ with an heavenly, sacred, divine
Life, the Root, and seminal Principle of a perfect, glorious, eternal Life. Let
this Body drop, which has been long thy burden! let it fall and die, it
matters not! Yet since thou love it, I will restore it thee again, pure and
glorious, like mine own. I am the Resurrection and the Life; he that believes
in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live, John 11.25. Never fear to
venture thy self with me, nor to commit thy Body to my after-care.

And now, all the question will be, Which alleges the more considerable
things? and the matter will be estimated as the temper of the Soul is. An
earthly sordid Soul, when the overture is made to it of such a translation,
will be ready to say as the Shunamite did to the Prophet, 2 Kin. 4.
when he offered to speak for her to the King, (perhaps that her Husband might
be called to Court, and made a great Man) I dwell among my own People, (an
Answer that in her case well expressed the true greatness of a contented Mind,
but in this case nothing more mean) I am well where I am, and dwell among a
People like my self. So faith the degenerate abject Soul, sunk into a deep
oblivion of its own Country. Here I dwell a fixed Inhabitant of this World,
among a corporeal People, where I make one. And we find how it is with this
sort of People; each one charms another, and they grow familiar; have mutual
ties upon one another, and there is a loathness to part. Especially as here, in
this lower World, we are variously disposed, and cast into several mutual
Relations to one another. Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Brothers
and Sisters, all dwelling in Bodies alike, cohabiting, eating and drinking
daily, and conversing together. These are great and sensible endearments, by
which the minds of Men become as it were knit, and united to one another. How
are Men's Spirits fixed to their own Countries! Nescio qua natale Solum
dulcedine -- It Is by an unexpressible pleasure and sweetness, that the People
of one Country are as it were linkt and held together.

But would not an heavenly, newborn Soul say, No; this is none of my Country,
I seek a better, and am here but a Pilgrim and Stranger; This is none of my
People? So it was with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that conversed in the earthly
Canaan, but as in a strange Country; their mind being gone, toward that other,
which they sought. And accordingly you find it said of each of them in their
Story, when they quite left this World (as also of Moses and Aaron afterward)
that they were gathered to their People. A People that were more their own. And
surely, as God (who was not ashamed to be called their God) is not the God of
the Dead, but of the Living; We must understand this was not the Congregation
of the Dead to which these were gathered, otherwise than in a low, relative
sense, as to us only, and our World. Holy Men, as they die out of one World,
are born into another, to associate with them that dwell in light: And be
joined to a glorious community above, the General Assembly, the innumerable
company of Angels, and the Spirits of just Men made perfect. Where all love,
and adore, praise and triumph together.

4 thly, It is again to be taken in to the state of this case, that we have,
one way or other, actual present Notices of both the States, which both sorts
of Objects, that stand in this competition, belong unto. Of the one by sense,
and experience. We so know what it is to live in the Body, and in a sensible
World, and among a corporeal People. Of the other by Faith, by believing as we
are told, by one that, we are sure, can have no design, or inclination to
deceive us. There are many Mansions (says he) in my Father's House, as good
Accommodations, as suitable Society, (and sufficiently numerous which the many
Mansions implies) to be sure, as any you have met with here. Faith is, in this
case, to serve us instead of Eyes. It is the substance of things hoped for,
Heb. 11.1.
the evidence of the things not seen. As we have the Notion of a Country where
we have not been, by the description of a Person whom we can trust, and that,
we think, intends not to abuse us by Forgeries, and false Representations. In
reference to this Country, we walk and guide our selves by sight in our
Converses and Affairs wherein we have to do with it; As to that other, by
Faith, (as verse. 7. it is implied.)

5 thly, Yet further it is to be considered, that this Body, and this present
bodily People, and World, have the present possession of us. And though the
spiritualized Mind do, as it were, step forth, and place it self betvveen both,
when it is to make its choice; yet the Objects of the one sort are much nearer;
the other are far distant, and much more remote.

6 thly, That it cannot but be apprehended, that tho the one sort of things
has the faster hold; the other sort are things of greater value. The one has
the more entire present possession of us; the other, the better right.

Thus we see the Case stated.

II. We are next to show, What the temper is of an holy Soul, (i. e. its proper
and most genuine temper) in reference to this supposed state of the case. We
are willing rather, or have a more complacential inclination, to be unpeopled
from the Body, and this bodily sort of People, and to be peopled with the Lord,
and that sort of incorporeal People, over which he more immediately presides in
the upper World. He speaks comparatively, as the case requires. And because all
comparison is founded in somewhat absolute, Therefore a simple disposition both
ways, is supposed. Whence then,

1 st, This Temper is not to despise, and hate the Body. It imports no
disdainful aversion to it; or to this present State.

2 ly, Nor is it an impetuous precipitant tendency toward the Lord, impatient
of delay, mutinous against the divine disposal; or that declines present duty,
and catches at the (...), the Crown and Prize, before the prescribed race be
run out. An holy Man is at once dutiful and wise. As a Servant, he refuses not
the Obedience of Life; Ambros. de bono mortis.
and as a wise Man, embraces the Gain of Death.

3 ly, But it is considerate, the effect of much foregoing deliberation, and of
a thorough perspection of the case; (...), Verse. 6. knowing, or considering,
that while we are at home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord. This choice
is not made blindly, and in the dark.

4 thly, It is very determinate and full, being made up of the mixture of
Fortutide and Complacency, as was said. The one whereof copes with the evil, of
being severed from the Body. The other entertains the good of being present
with the Lord. Therefore this is the sense of a pious Soul in the present case,
q. d. I do indeed love this Body well, and reckon it a grievous thing to be
severed from it, if that part of the Case be singly considered, and alone by it
self; but considering it in comparison with the other part; and what is this
Body to me? What is it as an Object of Love, in comparison of being with the
Lord? What is Death to me as an Object of Fear, in comparison of being absent
from the Lord? Which is a Death many thousand times more deadly than the other.

III. The agreeableness of this temper to the general frame and complexion of
an holy Soul as such. Which will appear, if we consider, 1. What sort of frame
or impression, in the general, that is, that does distinguish a sincerely pious
Person from another Man. 2 ly, The more eminent Principles in particular that
are constituent of it, and do, as it were, compose and make it up.


1. The general frame of an Holy Soul as such, is natural to it: It Is not an
artificial thing, a piece of Mechanism, a lifeless Engine; nor a superficial,
an external Form, an evanid Impression. It is the effect of a Creation, (as
Scripture often speaks) by which the Man becomes a new Creature, and has a
Nature peculiar to him, as other Creatures have: Or of Regeneration, by which
he is said to be born anew. Which forms of Speech, whatever they have of
different signification, do agree in this, that they signify a certain Nature
to be the thing produced. This Nature is said to be Divine, 2 Pet. 1.4.
somewhat born of God, as it is expressed 1 John 5.4. and in many places more. And
it is an intellectual Nature, or the restored Rectitude of such a Being. Now
who can think but what is so peculiarly from God, a touch and impress from him,
upon an intelligent Subject, should, with design, choice and complacency, tend
to him, and make the Soul do so? Especially, when it is so purposely designed
for Remedy of the Apostasy, wherein Men are revolted and gone off from him?
Will he suffer himself to be defeated in a Design, upon which he is so
industriously intent? Or is it supposable the All-wise God should so mistake
himself, as to do such a Work upon the Spirit of Man, on set purpose for an
End, which it is no way apt to serve? Yea, and when he now takes him in hand a
second time? Nor can it be, but this Impression of God, upon the Soul, must
have principal reference to our final State. It is a kind of Nature, and must
therefore tend to what is most perfect in its own kind.

But we need not reason in a Matter, wherein the Word of God so plainly unfolds
the scope, and the success of this his own Work. By it we are said to be alive
to God through Jesus Christ, Romans 6.11. To turn, and move, and act toward him,
as many Scriptures speak. And toward him, as he is most perfectly to be served
and enjoyed in the most perfect state of Life.

We are said to be begotten again [ to a lively hope] 1 Pet. 1.3. (Where Hope
is taken objectively, as the following words show) to an Inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for us.
And when, elsewhere, it had been said, Every one that does Righteousness is
born of him, 1 John 2. ult. There is immediately subjoined, Chap. 3.1, 2. a
description of the future Blessedness; whereto it is presently added, Verse. 3.
And every Man that has this Hope in him, purifyeth himself, even as he is
pure. Implying the Hope of that blessed state to be connate, implanted as a
Vital Principle of the new and divine Nature. And all Hope, we know, involves
desire in it. Which is here intimated to be so powerful and prevailing, as to
shape and form a Man's whole course to an agreeable tenor: Which it could not
do, if Hope were not superadded to Desire; for no Man pursues an end whereof he
despairs. And what else is living Religion, but a tendency to Blessedness? A
seeking Honor, Glory, and Immortality, by a patient continuance in well-doing,
Romans 2.7.

Nor need we look further than this Context for evidence, that this divine
Impression upon the Soul has this reference. For when, Verse. 4. the Apostle
had avowed the fervor of his desire after that state wherein Mortality should
be swallowed up of Life, he immediately adds, Verse. 5. Now he that has wrought
us to this self-same thing, is God, etc. And indeed, after that transforming
touch, the great Business of such a Soul in this World, is but a dressing it
self for the Divine Presence, a preparation for that state, wherein we are for
ever to be with the Lord. And it is not only an incongruity, but an
inconsistency; not only that which is not fit, but not possible, that a Man
should ever design that as his end, which he cares not ever to attain; or that
for his last end, which he does not supreamly desire.

2 ly, If we consider particular Principles that belong to this holy divine
Nature; the more noble and eminent Are Faith and Love.

The former is the perceptive, visive Principle; The other the motive, and
fruitive. And these, though they have their other manifold References, have
yet, both, their final to that state of absence from this Body, and presence
with the Lord; the one eying, the other coveting it, as that wherein the Soul
is to take up its final rest.

Here some consideration should be had of Objections, that some may be apt to
make use of, to shift off the urgency of this Truth, and excuse the unsuitable
temper of their Spirits to it.

1. That they are unassured about their states Godward; and how can they be
willing to die, and be absent from the Body; or not be afraid of the Lord's
Presence, whom they may, for ought they know, find an angry vindictive Judge,
when they appear before him?

Answ. This, which is the most considerable Objection that the Matter admits
of, if it were directly pointed against this Truth, as it has been laid down,
would answer it self. For it is not dying simply, that is the Object of this
Inclination, but dying conjunctly with being with the Lord, in his blessed
joyous Presence. Do not therefore divide the Object, and that Objection is no
Objection. You are unwilling to die, and be banished the Divine Presence; But
are you unwilling to die and enjoy it? Or, upon supposition you should, are you
willing? This is all that we make Characteristical, and distinguishing. Where
there is only an aversion to leave this bodily Life and State, upon a fear we
shall not be admitted into that blessed Presence; there is only an accidental
Obstruction to the more explicit, distinct, and discernable exertions of
desire this way; which Obstruction, if it be removed, the Soul would then
follow the course which the Divine and Holy Principle in it does naturally
incline to. But the mortal Token is, when there is no such doubt; and yet there
is still a prevailing aversion; when Men make no Question, if they die they
shall go to God; and yet they are not willing to go. In the former Case, there
is a supreme desire of being with God, only suspended; take off that
Suspension, and that desire runs its natural course. In the other Case, there
is no desire at all. And the difference is, as between a living Man that would
fain go to such a place, but he is held, and therefore goes not; And one that
is not held, but is dead, and cannot stir at all. For the Life of the Soul
toward God is Love; Aversion therefore is (not an absolute, but) respective
Death, or quoad hoc, a Death toward him; or, as to this thing, viz. being with
him.

2. As for the Objection of being more serviceable to Children, Friends,
Relations, or the Glory of God in the World, and his Church in it. Upon which
last account this Apostle, (Phil. 1.22, 23, 24.) though he express a desire to
be dissolved and to be with Christ; yet is in a strait, and seems also very
well pleased to abide in the flesh a longer time. He can himself best judge of
our serviceableness. The meaning is not, that we should be willing to leave the
Body before he would have us, but that we should not be unwilling then.

And because we know not when his time will be, and it may be presently for
ought we know; we should be always willing and desirous, upon that supposition.
Our desire herein should not be absolute, and peremptory, but subordinate, and
apt to be determined by his Will; which can determine nothing but what will be
most for his own Glory, and for their best good who belong to him.

But as to this Instance of the Apostle, we must consider what there was
peculiar in the Apostle's Case, and what is common, or ought to be, to all
serious Christians. There is no doubt there was this more peculiar to him, (and
to Persons in such a capacity and station as his was) viz. As he was an
Apostle, he was one that had seen the Lord, which was a qualification for the
more special Work of that Office. Whereupon he was as an Eyewitness, to
testify of his Resurrection; upon which so great a stress lay, in asserting the
Truth of the Christian Religion, and in propagating it with the greater
assurance in the World. To testify as an Apostle, therefore, could not be done
by one of a following Age. And it is very probable, when he expresses to the
Philippians, verse. 25. his Knowledge he should abide and continue yet longer
with them all, i. e. with the Christian Church in the World, (for we cannot
suppose he was to continue at Philippi) for the furtherance of the common Cause
of the Christian Faith, which was their common Joy, (and which would no doubt
be increased intensively and extensively at once); He had some secret
intimation that all his Work in this kind was not yet over. Nor were such
Monitions and Advertisements unfrequent with the Apostles, that specially
related to the Circumstances of their Work. And so entirely was he devoted to
the Christian Interest, that wherein he saw he might be so peculiarly
serviceable to it, he expresses a well-pleasedness to be so, as well as a
confidence that he should. As we all ought to do, in reference to any such
significations of the Divine Will concerning us, if they were afforded to us.

But as to what there is in this Instance, that is common and imitable to the
generality of Christians, it is no other than what we press from the Text we
have in hand: A desire to depart, and be with Christ, as that which is far
better for us; submitted to the regulation of the Divine Will* as to the time
of our departure, and accompanied with a cheerful willingness to serve him
here, to our uttermost, in the mean time.

But we have, withal, little reason to think we can do God greater service, or
glorify him more here, than above. There is indeed other Service to be done
below, which is necessary in its own kind, and must (and shall) be done by some
or other. But is our Service fit, in point of excellency, and value, to be
compared with that of glorified Spirits in the upper Regions? We serve God by
doing his Will, which is (sure) most perfectly done above. And our glorifying
him, is to acknowledge and adore his glorious Excellencies. Not to add the Glory
to him which he has not, but to celebrate and magnify that which he has:
Whereof certainly the large minds of glorified Creatures are far more capable.

He never needs Hands for any Work he has to do, but can form Instruments as
he pleases. And what is our little point of Earth, or any service that can be
performed by us here, in comparison of the spacious Heavens, and the noble
Employments of those glorious Orders of Creatures above, which all bear their
parts in the great Affairs of the vast and widely extended Heavenly Kingdom? We
might as well suppose, that, because there is in a Prince's Family, employment
below-stairs for Cooks and Butlers, or suchlike Underlings, that therefore
their service is more considerable, than that of great Officers, and Ministers
of State.

3. And for what may be thought by some, that this seems an unnatural
Inclination: We must understand what we say, and what our own Nature is, when
we talk of what is natural, or unnatural to us. Ours is a compounded Nature.
That is not simply unnatural that is contrary to an inferior Nature, and
agreeable to a Superior. The most deeply fundamental Law of the intellectual
Nature in us, was to be most addicted to the supreme Good. The Apostasy of this
World from God, and its lapse into Carnality, is its most unnatural state. To
have an inclination to the Body is natural; but to be more addicted to it, than
to God, is most contrary to the sincere dictates of original pure and primitive
Nature.

There are now (for our use) many things to be inferred.

1. We see here, from the immediate connection between being absent from the
Body, and present with the Lord, there is no place for the intervening sleep of
the separate Soul. Can such a presence with the Lord, as is here meant, consist
with sleeping? Or is sleeping more desirable than the converse with him our
present state admits? But of this much is said elsewhere.

2 ly, Death is not so formidable a thing as we commonly fancy. We are
confident and willing rather. There is a Fortitude that can oppose the terrors
of Death, and overcome. How many have we known die triumphing!

3 ly, We see that Men of Spiritual Minds have another Notion of that which we
call Self, or Personality, than is vulgar and common. For who are the [ We]
that speak of being absent from the Body, and present with the Lord? The Body
seems excluded that Notion; which we know cannot be absent from it self. How
like in sound is this to Animus cujusque is quisque? Or, That the Soul is the
Man? I would not indeed drive this so high as some Platonists are wont to do,
as if the Man were nothing else but a Soul (sometimes) using a Body. Nor do
therefore think the Body is no more to him, than our Clothes to the Body,
because the Apostle in this context uses that similitude. For that is not to be
conceived otherwise than (as is usual in such illustrations) with
dissimilitude. A vital Union must be acknowledged; Only neither is it agreeable
with their self-debasing thoughts, that seem to make the Body the more
considerable part of themselves, that measure good and evil by it, as if what
were grateful to the Body were simply good for them; and that which offends the
Body simply evil; that speak or think of themselves, as if they were all Body,
forget that there is belonging to them an (...), as well as an (...), an inner
Man, 2 Cor. 4.16.
and an outer. That the latter may be decaying when the other is renewed day by
day. That the Father of our Spirits may often see cause to let our flesh
suffer, (and, at last, perish) for the advantage of our Spirits, Heb. 12.9, 10.
(So distinct are their Interests and Gratifications, and sometimes
inconsistent). When Men make therefore this bodily, brutal Self their Center
and End, how sordid and unchristian is their temper! And how reproveable by
some more noble-minded Pagans that had better learned the Precept, inculcated
by some of them, of reverencing themselves. Of whom we find one Epict.
speaking with a sort of disdain; Is this Body, I? Another saying, He might be
killed and not hurt; and upbraiding to his Friends their ignorance, Socrat.
when they enquired how he would be buried. As if he could be buried, who (he
said) should be gone far enough out of their hands. Another, Anaxarch.
that the Tyrant (that made him to be beaten to death with Iron Mallets) might
break that Vessel of his, but himself he could not touch.

4 thly, We learn, that when God removes any of our dear godly Friends and
Relatives out of the Body, tho he displease us, he highly pleases them. For
it is that they desire rather; and we are sure he pleases himself, for what can
induce him, or make it possible to him to do any thing against his own
pleasure? We are too apt to consider our own interest and satisfaction apart
from theirs, and God's in such cases. And hence is that too vulgar and
practical error among many very serious Christians, That when such as are dear
to them are taken away, they reckon their thoughts are to be principally
employed, in considering such a thing as afflictive, or punitive to them. It Is
true, that the affliction of that, as well as of any other kind, should put us
upon very serious enquiry, and search what the sin is that may, more
especially, have deserved it. But that ought, upon all occasions, to be
principally considered in any case, that is principal. As God did not make such
a Creature principally to please me, so nor does he take away such a one
principally to displease me. God's Interest is supreme, their own next, mine
comes after both the other. Therefore when the stream of Thoughts and
Affections has run, principally, in such a case, upon our own affliction, it is
time to check it, and begin to consider, with some pleasure, how the Lord and
that translated Soul, are now pleased in one another! He has his end upon his
own Creature, and it has its end and rest in him.

5 thly, We see the admirable power of Divine Grace, that it prevails against
even the nature love of this bodily Life. Not where discontent, and weariness
of Life contribute; but even where there is a willingness to live too, upon a
valuable consideration, as this Apostle does elsewhere express himself, viz. in
the place before noted; and how easily the Divine Pleasure could reconcile him
to Life, notwithstanding what is said in the Text, is sufficiently signified in
the words immediately following it. And the Effect is permanent, not a sudden
transport, (wherein many are induced to throw away their Lives upon much lower
Motives); This appears to be an habitual Inclination. At distant times, we find
the Apostle in the same temper. That is not surely from the power of Nature,
that is so much against it, as the stream of Nature now runs, i. e. that a Man
should be willing to be plucked in pieces, and severed from himself! And we
see, Verse. 5. whereto it is expressly ascribed, He that has wrought us to the
self-same thing, is God.

6 thly, How black is their Character, and how sad their State, that are more
addicted to the Body, and this bodily life, than to the Lord, and that holy
blessed Life we are to partake in with him! Their Character is black and
horrid, as it is diverse, from that which truly belongs to all the People of
God, that ever lived on Earth; and so does distinguish them from such, and
place them among another sort of Men that belong not to him; such as have their
portion in this Life, their good things here; and who are to expect nothing
hereafter, but woe and wailing. And who would not be affrighted that finds a
Mark upon him, that severs him from the whole Assembly of the Just, and the
Blessed! Their state is also therefore sad and dismal: And in as much as what
they place their highest felicity in, (their abode in the Body) they know will
continue but a little while. Who could ever, by their love of this bodily Life,
procure it to be perpetuated? or by their dread of Mortality, make themselves
Immortal? Have not others, in all former Ages, loved the Body and this World as
much? and what is become of them? Has not Death still swept the Stage from
Generation to Generation? and taken all away, willingly or unwillingly? To have
all my good bound up in what I cannot keep! and to be in a continual dread of
what I cannot avoid! What can be more disconsolate? How grievous will it be to
be torn out of the Body! not to resign the Soul, but have it drawn forth as a
rusty Sword out of the Sheath; A thing which our utmost willingness (will make
the more painful, but) cannot defer. No Man has power over the Spirit to
retain the Spirit, nor has he power in death, Eccles. 8.8. How uncomfortable,
when the Lord's Presence, the common joy of all good Souls is to me a dread! By
the same degrees by which an abode in the Body is over-desired, is that
presence dreaded and disaffected. And how deplorate is the case, when this Body
is the best shelter I have from that Presence! Would I lurk in the Body, and
lie hid from the presence of the Lord? How easily, and how soon will my
Fortress be beaten down and laid in the Dust! and I be left naked and exposed!
and then how fearful things do ensue!

But what now, does this fearful Case admit of no remedy? It can admit but of
this only one, which therefore I would now recommend and press: The serious
effectual endeavor of being, to a just degree, alienated from the Body, and of
having the undue Love represt and wrought down of this bodily Life. Mistake
not, I go not about to persuade all, promiscuously, out of hand, and without
more ado, to desire Death, or absence from the Body. The desires of reasonable
Creatures should be reasonable; the product of valuable Considerations, and
rational Inducements. The present case of too many, the Lord knows, admits not
they should be willing to die. Who are they that they should desire the Day of
the Lord? a Day of such gloominess and darkness, as it is likely, should it now
dawn, to prove to them? No; but let all endeavor to get into that State, and
have their Affairs in such a posture that they may be, upon good terms,
reconciled to the Grave; and that, separation from the Body may be the matter,
with them, of a rational and truly Christian Choice.

And since, as has been said, there are two terms between which the
inclination and motion of our Souls, in this case, must lie from the one to the
other, viz. the Body, and the Lord, life in the Body, and with the Lord. Let
such things be considered on both hands, as may justly tend to diminish and
lessen our inclination and love to the one, and increase it toward the other.
So as that all things being considered, and upon the whole, this may be the
reasonable and self-justifying result, to be well pleased rather to be absent
from the Body, and to be present with the Lord. And,

1. On the part of the Body, and this bodily Life, consider,

1. How costly it is to you! you lay out upon it (the most do) most of your
Time, Thoughts, Cares. The greater part, most (or even all:) of their Estates.
All the Callings you can think of in the World, and which all help to maintain
at no little expense, are wholly for the Body: What costly Attendants must it
have of Cooks, Bakers, Brewers, Mercers, Physicians, Lawyers, and what not? One
only excepted that refers to the Soul.

And again, when all is done, how little serviceable is it! when you would
employ it, sometimes it is sick, sometimes lame; sometimes lames the mind and
intellect too, that it cannot do its Office, merely thorough the distemper of
bodily Organs; is at all times dull, sluggish, indisposed; The Spirit is
willing, but the Flesh weak.

Yea moreover, how disserviceable! hinders your doing good, prompts to the
doing much evil. What a world of mischief is done among Men, merely by bodily
Lusts, and to serve fleshly Appetite. These fill the World with confusion and
miseries of all sorts. All catch from others what they can for the Service of
the Body. Hence is competition of Interests and Designs: No Man's Portion is
enough for him to serve the Body, (or the mind, as it is depraved by bodily
Inclinations). And so the World is torn by its Inhabitants, Countries wasted
and laid desolate. Religion it self made subservient to fleshly Interest, and
thence is the occasion of many a bloody Contest, of Oppressions, Persecutions,
and Violences; whereby, many times, it so falls out, that such as are most
vigorously engaged in a design of serving the Body, destroy it; their own as
well as other Men's. And (which is most dreadful) Souls are numerously lost and
perish in the Scuffle; Yea, and very often, upon the account (or pretense) of
Religion, whose only design it is to save Souls! And how many to save their
Bodies, destroy even their own Souls! Not having learned that instruction of
our Savior's, not to fear them that can only kill the Body; or, being unable
to suffer some lesser bodily Inconveniences, apostatize, and abandon their
Religion, whereby that, and their Souls too, become Sacrifices to the safety
and accommodation of an idolized lump of Clay! And how certainly (if a
seasonable Repentance do not intervene) do they, who only thus tempt the Souls
of other Men, destroy their own! Nor can it be doubted, at this time of day,
and after the experience of so many Ages, wherein Christianity has been so
visibly and grossly carnaliz'd, but that it is a Religion perverted to the
support of the bodily and animal Interest, that has thus embroiled the
Christian World. How plain is it, that they who desire to make a fair show in
the Flesh, to strut in pomp, to glitter in secular grandieur and splendour, to
live in unrebuked sensual ease and fullness, are the Men that would constrain
others to their carnal Observances! Men that serve not our Lord Jesus Christ,
but their own Bellies. Who can think it is pure love to Souls, and zeal for the
true ends of the holy peaceable Religion of our blessed Jesus, that makes them
so vexatious and troublesome to all whom their fleshly Arm can reach and ruin,
and whom their Spirit and way cannot allure and win? Who that understands
Religion, and the true design of it, and the blessed end wherein it will
shortly terminate, would not be glad to be rescued out of this large diffusive
unquiet Empire of the Body, that extends it self over all things, mingling its
odious impurities, even with what is most Sacred! Who would not long to be from
under this Reign of the Beast, if he might have a fair way of escape!

And where Religion is not in the case, what multitudes of terrene Creatures,
earthly-minded Men, are stupidly going down to Perdition daily, and destroying
their Souls by mere neglect, while they are driving designs for the Body!

Which yet, in the mean time, is, at the best, but a Prison to the best of
Souls. O how could they love God! admire, and praise him! were they once out of
this Body!

But it is not enough to a Subject wherein Love is implanted, and is a part of
its Nature, to have only the prospect of what is unlovely; or be told only what
is not to be loved. There must be somewhat to invite and draw, as well as to
depel and drive off. Therefore,

2 ly, Consider also, on the other part, The Lord, and that Life you are to
transact and live with him. Little can now be said; You are not ignorant where
much is, and your own thoughts may, upon much conversing with the Holy Oracles,
suggest yet more. And you have need to use your Thoughts here, the more
largely, where your sense does not instruct you, as on the other part it does.

Consider the Descriptions which you are copiously furnished with, both of him,
and of the state in which you are to be present with him. Recount his glorious
Excellencies; his immense and all-sufficient Fullness; his Wisdom, Power,
Holiness, and Love in absolute perfection.

Consider his high, equal, comely, amiable Regency over the blessed Community
above, that spiritual incorporeal People, the pleased joyful Inhabitants of the
Celestial Regions. And that he rules over them, and communicates himself
universally to them, in a state of perfect Light, Purity, Peace, Love, and
Pleasure, that is also immutable, and never to know end. There is nothing
capable of attracting an intellectual Nature, which is not here!

But on both parts, suffer your selves to be directed also.

1. Take heed of over-indulging the Body; keep it in subjection, use it, and
serve it not. Primitive Nature, and the Creator's wise and holy Pleasure,
ordained it to serve. Lose not your selves in it; take heed you be not buried,
where you should but dwell; and that you make not your Mansion your Grave.
Mansion do I say? call it as this Apostle does, and another, (2 Pet. 1.) your
Tabernacle only; a Tent pitched for you, but for a little while.

Every day look upon it (and without fond pity) as destined to rottenness and
corruption. And as that, which when it ceases to be your clothing, must be
Worms meat. Labor to make the Thoughts easy and familiar to your selves of
leaving it; think it not an uncouth thing. How does that part of the Creation
that is inferior to you, abound with like Instances? Of Fruits springing up out
of this Earth, and growing to ripeness and maturity, with Husks, Shells, or
other Integuments, which then fall off; such as never ripen, they, and their
enfoldings rot together. Esteem it your perfection, when your Shell will fall
off easily, and cleaves not so close, as to put you to pain when it is to be
severed from you.

Endeavor the Holy and Heavenly Nature may grow more, and more mature in you;
so Death will be the more also an unregretted thing to your Thoughts. By all
means labor to overcome the fear of it; which that you might, our Lord also
took a Body. Forasmuch as the Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood, he
also himself likewise took part of the same, that through Death he might
destroy him that had the power of Death, that is the Devil: And deliver them,
who through fear of Death, were all their lifetime subject to bondage, (Heb.
2.14, 15.) Reckon not much of that fear, which is only the mere regret of
sensitive Nature, purely involuntary. And that can no more obey the empire of
the Mind, or be regulated by it, than you can make strait a crooked Leg by a
mere act of your Will, or make your Body not feel pain. A fear from which the
perfection of our Nature, in our blessed Lord himself, was not exempt. But it
is one thing to extinguish even that Fear, another to overcome it. The former
is impossible to you, the latter necessary. It is overcome, when a superior
Principle governs you, and your Resolutions and Course, as it did our Lord. He
did not, because of it, spare himself, and decline dying. You may feel perhaps
somewhat of such a fear (a secret shrug) when you are to be let Blood, or have
a Wound searched. It governs not in such a less important Case, when (being
convinced it is requisite) you omit not the thing notwithstanding. Labor
herein to be hardy, and merciless to this Flesh, upon the fore-thoughts of the
time when God will allow you to step forth, and go out of the Body; and say to
it, with an obdur'd mind, For all thy craving, and shrinking, thou shall be
thrown off.

Labor it may, not only, not be the matter of your prevailing Fear, but be the
matter of your Hope. Look toward the approaching Season, with pleasant
cheerful expectation: Aspire (as it belongs to you to do, who have received the
first Fruits of the Spirit, that blessed Spirit of Adoption) and groan for the
Adoption, (the season of your being more solemnly owned for Sons) viz. the
redemption of the Body, Romans 8.23. Which though it ultimately refer to the
Resurrection, may be allowed to have an incomplete meaning in reference to
Death too: For I see not but (...), may admit such a construction, as (...),
Heb. 9.15. i. e. that redemption of the Body may mean redemption from it
(wherein it is burdensome, a grievance, and penalty) here, as well as there.
The redemption of Transgressions, does truly mean liberation from the penalty
of them. From which penal Evil, of, and by the Body, (so materially, at least,
it is) we are not perfectly freed (as our blessedness is not perfect) till
Mortality be swallowed up of Life, and all the adopted (the many Sons) be all
brought to glory together.

How happy in the mean time is your case, when Death becomes the matter of your
rational well-grounded hope! You have many Hopes wherein you are liable to
disappointment; You will then have one sure Hope, and that will be worth them
all; none can prevent you of this Hope. Many other things you justly hope for,
are hindered by ill minded Men of their accomplishment. But all the wit and
power of your most spiteful Enemies can never hinder you from dying. And how
are you fenced against all the intervening Troubles of Life! Nihil metuit qui
optat mori, You have nothing to fear, if you desire to die; nothing but what,
at least, Death will shortly put an end to. Make this your aim; To have Life
for the matter of your Patience, and Death of your Desire.

2 ly, On the other part also, labor to be upon good terms with the Lord;
secure it that he be yours. Your way to that is short and expedite. The same by
which we become his, Ezekiel. 16.8. I entered into Covenant with thee, and thou
becamest mine. Solemnly and unfeignedly accept him, and surrender your selves.
Without this, who can expect but to hear from him at last, Depart from me, I
know you not? Know of your selves, demand an account, Are you sincerely willing
to be his? and to take him for yours, without limitation or reserves? Matters
are then agreed between him and you: And who can break or disanul the
Agreement? Who can come between him and you? I often think of the high
transport wherewith those words are uttered; The excellent knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord, Phil. 3.8. This is Christian Religion, not in a System, but as
it is a vital principle, and habit in the Soul, inclining us, making us
propense toward our blessed Lord; addicting and subduing us to him; uniting us
with him. Whereby we come to know by inward sensations; to feel the
transfusions of his spiritful Light and Influence, and our Souls thereby
caught, and bound up in the bundle of Life. So we have Christ formed within;
His Holy Truths, Doctrines, Precepts, Promises, inwrought into the temper of
our Spirits. And, as it follows in that Context, Phil. 3. to have him,
according to the States, wherein he successively was, by correspondent
impressions represented in us. So as that we come to bear the Image of him,
crucified and dying, first; then reviving, and rising; and afterward,
ascending and glorified. To know him, and the power of his Resurrection, and
the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable to his Death; If, by
any means, we might attain unto the Resurrection of the Dead, Verse. 10, 11.

Let us not be at rest till we find it thus, in some measure with us. If we
feel our selves, after this manner, internally and initially conformed to him,
this will be both a Preparative and a Pledge of our future perfect conformity,
both internal and external. It will fit us to be ever with the Lord; and assure
us we shall, and can be no where else. That he and we shall not to eternity
dwell asunder. We shall neither fear to be externally conformed to him in his
Death, to quit, and lay down the Body as he did; nor despair of attaining with
him the Resurrection from the Dead, and of being present with him in Glory. Or
that he shall recover for us, out of the Dust, our vile abject Bodies, (the
(...)) the Body of our Humiliation, wherein we were humbled, as he was in his,
(as it follows in that, Phil. 3. verse. 21.) and make it like his own glorious
Body, ((...), conform, and agreeable) by that power, by which he is able even
to subdue all things to himself.

In the mean time, as this present state admits, converse much with him every
day. Be not strangers to him; often recognize, and renew your Engagements to
him. Revolve in your Thoughts his Interest in you, and yours in him. And the
nearer relation which there is between him and you, than that between you and
this Body. Recount with your selves the permanency and lastingness of that
Relation. That whereas this Body, as now it is (a terrestrial Body) will not be
yours long; He is to be your God for ever and ever. That, though Death must
shortly separate you from this Body, Neither Life nor Death, Principalities nor
Powers, things present, nor things to come, shall ever separate you from the
Love of God which is in Christ, our Jesus, our Lord. While this Body is a Body
of Death to you, he is your Life, your Hope, and your exceeding Joy, your
better, more laudable, and more excellent Self, more intimate to you, than you
can be to your self, (as has been anciently, and often said); And for the
obtaining whose presence, absence from the Body is a very small matter.

A great Julian. Ep. ad Iamblic.
Prince (in an Epistle to that Philosopher) tells him; I seem to my self not to
be a Man, (as the saying is) while I am absent from Iamblichus, (or while I am
not conversant (...).
with him). That we can better endure our Lord's absence, is surely a thing, it
self, not to be endured. We should labor our acquaintance with him (such as is
fit to be between so great a Majesty, and such mean Creatures as we) should
grow daily.

Yea, and endeavor to make the Thoughts more familiar to our selves, of
spiritual Beings in the general. For we are to serve, and converse with him in
a glorious community of such Creatures. An innumerable company of Angels; The
General Assembly, and the Church of the First Born, and the Spirits of just Men
made perfect, Heb. 12.23. In a Region where an earthly Body, remaining such,
can have no place. Why do we make the Thoughts of a Spirit out of a Body so
strange to our selves? We meet with hundreds of Spirits in Bodies, and moving
Bodies to and fro, in the Streets every day, and are not startled at it. Is a
Body so much nearer akin to us, than a Spirit; that we must have so mean a
thing to come between, to mediate and reconcile us to it? Why are we afraid of
what we are so nearly allied unto? Can we not endure to see or think of a Man
at liberty, (suppose it were a Friend or a Brother) if we our selves were in
Prison? The more easy you make the apprehension to your selves of a disembody'd
Spirit, i. e. free, I mean, of any terrestrial Body, the better we shall relish
the Thoughts of him who is the Head of that glorious Society you are to be
gathered unto; For the Lord is that Spirit, the Eminent, Almighty, and
All-governing Spirit, (to be ever beheld too in his glorified Body, as an
eternal Monument of his Undertaking for us, and an assuring endearment of his
Relation to us).

The better your Minds will comply with the preconceived Idea we are to
entertain our selves with, of the Constitution, Order, Employment, and Delights
of that vast Collection of Heavenly Associates we shall dwell with for ever.
And the more will you still incline to be absent from this Body, that (among
them) you may be ever present with the Lord.

And if you thus cherish this pleasant Inclination, think how grateful it will
be when it comes to be satisfied! How natural is that Rest that ends in the
Center, to which a thing is carried by a natural motion! How pleasantly does
the departed Soul of that good Gentlewoman, whose decease we lament, solace it
self in the presence of her Glorious Lord! I shall say little concerning her;
You will have her just Memorial more at large e're long. I had indeed the
opportunity, by an occasional abode some days under the same Roof, (several
Years before she came into that Relation wherein she finished her Course) to
observe her strangely vivid, and great Wit, and very sober Conversation. But
the turn and bent of her Spirit toward God, and Heaven, more remarkably
appeared a considerable time after. Which when it did, she showed how much more
she studied the Interest of her Soul than the Body; and how much more she
valued mental and spiritual Excellencies, than worldly Advantages, in the
choice of her Consort, whom she accepted to be the Companion and Guide of her
Life.

She gave proof, herein, of the real greatness of her Spirit; and how much she
disdained to be guided by their vulgar Measures, that have not Wit, and Reason,
and Religion enough to value the Accomplishments of the Mind, and inner Man.
And to understand that Knowledge, Holiness, an heavenly Heart, entire
devotedness to the Redeemer, a willingness to spend and be spent in the Service
of God, are better and more valuable things, than so many Hundreds or Thousands
a Year. And that no external Circumstances can so far dignify a Drunkard, an
Atheist, a profane Wretch, as that, compared with one that bears such
Characters, he should deserve to be simply reckoned the better Man. And that
mere sober carnality, and ungodliness, suffice not to cast the Balance. Or
that have so little of these Qualifications for the making a true Judgment, as
to think that Calling dishonorable, and a diminution to a Man, that refers
immediately to the Soul, and the unseen World, and that relates and sets him
nearest to God.

She knew how to make her estimate of the Honor of a Family, and a Pedigree,
as things valuable in their kind, without allowing her self so much vanity, as
to reckon they were things of the most excellent kind, and to which nothing
personal could be equal. And well understood, of the personal Endowments of the
Body, and the Mind, which were to have the preference. Her Life might teach
all, those especially of her own Sex, that a Life's time in the Body, is for
some other purposes, than to indulge, and trim, and adorn the Body; which is
most minded by them who (as that shows) have, in the mean time, most neglected,
and (God knows) most depraved and deformed Souls. I hope her Example more fully
and publicly represented, will more generally teach. In the mean time, this
Instance of our common Mortality should teach us all. We see this state of Life
in the Body, is not that we were finally made for. Yet how few seriously look
beyond it! And it is amazing to think how little the Deaths of others signify,
to the making us mind our own. We behave our selves as if Death were a thing
only to be undergone by some few Persons, here and there; and that the most
should 'scape; and as if we took it for granted, we should be of the exempted
number. How soon are Impressions, from such occasions, talked, and trifled, and
laughed, and jested away! Shall we now learn more to study, and understand our
own Natures? To contemplate our selves, and our Duty thereupon? That we are a
mortal, immortal sort of Creatures. That we are sojourners only in a Body,
which we must shortly leave to Dust and Worms? That we are Creatures united
with Bodies, but separable from them? Let each of us think, I am one that can
live in a Body, and can live out of a Body. While I live in one, that Body is
not mine, I dwell not in mine own. That the Body must be for the the Lord, as
he will then be for the Body. That we shall dwell comfortless and miserable in
the Body, if we dwell in it solitary and alone, and have not with us a better
Inhabitant. That our Bodies are to be Mansions for a Deity, Houses for
Religion, Temples of the Holy Ghost. O the venerable thoughts we should have of
these Bodies upon this account! How careful should we be not to debase them,
not to alienate them. If any Man corrupt the Temple of God, him will he
destroy, 1 Cor. 3.16. Will a Man rob God? break and violate his House? how
horrid a Burglary! Shall we agree to resign these Bodies, and this bodily Life?
Our meeting will have been to good purpose, might this be the united sense of
this dissolving Assembly. Lord here we surrender and disclaim (otherwise than
for, and under thee) all right and title to these Bodies and Lives of ours. We
present our Bodies holy, acceptable, living (yet, living) Sacrifices, as our
reasonable Service. Let us do so, and remember we are hereafter not to live to
our selves, nor to die, at length, to our selves, but living and dying to be
the Lord's.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere is lately printed, A brief Exposition of the Lord's Prayer, and the Ten
Commandments. To which is added, The Doctrine of the Sacraments. By Isaac
Barrow, D. D. and late Master of Trinity-College in Cambridg: And now, since
his death, published by Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury. Printed for Brabazon
Aylmer, at the three Pigeons over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. In
Octavo.


