Royal Institutions:

Being Proposals for ARTICLES To Establish and Confirm Laws, Liberties, and
Customs OF Silver and Gold Mines, TO ALL The KING's Subjects, in such Parts of
AFRICA, and AMERICA, which are Now (or Shall be) Annexed to, and Dependant on
the CROWN of England.

With Rules, Laws, and Methods of Mining, and Getting of Precious Stones; The
Working and Making of Saltpeter; And also, The Digging and Getting of Lead,
Tin, Copper, and Quicksilver Oars, in Any or Either of those Countries;
Whereby Navigation, and Trade, with the Subjects Interest and Riches, together
with the CROWN's Revenues, would be greatly Increased, in a little Time.

Most Humbly Offered to the Consideration of the King's most Excellent Majesty,
and this Present Parliament.

By Thomas Houghton, of Lime Street.

Licensed, DANIEL POPLAR.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1694.

TO THE KING's MOST Excellent Majesty; Together, with the Present PARLIAMENT
Assembled this Thirtenth Day of February, 1693/4.
Great Caesar, and Senators.
In all Humility, most Humbly I inform You

THere is nothing more Certain and True, Than that there are many extraordinary
Rich Veyns, Mines, and Mineral Countries, in some Parts of America, which are
now Annexed to and Dependant on the CROWN of England; (the Experience and Truth
of which, nothing but want of Skill in Mineral Affairs, and Incredulity, can or
will deny); which Veyns and Mines, if they was Sought for, and Set to Work, by
any that understands them, would undoubtedly, in a little Time, prove as Rich
as any the Spaniards have in Peru, or on the North Side of the Aequinox, in
New-Spain; and, in a few Years, would produce and raise great Quantities of
Silver, Gold, Copper, and other Valuable Things, to the great Content and
Satisfaction of the English; provided there was any Regular LAWS, RULES, and
METHODS Settled, for Working, and Carrying on the said Mines; by which LAWS,
the Enterprisers, or Undertakers thereof, might Enjoy and Secure their Rights,
Interests, and Properties therein, to Them, their Heirs, and Assigns, after
they have been at the Cost and Charges of Finding and Discovering the said
Mines. But, as the Royalties thereof stand, at present, (in their respective
and separate Grants from the CROWN) to a few PROPRIETORS, who formerly has
not, at present does not, nor hereafter, in all Probability, will not use any
effectual Ways and Means to Work an Discover the same; whereby this excellent
Undertaking has hitherto been Neglected and Slighted, and is yet rendered
Impracticable to all Englishmen; and so will remain to Posterity; by which)
many Rich Veyns and Mines have been, are, and will be of no Benefit; but
continue Void, and utterly Lost, unless some further Care be taken, than yet
has been, for Settling and Methodizing the same: The evil Circumstances of
which; has been, is, and will be, if not remedied, an unvaluable Loss to the
English Nation, in Neglecting to give all due Encouragement to improve this
Honorable Enterprise; which would greatly increase the Revenues of the CROWN,
and advance the English Nation's Interest, to an unspeakable Degree, in a
little Time. Therefore, that the King's most excellent Majesty, in his Princely
Wisdom, together with this Present Parliament, would be Graciously Pleased to
take it into Consideration, and amend this Mischief, by making the following
ARTICLES, (or some such other, as the Government shall approve off) for
Standing LAWS, and CUSTOMS, to be Observed and Practiced by all the KING's
Subjects in America; whereby the Enterprise would become National to the
English Posterity, and every Freeborn Subject have Liberty to Seek, Find, and
Enjoy the Fruit of his Labors; Paying to the CROWN, the Duties and
Reservations here-after mentioned, Is the sole Desire, and earnest Request of.

Your most Humble, Most Dutiful, and most Obedient Petitioner, Thom. Houghton.

ROYAL Institutions.
Article I.
THAT it is the Right and Prerogative of the CROWN, to Elect and Choose an
Officer, and Officers, for the Management of the Royal Treasures, when and
where Occasion does or shall require, to take the Care and Charge of the KING's
Part, in all Royal Mines; and also, in all Mines of Base Metal, where the
Royalties yet remain annexed to the Crown; Which Officer, and Officers, shall
be Sworn to do Right and Justice, as much as in Him or Them lies, (according
to the best of his or their Skill and Knowledge) between his Sovereign Majesty
the KING, and the Miner, Maintainer, or Venturer; and also, between Miner and
Miner, and Miner and Maintainer of such Mines; and shall either Himself, or by
his or their Lawful Deputy or Deputies, duly Execute, and faithfully put in
Practice, amongst the Miners and Adventurers, and all other of the KING's
Subjects, these ARTICLES, as Rules, Laws, and Customs, fit to be kept and
observed, in all Parts of Africa, America, or the West India Islands, where any
Silver or Gold Mines, or any other Mines of Tin, Lead, Copper, Quicksilver,
Precious Stones, and Saltpeter, shall be Found, Dug, Made, and Discovered
hereafter; which Officer shall be called the Bar-Master; and shall remain
Overseer and Superviser of the Royal Mines, and other Mines of Base Metal, for
the KING's Part, during his Majesty's Pleasure.

Article II.
THAT all or any of the KING's Subjects, of what Degree, Quality, or Estate
soever they be, shall have full Power, and free Liberty to Dig, Delve, Work,
Mine and Break up Ground in any of the Countries aforesaid, to seek for
Silver, Gold, Lead, Tin, Copper, Quicksilver, Precious Stones, and Saltpeter,
in any Part or Place whatsoever, Houses, Orchards, Gardens, and Enclosures of
Sugar-works excepted, upon the Terms and Conditions following: That is to say,
He or they who finds them, or any of them, shall pay to the KING's Officer,
for the Use of the KING, in Oars ready dressed, and cleansed from the Earth,
Stone, and Rubbish, made fit for Smelting, Melting, and Refining; Of all Gold
and Silver Oars, one Sixth Part; And of all Lead, Tin, Copper,
Quick-Silver-Oars, and Precious Stones, one Twelfth Part; And of all
Saltpeter, every Twelfth Tunn: For Payment of which Sixth and Twelfth Parts,
as aforesaid, every Miner, Maintainer, or any of the KING's Subjects, shall
have free Liberty to Dig, Work, and Break up Grounds in any of the Countries
aforesaid; except in such Places, as is before excepted.

Art. III.
THAT all Rakes, or Veyns of Silver or Gold, Lead, Tin, Copper, and
Quicksilver, and all Pipes and Flat-Works of Precious Stones, or Saltpeter,
shall, in three Days Time next after they, or any of them are found, be possessed
with one pair of Stowes or more, by the Owners of first Finders thereof; and
Notice shall be given, or sent to the KING's Officer, by Word of Mouth or
Writing, concerning the same, within three Months Time next after such Veyn or
Veyns, Rake or Rakes, Pipe or Pipes, Flat-Work or Flat-Works are Found and
Discovered; and, for want of such Officer, to the Minister of the Parish, or
the next Magistrate, or Justice of the Peace, or Governor of the Place, where
such Mines are Found, who shall immediately go or send his Deputy to the said
Mine, Rake, Veyn, Pipe, or Flat-Work, and shall there Measure out as many Meers
of Ground, as the Owner or Owners thereof have Stowes set in quiet Possession;
which Meers of Ground he shall deliver to the first Finder, or Owners thereof,
and shall Register that Veyn, Rake, Pipe, or Flat-Work, by such Name, as the
Owners think fit to give it; the Miner, Owner, or Finder thereof Paying to the
Bar-Master, or his Deputy, Ten Shillings for every Mere of Ground he or they
shall so Measure out and Register; each Mere of Ground containing Twenty Nine
Yards of Ground in Length: Upon every of which Mere of Ground, a pair of Stowes
shall stand to keep Possession, as aforesaid, within which Length of Ground, no
Person or Persons shall presume to Work, Dig, or Break u^ Ground, in Order to
get Oar therein, without the Leave and Consent of the Owner, or first Finder
thereof, whether Gold, or any other Metal whatsoever.

Art. IV.
THAT it is, and shall be, Lawful for any Person to Cross, Stow, and take
Possession of either of the Extremes or Ends of all Rakes, Veyns, Pipes and
Flat-Works so found, where the Right and Possession of the next Owner expires,
either at the Measuring out of the first Meers of Ground, or before; and he who
shall first break Ground by the Making of a Cross or Crosses, and shall Own and
Prove himself to be the first Taker at the Finder, or to him or them that
Holds and Enjoys the next Possession, and shall set on one pair of Stowes
or more, within Three Days Time next after the Making of such Cross or Crosses,
or breaking of Ground, shall be Judged and Concluded to have the Right.
Interest, and Possession of the next Ten Meers of Ground in the same Rake,
Veyn, Pipe, or Flat-Work, there-unto adjoining, at whither End or Side soever
it is, or shall be; provided he or they shall and do set on the other Nine pair
of Stowes, within Three Days Time next after the Making of such Cross or
Crosses; and shall Pay the Bar-Master, or his Deputy, Ten Shillings for
Registering and Measuring out each Mere of Ground; at which Time, Stakes shall
be driven down, or Marks made to determine and show the End of the same. But if
he or they, who have made such Cross or Crosses, and broken Ground, Neglect or
Refuse to set on One Pair of Stowes or more, where such Cross or Crosses was
made, within Three Days Time next after the Making thereof; that then it shall
be free and lawful for any other Person to Cross, Take, and Set on Stowes, and
Possess those Ten Meers of Ground, and shall Hold and Enjoy the same to
himself, or his Assigns, giving the Bar-Master, or his Deputy, Notice thereof,
and Paying for Registering and Measuring these Meers of Ground, as aforesaid.
And thus every one shall be served, sooner or later, in the same Rake, Veyn,
Pipe, or Flat-Work, whether it be Silver, Gold, Lead, Tin, Copper,
Quicksilver, Precious Stones, or Saltpeter, according to his or their
Antiquity of Crossing, or Breaking of Ground, and Setting on of Stowes, as is
aforesaid.

Art. V.
THAT after the Ground is Possessed with Stowes, Measured, Marked out, and
Registered, if any Man's Stowes be Stolen off, and taken away by any Malicious
Person, or by any Indirect Way or Means shall be Carried or Taken from the
Places where they or any of them Stood, That it shall not be Lawful for any
Person or Persons to Set his or their Stowes, or Possess the same Ground, or to
Work therein, or in any Part of it, for three Months Time next after; and at
the End of the three Months, he or they who desires to be Owners and Possessors
of the same, shall go or send to the Bar-Master, or his Deputy, or to the
Minister of the Parish, or to some other Person, as aforesaid, and acquaint him
or them therewith; where-upon the Officer or Person, so acquainted, shall Write
or send to the late Owner or Owners thereof, to whom the Right of those Meers
of Ground did belong, or to some of his or their Agents; and shall give them
Notice, That unless he or they set on New Stowes upon those Meers of Ground,
and Dig or Work in some Part of it, within three Months Time next after such
Notice given. That his or their Right in and to those Ten Meers of Ground will
be given away: But if the Bar-Master, or other Officer, knows not how or where
to Write or Send to such Owner or Owners, nor any of their Agents, to give him
or them Notice thereof, Then the Bar-Master, or his Deputy, shall go to that
Ground, and shall take Three or Four Persons along with him, and shall there
make open PROCLAMATION, upon the Mine, some Time of the Day, between the Hours
of Eight of the Clock in the Morning, and Two in the Afternoon, in the hearing
of such Persons as go along with him, That unless the late Owner, or Owners
thereof, shall set on new Stowes, and make Workman-ship in some Part of those
Meers of Ground, within Three Months Time next after such PROCLAMATION, so that
the Mine may be set forwards, and wrought for the Public Good of the KING, and
his Subjects: That for such Neglect, those Ten Meers of Ground in that Rake,
Veyn, Pipe, or Flat-Work, will be given away to others, and his or their Names,
that was late in Possession, will be raced out of the Register, and new Owners
put into Possession, and their Names Registered: And this PROCLAMATION shall
determine the Right and Interest thereof. And furthermore, Every Person and
Persons whatsoever, having Possessed and Stowed up the Ground, as before said,
whether it be Rake, Veyn, Pipe, or Flat-Work, shall do and perform some actual
Work, by Digging and Mining, in some Part of that Ground, in Twelve Months Time
next after it is so Stowed and Possessed, as aforesaid; or else it is, and shall
be, Lawful to and for the Bar-Master, or the KING's Officer, to throw off those
Stowes, so set on, and to set on the Stowes of any other Person that shall
desire that Ground; to the End, That the Mines may not lie Waste and Neglected;
but that the KING, and the Public, may Receive the Benefit thereof.

Art. VI.
THAT no Person or Persons, Society or Societies of Men, shall take up or
Possess above Forty Meers of Ground together, in any Rake, Veyn, or Pipe-Work,
without leaving an Interval, or Space of Ten Meers of Ground at least, for
other Adventurers; for the Reason of giving all the KING's Subjects
Encouragement to Venture, and to set the Field or Mine more fully at Work, for
the Public Good. But in all Flat-Works of Gold, or any of the before --
mentioned Metals, Minerals, Stones, or Salts, every Man shall have as many
Meers of Ground, as he or they have sett-on Stowes, being Twenty Nine Yards
Square, upon the Superficies of the Ground, for every Pair of Stowes; and for
every Man successively, sooner or later, according to his or their Taking,
Stowing, and Working the same, as aforesaid.

Art. VII.
THAT all Miners, and Adventurers, shall have the Timber of the Country,
(where the Grounds are not enclosed) for the use of their Mines, to Work and
Uphold the same, and to Smelt and Refine their Oars with, or to do and perform
any other Service or Business, their Occasions shall require, in and about the
Mines; And Liberty to Dress, Wash, and Cleanse their Oars from the Earth, and
Rubbish, whether they be Silver, Gold, Copper, or any other Metal, Stones, or
Salt, as beforementioned, in the most fit and convenient Places they can find;
and shall Build, and set up Smelting Mills, or Melting and Refining Houses for
the same; and shall have Ways, with free Egress and Regress, to Pass and
Repass, to and from the Mines, with any Carriages; and the Benefit of the
Water, wherever they shall find it. And when the Oars shall be Cleansed from
the Earth, and Rubbish, and made fit for Melting and Refining, before any of
the Oar is Removed, Conveyed, and Carried away from the Ground, where it is
got, to Smelt, or Refine, or any other Ways to be disposed off by the Owners,
Diggers, or Getters of the same; The KING's Officer, or his Deputy, or some
such Person, as is beforementioned, shall be sent for, to Measure or Weigh the
same. And when the Bar-Master, or his Deputy, has taken the Sixth Part of all
Gold and Silver Oars, and the Twelfth Part of all Copper, Lead, Tin, and
Quicksilver Oars, and the like for Precious Stones, and Saltpeter, as
aforesaid, for the Use of the KING; Then the Miner, or Maintainer, shall have
Liberty to Sell and Dispose of the Rest, to his or their best Advantage; or to
Smelt and Refine the same, as he or they that Owns them think fit; And after it
is made into Copper, Lead, or Tin, shall and may (if he or they please) Smoke
off the Base Metal, or Refine their Oars, before they are Melted, by
Quicksilver, or Corrosive-Waters, or any other Way, to the best of his or
their Advantage, according as his or their Skill and Judgment shall direct
them, either in Oars, or in Metal, as he or they think fit.

Art. VIII.
THAT if it shall so happen, that Two Veyns of Silver, Gold, Copper, or any
other Metal, shall run or go along One by the Side of Another, and shall be
parted by a Rither or Rock of Stone Three Foot Thick, or more; That then they
shall be Held and Accounted for Two Rakes or Veyns; and he or they that Found
the First Veyn, shall Hold and Enjoy that in his or their own Right; for each
Pair of Stowes, a Mere of Ground, as is before-said: And so likewise shall he
or they that Found and Discovered the other Veyn or Rake, so running near, and
going along by the Side of the Veyn first Found, according to his or their
Crossing, Taking, and Possessing of the same with Stowes, one Mere of Ground
for each Pair of Stowes; and so every Man, sooner or later, according to his or
their Taking and Stowing. But if these Two Rakes or Veyns run One into Another,
and continue so, or go so near together, that the Rither or Rock, which parts
them, may be got, without Blasting and Blowing down of the same Rock with
Gunpowder; Then they shall be Taken, Held, and Accounted for one Veyn; and he
or they that was the first Finders, or Owners of the Veyn first Found, shall
Enjoy the same, so long as they continue thus together: But if these two Rakes,
or Veyns, or any other Rake or Veyn, Intersect and Cross one another
Diametrically, as thus, + or obliquely, in this manner, He that first comes to,
and finds the Place, or Point of Intersection, shall Hold and Enjoy the same:
That is to say, He shall Hold and Enjoy his own Veyn, as A. -- A. in his own
Right, and Three Foot of either Side into the Veyn B -- B, as far as the Black
Spots.. beyond which, being Three Foot, of either Side, from the Point of
Intersection, toward B -- B, he shall not Work, upon the Pain of Forfeiting
the double Value of the Oar got therein, without any Cost or Charges to the
Wronged Person, if that Veyn or Rake B -- B belong to any other Person or
Persons; and this Point of Intersection shall be called the P, to distinguish
it: But if the Veyn B -- B be a New Veyn, and no other Person in Possession of
it; Then it is, and shall be Lawful for the Finder thereof to Take and Possess
it, and Hold it in his own Right. And if any Person shall Work upon the Front
and Forefield of another Man's Rake or Veyn, and shall be thought and judged to
Work in the same Veyn that another Man, at some Distance, had first in Work,
and was Possessed of; Then the Person that thinks himself Wronged, shall apply
himself to the Bar-Master, or his Deputy, and desire him to keep an Account of
all the Oar got therein; and before the Getters, or Owners thereof, shall carry
it, or any of it away, or shall Smelt, Melt, or Refine any of the same into
Silver, Gold, or any other Metal, he or they shall give Bond to the Owners of
the first Veyn, That, if by Workmanship, in Length of Time, these Two Places
proves to be one and the same Veyn, to return the full value of the Oar got
therein, to the Owners or Finders of the first Veyn, without Stoping or
Deducting any Cost or Charges for Getting the same; and if he or they refuse to
give Bond, then the Oar shall be Stopped, and Seized for the Use of the first
Owners, by the Bar-Master, or his Deputy, till further Workmanship shall make
the Truth appear, whether they be one and the same Veyn or no; and to whether
of them, the Place in Question and Dispute, does appertain and belong.

Art. IX.
THAT whereas it is most Natural and Customary, for Gold to lie in the Earth in
Flat-Work; therefore, when any Gold, Silver, Copper, or the Oars of any other
Metal, shall be found to lie in Flat-Work, he or they who first Finds the
same, and Crosses, Breaks Ground, and Sets on Stowes within Three Days Time
next after such Flat-Work is Found, shall have as many Meers of Ground in that
Flat-Work, as he or they shall Set on Stowes in Three Days Time next Ensuing
the Finding, Crossing, and Taking thereof, each Mere of Ground containing
Twenty Nine Yards of Ground Square, upon the Superficies; within which Length
and Compass of Ground, no other Person or Persons shall presume to Dig, Work,
or Carry the same away, without the Leave and Consent of the first Finder, or
Owners thereof. But if any other Person or Persons, shall find any other Veyn
or Veyns, Rake or Rakes, that shall sink Perpendicular or Hadeing, within the
Limits or Compass of that Ground so Taken, Possessed, and Stowed up for
Flat-Work, as aforesaid; That then it is, and shall be Lawful to and for the
first Finders, or Owners of those Rakes, and Veyns, to Hold, Work, and Enjoy
the same, and all the Product thereof, that shall be got within the Compass and
Bounds of those Rakes or Veyns, without any Disturbance or Hindrance from or by
the Owners or Masters of the Flat-Works; because such Rakes and Veyns lie in
the Earth after another Manner, and Nature, quite different to Flat-Works, and
are Separate Things; And so (successively) every one in the same Rakes or
Veyns, according to his or their Taking, and Possessing with Stowes, sooner or
later, shall be served, Hold and Enjoy the Meers of Ground so Taken, and
Possessed, in those Rakes and Veyns. And if there be no Veyns or Rakes Found
within that Compass of Ground, so Taken and Possessed for Flat-Work, but the
Flat-Work shall continue, and extend it self, bearing Gold, or the Oars of any
other Metal, further, and beyond the Limits of the Ground so Possessed with
Stowes, as aforesaid, for Flat-Works; That then the first and next Taker,
Possessor, and Stower of the next adjoining Ground, shall Hold and Enjoy as
many Meers of Ground, each Mere containing Twenty Nine Yards of Square Ground
upon the Superficies, as he or they have Taken, and Set on Stowes for the same
Flat-Work, within the Time aforesaid; and so, successively, every other Person
or Persons shall be served, sooner or later, according to his or their Taking,
Possessing, and Stowing up of the same Flat-Work; be it in Gold Mines, or in
Seams and Beds of Saltpeter, or Precious Stones lying in the Earth, Soil, or
Rocks, in Flat-Works, as aforesaid; or any other Metal and Oars, lying in the
same manner whatsoever.

Art. X.
THAT where any Oars shall be got, made, and run into Copper, Lead, Tin, or
Quicksilver, all and every Part of those Metals, that shall be used and spent
in the Country, where they are got, shall Pay no other Duty to the KING, but
only that beforementioned; for the Reason of giving the Inhabitants, and
Adventurers, all the Encouragement, that may be, to Work the Mines, and to
Carry on the Field. But if the Finders, Getters, or Owners thereof, or any
other Person, shall have a mind, and finds it for his or their Benefit and
Advantage, to Transport and Ship them, or any of them, from the Countries where
they are got, to other Places beyond the Seas, he or they that Ships them,
shall Pay for every Tunn of Copper so Shipped, Twenty Shillings to the KING's
Officer, for the Use of the KING; and the same Sum of Twenty Shillings the
Tunn, for Saltpeter, and Tin; and Five Pounds for every Tunn of Quicksilver
so Shipped off, and Transported from the Countries where they are got: For the
Payment of which Duties, and the Twelfth Part or Caract of all Precious Stones,
as aforesaid, All Diggers, Finders, Owners, Buyers, Adventurers, or Dealers
therein, or in any of them, shall have free Liberty to Sell, Ship, and
Transport them to any Part or Place whatsoever, to the best of his or their
Advantage.

The End of the Articles.
ALL which Methods, Rules, and Articles, that they, and every of them, may be
Enacted, Established, and Confirmed by the King's most Excellent Majesty, and
this present Parliament, now Assembled, as LAWS and CUSTOMS, hereafter to be
Practiced, Used, and Observed by all the Subjects of the Crown of England, in
all Parts of Africa, and America, for the Discovering, Working, and Carrying on
any of the Mines beforementioned, when and where they, or any of them, shall be
Found, is the most Humble Petition and Request of a well-Wisher to the Nation's
Interest,

T. H.

Postscript.
TO THE LORDS Spiritual and Temporal, Together with the COMMONS, Assembled in
this present PARLIAMENT.
Gentlemen,
IT is Worth your Thoughts and Considerations, to Enquire into the Reasons and
Causes, Why no English King, Prince, Nobleman, Merchant, nor any other Person
of Heroic Spirit, should not, in all this Time, since America has been
Discovered, endeavor to be Master of Silver and Gold Mines, as well as the
Spaniards; there being in many Places of America, now in the Hands of the
English, as Rich, and as Plentiful Veyns and Mines to be Found, as any the
Spaniards have in Peru, or New-Spain. But one Reason of this Misfortune, I
believe to be this; He that has had Substance, to have undertaken this
Enterprise, has wanted Skill, and durst not Trust another with a small Stock
out of Sight; nor would not go himself with such as had Judgment therein: Or,
He that has had Skill, has wanted Money, and Encouragement, to Manage and
Carry on this Affair, and so could not undertake it, for want of a Stock; and
as yet, no Person has Petitioned any KING or PRINCE, about it: However, it is
plain, and too true, the Mines have been Neglected, which one would think,
since all the Kings, Princes, Grandees, and Persons of Estates, in Europe, have
known, That for 150 Years last past, the Spaniards have imported at Cales, from
Ten to Forty Millions a Year, in Silver and Gold, besides many Precious Stones,
and other Rich Commodities, of great Value. The Knowledge of which, one would
imagine, should have strongly induced some other Prince, or Heroic Spirited
Men, to have used all their Endeavors to have Found and Discovered such Mines;
and have given them sufficient Cause to have pursued the same, by sending such
Persons about this Affair, as well Understands such Things: But the chief
Reason and Mischief, that these Mines have layn so long Neglected, is, Because
a few PROPRIETORS (as is before recited in the PREFACE,) having, together with
the Land, got Grants from the Crown, of the Royalties, where Mines, and Mineral
Countries are; and not using any effectual Means to Discover the Mines
themselves, at their Charge, the Enterprise has remained intricate, and no
ways feasible to Others, by Reason of those Grants; all other Persons being
prohibited to engage therein. For, to what purpose shall a Man spend his Time,
Labor, and Money, to Enrich Others, by Seeking for That, which, when he has
found, neither He, nor his Heirs, shall Enjoy, nor any part thereof: To Engage
in this, would be perfect Madness. This is the chief Reason, why the English
are not Masters of Silver and Gold Mines, as well as the Spaniards; and not the
want of such Mines, being within the English Territories and Dominions; for if
this Sore was once Cured, The English would have a Plate-Fleet, in a few Years,
Arrive in England, as well as the Flota does in Spain. How great the Loss of
which has been, and is, and how Acceptable and Profitable the Discovering of
such Mines, and an Arrival of a Plate-Fleet Yearly in England, would be, I
leave every one to Judge, that knows the Use and Service of Silver and Gold:
And the Cause and Causes, why there are no such Mines Wrought in America, but
what are Wrought by the Spaniards, are only the Reasons aforesaid; concerning
which, I hope, I have said sufficient; and that some better Care will be taken,
for the Future, whereby all those Grants, relating to the Mines in America, may
be Nulled, Revoked, and made Void, (only in such Clauses as concern Mines,) by
the King's most Excellent Majesty, and the Prudence of this Present Parliament;
and that the KING hereafter may remain sole Lord of the Field, and Royalties,
in all Parts of Africa, and America, that are now, or shall be, Annexed to the
CROWN of England, etc. The Indians, both on the South and North Side the
Aequinoctial, had Found the Mines, and Wrought in them (after their Fashion)
for above Three Hundred Years before the Spaniards came there; or else most of
the Mines had layn Undiscovered to this Day, by Reason of the Spaniards
Laziness; for the Indians of Peru, having Lived some Hundreds of Years in a
civilized Government, before the Spaniards Arrival, had Wrought the Mines, and
got great Quantities of Silver and Gold, although they were in no proper way of
Working them, nor had any Iron or Steeled Tools, fit for the Service of the
Mines; but only Tools of Copper, which they Valued more than Silver or Gold, in
regard the Tools and Utensils of Copper were most serviceable for their
Domestic Affairs, and all other Occasions, in their Times: So that, for many
Years, wherever the Spaniards came, unless they Found Vessels of Silver and
Gold in the Indians Houses, or somewhere Wore about them, at their Ears, Lips,
Necks, or Noses; or was conducted, by the Indians, to the Mines, and Places,
where the Silver and Gold had been got, The best and Richest Mines, the
Spaniards now have, lay Void, and for a long Time Unwrought; being no more
taken Notice of, than some Mineral Countries now are by the English, in several
Parts of America. And the best Method (for Gathering and Taking up Gold,) most
of the Spaniards had, for many Years, was only to Cleanse and Scower up the
small Rivers and Brooks of the Country, falling from the Mountains; from the
Sands whereof, they Gathered much Gold, without the Experience of Digging,
Mining, and Sinking of Shafts, to seek for Veyns and Rakes: The Knowledge of
which has not been many Years Understood, and Practiced by them; nor is yet
Understood, Used, and Practiced to that Height, and to such Advantage, as it
might be. So that, in many Places, which are now in the Possession of the
English, there was never any Shafts Sunk, and put down, either by the English,
or the Spaniards; their chief Objects, and Places of Trial, being only the
Surface of the Earth, with the Brooks and Rivers, as aforesaid. And therefore
it remains, without Contradiction, there is all the probable Signs and
Symptoms of Rich Veyns to be had, and Found, for Digging and Seeking for. And
to this Day, the best Method and Way that is Known, Practiced, and Used by the
Spaniards, and Indians, for Gathering and Taking up Gold, in Flat-Work, is as
follows: The Spaniards set their Indians and Negro Slaves out a Parcel of
Ground, Forty or Fifty Yards Square, more or less, as the Patroon or Master
thinks fit; which Ground, the Indians and Slaves Dig up as Deep as they Find
any Gold in it; and as they Dig it, throw it into Wheel-Barrows; which being
done, their other Slaves run it away to the next River, or Running-Brook, and
there lays it down, and Returns for more; and in this Manner they Labor, till
their Days Work is done, in Digging and carrying of Earth. At the River, or
Running Brook, there are also several other Indian Women, Boys, Girls, or
Slaves, at Work, having Bowls, or small Treays with Handles; where a Negro Boy
or Girl, having first broken and beaten the Lumps of Earth small, where, by
Reason of the Heat, it immediately dryes; which when it is dry, they put about
an English Peck of that small Earth, so beaten and dried, into one of those
Treays, as aforesaid, at a Time; and then the Woman shakes and dances it about
in the Water, turning the Bowl or Treay about and about, till the Water has
Washed away all the Earth, and Rubbish; and what Gold is in it, sinks, and
remains at the Bottom; which not being fully Cleansed from the Earth, is put
into a Bowl that stands by, to undergo a second and a third Cleansing. And in
this Manner, the Women, Boys, and Girls, renew filling of their Treays and
Bowls, with that Earth, till their Days Work is done; and so daily gather more
or less Gold, according as it happens, and as that Flat-Work is more or less
Plentiful of Gold; Pursuing this Method in Digging, Carrying, and Washing, as
long as that Earth has any Gold in it worth their Labor; and then they remove
to another Place. After this Way, they Work out all their Earth and Land, that
lies near Rivers, or Running-Brooks, that has Gold in it; but where the Gold
lies at a great Distance from any Running Water, they are obliged to let all
alone, or else to lose the greatest Part of the Gold that is small; for in such
Places that are remote from the Water, (as on the Tops and Plains of the
Mountains, where there is generally the most plentiful Store of Gold) the best
Ways they Use or Understand to gather it there, are these: They Dig the Earth,
Dry it, then Beat it small, and Sift it; which done, they Spread or Strew it
thin upon the Ground, and there it lies, till the next Showers of Rain Wash it;
and then they pick out what Gold they can; which being done, they draw the
Earth up and down with Coal-Rakes, or turn it with Shovels, and spread it thin
again, and let it lie till other Rains wash it, and so pick it over again;
which Operation, being twice or thrice Repeated, and having taken what Gold
they can out this Way, they then shovel all the Earth together upon Heaps; and
if there be no Pools or standing Waters near, they make Ponds or Pools, which
when the Rainwater has filled, they carry that Earth, so laid upon Heaps,
thither, and wash it, with their Treays and Bowls, in those Pools, as
aforesaid: And by this Means they get some more Gold, although most of the fine
and small Gold is quite lost, because the Water of those standing Pools soon
grows dirty and muddy, and thereby rendered unfit to separate the fine dust Gold
from the Earth, for want of clear running-Waters; which Error, and Defect,
might easily be amended, and all the Gold, though never so small, preserved, if
they understood the way of Hushing, and using long Buddles, and Landers: As
much Gold might be taken up in a Month, by the same Number of Hands, as they
now take up in Seven Years: But, whether this be a proper Place, and a fit
Time, to Show and Describe the Way of Hushing, and Using these Buddles and
Landers, I know not, till I find what Reception and Countenance these ARTICLES
will meet with. And if the Design of this Book meets with Encouragement, I will
Publish a Book, Entitled, The Royal Miner; (in which, the whole Method and
Progress of Digging, Working, and Carrying on of Mines, from the first
Beginning, or Breaking of Ground, to the Melting, Refining, and Making the Oars
into Metal, shall be clearly Taught and Described; together, with all the
Work-Tools, Instruments, and Materials, Used in and about the Mines: As also,
what Incidents, or Accidents, Prejudicial, or Profitable, has, does, and may
attend the same, as far as Art, or Nature, has Discovered these things to
Humane Reason: In all which, (I may say, without Boasting,) I have had long
Experience, and am as capable to Acquaint Posterity with, as any Person extant,
having, for Six and Twenty Years past, been universally concerned in Mines, in
all, or most of the Mineral Countries of England, not only as a Partner,
Master, or Owner of them; but in the Practick Part of their Workman-ship, from
the Beginning, to the End:) In which Book, I will describe the Method of these
Buddles and Landers, for Hushing, and the most proper Way of taking up, and
gathering of Gold, with many Useful and Beneficial Directions and Instructions,
in and about the Mines, and Mineral Countries of England, and other Places,
shall be fully set out and described. In the Interim, If this small Book should
fall into the Hands of any Detractors, who, through Ignorance, or Envy, shall
exclaim against any thing herein mentioned, or hereby intended; I shall only
give such Persons this modest Reproof, Quis nisi mentis inops oblatum respuat
aurum? and he may well be reckoned a weak Man, if not a Fool, that will
censure, slight, or condemn any thing, in which he never acquired sufficient
Knowledge to be a competent and fit Judge.

Gentlemen,

I would not have You, or any of You, think, or believe, that Gold, and Silver,
or the Oars of any other Metals, lies in the Earth, in such Plenty, or in such
a Manner, as to discover themselves to every vulgar or unskillful Eye; however,
it is certain, There is great Plenty, and many Rich Veyns to be Found in the
English Territories; and for what I have mentioned before, concerning a
Plate-Fleet coming Yearly into England, if Liberty, and fit Encouragement, be
given, I will Undertake to Effect and Perform it. And, if any of You desires
further Information in this Affair, I am ready to Acquaint You with it, when
You Command me; and to Show You how, where, and by what Ways and Means the same
may be Effected; so that, if Liberty and Encouragement may be given; I doubt
not, but to have Five Hundred Miners at Work, in Two Years Time; by which, with
some Negroes, and other Persons, that I will Cause to be brought to them, in
Two Years Time more, I question not, but to make the Mines flourish to a
greater Degree, than I shall now Speak of.

To Conclude; All that I seek herein, is, That the King's most Excellent
Majesty, and this August Assembly of Parliament, would be Graciously Pleased,
(if in their great Wisdom, it may be thought fit,) to take away, and remove all
those Obstructions, which hitherto have Ruined this Honorable Enterprise; and
that, for the Future, they would Settle and Confirm either the afore-going
ARTICLES, or some other Fundamental LAWS and CUSTOMS, for the Mines
beforementioned; whereby all Freeborn Subjects of the CROWN of England, may
have Liberty, and full Power, of Using their Endeavors, to improve their own
Interests, together with the Revenues of the CROWN: Which is the most Humble
Desire, and Petition, of a Well-Wisher to his KING, and Country,

Thom. Houghton.

FINIS.

