HOW and RICH: AN IMPARTIAL ACCOUNT of the Proceedings at the late Election of
Burgesses for the Borough of Southwark, Wherein are Discovered, The palpable
Forgeries of Elephant Smith in his pretended Relation of the same.
By one of the Loyal Inhabitants of that ancient Borough.
OUR Bromidgam-Protestant Intelligencer having not only obtruded himself upon
us, at the time of our Election, as several others did unsent for, but also
concerned himself so far about our Proceedings in that affair, as to arraign
the wisdom of our Borough, to bespatter our Representatives, and as an utter
Abherrer of Truth and Modesty, to publish in his Print so many notorious
Falsehoods in favor of one Party, I have thought it a just debt to my
Neighbors to give the World a true and impartial Account of the whole matter.

The Gentlemen who were our Burgesses in the two foregoing Parliaments, had
acquitted themselves so well, that 'twas generally expected that they would
have been unanimously desired to accept of the Trust again; but some Strangers
and those no small -- thinking it seems, that they were fitter to choose for
us, than we for our selves, made all the Interest they could for two other
Persons. So that the Comp^titors were Sir Richard How, Knt. and Peter Rich, Esquire
Edward Smith, Esquire Steward of the Burrough-Court, and Slingsby Bethel, Esquire one
of the present Sheriffs of London.

Sir Rich. How and Mr. Rich, are Gentlemen of approved Loyalty and Integrity,
publicly known to be true English Protestants, ancient Inhabitants in the
Neighborhood, and liberal Benefactors to the Poor of our Borough, and who
have always quitted themselves with great Reputation in considerable Offices of
Trust, both Civil and Military, and faithfully discharged their Duty as our
Representatives in the two former Parliaments.

Mr. Smith, is a person not altogether unknown to the Inhabitants, having long
enjoyed a profitable place among them, and one of Loyalty enough to recommend
him to the good opinion of the better sort of the Burghers, had not himself and
his Interest been tacked to Mr. Bethel, who was indeed sufficiently eminent for
the Figure he made in the late Revolutions, but now no otherwise known to the
Electors, but by the singular Menage of his present Office, and by the Persons
who solicited for him and accompanied him to the place of Election.

Thursday, Feb. 10. being the day appointed for the Choice, the Writ was read
at St. Margarets Hill, and though a Poll was demanded for How and Rich, yet a
View was afterward earnestly insisted on by the D. of Buckingham, and other
the Adherents to Smith and Bethel, but this was generally opposed and decried:
not but that the Friends of How and Rich might have safely ventured on a View,
had they had an Elephant or any other rare show, as the others had a Star, to
attract the gazing Mobile; but because it could not decide the Election, nor
answer any other good purpose, the Bailiff adjourned to the Artillery-Ground,
the Place before appointed and mutually agreed upon for the Poll. However his
Grace being resolved to have a View, though but of himself and party, drew up
into St. George's-Fields, where as themselves report, there appeared above 8000
men for Smith and Bethel; though the truth is, when it came to Trial, there
were not 3000 on both sides. At the opening of the Poll, the Bailiff, to show
his own Impartiality, and to prevent all future misunderstandings, desired the
Competitors to agree among themselves upon the methods of Proceeding. Upon
which it was consented to between them, and that Agreement endorsed upon the
Poll-Book, that when the Polling-Place, which would contain about 150, was
full, the door should be shut, and no others admitted till all those within
were poll'd off and discharged at a Backdoor. And after some discourse of the
Qualifications of the Electors, it was agreed, that, according to ancient
usage, all Housekeepers, not receiving Alms, should be p^llable. And that no
others might be received, care was taken by mutual consent, that the Beadles
and other Officers of the respective Parishes (and what other persons any of
the Candidates did desire) should be present to take notice of all that offered
themselves to the Poll, to whom all other necessary Interrogatories were
strictly put, before the Question Who are you for? Moreover by the care and
appointment of the Neighboring Justices of the Peace, and the Bailiff, all the
Constables of the Borough attended in and about the Polling place, to prevent
any Tumult or disorder.

In this method all things were impartially and peaceably carried, till on
Tuesday following about Twelve of the Clock the Poll became dry, of which
several Proclamations being made, as well within doors as without, the Bailiff
by consent of all the Candidates closed the Book, and adjourned to the
Talbot-Inn, where the Book being cast up, the numbers for each (according to
Elephant-Smith's own Account, which with the number of the ascending steps to
the door of the Polling-house, is all the material Truth in the whole
Narrative) were as follweth, How, 1622, Rich, 1616. Smith, 1347. Bethel, 1334.

Now that How and Rich had the majority on their side upon the score of pure
merit, will appear from the consideration, that the other two had in many other
respects the advantage of them; For

I. The Bailiff of the Borough having a dependence upon Mr. Smith, the Steward
of the Court Leet, it is to be supposed, that if he would have been partial
(which to do him right, we acknowledge he was not) it would have been in favor
of Mr. Smith and his Partner. And the Bailiffs men which Elephant Smith takes
notice of, are also the Stewards Bailiffs, and hold their places at his
pleasure, so that, as they hope for bread, they are bound to serve his
Interest; whereas How and Rich could hope for no more than Justice from any of
them.

II. If I should write after Elephant Smith's Copy, and trust to Common Fame, I
might tell you of a famous dissenting Protestant Divine in the Neighborhood,
who a little before the Election laid himself forth with great zeal to stir up
his Auditors to a liberal contribution for some secret service which he did not
think fit to name, which secret service is by the same Fame said to be the
purchasing the Votes of the Sober Party, with whom dry Money is a better
Argument than Ale. But to take leave of that known Jilt, Common Fame, Elephant
Smith's Mistress; it is certain

III. That How and Rich, in the execution of their Office of Justices of the
Peace for the County of Surrey, had disobliged a great part of the Prisoners of
the King-Ben^h, by being somewhat nice in interpreting the Ten-pound-Act, and
refusing to discharge them by wholesale; which is a sufficient proof of the
Knavery of Elephant Smith's attributing their success to the Votes of Beggars
and Prisoners.

IV. And lastly, Amongst the many gentle and simple sticklers who swore, drank
and damned for the carrying on the C^use, Elephant Smith himself, overcharged
with abundance of Ale and Zeal, very fluently disembogu'd himself among a Crowd
of Electors, as follweth, Ah, Sirs, what do you mean? Is the Devil in your hearts
and the Pope in your bellies? Would ye have your houses fired about your Ears
again? I speak to you that are for How and Rich, Is the Devil in your hearts
and the Pope in your Bellies, etc. I speak I say, to you that are for How and
Rich. Which being delivered with a dismal face, and in a Tone (which it is the
Printers unhappiness that he has not Musick-notes to express) it must needs be
a great disadvantage to those Gentlemen to have such powerful Rhetoric engaged
against them, and nothing but their own merits to plead for them.

Notwithstanding all which disadvantages it appears by the forementioned
Computation, that How and Rich were duly chosen Members for our Borough, and
they will accordingly be returned.

It must not be concealed, that there were many gross slanders invented by
Knaves and divulged by Fools to weaken the Interest of How and Rich, which as
Christians they forgive, and as Gentlemen they despise.

Whereas mighty Complaints are made on the other side of some slight
Indecencies unavoidable in such Popular Elections, and for which the body of
the Borough is not accountable.

Who could help it if some Waggs, by the Emblematical Black-Pudding and the
famished Mouse, intended an abusive Representation of the Gentleman-Strangers
Nine-penny Ordinary abroad, and his empty Cupboard at home?

He must thank himself, if by threatening to pull the King's Watermans Coat over
his Ears, he provoked him to reply, Ay, Sir, so perhaps you would my Masters
too, if it were in your Power.

'Twas unlucky, that the Bailiff, by being so even in his management of the
Poll as to interrogate the High Sheriff of Surrey, whether he had a who^e house
to himself should give occasion to a By-stander to remark, that there was a
High Sheriff present that was no Housekeeper.

The rumor of his being married to Nell Gwyn did never obtain to his prejudice
and had ended with the Poll, had not he afterward taken so much pains at the
Amsterdam-Coffee-house to purge himself in that matter.

But certainly such petty instances of Our-Town-Raillery cannot bear out an
Appeal, so much talked of, to the Wisdom and Gravity of so August an Assembly
as the House of Commons; though perhaps the fairest pretense toward it lies on
the side of the Inmates, who may with some color complain that they were
rejected at the Poll, when one of their own Character was admitted a
Competitor, and who as the Kings Subjects in common, (and having Religion and
Lives and Wives, as well as other men) may desire to be represented by one,
whom perhaps they conceive obliged to endeavor the Relaxation of the severity
of the Laws at present in force against them.

But I at first designed only a bare Relation of Matter of Fact, and therefore
to observe the Rule of leaving off when I have done, I shall trouble the Reader
no f^rther.

FINIS.
London: Printed for T. M. 1681.


