THE SEAT OF THE SCORNER Thrown Down: OR, Richard Hobbs his Folly, Envy and
Lies in his late Reply to my Book, called, A Looking-Glass, etc. Manifested and
Rebuked.

Whereunto is annexed my Call from the BAPTISTS, to walk in the True LIGHT.

And a True Testimony to the Light and Power of Christ in the Heart.

With a few QUERIES to the said R. Hobbs.

By Luke Howard.

To which is added, a further Answer by T. R.

He that is first in his own Cause, seems Just; but his Neighbor comes
after, and searches him out,

Prove. 18.17. The Lip of Truth shall be established forever; but a Lying Tongue
is but for a Moment,

Prove. 12.19. Printed in the Year, 1673.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
INto whose hands this may come, for your sakes who are so much troubled, that
there should be so much contending, and as you say, striving betwixt People
professing Religion; this know, that we called Quakers are forced thereunto,
and that for Righteousness sake; for the Lord knows it is so, because the
Baptists began first with us: as soon as the King gave Liberty, they fell on
us, as David said, laying to our Charge things we knew not, of Lying Stories of
seven Years old out of Lincolnshire of one Richard Anderson of Panton, which
never was at a Quakers Meeting in his Life, but at many Baptists Meetings as
appears by their own Writing, and so in Hypocrisy would cloth him with a
Quaker by Name, who was rather a Baptist, and only because he at some times
(after his own manner) would speak of the Light Within (against them) which
Light these Men so hate, that for a little spoken from a Man which was never
one of us, neither in Reality, nor yet in Formality, they should make so much a
do, and such a Cry of to the World, as they have done, and would have the World
judge of the Light of Christ, which we say every Man is lighted with, by the
Carriage of him who was so near themselves.

And now mark, because our Friends gave an Answer in plain Truth to their false
Charge, Richard Hobbs Pastor of the Baptists in Dover, as he calls himself, in
Envy undertook to write a Relation of one Charles Bailey, of his Miscarriages
Ten or Eleaven Years old; and because a deal of his Mad Actions were true (for
which he must bear his own Burden) therefore they thought that that should
crown their Lies in their former Story from Lincolnshire, and so they Printed
them together: but his spirit, to wit, C. B. and his Work, we did and do deny,
as by the Looking-Glass for Baptists does at large appear, unto which I refer
the Reader. So that I am thus constrained for Righteousness sake to appear in
Print once more, by way of Reply unto this Scoffer's Night-Labour, a Work which
he has been Sixteen Years exercising in; and of late he has began in Print to
show the Fruit of his Labor against the Light Within, and snarling at the
Heels of those who believe in it: and although he reads in the Scriptures,
which he calls his Rule, That many are Called, and few Chosen; yet is his Eye
so watching for Evil, that the Fall of one Called and not Chosen is to him a
rich Feast, as appears by his first and second Printing of the Miscarriages of
one Charles Bailey; and if his last had not been redoubling of his Evil in Envy
in his first by Lying, Scoffing and Mocking, I might have rested at this time
in Silence; knowing right well, that my first Answer to his Envious Charge
against the Light of Christ Jesus, is clear enough (without Rubbing, as he
scoffingly calls it) to his first, and might have served for this second also
to all Impartial Minds.

Luke Howard.

THE Seat of the Scorner Thrown Down, etc.
ANd now Reader, because I am accused in page 9. of this Night-Watch-man's
Labor, of my leaving the Ordinances of God, as he calls them. I shall here
give a brief Account of my leaving the People called Anabaptists in their
carnal Water-dipping and elementary Worship, where I with many more were, as
now many are looking for the Living among the Dead; and in our meeting in those
days, and performing our Work and Duty as we then thought, in that which we
called Gospel-Faith, even then would God's Witness the Light arise, and show
me, that we were not in the Gospel-Faith, which we so much professed; and that
we were not Baptized by the One Spirit into the One Body: Here the Lord in the
Light put me to a stand, and set me spiritually to commune with my own Heart in
a weighty Sense of my own Condition, and then in the Light I saw, That we were
all ignorant of the One Baptism and One Faith, as well as of the One Lord and
one Body, into which that Baptism gives an entrance. It is true, we were
dipped in Water in Hope of Life and Peace, and called Brothers and Sisters by
Water-dipping; but that Formality satisfied not the Cry of my Soul, which was
still in me after spiritual Knowledge and Acquaintance with the Lord, which by
the Light shining in my Heart I saw was not to be had in carnal Water,
notwithstanding Men do so much quote Mat. 28. for Water-dipping, unto which in
the Baptists Looking-Glass I have spoken fully in page 12, 13. unto which I
refer the Reader. But to return, Then I became very much dissatisfied, and
constrained to for sake those things and People in their Observations, and that
for good Conscience sake, which I once practiced, while the Vail was over my
Heart, in a Day of great Reproach; and here I was willing to forget those that
things were behind in the Death, and press forward after Life, which they in
their days were Shaddows of, and that is all they ever were; but now there is
but one Lord, one Faith and one Baptism. At that time one of the Preachers
asked me (when separated) Why I would not walk with them? My Answer was,
Because neither they nor I was in the Gospel. Faith; and that if ever I should
know it, that it would be as plain to me as I saw the Door with my Natural Eye.
And now has the Lord sealed that Faith unto me in the Light, by which I then
saw my self out of it, everlasting Praises be unto his Name forever: Then my
Life became as it were alone, and like a Wanderer seeking Rest; for the Cry
continued, and the Witness attended, but I knew it not to be the Gift of God's
Grace, and that the Reproof of Instruction given by it was the Way to Life, and
so took little Warning by it more then to live a kind of a desolate Life for
want of Peace of Conscience with the Lord; and in this State would I Weep and
Cry in secret for want of true Bread to give Life to my Soul, which lay in
Death; yet would I not return again to those empty Shaddows, though importuned
thereunto; but the Father's House I sought, where there was Bread enough,
without which I should have perished forever; yet for all this the Spirit of the
World prevailed, carrying me captive to the Law of Sin and Death, but never
into Lewd Ranting, as falsely accused by this Night-Watch-man; in which Day of
Distress and great Loss came in the Year 1655* two of the Servants of the Lord,
preaching the Everlasting Gospel, which was as Lightning arising out of the
East, and shining unto the West, even through all in me, to the very Thought in
the Heart, by the Word, which is the Searcher and Discerner of them, to the
reaching unto the Seed of the Kingdom, and declaring of a Body of Death
standing, notwithstanding Men's Profession of Religion, unto which the Witness
answered; so that now I knew, He that believes the Gospel has the Witness in
himself, and out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of Living Waters; this spoke he
of the Spirit, as it is written in the Scriptures of Truth, which are to be
read, believed and fulfilled.

Reader, this is precious to read in the Eternal Light and Life, and though
this was in my Mouth sweet, yet afterward it became very bitter in the Daily
Cross to my own Will, and a Day of Sorrow and weeping I knew over him whom I
had pierced; so when it was Day I wished for Night, and when it was Night I
wished for Day; this indeed was a Day of great Distress, in which I saw the
Abomination which made desolate, stand where it ought not; Then was I to
understand what it meant, and what God's Will was in it, in making of it
manifest by his Grace the Light, whose Will in the Light and Grace I saw was my
Sanctification throughout in Soul, Body and Spirit; and here we leave the World
that lies in Wickedness, and the Professors of the Saints Words, with all that
have a Form of Godliness without the Power, behind us, in and amongst the many
Opinions and Voices of Lo here, and Lo there is Christ, and so we come to know
the Voice of the true Shepherd: whose Voice we heard inwardly, and abiding with
him, do forever hear in the Light the Word of Faith in the Heart, that we may
do it: So that now, I say, By the Grace of God and Light within, I am what I
am, and therefore is my Testimony amongst many Brethren, to the Grace and Light
within, through a living Experience of the good Effects of it, and against all
these Baptist Watchmen of the Night, who plead for Sin term of Life, and are
Backbiters, Slanderers, and Persecutors of the Innocent; and there will he have
his Ministers conclude their doctrine, and his Servants their Work, who must
all be paid off with his own Reward of Torment with him and his Angels forever,
which will be also the State and Condition of all Hypocrites and Rebellers
against the Light, if they repent not: And this my Testimony agrees with the
Testimony of the Servants of the Lord in Ages past. But to return to that which
was to me bitter, when the Lord had lighted my Candle, and with it searched my
innermost Parts, then the Body of Death (out of which arises all
Unrighteousness) appeared indeed like a Mountain of Blackness and Darkness. So
that I saw no Way how to get over it, and was ready to faint in my Mind; but
the Lord, whose Love is great, and also has Respect to the bruised Reed and
smoking Flax, and will it neither break nor quench, until he bring forth
Judgment unto Victory, supported me by the more sure Word of Prophecy, unto the
which I did well to take heed as to a Light which shined in my dark Heart,
until the Day dawned, and the day Star did arise therein; and then sprung a
secret Hope in God, and the Word of his Grace, whose promise rise in my Heart,
That he would cleave the Rocks and the Mountains, that the Redeemed of the Lord
might come to Sion: and now Glory be unto his Name, his Promise is fulfilled in
a good Measure, and all along unto this Day, and still is it a support unto me
in the midst of all my Troubles and Trials in my Travels from Death to Life, in
which my Temptations have been many, yea, very many, both within and without,
in the Daily Cross; but still was and is the Lord in the Light a God at Hand,
making good his Promises unto his own Seed, in whom they are all yea and amen,
says my Soul in a living Experience, in which I have a Testimony to bear for
the Lord, to the Grace, Spirit, Light, and Life of Christ Jesus; and that it is
sufficient for me and all Men in this Age, as it was for Paul in that Age and
Time of his deepest Exercises; for every true Believer has the Witness in
himself, by a living Experience; and he who has not, has no just Claim to the
Promise of God in Christ Jesus, declared of in the holy Scriptures; for the
Scriptures were given forth in the Light, by the Motion of Life in the holy Men
of God, as in them it moved, for after Ages to read and believe, and in the
Light to wait for the fulfilling of them; and not for Men to make a Trade and a
Gain of, nor yet for Men to live in the Profession of, and take up a Rest short
of the fulfilling of them, as all the Night-Watch-men and Children of the Night
do, who plead against the Light, and for Sin term of Life; and so can be no
true Witnesses for God in their Generation, though their Profession may be
large of the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles words, with varieties of Voices
and Opinions, crying, Lo here, and Lo there is Christ; but he said, Believe
them not: for as the Lightning arises in the East, and shines unto the West
(through all) even so shall be, and so is the Coming of the Son of Man, the
Second Adam, the Quickening Spirit, the Lord from Heaven, who according to the
Flesh is declared to be the Son of David; but according to the Spirit the Son
of God, by the Resurrection from the Dead, which we called Quakers believe, and
live in the Hope of, witness against all the Night-Watch-men and False
Accusers, which say we deny it; and herein according to the Spirit, must all
come to know him, yea, and him worship, serve, fear and obey, that ever receive
Peace by him. And this is a true and Faithful Testimony against the Watchmen
of the Night, and the Opposers of the Light of Jesus Christ within, born
through a living Experience to the Light of Jesus, which we make mention of,
and no other, in whom is Life, and his Life is the Light of Men, to lead all
into Salvation that follow it, and to condemn all the Disobedient unto it; for
this is the Condemnation, that Light is come, and Men love Darkness rather then
Light, because their Deeds are Evil: and he that loves the Light, brings his
Deeds unto it, that he may know they are wrought in God; but he that hates the
Light, brings not his Deads unto it, lest it should reprove them. And this is
my Testimony, with my many Brethren, and the Saints of old, born to the Eternal
and True Light of Christ within the Hope of Glory, and to my Call out of
Darkness into Light, and from the Power of Satan to the Power of God; in which
I stand a Witness for God, and against all the Worshippers of the Beast, who
have received his Mark in their Foreheads or Right hands, and therefore plead
for his kingdom of Darkness, and against the Light Within. These must needs be
blind Watchmen of the Night, says Luke Howard, who forsook the People called
Anabaptists and their Water-dipping upon this Account.

ANd now by way of Reply in Righteousness to this Night Watchman's Scoffing,
Mocking and Lying Work; who begins in his Title Page, saying, It is a Sober
Reply. But a sober Man, so made by the Grace of God which teaches Sobriety,
will not so call a Pamphlet made up of Scoffing and Lying; for in his Preface
he begins to scoff in these word, Charles Bailey, sometimes a Prisoner upon the
Quaking account in Dover: As if Quaking were now become a Scorn and Byword, if
it be so, it is but to the Fools in Heart, who are ignorant of the Life of
Moses, Isaiah, Job, Ezekiel, Daniel, Habakkuk, Jeremiah, Joel and Amos, who
were Prophets of the Lord, and all owned Quaking and Trembling in their Day:
And in the same Preface says he, But to show, what Enormities the pretended
Light leads them to, etc.

My Answer is, We are Real in our Testimony to Christ Jesus the true Light,
which lights every Man that comes into the World: and this, to wit, the
Light, Life and Spirit, which moved in the Holy Men of God to give forth the
Scriptures, which the Scriptures bear witness unto, which is the old time came
not by the Will of Man, but Holy Man of God spoke as they were Moved by the
Holy Spirit; but the Scripture is not that Spirit, nor Life, but testifies
thereof, nor yet this Night Watch-man's imagination of them, who gives his
corrupt Meaning to Peter's word* and so Perverts them, saying, He meant the
Scriptures, when he spoke of the more sure word of Prophecy, unto the which we
do well to take heed as unto a light shining in a dark place, until the Day
Dawns and the Day Star arise in our Hearts, these last words (to wit) the
Day Star arise in our Hearts, he leaves out, for against that (to wit) Light in
the Heart, are all his Arrows shot, this he calls Erroneous, a dark Light of
the Quakers, or any thing what his dark Mind is pleased to call it; and
therefore he may think, he has cause enough to wrest the words, and to clip
some off: for if he testifies against the Quakers Light, as he scoffingly
calls it, then he must testify against Peter, Paul, and John, and the rest of
the Prophets and Apostles, for their Testimony and ours are one, as may be seen
more at Large in the Testimony following, unto which I Refer the Reader.

Then in his first Page he begins with three or four Lies: first, he says,
that I said, Some new converted Friends aid own C. B. when there are no such
words in all my Book. Then again he says, But the Men-Friends in the Castle
did not own him so much: These are his own words (not mine) to make his foul
Work seem fair, to make them serve his own End, and this he calls, My appearing
with two faces. So here is a Brat of his own begetting in his own Image spit
out of his own Mouth, speaking his own heart of Lies in Hypocrisy; for I never
so said nor meant, for my words were these, Beside there were some at Liberty,
which did not own C. B. so much as Rich. Hobbs Reported of, as may be seen in
the Looking-Glass herein Annexed; this his Charging of me with words which I
never writ, alters the Matter, and makes it another thing, as any may read that
is not Blind.

Then again he says, I Confessed I owned C. B. as much as the Rest. There is
no such word in all my Book (as may be seen) and although these things may seem
small as here related; yet as they stand in his Corrupt Relation in Print, they
are Great, because they so alter the matter, and makes his Relation have a Face
of Fairness like Truth: but read my words as they stand in my own Book, and his
words would be found a Lie, and that a Lie is in his Right Hand, and a deceived
Heart has turned him aside. And for these and such like causes to clear the
Truth is my former added to this.

Again, in page 2. he has this Lie over again, that I, and three or four in
Prison with me did not own C. B. so much as Friends at Liberty: And their he
makes Lies his Refuge, and under Falsehood he hides himself; and when he has
frames up a Lie, he sets it up as a Bulwark to batter against, with Replies,
as if his Lies were mine: and this Course this Night-watch-Man takes to make a
foul thing seem fair; and a Lie, which is of the Devil, seem true. Several more
Lies I could gather out of his Lying Pamphlet in several places, where he says
I said, Many of his Flock were of his Mind; my words were these, As many of his
Flock, as were of his Mind: which alters the matter, and makes it quite another
thing; for to my knowledge, Several of his Flock were not of his Mind. Then
again he says, that I know my wife reported, C. B. had cured her Eyes; when I
know no such thing, but the contrary; and this I can prove by several Witnesses.

But in this work of bundling up of Lies I have no delight; but as constrained
thereunto, to place a few of them upon the Liars Head, as a Testimony against
the Father of them, who i^ the Devil; for my Time is precious, and in the Mouth
of two or three Witnesses is every word established.

And then he goes on in like manner of scoffing Language in his page 13. That I
beguile the Reader into Fools Paradise, in my saying in the Baptists Looking
Glass, That the Quakers worship God in Spirit and in Truth, which the Devil,
and all that do his Works of Envy are out of: And now if to worship God in
Spirit and in Truth be Fools Paradise, then what is the wise Man's Paradise,
seeing the Lord seeks such to worship him, as we do this Day witness.

Again in Page 10. he says, here is a great Cry, and a little Wool: A scoffer
indeed. And in Page 7 he says: I give my Glass a Rub, and that to the Purpose
too, as I think (says he) and thus scoffingly he writes these, and many more
like them not worth answering, which I do Return upon his own head, who sits in
the seat of the Scorner, for it is plain, he writes one thing, and means
another, which shows a Tongue without a Bridle, and his work to be with two
Faces; and by the Scriptures which he calls his Rule, is he found in the vain
Religion. My last Testimony it needed no Rubbing; for I here testify again, it
is clear Truth, and clear enough to manifest the Deceit of him, and those
concerned with him in it; and it is here offered again for him, with other
hypocrites, to see their Faces in, and also to the unbyassed mind, and to
answer both his pieces of Envy, Lies, Scoffs and Mocks; and were I not
constrained for the Light and Truths sake, I should rather choose Silence, then
to Answer either of his pieces of dirt, which at best is but Food for the
Serpent, and his Seed to feed upon.

Again in Page 9. he accuses me, with being a lewd Ranter in Days past. Now
behold his Envy? for I have believed in the Light of Christ, and have been
called a Quaker about Seventeen or Eighteen Years, and known to my Neighbors
from my Childhood, which is above Fifty Years, and therefore the less Answer
may serve this Man's Envy, who is a fierce Accuser, and a worse Judge; and my
answer is by Way of Challenge to him and all his Abettors in Envy, To prove in
Days past any thing against me more then the foolish Course of the World,
which the Men thereof (through Profession) take a Liberty in, yet short of
bodily Uncleanness, Murder, and such like gross Enormities: but if I had been
as bad as he renders me, and worse also, to wit, If seven Devils, Mary
Magdalene's State, had been my Condition, why should his Eye or any Man's be
evil, because the Lords is good? She loves much, because much was forgiven
her. And now from sensible Experience to our own Souls, we can testify for
God, That his tender Mercies is over all his Works, and reaches to the end of
the Earth, and follows Man calling to him in his vile Estate, yea, in the
Highways and Hedges, when the proud Pharisaical Professor refuses the
Wedding-Dinner, though bidden and invited, as this Nights Watchman with many
more, have been, and have done.

Then he goes on in his former Manner in battering against his own raised up
Bulwark, saying, I contradicted my self in the Relation of Nicholas Woodman, in
Page 9. because I said, Many were baptized by William Kiffin. This is not
Contradiction at all to my saying, Nicholas Woodman was the first Baptist-
Preacher raised up in the County of Kent, and so I say again, for they are my
Words in my Book, to which I refer the Reader; and then Judge, who is the
Two-Fac'd Man, and a Perverter of Words, and compare my Testimony to his, and
then judge, whether he has answered singlely, or may not be justly called, a
Watchman of the Night, by his vailing of himself with his Night-Garments, under
a Hood with two Faces, and then Harlot like wipe his Mouth, as if all were
well, and lays his Lies to my Charge, of which I could make a large Bundle; and
of slanderous Aspersions and scoffing Language, which his untimely Birth is
filled with, I have been short, considering the large Advantage I might and
could have taken, as for Lies I can prove at least Six or Seven more, then I
have answered unto.

And then his slanderous Words of Woodman's being my Brother, and plucking out
mine own Bowels to besmier them: as for Wood^ an, I de^i^d him in Time past,
before I lest the Carnal Baptists, and their Carnal Worship, and beggarly
Elements, which he continued in long after, preaching up and down: so no
Brother of mine, but theirs, Root and Branch. And as for the plucking out of my
Bowels (an Inhuman or Unchristian like Word) to besmeer them, in saying, That
he was the first Baptist Preacher raised up in the County of Kent; for they
were my Words, which I still affirm for Truth, though by this Night-watch-Man
Perverted into another Sense; now wherein are they besmeered by me, by calling
him their Root, more then they have fouled themselves by continuing in his
footsteps? only in this they differ, he was for the Particular Election, and
they for the General, as more at large may be seen in my Looking-Glass. And as
for my being a lewd Ranter as he slanderously and maliciously accuses me, if it
were true, as its notoriously false, that would not now help his bad cause; for
what says the Apostle? such were some of you, but now ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified, and you who were sometimes Darkness, are now Light in the Lord,
etc. Yet this blind Watchman thinks in his dark Heart, that his accusing me
for Time past, for want of present matter to accuse me now of, or ever since I
have been called a Quaker, will help his bad and dark Cause and Pharisaical
Profession, or crying out, I thank thee O Father, that I am not as this
Publican is, or once was, etc -- Tedious would it be to answer all at large;
but this day is this Scripture, Isa. 28.21, 22. fulfilled upon this Mocker, God
is a doing of his Work, his strange Work, and bringing to pass his Act, yea his
strange Act; now therefore be ye not Mockers, lest your Bands be made strong.
And all whose Eyes are in their Head, may clearly see this Man's Bands of
Darkness made strong indeed, that dares so Presumptuously Preach and Print
against the Life and Light of Christ Jesus, and this is all he has to cover
himself with, and Hole this Fox has to creep into (to wit) in calling it the
Quakers Erroneous Light, and the Dark Light of the Quakers; but that Cover is
too narrow to hide him under, and that Bed is too short to stretch himself on,
and will be so found in the Day of the Lord, when his Blasphemy shall be
charged upon his own Head.

But now I shall return to his three Particulars in page 1. to prove C. B. in
Fellowship with the Quakers, and led by their Spirit; says he, First, Bailey
Prophesied, saw false Visions, and pretended to Miracles: 2dly, He was then in
Fellowship with the Quakers: 3dly, He was led by their Spirit. Now if his last
be false, as it is, on which his whole Building depends, and by the Truth being
removed, then must all his Work and Labor fall, as dirt cast into a Dunghill:
And that his last is false, take this Answer as follows, Christ Jesus
prophesied, That false Prophets should arise, and deceive many; who transform
themselves into many things like the true Prophets, to deceive (as their Father
the Devil did) those whose Minds are outward, yea, and if possible the very
Elect, whose Minds are inward: yet who dare charge the true Apostles to be led
by the same Spirit the false were? except Cain and Ishmael's Off spring, and
the false Prophets under the Law, that stole their words from their Neighbors,
and they ran and prophesied, when the Lord never sent them, and therefore they
profitted not the People: yet we do not read of any but Blasphemers against God
so perverse as this Night-Watch-man is, to charge the true Prophets Spirit with
the false Prophets Presumption, and Wickedness, as he does the Light of Christ,
our Principle, with C. B's Presumption and Wick^dness. And then again,
Antichrist the Man of Sin he sits in the Temple of God, and says, that he is
God; and under the Name of Christ does work in the Mystery of Iniquity, and so
does great Evils under the Name of Christianity, as this day we see Christendom
full of Abomination, by which it is become as a Wilderness for Beasts of Prey
to live in; now is it kind Dealing with the Christians, to charge them to be
led by the spirit of Antichrist, because he pretends to the same spirit which
the true Christians are led by? Nay, would not this Watch man think himself
wronged to be so charged? yea surely; but if he were, yet were he not so much
wronged as we are by his charging our Principle with C. B's spirit, and the
Effects thereof; for if our Fellowship stood only in outward and bodily
Exercise, as the Fellowship of Water-dipping, and Christendom's Fellowship by
Sprinkling does, then might our Principle be the easier charged with his
spirit; but because our Principle, the Light, the Grace, the Word of the
invisible God is that, in which our Fellowship stands with God in Holiness and
Truth; therefore not to b^ judged by the Practice of Evil Men: and this (to
wit) their Carnal Fellowship is the cause of their thus Opposing, Gain saying
and Blaspheming against the Light of Christ, which, whosoever walks therein,
has Fellowship with God, and one with another. And this Night-Watch-man says,
If this (to wit) Bailey 's Actions* be not a Proof of Bailey being in Fellowship
with the Quakers, then he knows not what is: and here I believe him, that our
Fellowship he knows not, no more then Christendom at large does; and in this
his Ignorance must we leave him, till he can believe in the Light, which will
give him to see and know, wherein our Fellowship stands.

Another Proof that C. B. was in Fellowship with the Quakers he had, because
some joined with him in Prayer, and heard him Preach, and one fell on the
Ground, which is now none of the smallest Quakers in Dover says this Accuser:
All this proves not the Matter, no more then the Weakness of a Young Child can
p^ove the Strength of a Strong Man; and now, is it Reasonable to judge the
Principle of the Quakers by the Actions of them which were but just then as it
were convinced, and being very young and tender (as I said before in my
Looking-Glass for the Baptists) they could not easily discern, and were afraid
to judge: And now, to judge the Principle and Fellowship by such, surely,
amongst Wise Men this will be counted Folly, and condemned for Prejudice.

And in page 9. he says, If Duke Howard had proved by some convincing
Arguments, that the Quakers Light is Christ as he Scoffingly calls it) and then
made it appear, that the Baptists had Blasphemed in denying that Men are
Redeemed and justified by that L^ght within themselves. and not rather by Faith
in the Death, the Resur^ection and Ascension of Christ without us, for us,
which is the ch^ef Point in Controversy between us (says this Opposer of
Christ, the Life and Light of Men) and so indeed it is: and now that I have in
my first Answer proved, and in this second also, that Christ is the true Light,
which lighted every Man that comes into the World, is as clear as the Sun: But
says this Scoffer at the Light, that if he had proved, that the Quakers Light
is Christ, etc. as if the Quakers Light, and the true Light that lights every
man that comes into the World, were two; here we affirm to all the World, that
we never spoke of any other Light in us, but that which all Men are lighted
with, even Christ, a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of Israel:
and if this Christ, the Light, Life, Wisdom and Power of God be not in us
Governing and Ruling, we are Reprobate, as well as others, according to the
whole current of Scripture, which is the Mystery hid from the Rebellious in all
Ages and Generations, but in all the Obedient, Christ within the Hope of Glory;
and Christ in you except you be Reprobates, said Paul; and this is our Light,
wherein our Fellowship stands with God, and one with another, and this all are
Ignorant of, who make it their Business to Gainsay him in his second
Appearance, in the Light and Spirit, in which we are to know him to our Souls
Salvation, if ever we be saved from Sin by him.

And now what is written in the holy Scripture concerning Christ Jesus, his
Birth, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection and Ascension, we do believe as much as
any men living, and so I do believe Paul did, who said; Henceforth know we him
no more. It is also said by John, He that confesses that Jesus Christ is come
in the Flesh, is born of God. Do not the Papists, Protestants, and all Sects,
yea, even Drunkards and Liars, that are shut out of the Kingdom, and all called
Christians confess to the truth of God's manifesting himself in the Body of
Jesus, which he had prepared to do the Will in, even from the Birth to the
Ascension: But will or dares any man say, that those are born of God, because
all those confess God manifested himself in Flesh? and this Faith is as much as
this Night-Watch-man pleads for, or does believe of Christ in point of
Justification, as his own words witness against him, saying, But rather in
Christ without us, for us.

To which I answer by living Experience, That Christ Jesus, who offered up his
Body through the Eternal Spirit, and poured out his Soul unto Death, and tasted
Death for every man, those his Sufferings have a living Extent unto every one
that does believe, and feel the Power by which he laid down that Body, and took
it up again; and these are they, unto whom he becomes a Savior from Sin, and
gives them an Inheritance into Glory: and those which believe only the offering
up of the Body, and feel not that eternal Power to save from Sin, made manifest
to them in his spiritual hight, cannot have a real Sense and Feeling of the
Benefit of his Death, whatsoever they may pretend to of Faith in his Blood,
neither can they have Salvation to their Souls: and this is my Answer, as a
Testimony to the true Faith and Christ of God, a Quickening Spirit, the same
yesterday, to day, and forever, who was Glorified with the Father before the
World began, from Everlasting to Everlasting, the Rock of Ages, and so Israel's
Rock, which they drunk of; for they drunk of the Rock which followed them,
which Rock was Christ, the Foundation of all the Generations of the Righteous
in all Ages, Christ within the Hope of Glory; Christ within, except you be
Reprobate; I in them, and they in me. that they may be one as we are one, said
Christ Jesus the Light of Men: If any Man be in Christ, he is a New Creature:
behold all things are become new, new Heart, new Mind, new Will and new
Affections; the old Heart in the Earth, the new Heart is given to God; the old
Mind Carnal, the new Mind Spiritual; the old Will Unsanctified, the new Will
Sanctified; the old Affections in the Earth, the new Affections set upon things
above; the old Conversation is after the Course of this World, which lies in
Wickedness; the new Conversation is in Heaven, where Christ fitteth at the
Right hand of God: he that can read, let him understand.

And now to his Appeal to the Inhabitants and Magistrates of Dover, if I be not
a false Man, as he says, for my saying, They creep into Holes in a Day of
Persecution, and that our Rock is not as their Rock, our Enemies themselves
being Judges.

Reader, I have spoken the Truth, and I say it here again; and I appeal to the
Inhabitants of Dover, Mayor and Magistrates also, unto their own Consciences
likewise, whether I have wronged them in this at all? It is true, they were in
their Meeting Place interrupted as all were that dissented from the Public,
and their Meeting House Door was locked up by the Mayor's Order, and then they,
or some one for them knocked off the Lock, and cast it into the Mayor's Porch,
as if they were valiant Men, as the Valiants of Israel, and intended to meet
again in their own hired Place; but whether so, or in Despite, there lies the
Question; however, they never met there more, till the King gave a general
Liberty, as I said before in the Looking-Glass to see themselves in: But we
still met (said this boaster) elsewhere; it is true, they did meet; but where?
I said, In Corners: for which Saying he would make me a Liar, and appeal to the
Inhabitants and Rulers to be Judge, after a very confident Manner, in so false
a Matter. And now let all the Inhabitants of Dover be judge, whether they did
not meet so private in Corners, since it was hard for people to know either
Time or Place, and with so much Secrecy, that it was sometimes at one part, and
sometimes at another part of the Town, and sometimes in the Country, and one
while by Five or Six in the Morning, and another while in the Evening, and at
several uncertain Hours of the day: Now whether I have wronged them in saying,
they met in Corners, let the Inhabitants of Dover judge; for this is a true
Relation, known well to themselves, and others also. Now it was evident, and
known to all, that we called Quakers always kept our Meeting Place, the Day
and Hour; and their Practice of shifting Time and Place into Privacies, that
they might not be known when, nor where, was laid hard to us, by way of
Persuasion to do the like, by some much concerned, who were willing, that both
themselves and we might be saved from Damage; but we could neither change Time
nor Place; and this was our Testimony to all concerned, who had Experience of
them and us by an Imprisonment in Dover Castle before that time, wherein they
did but add to our Bands; for they were soon gotten out (either directly, or
indirectly) by Money given to the then Martial John Slowman; which because we
could not do for Conscience sake, we were born upon much the harder; and
Sixteen Months, except Four Days, were we kept as it were Close Prisoners, in
a Room called, the House of Office, with no Chimney in it, until the Governor
Francis Vincent got an Order from the King to sit us free: and this was that he
Scoffingly speaks of, my seeing through the Stone Walls of Dover Castle; where
he with others might have been, if their Cause had been good, and they true Men
unto it, and then he need not a mocked at my seeing through tee Stone Walls;
and this Experience, with others of the like Nature, the Rulers and People of
Dover had of them and us.

And thus I have run through some part of this Night-Watchman's Work, and
confounded his vain Boasting, and my Conscience is Clear, and not Seared, as he
Enviously seems to charge me; and here I shall leave him, and his dark mind and
spirit an absolute Night-Watch man, Scoffer and Scorner, and proceed to my
Testimony to the true Light.

A True Testimony to the Light and Power of Christ in the Heart.
ANd that is, that God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all, and Christ
is the Ligt of the World, and in him is Life, and his Life is the Light of Men;
and to know, God and Christ is Eternal Life; and this Life is in the Son, and
he that has the Son has Life, and be that has not the Son; has not Life.
Now that which is to be known of God (and of this Eternal Life) is manifested
in Man, for he has showed it unto Man, even the Manifestation of the Spirit of
Truth, which is given to every Man to profit withal, as a Talent or Measure of
Knowledge of the Will of God concerning Man, of his State and Condition, as he
stands in the Fall (by Sin having fallen short of the Glory of God) is given of
God unto Man, so has he commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, and has
shined into our Hearts, to give us the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of
God again in the Face of Jesus Christ, to wit the Knowledge of the Grace and
Truth, the Fullness of which dwelt in that Body which the Father had prepared,
and this Grace and Truth which Man had deprived himself of, so became Darkness,
has the Lord in Love to lost Man made appear again by the Name of the Grace of
God appearing to all Men, and Light shining in the Heart, where the Darkness
and the Power thereof has taken Place; so now the Grace of God which brings
Salvation, has appeared unto all Men, teaching us (to wit, all that believe in
it) to deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly and Godlikely in
this present evil World. Now the Grace that brings Salvation to as many as
believe in it, is the Condemnation of those which believe not in it; for this
is the Condemnation, that Light (Grace) is come, and Men love Darkness rather
then Light, because their Deeds are evil: Light shines in the Heart, by it the
Lord does search out the desperate Wickedness thereof, and so tries the Reins,
that all Men are left without Excuse in his Sight: the Talent is given to all,
Light shines in all, Grace and Truth appears to all, the Possession of the
Glory of God again is tendered to all through the Light which shines in the
Heart, to give the Knowledge of the Glory of God again in the Face of Jesus
Christ, who is God's Power to save from Sin, and the power of Darkness and
Death, which rules more or less in the Hearts of all the Children of
Disobedience to the Light, and those be they that rebel against the Light, they
know not the Way thereof, neither do they abide in the Path thereof; for to him
that believes, it is a Path shining more and more unto the perfect Day, and in
it does the Lord meet with Man; thou meetest him that rejoices and works
Righteousness in thy Way; and he that is the Light of men, is the Way to the
Father; and he that knows him, knows the Father also, for he reveals the Glory,
which none of the Princes of this World by their earthly Wisdom can come to
behold, or ever could; but we behold his Glory, say they, which had believed in
the Light, and were Children of it, which by the wise Men were accounted
Accursed, and that they knew not the Law; and so it is now, To you it is given
to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven; but to others in Parables; To
you which believe in the Light, and so receive the Power to walk in it, and
know the Way of it, the Just Man's Path, which is a shining Light, and rebels
not against it; To you is the Father become a Fountain unsealed; to you i^ the
Wel-spring of eternal Life opened; to you is the Power given t^^ec-me the Sons
of God; now are we the ^on of God; but it does not ye^ ^ppear what we shall be;
now can we call God Father, and cry to bi^^ in ^iving Sense of his b^getting
Power for daily Bread, that we may be strengthened with might in the inward
Man, and that his Kingdom may come; which comes not by Observation, as lo here,
and lo there; neither does it stand in Words; but in Power, and consists of
Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the holy Spirit.

And that you may have Fellowship with us, herein is the Travel of our Souls,
and that you may know him whom the Father has given to be a Leader and a
Commander to all that receive him the Light and quickening Spirit, and him that
has this Hope, purifies himself as God is pure, and has the Witness in
himself by his continuing, believing and Walking in the Light, where the Spring
of Eternal Power is witnessed to become the Sons of God without Rebuke, and now
if we walk in the Light as he is in the Light, then have we Fellowship one with
another (mark that) and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all
Sins; and this is the Fellowship which the Saints in Light have with God, in
the Church which is in God, and one with another, by one Baptism, which is our
entrance, by the one Spirit, into the one Body, of which Christ Jesus is the
Head, World without end.

And this is a Plain, Faithful and True Testimony born through living
Experience to the true Light of Christ Jesus, which we in scorn called Quakers
believe in, and declare of to all men in the Love of God, and of no other, says

Luke Howard.

Here follows a few Queries for this Night-Watch-man to Answer according to
Scripture, before ever he be by his Neighbor searched out the third time, and
found again, as he has twice been already, a raking in the Bottomless Pit to
fetch up Matter against the Light of Christ Jesus.
1. Whether the Light of Jesus be not the Light of Men, and a Measure of the
Spirit of Truth given to every Man, as a Talent to profit withal? and whether
it does not convince the World of Sin, of Righteousness and of Judgment, and is
not the Condemnation of all that believe not in it, seeing that the
Condemnation is, that Light is come into the World, and men love Darkness
rather then Light, because their Deeds are evil?

II. Whether ever we called Quakers ever declared of, or testified to any other
Light, then that which John called, the true Light, which lights every man
that comes into the World; we saying with Paul, That God has shined into our
Hearts with it, to give us the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in
the Face of Jesus Christ; and if we, or any People else believe not in it, then
is^t not the Condemnation of all such? but if we do believe in it, we have the
Witness in our selves, even the Light and Life according to the Scriptures,
which we do believe are to be fulfilled?

III. Whether all that oppose the Light in the Heart, be not Opposers of the
Life of Jesus, seeing that in him is Life, and his Life is the Light of Men?
and whether all that gainsay and oppose this Light of Jesus, be not Fighters
against God, and Blasphemers against his Temple, and the Worshippers therein,
and so have no part of the Inheritance with Saints in Light?

IV. What is the Word in the Heart, that Man may hear it, and do it? and what
is that Word which is said to be the Name of Christ Jesus (the Power and Wisdom
of God) by which Word we may come to know him, who is from Everlasting to
Everlasting, the same yesterday, to day, and forever?

V. What is the Manifestation of the Spirit, which is given to every man to
profit withal, if it be not the Light within? and what is the Light, which
lights every Man, if it be not the Light within? and what is the Quakers
Light, if it be not that which every Man is lighted with, seeing thou make a
Difference, crying out, The Quakers Light, and Woe be to him that walks by the
Dark Light of the Quakers?

VI. What is the Grace of God, and where does it appear, which brings
Salvation, that has appeared unto all Men [mark] unto all men, if it be not
the Light of Christ in the Heart? and whether the Quakers have not a share in
that Common Grace, as well as others, seeing it is to all Men? then what
difference between the Quakers Light, and all men's, in the first Gift to man?

VII. What is that Leaven which the Woman took, and hid in three Measures of
Meal, until the whole was leavened? and what is the Grain of Mustard Seed,
which a Man took and sowed in his Field, the least of all Grains, and grows the
greatest of all Herbs? and what are the Fowls of the Air, which lodge in the
Branches of it? And what is the Pearl hid in the Field? and what, and where is
the Field? and who is the Merchant Man? and what is that he parts with for the
Field? and how, and with what does he dig deep to find the Pearl? And what is
the Groat the Woman lost and found again, when she had sweeped her House? and
what is the House and Broom, with which she sweeped? And what is that Talent
the Householder gave to his Servants, and then himself went into a far Country
for a time, and then at his return again called them to an Account? And what is
the Draw-Net cast into the Sea? and what is the Sea? and what are the Fish? and
what is the Vessel and the Good Fish that are put therein, and the Bad Pish
that are cast away?

VIII. What is that Baptism that is to remain seeing the Scripture says, there
is one Lord, one Faith, and one Baptism: is it John's, or is it Christ's? or is
it Water, or is it Spirit? or must there be two? And what is that true Bread
which comes down from God, the flesh of Christ which he gives for the Life of
the World? and whether he that eats of, it shall not live for ever; and whether
any have Life, but those that eat thereof; and whether your Bread be that yea
or nay, which you give each other as an Ordinance of God, as you call it?

IX. What Baptism is that now which gives an Entrance into the one Body of
which Christ Jesus is the Head, seeing the Scriptures of Truth which we believe
and own, say, That by one Spirit are we all baptized into the one Body? and who
is the Administrator of this Baptism? and when may it truly be said of any Man,
that he is baptized with this Baptism?

Luke Howard.

A Looking-Glass FOR BAPTISTS Being A Short Narrative of their Root and Rice IN
KENT.

Wherein the Erroneous Spirit of Richard Hobbs (Pastor of the Baptists in
Dover, with some others therein concerned with him) is Reprehended.

By Luke Howard.

Be sober, be vigilant, because your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion,
walks about, seeking whom he may devour.

Whom resist steadfast in the Faith, knowing that the same Afflictions are
accomplished in your Brethren that are in the World.

But the God of all Grace, who has called us into his Eternal Glory by Jesus
Christ, aft^r that you have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen settle you.

To him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever, Amen,

1 Pet. chap. 5. verse. 8, 9, 10, 11. Printed in the Year, 1673

THis Narrative is for the Unbyassed Minds to look into, whether Baptists or
others: in which short Narrative (by all such) may be seen the Rice and Root of
the Baptists in Kent.

And the Face of an Envious spirit ruling in Richard Hobbs, Pastor of the
Baptists in Dover, as he pretends himself to be, with all concerned with him in
it (except he has beguiled any) to set their Names to an Envious Story of one
Charles Bayley, Ten Years by past; to which Story there is Nine Names, but five
of them dead for several Years; and C.B. of whom the Story is, was by the
Quakers denied ten Years since, and so is to this Day, as in this Narrative
will appear to the Authors shame, because they have known he was denied for
several years, as their own Consciences will testify against them.

This they joined to another like it self, at the Re-printing of it, which
before was sufficiently Answered, and the Forgery therein detected to all
unbyassed Minds.

READER,
I Hearing of, and this day seeing a Scandalous Narrative from the
Baptist-People of Dover, at the reading of which I could not but very much
strange, that men should so much lose their Reason, as men, that as soon as
they have a little Liberty given them, to abuse it so, as to employ themselves
in such dirty work once and again of Nine and Ten Years by past, and so to make
themselves a Scorn to Fools, and the innocent Principle of the Quakers the
Worlds Talk, whom they hate, as Ahab did Micaiah; and therefore is their work
like themselves, whose Envy destroys their Reason, which is the Cause they
Print such things as are filled with Mischiefs, and no good to any; though such
as envy and hate the Light of Jesus, and perfect Way of the Lord (and so bring
not their deeds to it) may rejoice thereat. The tendency of which Narrative was
of C. Baily's spirit and works manifested in Dover in the 8th Month, called
October, 1661. to crown the rest of their work in their other Narrative (to
which this of C. B. was added in the Reprinting of the same) as the Baptists in
subtilty thought, or might think. Therefore it was something upon me to give
forth a true Relation (according to my knowledge) of C.B. and his being denied
long since by us, and so not to be by Wise Men accounted of us.

And also, for the Truth's sake, to make a sure Discovery of the Rice of the
Baptists in the County of Kent (who show what spirit they are of by their works
in Print) that they should not be lifted up, and glory in the flesh above their
sphere, and so preach and affirm they know not what unto the people, which are
more simple ( some of them) and cleaner in heart and mind, before they are
Dipped, then ever they come to be again, after once they are proselited into
their Yoke of Bondage; and therefore is this plain Discourse (for the Simple
sake) given forth.

The 9th day of the 5th Month, called July, 1672 L. H.

A LOOKING-GLASS for Baptists, etc.
IN the Year 1643. and 1644. the People called Baptists began to have an
entrance into Kent; and Anne Stevens of Canterbury (who was afterward my Wife)
being the first that received them there, was dipped into the Belief and Church
of W. Kiffin, who then was of the Opinion commonly called, The particular
Election and Reprobation of Persons; and by him was also dipped Nicholas
Woodman of Canterbury, my self, and Mark Elfreth of Dover, with many more both
Men and Women, who were all of the Opinion of the particular Point, and who
reckoned themselves of the Seven Churches in that Day, who gave forth a Book
called, The Faith of the Seven Churchs; which was then opposite to the Baptists
that held the general (and is still the same) at which time there was great
contest betwixt those Baptists called, The General, as Lamb, Barber, and those
which held the Universal Love of God to all; and Kiffen, Patience, Spillman and
Colyer, and those that held the Particular Election; so that if any of the
particular Men or Women of the Seven Churches aforesaid, did change in their
Opinions from the Particular to the General, that then they were to be baptized
again, Because (said they) You were baptized into a wrong Faith, and so into
another Gospel, using that saying, That if any man bring any other Gospel, then
that which we have received, let him he accursed; whereupon several denied
their Belief and Baptism, and were baptized again into the General Opinion or
Belief: But N. Woodman aforesaid, with M. Elfreth, with all of then in Kent
(except Daniel Con of Canterbury, which never baptized any) held their Baptism
in the particular, but changed their Opinions to the General, and some to
Free Will, and the Mortality of the Soul, and many other things too redious
here to relate, from whence did arise almost all the Baptists which now are in
Kent, whose Root is Babel and Confusion (which so much boast themselves in this
day of a little Calm) so that in their Root (to wit. Baptizing into the Faith
of Particular Electioners) they being false, neither Branch nor Fruit can be
true, but a confused Breed, Increase, and Body is the very best state they can
lay claim unto by their own Rules, if the General Opinion and Practice of Lamb
and Barber be true, of whose Opinion these Baptists in Kent profess now to be
of, (though they did arise from the particular Root) and devoutly preached it
up, as if they were Naturalized into the Root of the General, by Baptism: and
so make Proselites to themselves in that which they know not whereof they do
affirm, not being Spiritually Baptized into the Universal Love of God; and so
you Leaders of this People cause them to err, and they that are led by you are
destroyed (for where the Blind lead the Blind all must needs fall into the
Ditch) and when they are proselited to hold Truth in Vnrigh^eousness, they are
made twofold more the Children of Hell then they were before, because they are
now covered with a Profession without Life, which God's Spirit leads not to,
but man's Traditions, as before proved by their false Baptism: And here many
simple Ones think themselves in their state to be Rich and Full, because they
can now say something for their Opinion, as they have leavned of their Leaders,
when as they are Poor, Blind and Naked, and as empty of the Spirit of Life to
lead as ever they were in days past, and as ignorant of the One Lord and One
Baptism by One Spirit, into the One Body, whereof Christ Jesus is the Head, as
ever they were, because the Root and Foundation of their standing is rotten,
and laid in Babel and Confusion; and all this appears sufficiently unto those
whose Eyes are opened by the Eye Salve of Jesus, who counsels all to buy of him
Eye Salve, that they may see (to wit) themselves in the Fall, and him who is
the Light a Quickening Spirit to redeem up to God, out of the Fall; and all
such behold and understand things which differ, and can see the Ground and Root
of you, and of the Bitterness which remains in you Carnal Baptists, against the
Spiritual Ap^eatance and Light of Jesus, and the Truth professed in it by the
People of God called Quakers. Oh! the height of Enmity, and Abomination of
Cruelty, which lodges in the Hearts of some of your proud Leaders, who call
the Scripture their Rule, and yet walk so contrary to it; for does it not say,
Do unto all Men as you would they should do unto you? which in many things you
do not; as in your Printing and Publishing Forgeries, and Falsehoods, and the
Miscarriages of some who never were established amongst us; but since denied by
us: do you not hereby seek to cast Dirt upon us all in your Pamphlets, as if it
were a thing of yesterday, and allowed of by us at this time? Cannot you see
your Envy and great Hypocrisy in this thing? For do not you know who are the
Authors of that Story, that it is about Ten Years ago, that Charles Baily was a
Prisoner in Dover? And do not you know in your own Consciences, that he has
been by us, called Quakers, denied for many Years? And is he not then to us as
a Stranger or Heathen man, according to the Scriptures? And what is that in
you, that lays his Miscarriages to our Charge? now, is not that against the
Scriptures, which you call your Rule? And besides, you belie him too in some
things, as bad as he was; and so you show your spirit to all men, and
especially to the Wise in Heart, who will forever conclude you to be as you
are, and that he is not to be accounted of us, nor his Actions laid to our
Charge, as you envious People have done: you were moved to do it; but surely
you were so moved in Envy, as were Joseph's Brethren, when they sold him into
Egypt (it was a Murdering Motion at the best of it) but God was with him to
their Shame and Confusion of Face in due time, and so is he with us: and I do
believe, though you do not now Blush, yet you shall Blush and be Ashamed, when
the Fruits of your own doings shall correct your Folly: For what have you to
glory in, but your own Shame? If we should look back among your Society, as you
deserve what might be said, as many of you well know, and some pretended
Leaders too, Thou that says, another should not Steal, do thou Steal? here
read your selves: but for the sake of the Simple I shall not here enlarge, yet
suffer a little to be said concerning N. Woodman aforesaid, who was the first
Baptist-Preacher and Dipper reared up in this County of Kent, from whence your
Rice is, whose Evils I will not lay to the charge of the Vnconcerned in this
matter; but to speak a little to inform you, which know not your Root and Rice,
which before is called Babel and Confusion, and rotten; and now judge your
selves if it were not so; for there be many yet living, which know the Truth of
this following Discourse, and much more.

This Woodman took to Wife and honest sober widow Woman in Dover, named
Katherine Brown, who lived in good fashion in the Town, and for his
Profession's sake married him, who in idleness spent her Means, and then abused
her Body with many Blows; when he had her in the wide Fields in the Wild of
Kent, then would he leave her there to shift for her self, and himself go from
Place to Place to preach up Water Baptism; of whose (with more since his time)
filthy unheard of Abominations, both in spirit and practice, there might be
more said then you can say of C. Baily, as some of your selves well know, which
we are not willing to relate in Print, except provoked to it by your hereafter
Carriages. Now, C. Baily we are as clear of, as we are of you in the sight of
God and Wise Men, and as clear as the Churches were of them denied by them in
the Primitive Times, of which the Scripture is a full Witness for us, and
against you in this Case, unto your great shame in putting forth this your
Folly in Print of Ten Years conceivings.

Now this Man, your Root, and from whence you rose, was not in his day inferior
to any of you, in preaching the Scripture words without Life, as you do, and in
getting Disciples to him, as you do; but his Folly was made manifest, as yours
in due time will also be, who through feigned words deceive the Hearts of the
Simple, and make them two fold more the Children of Hell, then they were before
they came amongst you, as said Christ Jesus to the Pharisees, in whose steps
you are found, with the Sheep's Clothing, but in the Wolves Nature, inwardly
ravening; and so your Righteousness does not exceed theirs, because the
Ravening and Murdering Nature is standing in you, as in them, which can look
seven, eight, or ten years backward, to smite with the Fist of Wickedness, and
persecute the Innocent with your Tongues for want of power in your Hands to
effect your Wills, whose Opinions we well know, and much more then is here
said; and what is here said, is not there a cause for it? let the Unbyassed in
Heart and Mind judg^ in the Case, and let the Lord judge, who judges not as
man in the Fall judges, but will judge Righteous Judgment. But to return, Now
this Man your Root is gone, and many which knew him not are gotten into his
Form, crying up your Water Baptism as the Jews did Circumcision, and a Temple,
with other things, which God commanded in its Day, as was Baptism to John,
which was to decrease; but the one Baptism of Christ by the one Spirit into the
one Body was to increase, as John testified of him, and stands a Witness in the
Holy Scriptures against you all. And so we say, There is one Lord, one Faith,
and one Baptism to be contended for, and to be lived in, by all who are of the
Church which is in God, of which Christ Jesus is the Head, World without end,
when all things which are seen shall have an End.

And this Testimony lives in my Heart for God. That it is neither Baptism, nor
not Baptism in Water, that avails any thing no more then Circumcision, but a
New Creature (here read yourselves) and as many as walk according to this Rule
(to wit, of the New Creature) Peace be unto them, and to the whole Israel of
God; and now Wisdom is justified of her Children, and every Tree is known by
its Fruit, and so are you to all, whose Eyes are open to see your Folly and
Envy, in raking Ten Years back, as if you had sat brooding the Cockatrice Egg
all this time, to hatch forth the Serpent's Seed of Envy, to come behind, and
bruise the Heel of an Innocent People, which have denied, and do deny (and all
along our Principle has been against) such spirits as C. Bayly's was of Ten
Years since, and is of now. But Richard Hobbs, who takes to hims^^f the name of
Pastor of the Baptists in Dover, s^^th in p^g^ 7. of their Hatched up Envy, That
^f the Quaker^ should de^^ Charles Bailey to be owned a very eminent Man amongst
them at the time of his Imprisonment, that then they will render themselv^^
(...) Persons that ever professed Religion. Thus, Capera^^^ (...) ex^lts
himself, as it he spoke Truth, and knew all the Q^^^^^s Minds at that time; but
his Anger over-ruli^g his Knowledge (...) to seek of his Proof, although he
seems to prov^ ^t by his com^^^ on Lords Day after, as he says, to the Prison,
and there saw C. B. and most of the Quakers in Town with him; and he Prayed,
and some of them kneeled; A poor Proof: He there neglects relating, That
several of he Men Friends were then Prisoners in Dover Castle; and besides,
amongst them at Liberty there were some which did not own C. Bayley so much as
R. Hobbs reports of, though to him it was not declared; and besides, Anne
Howard my Wife (I being then a Prisoner in the Castle) did so far disown him,
that she sent up to London, to the Elders of Friends, and gave them an Account
of his mad Actions, who sent down two Friends to look after him, and they
testified against him, when they saw him; this Friends did not acquaint the
Baptists with, who we knew waited for Mischief: but Friends Care was of him, to
preserve him, if possible, and to restore him in the Spirit of Meekness and
Love, as our Duty is according to Scripture; but when no Recovery can be, then
denied, as he was and is to this day. And how can be charge the Principle or
Body of our Friends with him, save Envy it self? And besides, those Friends
which chiefly were with him in the Prison were young Convinced, and tender, and
could not easily discern, and afraid to judge, not knowing what to say; but to
us in the Castle Prison* when they came up to us, they would speak as it was,
but this did not we see meet to acquaint the Baptists with, but rather
endeavored to get him to London, which was done in order to his Recovery; so
that Friends are clear of him in the sight of God, and according to Scripture,
although the Baptists in envy seek to lay Stumbling Blocks in the way of the
Simple by it, and so do transgress the Law of God, and Scriptures, which they
in words call their Rule, which say, Thou shall not lay a Stumbling Block in
the way of the Blind, but shall fear thy God: But they show their Spirit to the
full; and the Lord judge between us and them for his Seed's sake. And surely if
these men had been in the days of Christ and the Apostles, they would have
done as the Jews did, lay blame to the Life and Doctrine of them, because of
Miscarriages in Judas, and others, of which the Scripture declares much, and
that through them the Name of God was blasphemed; but surely the Blasphemers
were to bear their burden from the Lord, as well as the Cause-givers, and so
mus^ all now; for the Lord will not be mocked, but as every one sows so must he
reap, even the fruits of their own doings; and so must you for all your
Blasphemy against the Light of Jesus, which we declare of, which every man is
lighted withal, according to the Scriptures, though you presumpuously sometimes
call it Natural, and scoffingly and enviously, the Quakers dark Light, with
many more blasphemous words, as the Jews of old did, in whose steps you are
found walking, and whose works you are found doing in the spirit of envy, which
said, This is the Heir, come let us kill him, that the Inheritance may be ours:
now he that envyeth is a Manslayer or Murderer; and we know, that no Murderer
has Eternal Life abiding in him; and we may justly desire of the Lord, to be
delivered from such unreasonable men, which so show your Teeth, as very ready
to bite, if you had but power; crying out in a public Assembly of Baptists in
Dover, That he which answered your false Accusations of eight or mine years
Envy, deserved to have his Ears nailed to the Pillory, for only his setting two
Letters for his Name; which shows your spirit to all wise men sufficiently: And
therefore, let your Profession be what it will, the body of death is standing
in you, in which the Persecutor and Murderer lives, for how unlike a true
Christian are your works, in raking for matter ten years back, to beget in
people an evil Opinion of the Quakers? and what will you get by it amongst the
wise in Heart but shame and contempt? for our Rock is not as your rock is, as
late experience has shown, our Enemies themselves being Judges; and now you
show, what seed you are of, by biting at our Heels, and smiting us with the
Fist of Wickedness, and persecuting us with your Tongues for want of power,
laying to our charge his spirit, which we have denied ten years ago. O ye
Fools! so soon as ever the King gives you a little Liberty to meet, where you
were afraid of man to meet but a little time since, and so crept into Cor^ers;
is this the glorious and beautifullest Fruit you have to appear with? surely
this is not the Wisdom which is from Above, which is first Pure, then
Peaceable, and easy to be entreated; but that wisdom which is from Beneath,
where the Serpent's life is, which is earthly, sensual and devilish, which
bites at the Heel: Surely Dust is and shall ^e the Serpents meat, and upon his
Belly shall he go all the days of his life: ^ere read your selves, if you can
understand what it means, says ^e who is a true Friend to all men's Eternal
Peace,

Dover, the 9th day of the 5th Month, 1672. Luke Howard.

A Postscript.
This Baptist Pastor, and as many of his Flock as are of his mind, would have
all people to believe, That the spirit by which C. B. was acted, when he h^d
erred in his heart from God, was and is the spirit, by which all the Quakers
are led by, as the very Principle of their Religion. This is the thing which
his printing is for, to possess people with a Belief of; and he thinks in his
Serpent's Wisdom, that he has made it sure enough in saying, That he was owned
an eminent Quaker at the time of his Imprisenment, and running out, to which I
have Answered already, how he was then looked upon by Friends, whom he reputes
to be a Poor, Mis^led and Deluded People; but in that Way which he accounts
Delusion, to w^t. Believing in the Light of Jesus, which shines in the Heart
and (...) manifest in every man's Conscience, do we worship God in, even in the
^^p^^it and in the Truth, which the Devilis out of, and all which do his works
of Envy: And therefore something is yet in my Heart to s^e^k t^ (...) spirit of
Envy in the Baptist Pastor (as he styles himself) and that on the wise.

Christ Jesus was glorified with the Father before the World was, and in time
manifested to the World in that Body, which the Father had prepared him to do
his Will in, whose Name is called, the Word of God, by which the World was
made, who took upon him the Seed of (...), and declared to be the Son of David
according to the Flesh but ^he Son of God according to the Spirit, by the
Resurrection from the dea^: who had all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him,
by which he gave Commission to his Apostles or Messengers, to Baptize into the
Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, which is into the Nature and Life of
each, which is one divine Nature; and these three being one in Nature and
Being and every one which is herein baptized, knows the Father and the Son b^
the Spirit, which to know is eternal Life, which is to increase in which they
also know John's Ministry and Baptism, which was to decrease, else there must
be two perpetual Baptisms; but there is one Lord, one Faith, and one Baptism,
which is to be contended for, and lived in by all who are of the true Church,
which is in God the Father of Spirits, and of our Lord Jesus Christ the second
Adam, the Quickening Spirit, the Lord from Heaven, who in his Body prepared him
to do the Will of God in, went up and down doing good, and chose Twelve, and
one of them was a Devil, not a Devil when he chose him [Mark that] for when he
had part of the Ministry, then a Servant of God, but he erred in his heart, and
fell away, and it was said, Let his Habitation be desolate, and let no man
dwell therein; and his Charge let another take: What now Baptist Pastor?
would thou not here have judged all, because he walked and professed among
the rest of the Disciples? and yet afterward in eating and drinking with them
was called a Devil by him that had chosen him into his Service before, in which
he had so walked, that each Disciple was ready to question himself, Is it I?
and Is it I? here would not thy spirit have said, Ah! you are all alike, led by
one spirit? here see thy spirit and face thou blind Pastor. And Peter, he
denied his Master. and cursed and swore he knew him not; would not thy envi^us
spirit have said, Ah! they are all alike, and led by one spirit, for all ^hey
have been a preaching up the Light? yet would not thy Pharisaical spirit have
condemned all for Peter? and though he found a place of Repentance, what is
that to thee and thy judgment against the Truth in this ^ase? for Judas found
no more place, then C. B has yet found; and ^et he had a part, and might be,
and was reckoned a Disciple, as well by ^he rest of the Disciples as C. B. was
reckened a Quaker by some of the Quakers; for to some he was manifest, as I
said before, though you Baptists knew is not. And then Demas, he forsook Paul,
and embraced ^he present World; what would thou have said less then, Ah! they
are ^ll alike, led by one spirit, let them profess what they will? for those
which said, the Apostles turned a the World up-side down, and contradicted and
blasphemed their Doctrine: What do you Baptists in this your Work ^iffer from
them? And those which had the Form, and not the Power, which were to be turned
away from; what would thy Jewish spirit ^ave said, Ah! they are all alike, led
by one spirit, for they speak ^like and act alike? as this blind Pastor said,
Charles Baily did ^^st as the Quakers in all things, both in Words and Actions,
therefore all one spirit, said he. And then John said, They went ^ut from us,
because they were not of us, that it might be made ^anifest, they were not all
of Us: He does not say, They had never ^een among them [Mark that] but, They
were not of them: ^ere would not thou have been the Accuser of the Brethren,
and in ^nvy have been ready to have ^rinted against them, and have ^aked Ten
Years back to have proved them that went out from them to have been of them, at
such a time, and at such a time, and especially at that time when they held out
their Golden Cup of Profession in good words, as you do? Here may you see your
selves, if the God of this World has not blinded your Eyes. And then in the
Churches there was some Fault found with the most of them in some things; if
thou Pastor of Dover-Baptists had been in those days, and heard of it, would
not this thy spirit have said, It is all their Principles, and one spirit leads
them all? as thou do say concerning the Quakers, against whom thou watchest
for Evil both in words and action, and then bringst it forth Ten Years after it
is done, so much out of Time, that it was high time it had been buried long
since, that it might have been rotten before now; but now to Print such
long-past things, shows thy spirit and thy self to be but a Woolf in the
Sheep's Clothing, and so a very unfit Pastor to overlook a Flock, and
especially the Flock of Christ, when thou art always a snarling at our Heels,
as the Serpent's Nature is, bringing back Blows of Ten Years old, and of that
which we are no more to be charged with then the Saints of old, as before
declared, might be with the false spirits, which were once amongst them, and
then went out into the World, as C. Baily is gone. Now all had a beginning of
the Work in themselves, before they went out from the Church, and at the first
appearance of that spirits working in the M^stery of Iniquity, and transforming
of it self as an Angel of L^ght; for to judge a whole Body and Church of People
to be all led by that spirit, is not this to be the Accuser of the Brethren,
and especially, when that people deny and testify against that spirit in due
time, as you Baptists know in your own Conscience we have done? is not this
Wickednes^ and Env^ drunk in by you, as an Ox drinks in Water? and surel^, if
you had not made your selves drunk with the Whore's Cup of Abominations, you
must needs have been Wiser Men; but having drank deep, the dreggs so stick in
your Throats, that makes you thus vomit up your own shame, and that Nature
nothing will cleanse you of short of the Divine Name of Christ Jesus, which
leads to God; but you, in the Old Man's Nature and Envious Holiness, can get
the words to talk of, and profess in the Ravening Nature, fe^ching up such old
Matter against the Quakers of Ten Years standing, and Print it, as if People
should believe it were now our Principle, Spirit and Practice; against which,
with the Pastor and his Flock, which have a hand or consent to it, we have a
Testimony for the Lord to bare in the Truth, which is Christ Jesus our Light
and Life: For he that has the Son, has Life, and he that has not the Son,
has not Life, he which has the Son has the Father also; unto whom be
Everlasting Praise.

And blessed are they, which are not offended in Christ Jesus the Light of men,
who is the Foundation that God has laid, and chief Cornerstone of this Age, as
in Ages past, though the wise Master Builders refuse now to build thereon, as
the Generations of old did; but now is the Lord a taking of the Wise in their
own Craftiness, with the little Foxes, which destroy the Vineyard, from and by
whom Offenses come; but We be to them, by whom they come, because, if they do
not fall on this stone Christ Jesus, and so be broken to pieces, it will
certainly fall on them, and grind them to powder, when there shall be none to
deliver: Therefore the Wise in Heart will prize their time, whilst it is called
to day, and whilst they have the Light to believe in it, that so they may be
the Children of it, lest darkness comes upon them, and so their feet stumble
upon the dark Mountains even at noon day; for Light was in Goshen, when
Darkness was and is in Egypt, even such darkness as may be felt of Sodom and
Egypt, spiritually so called, where our Lord was and is Crucified; he that can
read, let him understand, and prize his day, and live to God, and not to
himself; that so in all things God may he glorified in all, and through all,
and over all, who is Blessed forever and forever, Amen. says

The 14th of the 5th Month. 1672. Luke Howard.

THE Water-Baptists Reproach REPELD.

Being A further REPLY Answering a Defense of R. Hobbs to his pretended
Impartial Narrative of one C. Bailey, hereto a pretended Quaker: A Story of 11
years standing. IN Defense of an Answer to the said Narrative; clearing the
People called Quakers of the Water-Baptist's Calumny and Abuse blabbed out
against them.

By T. R.

Printed in the Year, 1673.

TO THE Impartial Reader.
HAving lately read a Pamphlet (whose Epistle to his Reader is subscribed
Richard Hobbs) weighed the Arguments, and considered the Tendency of that
Discourse; I could do no less then write a few Lines as reason^ble Remarks upon
it. The Piece is averred by the Author to be a Sober Reply to Luke Howard:
which had the Author performed, he neither had thus abused thee, nor occasioned
me this Trouble. And truly, Reader, I must tell thee, I have not often met with
more Impertinency, or Abuse wrapped up in so small a Fardle; which confirms me,
that the Promise of a Sober Reply in the Front of his Pamphlet was to Gild the
Poyson-Pill, to swallow the more glib; without which Artifice (I doubt not but)
he is sufficiently sensible the Palate of this Age would not easily touch, much
less take his Potion.

How considerable Richard Hobbs is amongst his Brethren, I determine not; but
as a Pr^acher, and Water dipper at Dover amongst them of his Perswasi^n he is
exercised, and has been for some years past, and writ a Supplement to a strange
Prodigy, or Miracle, pretended to be wrought by his brother R. James, a
Preaching Dipper, or Water-Baptist in Lincolnshire.

The first piece of Abuse (I mean that out of Lincolo^shire) present^ the World
with a Miracle, and I must say, a strange one too, a Leprosy and diseased
Family miraculously cured by them, whose known and owned Belief, and Principle
are, that Miracles are ceased: which exceeds the very Power of Christ's
Apostles, that could not so much as cure the Lunatic having not Faith, Mat.
17.16, 17. And gain, that they should he so kind to a Quaker, and his Family,
as to cure them, whom of all Persons they hate, and which of all Persons (they
say) have not Faith; is beyond all Bounds of Romance. And this ushered in as a
late piece of strange Providence, and Finger of Heaven of few days, or weeks
standing before publication; although the Cheat was Eight or Nine, some say
Twelve Years past acted by those Water-Baptists, and now brought to light to
their Shame, and their Sophistry discovered by W. S. in Answer to Ralph James
his Subterfuge, etc. to which I refer the Enquirer. But to return to R. H.
whose Sober piece (as he would insinuate it to be) I have now under hand, and
shall (as a Friendly Reader, to whom he directs his Defense of a pretended
Narrative formerly published concerning Charles Bailey sometimes a Prisoner in
Dover) make such reasonable Remarks and Observations, as may give thee to
understand the Author's Drift and Depth in his former, and renewed appearing in
Print against us, and by which the Impartial and Vnprejudiced may judge,
Whether it be a Sober R^ply, or an Envious Retort to his Opponent? whether writ
in Love, or in ^^^roach? whether in solid and sound Judgment, or an airy and
corrupt Mina? And I affirm, the Matter will best discover, of what spirit the
Author is; for the Tree is known by its Fruit. Yet its not my purpose to charge
his Disi^genuity upon all that may bear that Name (for there are lost Sheep,
whose Innocence and Simplicity is betrayed by such as He, who cause them to
err, whose State and Condition I really pity, and desire their Recovery) But
with much Plainness to deal with him, who Brawles in our Streets, and utters a
Reproach at our Gates, of and from which a though in the Sight of God and good
Men we are clear, and innocent; yet for the sake of the Simple, and all such,
with whom any Doubts of us may yet remain, is this as a Seasonable Caution,
that in the sight of all Truth may be clear, and the Slander may lie at the
Fool's Gate.

London, 1673. T. R.

THE Water-Baptist's Reproach REPELD, etc.
THis Water-Baptist, that he might appear a Methodical Writer, presents his
Reader with an Epistle, as a Key to open the Secrets of his succeeding
Discourse. But that they are of the least Alliance each to other in that sense,
I cannot find; but both being wrought with Envy, and Madness; they may pass
with a probatum est for Companions. Its some difficulty to determine, whether
the Zeal of our Author run him more into the former; or latter? but certainly
he may claim a considerable share of either. And if his Proselites, whom he
passes through his Watery Element, be no better cleansed from their Confusion
and Filthiness, then his Lines of Controversy; he might better spare his
Pains, and they their Trouble. It Is possible, R. Hobbs presuming the Impress
passing the hands of the Water-Criticks, or Book-Readers of the Town, might
change its ill shaped Dress, and present it more refined to the World; so
spared a Review of his seven or eight Months Pains. Yet I Will not set so little
by our Author, but own to all that he barks, which may be Argument enough for
Approbation, that h^'s fit to go out.

In his Epistle he thus treats his Reader, viz. I do here present thee with a
sma^l Tract, containing a brief Reply to a Book put forth by Luk^ Howard,
intitul^d, A Looking-Glass for the Baptists; The Contents of which Book and the
Intents of the Author is to obscure the Truth of the Narrative, which is
hereunto annexed.

First I answer, R Hobbs has not here dealt heartily with me, and his Reader,
referring us to an annexed Narrative, when there is not one Section, Chapter, or
Particular in all his succeeding Discourse, or any Piece annexed, that imports
any such Matter: so that the Cause of his Cavil cannot be easily examined, he
not showing us what he cavils at; an Absurdity, had it been by us, would have
been baited to purpose. Yet that I may afford our Adversaries that Assistance
and Supplement they ever denied us, I have traced back the Controversy, and am
willing to allow him the help of any Narrative formerly printed, so far as it
may clear the Truth, of what is in Controversy betwixt us.

1. Then first, I find that in the Reprinted Pamphlet relating to the
Lincolnshire Prodigy, there is a supplemental Letter, and a pretended true and
impartial Relation of some remarkable Passages of Charles Bailey.

As for the Letter, it bears date from Dover, June 10. 1672. by a Nameless
Author, and without any Account to whom sent: stuffed full of Calumny, and
Reproach, attended with such Circumstances, as might well excuse the naming
either the Forger or Fosterer thereof; however its Tincture and Complexion may
well discover who writ it; and should Richard Hobbs deny to father it, and cast
it upon some or other of his Brethren, as did his Brother Ralph James, when
charged with that notorious Lie (in the Front of his Pamphlet of Eye and Ear
Witnesses of that pretended Miracle wrought upon the Leper by his and his
Brethren's Prayers) who said, it was none of his Composing; yet its Language
would betray it: See his Subterfuge, p. 13. See page 9.
(and a further Circumstance, Luke Howard has charged it upon him, which R.
Hobbs denies not by his Reply) not much differing from that Dialect in which
his pretended true Relation is penned. And then

2. The Relation relates to C Bailey; who, say they, acted several things as a
Quaker from the 13th of O^tob. to the 22th, 1667. (which really was in 1661.)
which the Forgers would charge upon all called by that Name, which is the Cause
of Controversy betwixt Luke Howard and R. Hobbs, the first clearing, the 2d
casting all the Dirt of Charle^'s ^ise cringe upon us; which R. Hobbs terms in
L. Howard obscuring the Truth of the Narrative.

And that the Impartial Reader may have a just Understanding whether R. Hobbs
or L. Howard has been Malicious and Clamarous uttering a Reproach and Slander,
cavilling against the Truth, and abusing his Reader; I shall descend in these
few Particulars to evince to the impartial Understanding: and shall go on I. To
manifest the nullity of the Water-Baptists Charge by his Letter and Relation.
II Our Clearness from its Impositions.


But previous hereto I would have the Reader take notice, that its neither my
Work, nor Purpose to vindicate C. B. (whose Miscarriages long since separated
him from us, and against whom our Testimony was many years past given out for
his Disobedience to that everlasting Light and Truth of God: for the Sake of
which Truth R. Hobbs is so enraged against us) But to clear the Truth, and the
faithful Followers of Christ from the wretched Impositions and calumnious
Impostures of our Malicious Adversaries. Then

I. The Nullity of Water-Baptists Charge appears in these particulars.

1. Its own Contradictions, and most apparent and palpable falsness. 2. His
averring those things, that absolute necessary Consequence does contradict and
deny. Which if proved, will be no hard Matter to determine, Whether R. Hobbs
his Evidence in this matter be sufficient to prove us guilty of his C^lumny and
Reproach? for which I need to go no further, then R. Hobbs, contradicting and
charging R. Hobbs by his Letter and Narrative in Print
1. R. Hobbs, that C. Bayly's Miscarriages might^ly upon us, and upon that
Truth of God we bear Witness unto, he affirms in his said Letter (Page 17) that
C. Bailey did those Actions at the same Time, when he was owned by us as a very
eminent Man amongst us, yea, says he, "After he had acted these things in the
"Narrative, they did own him as aforesaid. Here Is the Accusers Charge, from
which he would evince all called Quakers to be guilty of his Miscarriage. And
to prove his Position, he lays down this only Argument, and none other, viz.
As appears by this (says he) One Lords day, after this Tragedy was past, I came
to visit my Brethren in Prison, and went into C. Baily's Chamber to reason with
him: in which Time came in most of the Quakers of the Town, See the Letter
dated June 10. 1672.
with whom Bailey went to Prayer, and diverse of them I observed fall down upon
their Knees in that Duty; my self, and three more Bap^ists stav'd in the
Chamber all the while he was in Prayer: in which Praye^ I very well remember he
earnestly bagg'd of God, that he w^^la send his A^gel, and bind me Hand and
Foot, and cast m^^mo Chains of Darkness* Thus would he prove, Co. Bailey was
owned after his Miscarriages, as diverse joining with him in Prayer.

Answ. As for most of the Quakers of the Town coming there, or joining in
Prayer in such manner, as he deceitfully and falsely insinuates, is after in its
place answer^d and refeld: but as to the Time instanced when this was
pretended, I further say, R. Hobbs forgetting the Method his pretended
Impartial Relation was penned in, or his Z^al out-running this Policy in the
very Front of those his remarkable Passages gives us this very Story in the
first Paragraph of those recorded Actions, See Page 1. and 2. of the Relation.
and there rel^tes that C. Bailey fell to praying, etc. (relating that Passage)
O Lord God of my Life send down thine Angels and bind this thine Enemy Hand and
Foot, for he (meaning R. Hobbs) has opposed and resisted thy pure Spirit, etc.
So that what is pretended to be last in his Letter, is first in his Impartial
Relation.

But should it be objected, That this Piece of Remark was ill placed in the
History, and might be an after Passage, though first related here.

Answ. That is not probable, for the 2d Story following this of the Prayer
begins thus, About two Days after, etc. (relating plainly to the Time of the
former Story) And following that begins another Paragraph thus, Within a short
Time after, etc And ending the whole Relation with a Story of O^tob. 22th,
1667. so that R. Hobbs his only Proof of C. Bailey being owned by the Quakers,
after his acting those Passages in the Narrative absolutely falls to the Ground
without the least Color or Pretense of Truth, if the pretended Historical
Impartial Relation be in the least to be credited. And to put all our of doubt,
with a most solemn asseveration that History is thus closed, viz: This Relation
we that subscribe do testify in the presence of God is true: under which is
printed no less then R. Hobbs, and the Names of eight persons more.

And so if the Relation be true, the Letter is most horridly false; and whether
to believe R. Hobbs in one, or R. Hobbs in the other, or R. Hobbs in either, I
leave the Juditious Reader to Judge.

2. Another Passage observable in R. Hobbs his Letter is this: near the Close
thereof to give his Reader a pregnant Testimony of his Modesty about the
publishing the Relation, says he, The only Reason why it was not published
sooner, was, because I should seem to some as if I had boasted; And must R.
Hobbs his Reader credit him in this? I must needs say, the Pharisee has told a
fair Tale to enforce a belief, that 'twas no small share of self-denial in him,
that refused the proclaiming an instance of Providence, that would add so
highly to his Praise. But alas! if R. Hobbs were guilty of any such ^^tter, he
most grandly mistook himself in a few Lines b^^^e, where (surmising that some
Readers might Question the verity of the Relation or Honesty of the Forgers to
detain it in Obscurity for so many Years before it came to Light) he excuses
himself and insinuates to his Reader, that the Fault was not his: And says R.
Hobbs, If any question, why it is published now, and not before, my Answer is
this, I sen a Copy of it to a Friend in London some Time ago.

So that after this rational Acc^mpt of his Innocence 'twere unreasonable to
charge R. H. for keeping this Story for so many Years for fear of his appearing
to some, as if he had boasted, as he gives for his only Reason, when he tells
his Reader again, how little he was accessory to its being so long kept in
obscurity, giving this further Reason for its Publication; I saw (says he) the
Truth of Christ might be advantaged thereby.

Further Instances not much less absurd (in this Letter) might be brought to
show the intolerable Folly and Abuse of this envious Water-Baptist, whose
bitter and malicious Spirit has led him thus to be a shame to his party, Abuse
to his Reader and Derision to juditious Men.

3. The next matter is the Printed Relation it self, at the foot of which is
written, This Relation we that subscribe do testify in the Presence of God is
true, we being Eye and Ear Witnesses of these things, some at one time, and
some at another: Tho. Patridge, Simon Lovelace, John Heal, Christopher
Streeting, Thomas Williams, Richard Hobbs, John Hobbs, John Finnes, Edmund
Finnes.

Here Is there joint Asseveration or Protestation, that the Relation is true,
every Particle thereof averred unto by no less then Nine Witnesses; and this to
credit their Story concerning Charles Bailey; which whether true or false
relates not to us: yet to manifest the Unreasonable Abuse of its Forger, I
shall remark his indirect Dealing with, and Imposing upon his Reader.

1. In presenting the Relation under the hands of nine Persons, as Witness^s
thereto, yet in Fact five of them dead before the drawing up of the same: which
L. Howard charges in p. 3. upon R. H. and has no Answer to i^, and if that be
not a full Testimony and Proof of that Piece of Abuse, look but to R. Hobbs his
forementioned Letter from Dover of June 10. 1672 where he confirms the sam in
these words, and when (says he) the Narrative was drawn, I showed it to all
the Persons, that are now alive, who all own every Sentence in it. But whom
alive, and whom dead, not a word: a d^uble Abuse.

2. But 2dly, That which has a more Scarlet-dye, and renders the Forgers of it
most criminal, is, that under their hands each Person testifies to every
Particular of the Relation, as each being an Eye and Ear Witness to every
Passage, and Particle of the Narrative.

Here I must take notice, that its usually observed, that the Judges (in Matter
relating to meum and tuum) in case a Witness testifies beyond the Bounds of his
Knowledge in any one Particular, do suspect him for all; yea, and reject him as
a Person not to be credited: and shall so many, and frequent Instances of
Unconscionable Abuse be exposed to the Eyes of our Understanding; and yet the
Exposer stand with an untoucht Reputation? I leave it to the Impartial; and
return to the Matter.

It had been Modest for these Water-Baptists to have testified; that some of
them were Witness to one particular, and some of them to another (as probably
they might) and not so audaciously to brason it by their bold, though unadvised
Asseveration: We (every one of them) do testify every Sentence in it to be
true, and that in the Presence of God: when 'twas impossible, that all could be
privy to every Sentence, as the thing it self fully demonstrates. Its easy to
reconcile, who made them to Err? viz* their Pastor R. Hobbs, who speaks the
like Language in his Printed Letter of June 10. 1672. When the Narrative was
drawn, I showed it to all the Witnesses that are now alive: who all own every
Sentence to be true, and still fresh in their Memories: when the greater number
of them are dead, and none of them witness to one and the same Matter, as
hereafter will appear.

Yea, but return to the Relation or Narrative it self; and it presents another
Complexion: not all, nor one half of them witnessing every Sentence; but
clearly otherwise. To some Sentence no Witness, other one, others two or three:
and so giving such Testimony to the respective Parts, as then were said to be
present at the particular Action: as appears thus out of their own Relation or
Narrative.

1. The first paragraph relates a Report of Charles Bayly's coming from France,
and the Noise of his coming to Dover, See the Narrative printed 1672. page 19.
and being taken from the Quakers Meeting. This was but a Report to the
Water-Baptists Witnesses, who then were in Prison: and so they not Eye and Ear
Witnesses, as affirmed.

2. After this Historical Discourse is an Account of C. Bayly's Preaching, R.
Hobbs his Opposition, and C. Bayly's Prayer against him, that he might be bound
hand and foot, etc. And this Sentence closed without Witness (with an etc.) and
not one Water Baptist mentioned to be there, but R. H. much less all the
pretended Eye and Ear Witnesses. See p. 19, 20.

3. Nex^ is a full Acc^mpt of Charles Bayly's Prophecy (as there its termed)
against R. Hobbs; in the Body of which Relation Tho. Patridge is said to be
present with R. H. and not a Word of any other. Therefore to the foot of that
Paragraph is subscribed, Witness So but Two of the Nine Eye and Ear Witnesses.
Thomas Patridge, Richard Hobbs.


4. Then follows a Discourse betwixt C. B. and R. H. where there is not the
least mention made of any of the many Eye and Ear Witnesses to be then present;
which Sentence ends thus: This, I testisie, is true; witness my Hand, Richard
Hobbs.

Certainly, R. Hobbs did much mistake the Point, when he by his Letter
confidently affirmed, That all owned every Sentence to be true. But to proceed,

5. The next Paragraph of the Narrative gives a further Relation of R. Hobbs,
and closed the History of C. Bayly's Prophecyes against him, which mentions not
more then Three to be present; and is witnessed by Tho. Patridge, Edmond
Finnes, John Hobbs; and had the rest been there, we had without doubt heard of
it.

6. And lastly the Relator gives us a large Story of a Contest 'twixt C. B. and
one Wollett a man frenzy in his Brain, who took C. Bailey to be one of the
Locusts come out of the Bottomless Pit, because of his Hair, etc. where was
present Five of the Baptists, as says the Story, viz. T. Patridge, Ed. Finnes,
Simon Lovelace, Jo. Hales and Chr. Streeting; not one word mentioned of their
Pastor, who usually bore the greatest part in the other Acts: or of the Three
other writ under in the general Attestation. Yet says R. Hobbs in his Letter,
All averred every Sentence (and he himself subscribed it) to be true: although
many of them (as plainly demonstrated) absent, when several of there presented
Matters were acted; and most of them dead, when the Relation drawn up: as
appears largly by R. H's Letter and Narrative it self.

Now therefore I recommend it to the Judicious and Impartial, of what
Persuasion soever, to judge of R. H's Labors, whether they be the Product of
Love, or Envy? of sound Understanding, or a confused Mind? And whether he now
brought his super-annuated and confused Story to Light in order to clear the
Truth, and Love to his Opposers, as he boldly insinuates; or rather as a
Relic of that Enmity and Hatred, which the Wicked One has sown in his Heart,
from which his Water-Washing has not cleansed him: and to the Witness of God in
all I appeal.

Having waded through the Depths of R. Hobbs his unstable Foundation, and vewed
the irregularity of this Watery-Builder; let us now return to his latter piece
of Architect, and examine, What Monuments he now raises upon the old Bottom.

1. Then first I observe, that in the Front of his Reply to encourage the
Reader, who might suspect his Cause (by reason of the confused witnessing of
the late Relation) he tells him, That the Truth of the Narrative is further
evidenced.

Upon the view of this large Averment, I presently turned over his whole piece,
if possible to find him as good as his word; but alas; it was Labor lost: for
instead of producing fresh Witnesses, and new Evidences, as he boldly
insinuates; he brings pregnant Instances of his old Abuse, and that accompanied
with an ill-favored way of Canting, which issues from him much like a Proverb
out of a Fool's Mouth.

2. Then next, he proceeds to certify the Reader, That the Narrative was not
published to blemish the Persons of the Quakers, nor yet from a Spirit of Envy,
page 3. And truly, if R. Hobbs did expose his Fardle to the World in a Spirit
of Love, and to advance the Reputation of the Quakers, I must acknowledge my
Mistake. And whether he did it not for the End he denies; such who weigh the
Circumstances following, may judge first of 1. An old Story of so many years
standing now to be brought out in Print. 2. And of a Person, that since these
Miscarriages has never been owned amongst us. 3. And to be accompanied with so
many Instances of severe Reflections. 4. Backed with such a number of apparent
Contradictions and Falsities.


As the Proverb is, He that runs, may read; and needs not an Interpreter.

3. But he tells us plainly, what his Quarrel is against, that if any unkind
Blows fall on us, we may know for whose sake it is, page 3. He and his Legion
are against neither Great, nor Small, but Israel's King. Its against the Light,
the Power of God his Battle is pitched, says this Water-Baptist, Its their
Light Within, whom I withstand. Alas! neither he, nor all the dark powers on
Earth shall be able to extinguish it, whose Growth and Increase in despite of
all their Opposition over-spreads the people not only in this Nation, but also
in the Islands afar off; This accounts be his Enemy, and why? for any other
cause, but by reason it tells him the Truth when he heeds it? This would he
charge with all the Villainies and Enormities, that ever were committed, says
this Water-Baptist, to show to what Enormities the pretended Light leads them.
Let me tell thee, Has there been one that has caused thee to speak Evil of the
Ways of God, he shall bear his Iniquity: but know, thou shall not escape the
Judgments of the Lord, who hate the Light, and come not thereto for Reproof.

But certainly, thou come up to, if not exceedst the vilest of Men, to charge
gross Miscarriages upon that, which many of thy own Party acknowledge God's
Gift, and good in its place; they will at least say. Its the Light of a Natural
Conscience; or of the Mosaical Law, or the Relics of that Impression, that
was in our first Parents, which shows Moral Duties, and to know there is a God,
etc. But, says this Water Baptist, it leads them to Enormities: which yet he
neither has, nor can prove. I must acknowledge, that if he takes this for good
Arg^ment. If a Person having been Water-dipt, and owned the Water-Baptist-
Faith, and whilst amongst them commits one or other Enormous Crime, or
Wickedness, for which they disown him, or cast him out of their Fellowship, or
Communion; if the Cause of his Miscarriages must be charged upon their
Faith-Ordinances, and not his Disobedience to what he professed; then R. Hobbs
deals with us, as he would be dealt withal; else not. Again, the Episconalian,
Presbyter, Independent, Water Baptist, etc. all pretend the holy Scriptures to
be their Rule for Faith and Worship, daily Miscarriages being acted, and fallen
into by Persons under those Names, or Distinctions, shall it be said, See what
Enormities the Holy Scriptures lead them into? No; nothing less: no more is the
Light of the Son of God to be charged by Reason of him who professed his Truth,
but held it in unrighteousness: but as the Scripture says, If we walk in the
Light, as he is in the Light, then have we Fellowship one with another, and the
Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all Sin.

So the Light is clear from R. Hobb's his dark Impositions and our Fellowship
clear from him, and all such unfruitful Workers of Darkness. But to close his
Charge, he exhorts against the Light within (Terming it the dark Imaginations
of our own Heads) and rather to follow the Council of the Apostle Peter, which
he Sophistically words thus: we have a more sure word of the Prophets (says
he) meaning the Scriptures, to which we do well if we take heed (mark) as to a
Light that shines in a dark place, etc. when as our Translation is, word of
Prophecy, and not Prophets, as the Water-Baptist insinuates, and whence he
comments, that the word of Prophecy there spoken of is the Scriptures, and not
the Testimony of Jesus, Rev. 19.10.
the Spirit of Prophecy; although the Latin and Greek, as well as English has
it word of Prophecy, Lat. verbum Propheticum, and the Greek(...).

And if at this rate he can for his wicked End thus make bold with the holy
Scriptures; I Question not, but he will wrest and expound his Opposers words to
the like Purpose, yet I doubt not but to his own shame and Confusion, which I
shall descend to examine.

4. That I may not wrong R. Hobbs, who truly speaks the Substance of his matter
at the first, take his own words at large. (says he) This Quakers Looking
Glass is false, it presents two Faces; one as if they did, another as if they
did not own Charles Bailey for an eminent Quaker. And that this is so, see what
he says Page 10, viz. some new converted Friends, says he, did own Charles
Bailey; But the Men-Friends, says he, (meaning himself and three or four more
Prisoners in the Castle) did not own him so much.

Here Is the Water-Baptists Charge naturally dividing it self into these
particulars, which I shall briefly examine and answer.

1. R. Hobbs affirms that L. Howard in Page 10, of his Book should say, that
some new converted Friends did own Charles Bailey, viz. for an eminent Quaker.
2. But the Men-Friends (meaning himself and three or four more Prisoners in the
Castle) did not own him so much.
1. Then to the first Charge, that L. Howard says, that some new converted
Friends did own C.B. for an eminent Quaker, I Answer that in Page 10. or any
other page of his whole Book there is not any such matter, or any such
Expression of L. Howard; nay, so much from it, and L.H's words so far distant,
to what this Impostor would impose, that they are clearly otherwise, for Luke
reciting R Hobbs his Expression in his Letter of June 10 1672. Where Hobbs
alleges, Page 17. of their Narrative.
that if the Quakers should deny Charles Bailey to be owned as a very eminent
Man amongst them (at the Time of his imprisoment) that then they will render
themselves the falsest Persons, that over professed Religion. Which Averment of
the Water-Baptist L. Howard fully answers, and at the Close of his Discourse to
that Point he tells them, Amongst them at Liberty (which then few were) there
were some, which did not own C.B. so much, as R. Hobbs reports of: which Luke
descends to particulars to show. Which way of Answer to the Water-Baptists
Charge is both proper and full, giving not the admittance to his Constructions,
much less to affirm, that Luke Loward says, Some owned him to be a very
eminent Man amongst them.

2. The Water Baptist charges L. H. for saying, the Men Friends (meaning
himself, and three or four more Prisoners in the Castle) did not own him so
much.

1. Here R. Hobbs turns Critic advancing his bald Criticisms to such a bulk,
that they bear the Burden of his ensuing Discourse: Not so much four or five
times repeated in two Pages, yet an absolute Forgery. Had the Man spoke this
only to his Watery Auditory; it might upon his ipse dixit have passed for
Orthodox; but he must give us leave to tell him, that he by his Lines in Print
has horridly wronged his Opposer, and as considerably abused his Reader: for L.
Howard has neither word or Sentence, that imports any such matter, as he most
audaciously charges: nay, so far were the Men from little or more joining with
C. Bailey in Prayer, which is the Water-Baptist's charge of owning of him, that
they had not Liberty of Access to him, being then Prisoners in Dover-Castle,
yet insinuates the Water-Baptist from this (and that as the words of L. Howard)
The Men owned him, but not so much. Certainly, the Man was hard put to it, that
thus straind to ease himself; could not self-Evidence of this Antiquated
Relation against an Apostate, separated from us so many Years ago, have been a
Probatum sufficient to have decided the Controversy betwixt us, but it must be
thus redoubled, not only once, nor twice, but with more renewed Instances of
Lying Abuse, and Imposture to the Shame of himself, and Sorrow of the Flock to
whom he affirms to be a Pastor.

2. And out of these very words so much has this mighty Artist framed the very
Pillets of his Building: so by Theft and Violence makes be a Fortress against
us. Remember R. Hobbs, though stolen Waters be sweet; her Guests be in the
Depths of Hell.

Certainly, had R. Hobbs taken a dose of Opium, he could not have more
intoxicated his Brains then he has by this Occasion of Contest. And to see an
instance hereof, take his own Words

3. In page 1. of his Reply speaking of his Antagonist; we know not (says he)
but that he owned Bailey as much as the Rest did; well them, where is the Owning?
Said R. Hobbs page 1. It appears by their then affirming and justifying him to
be led by the True Light, as they did by their hearing him preach, and devoutly
joining with him in prayer, Is this proof sufficient? Said R. Hobbs pursuing
the Question, If this be not a sufficient proof they owned him. I know not what
is, or can be sufficient; nor do I know any Rule the Quakers have, by which I
shall know when they own one another. Here our water-Baptist tells us, if this
be not the Quakers Rule ^o own one another he is at's wits end; for he knows no
other. But what, will not he turn back, and show us his other side? yes: after
R. Hobbs has told his Reader this fair Tale, that L. Howard owned C. Bailey as
much as any, and the only proof of owning him was, by joining in Prayer, etc.
and if that was not sufficient Proof; he knew not what was: he bringing again
an Objection of L. Howard, that he and some more were in Prison, did not own
him so much (observe L. Howard uses not that Expression of so much, but its
Hobbs his Forgery) which Negation of L. Howard the Author thus answers: If by
so much you mean, you did not join with him in his Devotion, I grant it; for
your Restraint from him hindered you in that. What Is now become of the only
owning? all this (so much) fallen in the Dirt by a downright contradiction. How
well then our Water-Baptist has proved his Charge upon his Antagonist, I leave
it to the Considerate Reader.

But more of Confusion I have not often found in so brief a Writer; And I
cannot but take notice of this Impostors Confidence, that in despite of all
his forgeries and lying Citations of L. Howard's Answer to his first confused
Relation, yet he is so audacious to affirm; that he says no more of Luke, then
he himself confesses: when Luke Howard's words, sentences and expressions are
as opposite to the Water-Baptist's protests and averments of them, as Light to
Darkness it self.

R. Hobbs, let me advise thee as a Friend, to receive Luke Howard's Book; and
thy own Reply, and pass Just Judgment upon thy own Work: if not, give me thy
Reason Let not thy Zeal, and rage against us so blind thy understanding to
produce such monstrous effects; and after thou have inspected thy own untimely
Birth, and seen as well as thy Reader, of how little weight thy way of Argument
is to rectify the mistakes, or resolve the Doubts of the unprejudiced and
unbyassed Inquirer at this day. Answer me, whether if thy old piece of envy and
new-vampt story of C Baily were really true as to him-wards, what does it more
concern us, then the many hundreds, that about the year 1660. and since
Apostatized from you; yea, many of your Pastors and Teachers, that have
Revolted, and some to that Persuasion you frequently stigmatize us with all, as
being most obnoxious to the Gust of the people? We have generally forborne to
put them, and their Miscarriages in Print, as being weak Arguments to found
Religion, knowing that as well in the primitive times, and the first Apostolic
days, as in these Latter Ages there were still such, who made Shipwreck of
Faith and a good Conscience, and caused the Name of God and his Truth to be
blasphemed and evil spoken of; and so it is now.

But why do thou quarrel, that an Account of our Friends dealing with C. B.
was not daily brought to thee? Its more, then the Roman Priest's themselves
desire of persons not nearer related, then thou and us. Must thou be a
Confessor; else no plain dealing? must we acknowledge to thee all passages of
Christian Care to one or other, else justify an Evil-doer? strange Inference!
Its scarce that time of Day: when thou have power, command it; till then, thou
and thy Calumny rest together.

I cannot but observe, how natural it is for this water-Baptist to correct his
Antagonist; yet himself double guilty of being more like a Scold, then a sober
Christian: truly next after a personal knowledge of both, I recommend their
Books to the Considerate Reader; who may with ease determine, where the fault
lies: besides Luke Howard's solid behavior in Dover has not bespoke him the
scurrilous term of wanton and lewd Ranter as this wicked water-Baptist most
falsely insinuates; whose upright Life, and sober Conversation never merited
such unjust dealing from this Traducer, or any other. And so, I Justly Charge
it upon him, as a false Accusation.

And to evidence, what spirit he is of, the very dialect he writes in, and his
own Work will easily Discover: Have we more Modest Expression from him, then
the vilest or debauchest of men, canting at us, as if mere Lascivious and
wanton. It he mentions the Women of our Friends, guibing at them thus, Their
Female Companions. and such like airy Epithetes: if Sufferers; upon the quaking
account, and quaking Principles, with many more out of that Treasury of Envy
and Hatred, which in store he has long horded up against us, and now belches it
out, as an unsavory stink in the Nation.

I have read over the whole Discourse of two Sheets; and truly I think, the
Press is not very often troubled to so little, or so ill purpose: and did not
the Covetousness of the Printer exceed the Ingenuity of the Writer, I Judge he
had never passed h^^ pitiful Pamphlet. As to what is more in his piece, its
either such, as falls under the apparent nullity of the Forgers Arguments; or
with the confused heaps of his mere Imposturs, and Abuse. And if any thing else
remains deserving Regard, it is in the Knowledge of such, whose personal
acquaintance with the Forger and Fact can more properly answer, if not stop the
Mouth of this envious, and confused Babbler, with whom I leave him, and his
Piece, as they see cause for further Reproof and Examination.

London, the 1st Mon. 1673. Thomas Rudyard.

A Postscript.
THe Word of the Lord came unto the true Prophet Ezekiel against the false and
foolish Prophets, who followed their own Spirits, and therein prophesied Lies,
and false Divinations, and caused people to Err: And he said, Woe unto the
Foolish Prophets, who follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing. And God
said, Mine Hand shall be upon the Prophets that see Vanity, and that divine
Lies, they shall not be in the Assembly of my People, Ezekiel. 13.1, 2, 3, 6, 7,
8, 9. And has raised True Prophets in this Age to cry against the False
Prophets, and particularly against Charles Bailey, who was many Years ago judged
and denied by the Prophets and Servants of the Lord, because he prophesied Lies
and false Divinations by the Leadings of his own unclean spirit, which ruled in
his deceitful Heart: and because of these things he has been shut out of the
Assemblies of God's People ( in Scorn called Quakers) for many years, although
he sometimes appeared amongst them, as the false Apostles and deceitful Workers
did in the days of the true Prophets and Apostles appear amongst them; and as
the true then judged, and denied the false; so have we done unto C. B. in and
with the Light, Life and Spirit of God, and of his beloved Son Jesus Christ;
and in and with the same we do and shall judge all Dreamers and Prophesiers of
Lies and false Divinations, who follow their own corrupt, sinful and unclean
spirits, from which the Mysteries and Secrets of the holy pure God lie hid. And
now Richard Hobbs, who say, That C. B. was led by the Quakers Spirit in that
Delusion which he was given up to: If by the Quakers Spirit, thou do mean the
Quakers Light, which thou so much scoffest at, which I have cause to believe by
thy own words in thy Book thou do mean; then I do tell thee, thou do speak
Blasphemy against God, who is Light; and against his beloved Son, who is the
express Image of his Substance, and Brightness of his Glory. For I do tell
thee, and all others, unto whom these Lines may come, That we the People of God
called Quakers have never preached up, or directed any man or woman unto any
other Spirit or Light, wherein and whereby Salvation is brought unto the
Immortal Souls of Men and Women; but the Spiritual Light of God and Christ, who
is that Light, who lights every man that comes into the World, John 1.9. and
8.12. 1 John 1.5, 6, 7. God, who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has
shined in our Hearts, to give us the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God
in the Face of Jesus Christ; and his Treasure have we in Earthen Vessels, that
the Excellency of the Power may be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4.6, 7.

W. G.

THE END.

