REMARKS On the NEW PHILOSOPHY OF DESCARTES. In Four PARTS. I. Of the
Principles of Humane Knowledge. II. Of the Principles of Material Things. III.
Of the Principles, as they relate to the Visible World. IV. Of the Principles
of the Earth.


Done by a Gentleman.

-- Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere Causas.

Virgil. LONDON: Printed by J. Gardyner, and Sold by Richard Ellison, in the
Pall Mall, near St. James's House, M DC C.

THE AUTHOR'S EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO HIS Royal Highness THE PRINCE OF DENMARK.
PRINCES, Great Sir, of superlative Esteem have to their Glory promoted the
Excellencies of Science, and are accordingly conspicuous in Records of Fame: If
they have been Illustrious in their sphere, the Court; they have not judged
themselves greater under a Canopy of State, than when their Grandeur has
Flourished, with the Encouragement and Growth of the Arts of Knowledge.

And though Princes, as to the conduct of their Affairs, may by their Prudence
select their proper Ministers, and Courtly observance of such on whom they
confer the Grace of Officiary Dignities: It Is not to be denied, That Science,
without other Courtship than its own Merit; ought to be an especial Favorite
of the Soul, and chiefly so valued by the most Eminent of Men.

A Motive of such high Importance, that it caused the Great Alexander to
declare, That he had rather be a Prince of Science, than Commander of the vast
Dominions Possessed by him: And doubtless, he in great part, made good the
Expression, both as to his own Abilities, and the Improvements he received from
his Tutor Aristotle; whose Learned Works had never been so far diffused in the
World, had they not been encouraged and assisted by the Countenance and Power
of his famous Pupil.

The next great Example was Julius Caesar, who is mentioned, by Plutarch, as a
Parallel in Valor and Warlike Conquest's to the Mighty Alexander; but far
surpassing the conduct of his Arms and Counsels of State, as to the perpetual
Memorial of his Glory and Erudite Accomplishments; Men famous in Mathematical
Science were Authorized by him, to amend the then Erroneous computation of the
Sun's Annual Revolution; to which at this Day, in the Julian Year, we own our
Calendar, and the Month of July dedicated to his everlasting Renown, in the
Year that was Rectified by his Imperial Command: A work transcending the
greatest of his Earthly Fame, as to the height of the Sun, the Sovereign of
Light, his Name is exalted in Story.

If the Great Julius Caesar from his Sovereign Dignity and vast Ingenuity of
Mind, was signally accomplished to patronise so sublime a Performance; what
could recompense the Deserts of such famous Persons, who were his subservient
Assistants, or as it were the Ministers of Heaven, in order to give the Sun's
Ecliptic Year a renovated Conduct and Glory: Of which Persons Sosigenes, a
Mathematician of Egypt is chiefly mentioned.

But were his Astronomical Abilities compared with admired Tycho, who was of
Noble Extraction in the same Nation where the many great Predecessors of your
Royal Highness had Dominion and Birth; it is not to be doubted that the accurate
Skill and Observations of Tycho the Dane had exceeded Sosigenes the Egyptian:
And possibly, had he been consulted, might have furnished the World with a more
perfect Computation of the Year, than is, either the Julian or Gregorian
Account. His admirable Skill, Vigilance and Experience, employed Twenty Years
in Astronomical Science, did in a manner Crown his vast Endeavors: There being
no Observations, at this Day, that can compare with those made by unparalleled
Tycho.

And it is not improbable, amongst his Astrological Predictions, were they known
to us, that he signally Presaged the happy Alliance of Your Royal Highness both
to the Danish and English Throne: And how, in future Time, you would be no less
a Favourer and Promoter of the Excellencies of Mathematical Learning, than any
of Your Monarchial Predecessors.

Nor can the extraordinary Dignity be unknown to Your Royal Highness, by which
that Science does, beyond all others, advance the Elevation of the Eyes and
Heart, in order to the Divine Contemplation of the wonderful Movements and
Beings of the Celestial Orbs, however far distant from us.

If the Sun Revolves in his Diurnal Circumference more than Sixteen Millions of
English Miles; to what admirable, though less proportion, does then amount the
Period he makes in every Hour, and Minute of Time.

Insomuch, that it may be Affirmed, that by Astronomical Calculations in a high
Measure, we are Divinely taught to be more perspicuous Admirers of the Heavenly
Works and Conduct of the Almighty, than otherwise could be discerned by us:
Which wonderful Movements of the Sun, Planets and Stars, together with the
Benignities of Heaven incident to their Illuminations, Causes and Effects, are,
to our Admiration, with such a stupendous Facility Disposed, and Ordained
above; that it can be attributed to no other Original, than the Operations of
Incomprehensible Providence.

But of what Substance, and Manner of Existence, the Celestial Luminaries,
together with the Incommensurable Orbs, Height and Distances in which they
Revolve, may be defined; are Thoughts that have been the inextricable
Astonishment of Learned Pens, as they have been posed to determine the Nature
of their Essence and other Proprieties.

Notwithstanding, it appears, That by Writers of Refined Judgments, the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, with whatsoever may be denominated the Orbs above; are deemed,
in a manner, by them either spiritual Appearances, or equivalently such, for
want of other extrordinary Epithet, or Definement suitable to the Nature of
their Essence and Motion; by reason that their Substance does not admit any
visible Change, or Alteration in them: Which would be perceptible, were they
not essentially distinct from all Elementary Compositions.

These Instances in brief, I thought fit to present to Your Royal Highness, as
preparatory to Your Inspection of such Particulars as I have Written in this
Book, on the Philosophy, and Mathematical Passages Inscribed by Descartes:
Which are Humbly Dedicated to the perusal of Your Royal Highness, by

Your Most Dutiful Humble Servant, ED. HOWARD.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Dignity of Philosophical Science, has always been Celebrated by the most
Eminent of Men in all its Capacities: For as Men, are endu'd by the Gifts of
the Mind, above all other Animated Creatures; Philosophy does by its Excellency
highly advance the useful Speculations and Comprehension of one Man superior to
another. If Princes, or Supreme Magistrates; it wonderfully Improves the
Conduct and Prudence of their Rule, and fits their subordinate Ministers with
such signal Qualifications as naturally lenifie the course Ignorance of vulgar
Men, and Attract their Obedience. Though Iron be a harsh and rugged Metal, the
Loadstone can affectedly draw it: And doubtless Philosophical Knowledge, when
duly Communicated, has a more complete and genuine Sympathy on the Souls of
Men; as it usefully displays the benign and facile Conduct of Providence, in
disposing the Government and Contexture of the Universe, with its admired
Appurtenances: In which may be observed such a perspicuous and endeared
compliance to Order and Rule, that Nature seems but an Empress of Philosophical
Science, as she Ordains, by Causes and Effects, the Obedience of her numberless
Subjects.

From whose great Example may well be supposed, That the Wise and Learned of
Men Instituted Civil and Doctrinal Societies, as the most natural Directors and
Conservators of Humane Being.

Nor can the total World be more aptly denominated than the vast
Presence Chamber of Nature; in which, by a general admittance to the Eyes of
Mankind, may be perceived her outward Ornaments of State and Greatness: But in
that mighty Room she is most significantly attended by the Nobless in
Knowledge, who clearest discern Philosophical Grandeur; and especially how, and
where it is most requisitely Eminent when wedded to Mathematical Science the
Queen of Truth: Without which Solemnity, it is impossible to celebrate Nature,
or Providence, the sublime Disposer of her wonderful Operations, demonstrably
admirable; and consequently that the Hours of Time, by which we subsist,
together with its commodious Seasons, could not, otherwise be computed by us:
Whereas, contrarily, ungracious Ignorance, as also heedless neglect and
contempt of Science, are usually such Concomitants as chiefly proceed from
customary Sloth and illiterate Modes of Conversation; even in Persons of
superior Degree, who should be, to the exalting of the Dignity of their Souls,
leading Examples and especial Incouragers of such Parts of Knowledge, as might
Embellish their Esteem, and Patronize the Endeavors of others: But too many of
these, however big in Looks, Estate, and Interest, and accordingly their
outward Mien and Appearance; cannot but inwardly Blush, if deeply considered by
them, how diminitively they are Ensoul'd, if compared with the Intellectuals of
many of their Inferiors; or as if they were Born merely to Enjoy the Affluence
and Pleasures of Life, without recompensing their value, by fitting of their
Understandings in order to a due Intelligence of the Causes and Bounties of
Nature, from whence they proceed.

If the Titles that such Men have to their external Grandeur, Quality, or
Estate, were questioned or debased, they would doubtless resent it accordingly;
if not hold themselves obliged to clear their Repute and Interest, in all those
Considrations.

But were they required to make Out their Claims to Polite Literature, they
could not but Concede, That there are more Knights of St. George than Honourers
of Science.

Nor can it be denied, That whenever the Eminencies of Science are not
commendably Patronized, the Inconvenience must necessarily arise from the too
frequent Depravitiess of Conversation and Manners that to cover Foppish, or
Debauched Ignorance, would disguise the want of Apprehension by endeavoring to
Ridicule Knowledge by absurd and licencious Railleries.

Not that it is to be expected, that all Persons of Dignity, or such as are
advanced to Degrees of Trust, or Magistracy in the Nation; should be all
Proficients in Philosophical and Mathematical Erudition: Though more advantageous
and usefully becoming, in them, relating to their National Affairs and
Stations, on whatsoever account; than to others of inferior concernment and
manner of Life. Wherefore, it is very conducing both to the Service of the
Public, and lasting Applause and Fame of such Persons; if they are not
Scientifically capacitated, or their Abilities otherwise employed, that they
would be Renowned Incouragers of Learning, together with convenient Bounty; by
which means such Persons might be supported in Schools, and Places set apart
for that purpose, that are sufficiently accomplished to Instruct others in the
beforementioned Sciences: Which in a short time might exalt the Academical Fame
of England to a Second Athens.

How many Petitions have contitinually been presented to the Royal Magistrate,
and favored by Persons of nearest Access to the Throne, that tend to private
Advantages and Exaltatious to Stations of Superiority and Profit; but amongst
all these Addresses, few to be observed, that would advance the public Honor
and Emoluments, that deservedly appertain to the Advancement of the Skill, and
Arts of Knowledge? Which is no small reason, that the most considerable Parts
and Exercise of Humane Understanding are so thinly discerned, or too commonly
decayed amongst us.

If Scientifical Abilities have a cursory deference and value, from some
Persons who are not Learned enough to prove their Esteem of Performances of
excellent Importance; the Applause that it receives from not a few of them, is
no better than the bare Encomium of Virtue: Which caused the Pcet Juvenal to
reflect on the unworthy of his Time, when he says, that -- robitas laudatur et
alget: As if Men were obliged to Improve the Knowledge of Others, at the Cost
of their Diligence; or enough rewarded, if not Voted down by the Ignorant:
Which cold regard, or at best, but a lukewarm respect to Science; is no small
Cause, that many of our youthful Nobility and Gentry so rawly return from
Academies and Tutors: From whence it afterward proceeds, that they far more
incapably enter upon the Service of the Nation, at Land, or Sea, than otherwise
they might: And for no other Reason, than because Philosophical and
Mathematical Excellencies are not more familiarly Taught and Practiced.

'Twere too much, in this Place, to recount the many commodious Applications
and Uses of those Sciences, in reference to Public and Private Affairs: Which
are, on diverse Accounts, so very considerable, as they might deserve the
diligence of a Learned Pen, to enumerate their Conjoined value; by which the
Causes, Effects, Motions, and Operations of Nature would be more experimentally
and certainly understood.

And what ought more sublimely to be considered, the continued Blessings of
Providence, in their most natural Methods, bestowed on Mankind, would be
without Philosophical and Mathematical Knowledge, insensibly perceived, if not
supinely inadverted by us. And though the Suns Times faithful Accountant,
together with the Moon and Stars, in their outward appearance, invite the
Wonder of our Eyes; and what is far more incomprehensible, the manner of their
Existencies and diversified Progressions in their Orbs above: Yet in none of
these supreme Considerations, could they be rationally admired, however vast
their Distance from us; did not Science exalt our Intellects to such
approximate and necessary Computations, as render them, though no farther
apprehended by us, the effectual Supporters of our Worldly Beings

And if a Catechism were pertinently Compiled of the Works of the Omnipotent,
joined to that of his Holy Word, and duly explained by National Authority: It
might assure a more palpable Conviction, even to obstinate Opposers, that God
does Exist, than can be deduced from the simplicity of mere Belief, howsoever
conveyed.

Nothing being so demonstrably evident, to Humane Comprehension, as what is
apparently manifest to the Eye and Senses; to which purpose, the Divine
Application of the undeniable Assurance and Proof to be attained by the
Sciences precedently mentioned, would undoubtedly incline the most prudent of
Men devoutly to acquiesce, and profligate from their Souls, the too common
inconsiderate Tenants, and Atheism of others: As also, to their superlative
Glory, conspicuously distinguished from such numbers of Mankind, that no
farther employ their Understandings, than by Indulging the sensual
Satisfactions and Pleasures of Life: Amongst whom, may be found such an impious
sort of Men, that to Varnish their evil Examples, and stains of Manners, would
seem refined under the Name of Wits: And thereby arrogate to themselves an
Arbitrary Decision, or neglect of whatsoever they please to disallow, or is
above their Capacities to value: And these, for the greatest part, are
antipathiz'd to all polite Science; or determine it, as a Point resolved by
them, far inferior to their loose Drolleries, Lampoons, scurrilous Reflections,
and Abuses impudently pointed against the ingenious Desert, and Performances of
others; as on the Feet of their ignominious Verse, they run in the Nation.

And strange it is, that such ungracious Associators should not only have their
ordinary Countenancers and Abetters; but also their Leaders, Men of Title, who,
as their Captain-Generals, command their undisciplined Lists: As if by their
endeav urs, Ignorance, and contempt of Knowledge, might be no less prevalent,
than when the barbarous Goths and Vandals demolished Records of precedent
Literature.

But, Heaven be thanked, the present Age does yet abound with such laudable
Ingenuities and Patrons of Erudition, as enough defeat the Malice and Ignorance
of illiterate Opposers: The only remaining means, and strong reserve, by which
the value of Philosophy, with all its Accomplishments, may receive suitable
Acceptance and Protection.

To which worthy Personages, next to his Royal Highness the Prince of Denmark,
together with such of eminent Quality, who have Encouraged the Impression, is
chiefly presented the confiderable Importance of this Book: Not doubting, that
it may be inspected, by a Judicious Eye, no less valuable in English, where it
dissents from Descartes, than his did receive Applause when published with the
best of his Eloquence and Reasons, in French, or Latin.

Notwithstanding it is very observable, That some fantastical Judgments no less
propensely value French Authors than the reception they give to the Mode of
Clothes that are devised by Taylers at Paris.

But as to the Productions of the Mind, by advancement of Science, it is
palyably known, That the most Learned and Accurate Productions and Inventions
of the French have not been only Equaled but Improved by English Writers: To
which purpose, I will, instead of many, Insert a few Examples.

Vieta, who is acknowledged the first Author of the commodious Use of literal
Algebra, had he lived contemporary with our English Harriot, must have granted,
That the most curious Part, or in which consists the main Secret of that
profound Science, was discovered and completed by him. And so well perceived
by Descartes, that he, in the manner of a Plagiary derives the most exquisite
Part of his Algebraical Skill and Process, from our Learned Harriot: And so
published to the World, in the History of Algebra eruditely compiled by Dr.
Wallis.

To Harriot may be added our famous Oughtred, whose deep Mathematical Knowledge
and Perfection of Theorems, was never exceeded by any French Writer.

In the Judgment of Vieta, it was thought impossible, by knowing the simple
Anomaly of the Sun, or Planets, Geometrically to find the Equated; the contrary
of which is evidently proved by the Learned Bp. Seth Ward in his Book Entitled
Astronomia Geometrica.

If the Ingenious Peter Ramus was the first Deviser of the Analysis in Numbers
of the Cubick Root; the Operation is much facilitated by the accurate Invention
of Mr. Joseph Raphson, in his Converging Series, to his praise now extant.

And what yet more superlatively Exceeds to the Honor of this Island, both
Ancient and Modern Inventions; is admirably evident in the Structure of
Logarithms Compiled by the famous Lord Napier: By which the former Difficulties
of Mathematical Computations, in every kind, are totally waved; and in their
stead facile Calculations by Logarithms, resolved with ease and delight. If
Philosophically compared French Authors with English; or instead of more,
Descartes be mentioned, according to the Esteem allowed him by some Persons:
The Works of our Incomparable Bacon may be Instanced as an experimental
Confutation of the Failings of the other; with no less assurance, than that
probable Truth condemns Fiction: Nothing being more gracious in a Philosopher,
than a natural discovery of Causes and Effects: Or indeed, when the Parts of a
Naturalist and Philosopher are duly joined: Which actually elevated the
admirable Reputation allowed to the Georgicks of Virgil; because in them he
manifestly discloses the Effects and Operations of Nature, obviously agreeable
to common Observation: And I cannot liken any Works more eminently to the
excellency of his, than the natural manner of Philosophy delivered by
unparalled Bacon.

Whereas, if we confide on the Principles of Descartes, we must rely on
fictitious Inventions, instead of warantable Experience; as will appear by the
ensuing Remarks on the Parts I Treat of.

No Man can doubt, that any Thing is more requisite, or deserv'dly commendable,
than the Endeavors whereby to fathom such Depths of Science, as pertinently
contribute to the profoundest Search and Satisfaction of the Humane Mind:
Amongst which, none are more considerable than such as most Emphatically
conduce to the Apprehending the wonderful Manner by which the animated Being
and Life, with all their Proprieties, exist in the Body of Man.

And what Parts of Contemplation, or refined Literature, can so naturally
enbellish the Intellect, as the rational discernment of the Being of the Humane
Soul; and how it operatively conspires with its Corporeal Residence? The
understanding of which, if sufficiently acquired, may be deemed the
Quintessence, or Soul of Philosophical Knowledge; as it instructs us to
comprehend the Nature of the Soul, that appertains to our Persons.

Many are the Opinions of Philosophers, not necessary to be mentioned here, by
which they differ not more from themselves than Descartes does from all of
them, concerning the Manner of Existence and operating of the Soul in the
Humane Body: The main of whose Tenent, or Idea, as he calls it, is, That the
Humane Mind being a Thinking Substance, committed to the Body, by God, may
sensibly apprehend Objects, without the use of the Senses, or being precedently
entertained by them: By which Opinion of his he opposes common Experience,
together with that noted Philosophical Axiom, That nothing is in the Intellect,
which was not first in the Senses.

If a Man becomes accidentally Blind, there is not therefore with the loss of
his Sight any such Curtain drawn before his Imagination, that totally obscures
the Memorial of Things formerly impressed on his Intellect by the Senses. So
that the Maxim of Descartes is far more Blind, than a sightless Man; as he
states his Inference: 'Tho' upon this obscure Principle he erects the main
Foundation of the first Part of his Philosophy, as it relates to Humane
Cognition.

Notwithstanding, he is so fond of the New-fashion'd Ideas and Notions which he
there not a little magnifies, that he exposes them, (as he finds occasion) to
the view of his Reader in other Parts of his Works, besides those I have to do
with; witness the Fourth Particular of the First Chapter of his Dioptricks, or
of Light and the manner of Vision by the Telescope, where he has this
unintelligible Expression: If we consider, says he, the distinction that a Man
Blind, from his Nativity, can make betwixt the Color of Trees, Water, Stones,
and the like, merely by the use and touch of the Staff he walks with; no less
certainly, than seeing Men can discern Red, Yellow, or Blew, in any visible
Object; although their differences could be no other, in such Bodies, than
diversities of Motion, or the resistance they make to the Blind Man's Staff.

It has been an undoubted Maxim, That whosoever is Blind, is no judge of
Colors: But by the quaint Philosophy of this Author it seems a resolved Point,
That a Man may see without the use of Eyes: So that a sightless Man, who cannot
make a safe Step without a Guide, may, if conducted to walk to the end of a
Street, declare certainly of what Shape, Figure, or Color, every Post is that
he touches with the Staff that supports him.

I confess, as I Read this Particular, I expected, that he would have somewhat
more exalted the Conceit, by Affirming, That a Blind Man might perfectly
inspect through the Glasses of the Telescope, he there Writes of; and next give
an account of the Bigness, Diameters, and various appearances of the Stars,
colors of the Rainbow, and other Meteors: In Sum, he might have as well
Asserted, that the Ear could perform the Office of Seeing, as by feeling it
could be executed, in any kind, by a Blind Man's management,

Nor less unintelligible is the general Definition he gives, in the
beforementioned Head, of Colors; which he Terms no other than various
Modalities, by which they are received in Objects of Color. Whereas they are
certain Proprieties inseparably appertaining both to animated, and inanimated
Bodies; as sure as a Brown Horse is naturally different from a Gray, or
Chestnut: And 'twere a weak Imagination, to estimate Color, otherwise than
Nature has appropriated it to particular Subjects: And whosoever would fancy
the contrary, let him try, whether he can wash a Blackmoor's Face until it
becomes White.

Another passage he Inserts in the 4th Chapter of his Dioptricks, where he
states his. Idea of the Soul, as a distinct Substance separated from the
Senses, by supposing, that it is the Soul alone, and not the Body, that is
sensibly concerned: As he would infer from Ecstasy, or distracted
Contemplation; in which Circumstance he conceives, that the Soul is totally
abstracted from the Corporeal Parts: Whilst the Body remains stupefied, or
bereaved of Sense; no less than when by Wounds, or Diseases, the Brain is
prejudiced.

But could be Think, that in any such disturbance of Body and Mind, the Soul
does more than live as well as the Body; since, in that condition, it is
impossible for the Soul to act deliberately, of any Thing, whilst the Senses
are disabled, or not assisting her Operations? Yet in this plight of Body and
Mind, he is very inclinable to determine the Soul, a separate Thinking
Substance, but incapable of sensibly executing her Intellectual Faculty; which
is much the same, as to allow her, in this Case, a nonsensical Existence; or
not able to apprehend any Object without the concurring of the Senses.

This Objection is undeniably manifest; if pertinently considered the main
Potentials, by which are actually effected and completed the essential
Capacities of the Life of the Intellect and Senses, as they animatively
conspire in the Body of Man:

For as there are always Extant a sufficient Quantity of the most refined
Spirits, or Quintessence naturally extracted from the Corporeal Temperament,
and in a wonderful and indiscernable Method diffused into the Cells and
Crannies of the Brain; by which means, as the excellent Lord Bacon observes,
they are able to Move the whole mass, or weight of the Body, in the most
swiftest Operations and Exercise: Yet by no search, or anatomical Inspection
are these admirable Particles, or Quintessences of our Nature, at all
discernable: Though not to be denied, that they consist of quantitative Parts;
because nothing but Quantity can operate on quantitative Dimensions, as
signified by Humane Composition.

Wherefore, the wonderful Being and active Force of the material Spirits, or
Quintessence of the Corporeal Temper, can have no other apter Epithet, than was
given by Democritus to his Notion of Atoms, which he conceived by Reason and
Experience to be Things really Existing, but not to be perceived by the Sense
of Seeing This Notion well apprehended is more than sufficient to convict the
Tenent, of Descartes, whereby he would define the Humane Soul to be a distinct
Thinking Substance in the Body of Man, where it has Being, Action and Life; yet
discharged, in point of Thought, from the Accomplishment it has in the
temperial Excellency that it admirably exerts and partakes; so that, in that
Sense, it may be termed the Soul of the Body's temperature.

If at any time, the Seat of the Intellect in the Brain is perplexed, confused,
or detrimentally wounded, or stupefied, the Soul is obstructed for want of its
contiguous Passage in the Nerves, Arteries, and Sinews, however subtle the
contexture which they derive from the Brain to the Parts of the Body: Which
could not be, is the Soul, according to this Author, were in Substance
essentially distinct from the most refined Operations and Attributes, that
sensibly emerge from the Corporeal Composition. Let a Man Contemplate of any
Object, or Employment of his Senses, he shall find, is duly considered, That
in the same moment there is a ready Emanation of the Spirits of the Mind, to
the same purpose, which are most contiguous to the several Uses, Parts, and
Temperatures of the Body; though not otherwise Spiritual: Wherefore, the Soul may
not be improperly termed equivalently such, as by her imperceptible Essence,
She has, in a manner, an ubiquitary Efficacy in the total Body, and every of
its Parts and Members.

If the Souls of all Mankind be committed to Bodies, by God, as so many
Thinking Substances; it must necessarily follow, that they all had a precedent
Creation; and therefore could lose nothing of their Perfection, until joined to
the Body.

But if according to the Opinion of Some, the Soul is traductionally produced,
and born with the Body, as the disparities and temperatures of Men, both in
Mind and Person, seem to be exerted, either from Affinity in Blood, or
parentally propagated by the Connection of the Bodily Parts and Senses; it must
according to that Tenent, be materially produced.

Wherefore it is far more probable, if the Soul be granted a Thinking Substance
united to the Senses, by the Ordainment of the Almighty: Than to allow it, as
does Descartes, seperately and actively intelligent in the Body of Man.

Of what kind of Substance this Author would define the Humane Soul, is not
Intelligible from any Definition given by him; but as he Affirms it Active and
Motional: And therefore consisting, suitably to his Teuent, of quantitative
Parts, it must be Elementarily Composed, and consequently Mortal by Nature: By
reason that there is no sublunary Substance, that has not a mutable and
perishable Being. So that within the Compass of the World, and Course of
Providence, there is no Immortal Thing that can be, by Man, apprehended. Which
may be naturally Argued from the Doctrine of Descartes, as it relates to the
Humane Soul.

Notwithstanding, to Improve his Philosophical System, I will conclude, That as
a Learned Catholic, 'twas granted by him, that the eternalizing of the Humane
Soul, however Composed, or operative in the Body of Man, was wholly to be
referred to the Decree of the Omnipotent.

In his Second Part, he grossly defines and mistakes the Nature of Body, by
Affirming, That it does not consist, as as one Thing may be said to be more
Ponderous, Hard, or distinctly Colored than another, but as it is differently
extended in Length, Breadth and Depth; which is a very incompatible Tenent, or
all one as to Assert, That Air, Water, Man and Beast, are no otherwise
distinguishable, than as any one of them are heavier, or less than another;
though absolutely bereaved of their other Proprieties: Which shows, That there is
neither Head, or Tail, in the Shape of his Treatise, on this Subject.

In his Third Part, amongst diverse of his questionable Positions and
Phaenomena's, which I conceive are considerably taxed by me, he does in a high
degree, essentially debase the conspicuous Sphere of Glory and Light visibly
beheld in the wonderful appearance of the Sun; which according to his
Definition, is no other than a flaming Substance that flashingly Moves
continually from one place to another within its Circumference; but with such
resemblance to our common Fire, that it dissolves whatsoever Matter is
contiguous to its Movement: Notwithstanding he would distinguish it from the
Notion we have of Fire, as it is sed and maintained by consuming of such
Materials as are not too hard to be dissolved.

And is not this a pretty kind of distinction by which he gives a different
denomination to the flaming Substance, as be terms it, of the Sun, from the
combustible Nature of Tarrestial Fire, though, in effect, he grants that the
Operation is the same in both: There being little difference betwixt
Dossolution caused by a flaming Substance, and burning, as Matter may be
understood either way altered or consumed.

The Fuel, on which be conceives the flaming Substance of the Sun, to operate,
is no other than, what be calls his first Element, or imaginary material Fund,
as be determines, and orders it, of the Worlds original Being Above and Below;
So that by a thorough-pac'd fiction he Constitutes the Heavens and Earth
materially the same.

And if so, he must grant that their Substance may be equally subject to the
variable Alterations generatively, or corruptly understood, no less than
Terrestial Beings; which is contradictory to common Experience: There being no
such etherial Changes as are frequently visible in Things Below: Which is an
undeniable Argument that the Substance of the Earth could never be derivatively
the same with that of the Heavens, or originally so Composed. Of which the
Reader may be satisfied, at large, when he Inspects my particular Remarks, that
confirm my general Exception, amongst other Things, against the Fourth Part of
his Philosophy, where he makes the Earth, as it were, a diminitive Brat
engendered by Seeds descending from Skies.

To be plain, these Parts of his Philosophy, which Include the whole, depend on
so many fabulous Phaenomena's and improbable Conjectures, diversely introduced
by him, that it is impossible to apprehend any direct Foundation on which he
erects the Babel of his Hypothesis in reference to the Heavens and Earth. So
that it were prolixly improper, should I load my Preface by discussing of such
Particulars that require a more ample Debate in their proper Places.

It being more suitable to the Nature of a Preface to intimate briefly such
Observations as may give the Reader a taste of what he is more largely to
consider: Wherefore I shall refer him to my Remarks as in course they are to be
Read; where I believe he may find them as pertinently Compendious as my
endeavors could accomplish, or perhaps his Ingenuity may expect.

And for my own Vindication, I can sincerely avow that I discharged, from my
perusal of his Tractates, such opinionative Reflections as usually flow from
the Pens of opposite Authors: Being so fully prepared both as to the Repute of
the Person and the value that I propensly allowed to his great Abilities; That
I did, in a manner, not doubt that I should be proselited by his Principles.

But finding, upon a Mature and thorough Consideration, that his Maxims, in
diverse Particulars, not only checked with my Understanding, but also against
the Proofs that might be adjusted against them: I could not but infer that in a
Judicious Conception he was not the same Des Carts, or Grandee of Knowledge,
that had been, by many, attributed to his Caracter.

So that I might well pronounce -- Quantum mutatus ab illo Hectore. Not that I
presume on my Success farther than he contributes to his own Defeat, by
intruding such Notions, Ideas, Systems and Existency of Things, that could by
no Method of Providence, or Nature, have Being in the World.

Notwithstanding all which, he confidently assures his Reader that he takes
himself to be no Author of Novelties, or Principles disagreeable to the most
famous of Ancient Philosophers: Though palpably manifest that he neither mentions
Plato, Aristotle, or any others of Old, or Modernly Renowned, that he does not
sharpen his Pen to Confute: Though the Proofs that he offers are as far short of
the Validity of many of theirs, as Fiction is from best Probability, or
experimental Assurance: As may be seen by some Examples given by me.

To Conclude, had not these Motives prevailed on my Judgment, and what is more
the demonstrative Evidence that I have Instanced from Proof; I had been far
more inclinable, as I considered, on many Accounts, the Learned Deserts of this
Author, to have annexed to his Esteem my Praise, instead of my Opposition.

Farwell.
REMARKS On the First Part of the New PHILOSOPHY OF DESCARTES. Concerning the
Principles of HUMANE KNOWLEDGE. PART. I.
NOTHING is more commendable then the Exercising of the Humane Mind in such
requisite Contemplations, as most Effectually conduce to the Improvement of the
Understanding in things of special Importance.

And though Man does Exist in a World whose Structure is no less admirable to his
Speculation then how he came to have Being in it, or Originally Ensoul'd above
other Creatur's: Yet Nature, is no such Step-Dame as not to Communicate, by her
Works, such plentiful discoveries to the Rational Faculty as have an ample
perspicuity and genuine tendency to Improve our Apprehensions.

A Treasure of Science that ought to be far more valuable, by the Judicious,
than an excess of Worldly Riches that may fill the Coffers of such as are
meanly Apprehensive, or ungratefully Inconsiderate of the bounties of
Providence that in a Natural Course Replenish the Earth they Possess.

So that in Effect they are no farther sensible of the Conduct of Nature, in
whatsoever they most advantageously Enjoy, then a Man might be of a tale in a
Romance that Represents some, above others, Indiscretely Fortunate. How
precious should then be considered the deserts of such Persons, who by their
Elaborate Endeavors, and Learned Proficiencies so nearly trace the footsteps
of Nature, that they render their Knowledge Approximate to her closest Recess:
Whose mighty Door is no way so perspicuously opened as by the Key of
Philosophical Science, which if duly apprehended, or more regardfully
Incumbent on the Souls of Men; it would discountenance not a few, that out of
more than necessary respects to their Worldly Interest and concerns of Life,
bereave themselves of time and advertency in reference to such common Objects
as by Ordainments from above have a present Operation on our Senses: To which
purpse more Emphatically in the ensuing Discussions.

But here it may be observed, that notwithstanding that by the Natural facility
of Providence much is conveyed to common Understanding; it is not to be concluded
from thence, that all are equally discernable: Which, in Effect, were to
Affirm, that in the numbers of Men, every Man was alike Intelligent, or no less
capable of Philosophical, or Mathematical Literature, then such as are
Eruditely famous in both.

It being very evident, that as some Persons are by Nature Exalted to
predominant Accomplishments in order to the Government of Inferiors; so there
is an undeniable superintendency conferred on others as being gifted from Above
to be Supreme in Science, if their Superiority be Legitimately qualified. But
if Arbitrary or Transgressing from genuine and natural probabilities, or
methods of certainty, it then degenerat's, in its best Interpretation, to a
studied fiction, or artifice of Learned Tyranny; by imposing, at will, on the
Judgments of others.

Nor is it to be admired from the unwary condescentions of Men; that a Person
of reputed Capacity should subject their Opinions to the Dictatorship in
Science that he is prone to Attribute to himself: Insomuch that the Errors that
drop from his Pen, instead of being taxed, find a passable Reception.

Whether this Reflection is applicable, as too much an opiniator, to the
otherwise Ingenious Descartes, I leave to a serious Examination of his
Principles by the Reader of what here follows: Which shall contain the main
Essentials of this Part of his Works I now treat of; taking due care to deliver
the meaning of his Words as plainly in English as they are to be found in the
Latin.

His first considerable Assertion is, That in search of Truth, we may not
improperly doubt of the imaginary and sensible Existence of Things: (his reason
is) Because the Senses of a Man awake may err, as well as when by Dream he
imagines any Thing that never had Being suitable to his Imagination.

To which may be replied, That notwithstanding that it may be granted, that
both waking and dreaming the Fancy may represent Objects that never were truly
such; it being very possible, that a Man may contemplate on a Chimera, a
Monster, or the like, that never had Being in the World: But that being done,
and the Imagination examined, 'twill be found, that such Particulars had a
precedent residence in the Senses; however disorderly or uncouthly the Figures
of different Bodies imaginably appearing: For Example, it is impossible,
otherwise, to imagine a Substance partly composed of Man and Beast, such as the
Centaurs, or other seeming Mixtures of Creatures which had no other rise than
from Poetical Fables: Yet these being substantially represented by the Fancy
either waking, or sleeping; the sensitive Part of the Imagination will
peremptorily determine, That the different Shapes and Figures of any such
Things that the Fancy seems to Unite, had a precedent Residence in the Senses;
as their Species had been discernable in Part, or in their whole Shape and
Figure: It being no less easy to imagine half a Man, or half a Horse, than it
is to conjoyn their Proportions by the license of Fancy as it may Intrigue with
our Senses: So that whether this Learned Monsieur were sleeping or waking when
he inscribed this Query, it is certain, That he declined the sensible Method of
his Intellect, as he undertakes to separate the Mind from participating with
the Senses: Yet on this improbable Distinction, is grounded much of his
subsequent Matter. Who affirms immediately after, That of Things which we
sometimes judge most certain, and such as may be properly termed Mathematical
Demonstrations, or Principles of themselves manifest, we have afterward
doubted; because, says he, we have observed some such Propositions that have
been erroneously delivered.

But can it be argued from any Mathematical Problem, That whosoever doubts or
commits that mistake is not therefore certain of his Senses; which were all one
as to assert, That he who is not Mathematically knowing (of which Science too
many in the World are ignorant) cannot assure himself, that he is in any other
kind sensible. For Illustration, let a Mathematical Line be supposed, and
according to the Axiom of Euclid granted to signify length, but no breadth,
which may be allowed a very necessary and refined Maxim as being, in a
Mathematical Sense, the abstracting of Matter from Lines considered in
themselves, that in substance they may not be Part of their Measure: But as a
Line is beheld in any kind represented or delineated, it is impossible for the
Eye to perceive it in any other capacity, than as it appears to have both
Longitude and Latitude; for else it could not be the Object of Sight, which
clearly explains the Difference betwixt Geometrical Science and Sense; the one
being made evident by the Instructions and Rules of Practice, the other annexed
as a Propriety to Nature; by whose assistance a Man may certainly be said to
see and feel though totally ignorant of any Mathematical Theorem.

There is nothing more evident, than that every Man is endu'd with freedom of
Will, by the Concession of God, and their natural Compositions, to employ their
Senses in the most obvious and certain way of Management; but far from being
alike capacitated in the Gifts and Contemplation of the Mind: One may perform
whatsoever can be required from his Senses as perfectly as another,
notwithstanding there be a vast disparity in their Understandings; which in
effect is granted by this Author, as he words the Particulars I hitherto treat
of: And mentions nothing more of Moment to be observed, until he comes to his
seventh Head, where he states the most Capital Principle, as he conceives, in
order to the erecting of the Proofs he subsequently offers: But whether to be
allowed that Validity, he seems to magnify, will soon appear.

Rejecting, says he, all Things of which we can in any manner doubt, as also
supposing them false; we may easily suppose, That there is no God, no Heaven,
no Bodies; and that we have neither Hands or Feet, or any Bodies: But not that
we, who so imagine, are nothing; because it is absurd to conceive, That
whatsoever thinks does not Exist at the Time of its Thinking: Wherefore he
concludes, That he is, and that he Thinks, is of all the most certain Truth
that can be acquired by Philosophical Order.

Who would not judge, That so wild an Invention as this, in order to Improve
Knowledge, might not rather proceed from some Person in Bedlam, than from
Descartes? Of whom if Interrogated, how he comes to suppose, That a Man may
point blank, on the account of his Fiction, deny the Being of a God, together
with all the visible Particulars already mentioned? As to the Existence of the
Deity, he that considers the necessity of its Concession, as he beholds the
wonderful Conduct of the Universe, with so many miraculous Objects as are
contained therein, will as soon give credit to any Forgery of Fables, as to
doubt of the World's Omnipotent Creator. And no less impossible to acquiesce in
his other Suppositions; there being no Body that has his Eyes to See, and Hands
and Feet, can doubt, That he discerns That which is called Heaven above his
Head, and that he feels with Hands, and treads on the Earth with Feet. But, if
you will pass the Supposition of Descartes, he will assure you, That both Seeing
and Feeling is not so Intelligible, as Ego cogito, and Ego sum: Whereas, in
truth, I neither can understand, That I either Live or Think, but as my Senses
Conspire with my Intellect: If not, one may as well conclude, That he may live
without Thinking of whatsoever he knew before, or was sensibly requisite to his
Being and Life.

So nakedly has this Author stripped the Humane Soul from the necessity of
participating with the Body; and This he farther undertakes to Affirm by his
next Step, where he positively expresses, That there is no other Method of
defining the Nature of the Mind, and its distinction from the Body: Adding,
That it may be done by Examining what we are, and supposing all Things false
that are diverse from us; whence (says he) we may perspicuously apprehend, That
no extension, Figure, local Motion, nor any Thing like these, Attributed to the
Body, could appertain to our Nature: On which account he concludes, That mere
Cogitation is more to be preferred, in point of certainty, than any Corporeal
Thing that could be Apprehended.

To which I Answer, That had it been demanded, of this thinking Gentleman,
Whether at the time he writ This Treatise, he did not Contemplate of some
Bodily Notion? For how could he Pen the Wording in any Kind of Extension,
Figure, local Motion, or the like, and be without Thought of their Being, when
he named them such?

Had he been in that Season, to have Answered This Querie, it must have posed
his Contemplating in the singular way he proposes. And if the Author of this
Conceit could not perform what he requires, it could not be Doctrinal to
others: It being as Impossible totally to separate the Mind from the Senses, as
to think of a Nonentity, or what has no Existence; which were a contradiction
to Nature and the sensible Impression adherent to the Intellect with the Being
of Things; and such s cannot be apprehended by it, otherwise than as they are
Compossed of quantitive and Bodily Parts.

Could I imagine another World as vast as This, with as many Individual Beings
and Creatures of all Sorts, as are contained within the Compass of the Universe
we Inhabit; I could think of no other in all its Parts, than such a One, or in
likeness, the same with This, that had with all its Particulars, been the
precedent sensible Object, of my Understanding. So heterogeneous to the Nature
of Humane Comprehension, is the Principle of Descartes, whereby he endeavors
to separate the Imagination from the Commixture it has with our Senses.

These Discussions, if duly considered, are sufficient to defeat the farther
Progress of his Maxims; which, in Effect, will be liable to the same
Confutation: But to give him the Scope he takes, together with the Advantage he
can make by it; let us admit the Question he makes, in his Ninth Particular,
which he conceives very Emphatical to the purpose; and where he has this
passage; supposing, by a kind of Interlude of his Fancy, himself to See, to
Walk, and have Being, and all these Corporeally performed, yet makes no certain
Conclusion from thence: Because (says he,) I may sleeping think I See, or Walk,
notwithstanding my Eyes be not open, and that I move not from the Place I was
in, and perhaps as if I conceived that I had no Body: All which if referred to
the Operation of the Mind, whereby he Imagined or Thought that he saw and
walked, he determines certain.

And I Affirm no less, if to the Imagination be annexed, the Impression made in
it, by the Senses. For so I can Think that I saw, or walked when I Slept; which
Imports no more, than that there was a Residence in my Intellect, conveyed by
my Senses of my Seeing, and observing of my walking Person when I was really
Awake. So that it must be a very empty Notion to conceive, That I can be
Personated merely by the working of my Brain, without Comprehending any concern
of the Senses: For Example, Seeing, or Moving must needs have a necessary
Relation to my Bodily Parts, and the Senses that appertain to Motion; as I
cannot move on the Ground, but as, on it, I feel I move. So that all that can
be Implied from this visionary Conceit of Descartes, is, That the Fancy
imaginarily Retained, what before had been actually performed by the Senses.

He proceeds to Explicate, That misconception, by not orderly Philosophizing,
is the absolute Cause that the Mind is not accurately distinguished from the
Body.

And here, methinks, he imposes too critical a Task to be practically
Discharged by the common Use of Humane Understanding, considering how few the
World affords that are philosophically Accomplished, or sufficiently Instructed
to that purpose: Or if they were, could they be therefore convinced, That his
manner of distinguishing the Mind from the Body, is not a more refined Conceit
than can be exerted by any Imagination that resides in Bodily Composition? Is
it not manifest, that Elementary Substances are the Ingredients of our
Constitutions as they temper our Flesh and Blood? And can the Soul that resides
within their Circumference, and Acts by them, contemplate her self discharged
from them; yet at the same time, as is acknowledged by Descartes, employ her
Imagination in Representing such Objects as could not be known to her, but as
the Senses had made their Impressions, on Things, on the Intellect, that in
their material Proprieties and Shapes had been precedently apprehended by them:
And it were unnaturally absurd to annex Thought to any other Method actuated by
the Brain of Man: It being no less Insignificant to allow the Mind a distinct
Exercise within the Body, the Region of her Dominion, than to suppose a Prince
to Govern without the requisite Assistance of his Subjects.

Thus far, I conceive, stand sufficiently Taxed the groundless Mistakes, if not
Fictions of this Learned Author: Whose Defects did chiefly Emerge from his
attributing to his Abilities, as if proceeding from him as the first of Men,
that by their Grandeur could remove such Difficulties, that, in their Nature,
are too perplexed for the Resolution of the eruditest Pen, as they relate to
the manner of Being and Acting of the Humane Soul: Which if considered
absolutely spiritual; the Question may be, How any Thing, perfectly spiritual,
can be Enclosed, Actuate, and Exist in a Corporeal Substance? Since in a
Philosophical Construction, nothing can act on Body, or have Being with it, in
any consideration; but what is composed of Bodily Parts. If contrarily, the
Mind or Soul of Man, be deemed a material Essence, the Attribute of Immortality
conferred on its Dignity by common Opinion, will be debased by That Definition;
notwithstanding it may be affirmed, That whatsoever its Substance is, or manner
of being in the Humane Body; it is equally facile to the Omnipotent to
eternilize its Existence, as to Transform by Resurrection, the Dust of a rotten
Carcass to the material Figure and Parts of the Body that had been so consumed.

In the next place he takes for granted, That the Mind may with that simplicity
understand it self, as it may doubt of all Things else.

But how can that bare Intelligence be Attributed to the Mind, that cannot by
what has been before discussed, so much as Ruminate of any Thing of which it
does not participate with the Senses? The Reason he gives to the contrary, is,
That the Mind finding in its self many Ideas, which so long as it contemplates,
and of nothing, without it self, either Affirms, or Denies, it cannot be
deceived. But can he prove that the Mind, at that time he proposes, has no
Comixture with the Senses: The Argument he gives to make good his Assertion,
is, That the Mind being furnished with diverse Notions, composeth
Demonstrations, to which so long as it attends, it assures it self that they
are true. And what these Ideas are he Exemplifies, by Affirming, That the Mind
is replenished with Ideas of Numbers and Figures; besides common Notions,
amongst which this, that if to Equals be added Equals, there shall remain
Equals, and the like; on which ground he proves, That the three Angles of every
plain Triangle are Equal to two Right. Which cannot be denied by any Man that
understands Mathematical Certainties.

But must every Man that Reads Descartes, be so skilled in that Science as to
be able to Demonstrate, That the three Angles of a Triangle are equal to two
Right Ones; which many thousands of Men are not able to perform? And if not,
they will be little advantaged by the Notions here mentioned of this Author.
However, to treat him in his own Method, and for satisfaction of such as are
mathematically knowing; Can it be denied, That taking the half of Four, there
will equally remain Two: And this must properly signify the Substracting from
some Numerical Quantity, as it really Relates to its Arithmetical Proportion or
Measure; it being impossible to take the half of Nothing: Wherefore the Maxim
must have reference to some substantial Thing; or as the Figure of Four had
been precedently seen, or written, to whatsoever purpose it might sensibly
Relate; and if so, the Demonstration cannot merely proceed from the Mind
without the concurrance of the Sense; as I cannot tell One, Two, Three, and not
be apprehensive, that I count Something. And he that would determine to the
contrary, may as well Affirm, That a Man can tell Cash without the Use of his
Feeling and Fingers; or fancy Money in a Bag and be able to compute its Sum by
the notional operation of the Mind, according as it is applied by this Author.

Who to exalt the height of his Ideas, though far incompatible to what he designs
'em, he undertakes to prove, That amongst the Troops of Fancy, which may be
exerted by the Brain, there will be found one of that sublime Tendency, that
the most perfect Existence, or Being of a God, may be employed by it; together
with such a necessary and eternal Being, as distinguishes it from the possible,
or contingent Existence that may be attributed to all other Things.

If This Doctrine be true; I may consequently determine, That the Methods of
Providence by which the Universe and whatsoever it contains Subsist, are but so
many Contingencies; or that 'twas accidental that the Sun did yesterday Ascend
to the Meridian, if not Deified by an Idea of his Existence: Whereas there must
be such a determined and necessary Being of Providence, by the Decree of the
Almighty, in the Conduct and Preservation of the Universe, with whatsoever it
contains, that it cannot have a Period otherwise than by a total Cessation of
its natural Effects and Operations, as so many Bounties conferred from above,
on the vast Circumference of the World, together with every Individual Thing
that appertains to it.

Not that it can be denied, That by the usual Effects of Nature, no Minute does
pass in which there are not produced Innumerable Alterations as in course,
Generation and Corruption succeed one another in the various Changes of all
Things that have Life and Growth: Yet, not to be implied, That by any Idea of
them that can be imagined, according to This Author, is to be understood that
they accidentally subsist, or vary in their manner of Being, which would, by
Construction, Impute Contingencies to the Incomprehensible Wisdom and Methods
of Providence tending to the Conservation and Production of Men and Creatures.

But to return to the remaining Part of his Fourteenth Particular, where he
undertakes, with ample Assurance, to exalt his Idea of the Being of a God, by
the Proof that is to be made, that the three Angles of a Triangle are equal to
two Right, from whence as a parallel certainty he concludes the Existence of
God supremely Perfect.

But can it be Affirmed of any Idea, as he terms it, That because it is a
Mathematical Truth, That the three Angles of a Triangle are equal to two Right;
that it is sufficient to prove, from That Theorem, the miraculous Being and
Perfection of Omnipotency. And thus he again supposes, That all Men must be so
far Geometrically Knowing, or they will be deficient, or without demonstrative
Conviction that the Deity does Exist.

If This Doctrine were true, it were no less requisite that all Mankind should
have Recourse, betimes, to the School of Euclid; where they might be Instructed
as fully of the necessary Proportions of all the Angles and sides of that
Figure, together with what its Area contains in Feet, Inches, or the like;
naturally and usefully applicable to Corporeal Measures: Which were very
disconsonant to his Idea of any Perfection in a Triangle, as he would parallel
it to the proving of the Existence of the Deity; which cannot be likened to any
Commensurable Figure, or Being: Because two Immensely Infinite to come within
the Precinct or Computation of Lines. And he that most exactly discerns the
Properties of a Triangle, in every of its Capacities, can but apply it to
Commensurable Parts and Proportions, as before expressed, and nothing more
absurd than to assimilate their Proofs, on any account, to the undeniable
Existence of the Omnipotent so fully evident to the Eye and Sense, in the
sublime Wonders beheld within the Compass of the Universe: Insomuch, That it is
very Emphatically expressed by the Poet, where he Affirms, That God has taken
care to Inform us by miraculous Mediums suitable to these Words -- Os homini
sublime dedit Caelumque videre, jussit et erectos ad sidera tollere vultus. As
much more obvious to general Apprehension than any Geometrical Problem. Could
it be unknown to the Intelligent Descartes, how vast a multitude of Humane
Kind are scarce able to Define a Triangle as a Figure consisting of three
Angles; and far less apprehensive of the Truth of its useful Attributes; if not
Regardlesly unconcerned, whether there is such a Thing or no; or not at all
conducing to the Exerting of Omnipotence? For which they conceive they are, by
the Goodness of Providence, furnished with more palpable Motives: And such as
are approved by himself, as shall be observed in convenient Place.

In the mean time he much Insists on his Triangular Idea, as a Truth that gives
a main Rise to the Proof of the necessary Existence of Omnipotence; because as
he Affirms, That there is no other Idea to be found so absolutely certain; and
yet he Grants, in effect, That it is no more than that, in a Triangle, the
three Angles are equal to two Right: The disparity whereof, as he renders the
Application, has been, I presume, sufficiently noted already. Notwithstanding,
it may not improperly be farther demanded, Why a Person of his exquisite
Science should not allege other Mathematical Certainties, rather than fix, as
he seems to do, on the peculiar Example he gives of a Triangle? Yet not to be
questioned that the manifest Perfection of a Circle, in being a Round without
any Point that can signify its Beginning or End; together with the admirable
Equality; not to be found in any other Figure, that every Line, as so many
wonderful Attributes, has to each other, if drawn from its Center to its
Circumference; is a more Sublime resemblance and Proof of an Infinite Being,
than is consistent with a Triangle. All which, but most especially its Circular
Perfection, if considered by its proper Excellency, is no other than an
Indeterminate Individual, or Geometrical Wonder, not to be Attributed to any
other Figure: No Man having ever been able to give it an exact Measure, or such
as may be deemed its Square; though the accurate Endeavor of the Famous in
Mathematical Science. Whereas the Triangle is every way comensurable by the
Sides and Angles it contains.

If a Unite be considered in its Arithmetical Capacity, it is a nearer Parallel
to the proving of an Incomprehensible Existence of God, than can be deduced
from the Idea he undertakes to give of a Triangle: Nothing being more admirable
than the Entireness of the number One; in being both its own Root and Square,
and also its Cube and Root; and in the same manner continues, in a Geometrical
Progression, to the highest of Powers: Nor can it be wholly Divided or
Subtracted by any other Number: Which Excellencies solely appertain to Unity.

Yet from none of these Examples, howsoever certain in themselves, can be
asserted the Existence of God by such an Idea, of any of them, as may
Universally prove the necessary Existence of the Deity, both as they are the
Truths of Science; and therefore not every Man's sensible Conviction, as also
that they are only applicable to Things of a material Being; As I cannot term
the Square, Cube, or any figurative Demensions, the Comprehension or Measures
of Nothing: Which, in effect, is required by Descartes, as he would Abstract
his Speculation from all concomitancy with the Bodily Senses: And consequently
imputes it as a Fault, or Neglect in not distinguishing accordingly, the
perfect Idea of God, as it Impresses on the Mind the necessary existency of the
Almighty.

But the main Objection is, and far from being Answered by him, That the
Imagination cannot be separated from Objects of Sense: For let a Man
Contemplate with the utmost exactness that his Mind can afford, it will
certainly terminate on one Thing or other, that resembles Material Parts; though
by Supposition as vastly Extended as it is possible to Imagine: Wherefore had
this learned Gentleman thoroughly considered the Speculative Part, of his Idea,
when he Inscribed its Notion; as sure as he was of Humane Composition, he would
have annexed a Corporeal Representation, in some kind, to what he calls his
Idea; or he must, as Insignificantly, or as near to nothing have employed the
Labor of his Brain, as if he could have Contemplated of a Vacuity: All which
is equally absurd to whomsoever will allow to himself the liberty of Thinking.

On which consideration, and fully to confute his Supposition of bare Ideas of
the Mind: It has pleased the Almighty by the wonderful and no less apparent
Prospect of the Universe, with every Thing contained within its Boundless
Complex; to convince us, That nothing is comprehended by it, but what may imply
the Denomination of Corporeal Miracles: Yet so admirably different, that what
is of Elementary Form and Substance, within the Residence of Earth and Air,
seems perfectly distinguished by the manner of Being and Essence, of the Sun
and Stars, though of Bodily Resemblance: Yet none of them have other appearance,
in the most Refined Conception we have of their Natures, than Objects of our
Senses. And though the Original of the Universe, or the Individuals it
Comprehends, be not manifest by any external Assurance; it is perfectly evident,
That they had a Beginning from an Omnipotent Cause; by reason that our not
knowing how they had Primitive Existence; is an undeniable Conviction, That in
being Miraculous to our Understanding, or as so many Actual Works, wonderfully
visible; they could not be produced, or continued, otherwise than by an
Omnipotent, Incomprehensible Will and Providence. So far does the Observation
of admirable Facts, that by Divine Conduct are openly exposed to the Eyes of
our Reason and Sense, exceed the most Refined Dictates of Science; as they
direct the Sublime Ascents of our Conceptions by a more exact Progression, than
Geometrically can be given to the highest of its Powers. How impertinent is it
then to depart from the Road of Common Sense, by supposing such an Idea in the
Mind, as from any Mathematical Problem might guide us to the Proof of a Deified
Existence? though contrary to the palpable Method of the Omnipotent, Ordained by
the Miracles of his Works: Which enormous Mistake is evidently This Author's,
in a great Part of his Treatise, as he mainly endeavors to Parallel his
Demonstration of the Existence of God with Mathematical Certainty.

Which Science, though above all to be preferred, for the Dignity of its
unerrable Maxims, and particularly so esteemed by me: Yet I cannot but judge it
Incompatibly applied, even by this learned Author, to the purpose he would
intend it; and deserves a Remark accordingly.

He yet farther proceeds to heighten his Notion of Ideas; amongst which he
selects the Idea of something most exquisitely perfect; by which he would have
understood the necessary Existence of God. I will favor the Ambiguity of his
Expression so far as not to believe, That he meant by his Idea a necessitated
Existence, which could imply, that the Deity had an Exigency of Being from some
other Thing: Because, whatsoever is necessitated cannot have, of it self, an
entire voluntary Existence; or, as one Cause might Necessitate the Being of
another; which cannot be applied to Supreme and Infinite Perfection. Nor was it
possible for him or any Man to Imagine, by the most Refined Contemplation, That
the necessary Existence of God can be more clearly understood, then by the
Actual Prospect he has given us of his All Sufficiency, and wonderful
Providence annexed to the Conservation of the Universe, and All it contains.
And if otherwise Interpreted, the Being of God, as separated from the
Miraculous Prospect and Munificence we actually receive from the excellency of
his Works, that fill the World we Inhabit: Were in effect to Attribute to the
Deity a solitary Existence, or not the Author of the Innumerable Effects of
Infinite Goodness that have an Emanation from him. So that it is not any Idea,
of necessary Existence by which God can be apprehended; but rather the
necessitated Being that the Total Comprehension of Heaven and Earth does
receive from his Ordainment.

Which appears to be very significantly the Sense of This Author; as upon
farther consideration he thickens his Idea in his 17th Particular, where he has
this Expression: If any Man has the Idea of a Machine, or Fabric produced by
most curious Artisice, he will concede, That it Merits the utmost Inquisition
of his Thought, whereby to be Informed of the Authentic Cause by which it was
so accurately Effected; and such as could by no Device, or Humane Skill,
receive Perfection.

What could these Words Import, other than his substantial Idea of the
Constituted Being and Conservation of the Universe, in Reference to God the
Author?

And having added to his Idea, the weighty Consideration of the World's
Existence, he might well acknowledge, That it is the substantial Union of
Matter and Form, that gives admirable Subsistence to every Individual Thing,
Circumscribed by the mighty Universe; wherein is visibly presented, by the
wondrous Proprieties of Composition and Conduct, an Incomprehensible Founder.

Which Perfections not to be Imitated by any Parallel Structure, or performed
by Humane Industry or Art; he fully annexeth to their Excellencies, the
necessary Dependency and Manifestation of Omnipotent Power. By which Method,
according to the soundest Speculation of Descartes, may be perspicuously
Exerted the otherwise Indefinable Being of the Almighty: Because, as he grants,
the Extent of Humane Composition, in Soul and Body, cannot farther Ascend than
by Objects of Sense, or such as have visible Limitation, to the Admiration,
though not to the perfect Definition of their sublime Cause; which can be no
other than God as far exceeding all Imaginable expressing and height of
Rational Accents.

And is not this Doctrine more readily apprehended by all that may, (if they
please) be ocular Spectators, or by any means sensible Discerners of the Works
of the World, that, by Omnipotent Appointment Surround them above, and below;
than from the dry Idea of a Triangle, whose three Angles amount to two Right:
And from thence deduce the Truth of God's necessary Existence; which if
possible, by Mankind, so to be Demonstrated, 'twere no less requisite for Women
than Men, to be able to Resolve the Problem; if they would Assert their Belief
of the Being of a Deity: It being highly necessary, in order to that especial
Concern, that there should be a sufficient Number of Female Geometricians:
Which I confess might add Certainty to their Instructions, though not otherwise
Divine, when they Preach in the Society of Quakers.

Wherefore I may well admire, That such a Confufed and Impracticable Principle
should be entangled, by this Author, with Mathematical Verity; of which Science
he had, as to other Uses, a Learned Accomplishment: It being his real mistake,
or too much Curiosity, where he undertakes to Confirm, by a Mathematical
Inference, That God does Exist; instead of the open Evidence, that is visible
to Mankind, from the Miraculous Consistence of the World, and the Works it
comprehends. Wherefore it is judiciously Affirmed by Incomparable Bacon, That he
had rather be Imposed on by the Jewish Talmud, or Alcaron, then deny, That the
Universe, with whatsoever it contains, is without the Rule of a Mind, or, which
is all one, the Sovereignty of the Deity.

But the Authority of this Quotation, together with the Reasons I have before
Inserted, are very disagreeable to the Mental Idea of Descartes, by which he
rather Insers the Being of the Deity by his Notion of the Structure of the
World, than by the Prospect we have of its actual Conduct and admirable
Composure. On which he grounds this Interrogation; from whence (says he) had
any Man Being, that has an Idea of God's Perfections, unless from something
more perfect than himself? Which doubtless is true, if understood of the
apparent means described in the wonderful Figure and Facts comprehended by the
Universe, as the Effects of an Omnipotent Cause. And thus may Thought ascend,
by a miraculous Scale, to the acknowledgement of the Immense Power and
Providence of God actually manifest by Works. But not as this Author Affirms,
From being as he calls it, naturally Enlightened or Capacitated from a mere Idea
of the Mind, whereby to conclude, That Man has a present, or primivitive
Existence from any Thing more perfect; as he Insinuates: Since it is very
possible, That from an Idea, more natural than his, may be Imagined that Humane
Composition and Life, might be produced in a Course of Nature, which some have
been prone to Determine, from Materials very much inferior to the Subsistence
of Mankind, either in Soul or Body.

And this is frequently discernable as from Elementary Commixtures and
Operations, Animals proceed from Vegetables, and the contrary. Insomuch that
Aristotle, in his last Chapter, of the Generation of Animals, conjectures; That
the Origin of Men as well as other Creatures, might have in Time past, an
Earthly Production; and which he in another Place, supposes, by a long backward
Computation of Time, to have probably been an Artifice of Nature heretofore
known and omitted. Yet none of these Methods, however they were, but must have
had the allowance of Providence, without which there can be Nothing, in any
kind, completed. Notwithstanding, it cannot be Affirmed, with Descartes, That
although we have not, as he alleges, Being from our selves; it is no
assurance, That we can derive our immediate Existence, from something more
perfect than our Natures: Which if an univocal Truth, relating to God, the most
Supreme and Perfect of Beings; it may be objected whether so many Imperfections
as are naturally Adherent to our Compositions, could be consistent with any
Perfections that were bestowed by the Almighty; or by which we must not have
been more excellently tempered in the best of our Faculties, than really we
are: If not every Individual of Mankind equally perfect in all Parts of
Knowledge, had the Humane Mind been so committed to our Bodies by Supreme
Allowance: The contrary of which may be Asserted from Common Experience; as
sure that Particulars of Mankind are not more different in their External
Features, than they are in the Internal Proprieties of the Soul.

However Descartes is pleased so far to Dissent from the Universal Sway of
Experimental Science, that he undertakes to Philosophize against the Rules, and
Dictates of Nature, by devising of Principles whereby he would totally sever
the Mind from the Body: And with that Parity too, that he excepts no
Imbecility incident to Sex and Age; if the Mind be clearly evacuated, by a
Dose of his Idea, from Corporeal Thought, should it tend to the Soul of Being,
Operation and Management, that is ineffably conferred by Providence on the
Works of Nature: Yet all these mighty Limits, howsoever appearing
providentially impassible; must be so refinedly penetrated by his Idea, that it
may not encounter a Substance, though no grosser than the least Particle of
Epicurus's Atoms. But how to fix the Imagination on any Thing of Infinite
Perfection, so as to surpass the Boundaries of the Universe; and in that vast
Journey of Thought, exempt from the Intellect, all Bodily Perception; were no
less absurd than the Epithete of an Incorporeal Phantasme: Which every Man that
does Think, either Sleeping, or Waking, may sensibly confute: It being
impossible to imagine, by any strength of Thought, the Perfections of God
farther than our Compositions of Body and Soul, are capable to extend.

Yet this manner of Humane Intelligence, is so peremptorily thwarted by the
Suppositions of this Author; That he undertakes so to dis-joyn the
correspondency that the Intellect has with the Senses, That, according to his
Maxims, Men cannot be assured, that either God or their Souls Exist; if their
Imagination be not very singularly applied by expelling at pleasure, all
conception of Bodily Objects; or that there is any such Thing as Corporeal
Residence, or Motion; or that the Heavens are Replenished with Stars; or that
there is Earth, or that Men have Bodies and sublunary Existence; or at most but
Moral Certainties, That we sensibly perceive, there are any such Things: Unless
by his manner of Idea, the Mind may be so stripped from its Corporeal
Appurtenances, That it may Reign with such simplicity in its Kingdom of
Thought, that it may have nothing to do with Dominion over the Senses, or Body
wherein it has Being. On which distinct Method of Thinking he conceives does
depend the Natural Propriety of the Soul, as it may, by Imagination, be
separated from the Body. To come therefore to the Improbability of his
Assertion: Let it be granted, That he, or any other Man, could reject by
Speculation all Bodily Particulars that are visibly and sensibly perceived
within the Compass of the World; were it possible, at the same time, to
entertain Thought by no Representation of other Things of a Corporeal Nature;
which would amount to the creating of Thought somewhat more Fictitious than
when ensoul'd by Poets their Invention of Gods and Goddesses: Because they did
not transport their Fictions beyond, or without the resembling of Something in
Being before. But exceeded by the Imaginary Suggestions of this Author, who
gives no rise to his Thought from any Thing by likeness precedently known to
himself, or any Body else: Yet from this pure Conceit does he argue the clear
Existence of the Humane Soul, and the Knowledge that it may perfectly have of
the Being of God.

I should not have made this Discussion here, being much to the purpose of
which I have already Treated; had not Occasion been given, by what succeeds, so
far to Impress, its necessary Reiteration.

To proceed therefore with him to his 21 Particular, where he undertakes to
prove, That from the Evidence we have of Something more perfect than our
selves, we may clearly determine the manner of our Duration, and Temporary
Continuance; as also the natural Subsistence of all other Things; because, as
he alleges, no such Particulars depend on themselves. Which is a clear Truth,
if he would intend by his Notion the Intermediate Conduct of Providence in the
Modalities, Production and Conservation it gives, in a usual Course, to Things
within the Boundaries of the Universe. In which may be discerned, That some
Individuals are more or less durable, or subject to Decay, Alteration and
Periods of their Existence: Yet all these Varieties are not openly to be
understood otherwise than, in a natural Method, they may be Effects of
Elementary Operations; and this is no less than experimentally certain, as sure
as there is Heat, Cold, Dryness, and Moisture: And consequently, the
Ingredients of Bodies as they have temperatures from them; which is notoriously
manifest in the Complexions, Dispositions, and Tempers of Men and other
Creatures. But without these necessary Mediums, to lift up our Imagination,
after the manner of his Idea, to a mere Notion of a sublime Cause that gives
Being and Conservation to all Things; were to depart from the immediate School
of Providence, by undertertaking to be our own Instructers of what we cannot
without its natural Information, by any contemplative Thought, or imaginary
Speculation, howsoever Refined, possibly apprehend. Yet on this
incomprehensible Way of Thinking, is generally Erected the main Fund, and
Tendency of his Principles, whereby he undertakes to Improve Humane
Understanding.

I find nothing more Intervenes, in this Part of his Treatise, that requires in
Substance any farther Remark: Wherefore to avoid Repitition, I pass on to his
25th Head, where he has this Expression.

If God, from himself, or others, Reveals any Thing, that exceeds the genuine
strength of our Understandings, such are the Mysteries of the Trinity, and
Incarnation of Christ, We ought not to refuse their Belief; nor admire, That
many Things are both in the Immense Nature of God, as also in those created by
him, that surpass our Capacities.

All which I readily acknowledge, though I cannot but admire, that so speculative
a Person as Monsieur Des Carts, should not annex to his Belief of this
Threefold Mystery, the admirable facility of Providence, by which the most
Essential Part of That stupendous Article of Humane Faith, comprehended in
Christ the Second Person in the Mysterious Creed of Christianity, is so far,
for our more sensible Conviction, of familiar Resemblance to the Works of the
Omnipotent, as they are composed of Bodily Life and Figure, relating to Man and
Creatures; that by this Dispensation the Redeemer of Mankind is represented in
the Form and Substance of Flesh, as the most captivating Object of our Devotion
and Sense: It being impossible to conceive, how any Idea of Worship can so
Mystically fasten the Mind, that it may be totally barred from Conspiring with
the Senses in the admittance of Corporeal Objects. Which may be no
inconsiderable Reason, why Christian Profession has allowed the Representations
of the Passion and Resurrection of Christ, to impress their Memorial on the
Heart of the Believer.

How little does the manner of this Author's Idea, so magnified by his Pen,
conduce to the proving, That God does Exist; or that the Worship of Christ,
otherwise than a Miraculous Work, proceeding from Omnipotent Power, should be
the Object of Humane Devotion? With this Distinction, That although every Fact
of the Almighty comprehended by the Universe, be equally wonderful; we are
obliged, by Precepts, to pay the Duty of our Souls to no other than Christ.

Which this Author seems to acknowledge, where he excepts his bare Idea, of the
Being of a Deity, from the stupendous Co-existence of God in the Substance of
Flesh: As if but beholding to his Speculation for the Belief of the One, and to
Religion for the Other. From whence it may be concluded, That it was the Design
of Descartes to decline the common Road of Providence, in hopes to be
celebrated for a singular Conceit of his Brain, whereby he would Instruct
others to believe, That the Method of God's Works, though as broadly visible as
the Features of the World's Face, were too narrow to exert from them, his Idea
of the Almighty. Because, as he Affirms, It Is possible to Imagine, That there
is no Heaven, no Earth, no Bodies of Men; and yet by a naked Idea, in the Mind,
be assured, That God does Exist, though none of his Works had Being at all. --

But Passages of this Nature, having been precedently taxed, the Reader is
referred to them.

The next Point that he comes close up to, is, That we ought not to weary the
Brain with disputing of what is meant by Infinite: Because he judges it absurd
in Man, who is of a Finite Being, to determine any Thing of an Infinite.

To which purpose he gives several Instances; As the vain Discussion, or Quere,
Whether if a Line be supposed Infinite, the middle Part of that Line be not
also Infinite? Because, with such Things, (says he) we ought not to be
concerned, unless we Judge our Mind also Infinite.

Which I fully grant Judiciously Advised: But find it very dissentaneous to a
main Notion of his, formerly mentioned, whereby he Affirms, That it is very
facile by a mere Idea of the Mind, though acting within the Limitation of the
Body, to imagine the Infinite Existence of the Deity, by no other Speculation
than may be made on the Wings of Thought, when on its Contemplative Journey.
But how to be clear from all Corporeal Impediments, both within, and without
the Body, notwithstanding he here allows it confined to a Finite Imagination;
appears too like a Contradiction, in the Terms he delivers; or which is much
the same, that in one Place, of his Writings, he spoke of an Infinite Idea, and
of a Finite in another: How therefore to reconcile him to himself, on that
account, is not to be apprehended.

And this may be aptly Inferred from what he adds in the Paragraph I treat of,
where he Affirms, That no Extension can be Imagined so Vast, that a Greater
cannot be given; which is as numerically certain, as that Archimedes, by sixty
three Ciphers and a Unite before them, produced a greater Number than could be
Equalled if the Total World from the Center of the Earth to the Sphere of the
fixed Stars, were Replenished with the numerous Particles of Sands of the Sea.
If Thoughts could be Multiplied so as they might exceed the Sum before
mentioned, as many more might be added to their Number: Yet every particular
Thought would be severally terminated by some Object of Sense. On the contrary,
the Notion of Infinite may rather pass for a manner of Speaking than actually
explicable by the Humane Intellect: And thus Immense, Infinite, and the like,
are attributed to God, not as their meaning is otherwise to be understood than
as they have Reference to the Works of the Almighty; of which, because no
account is to be given how they either began or are continued; our highest
Admirations, not to be expressed by Accents of Speech, ought to exalt our
Wonder, Incomprehensibly annexed to a Word of Infinite Denomination.

And this, in Substance, he soon after concedes; where he holds it very
advisable, that we should not Inquisitively Reason of Natural Things, or the
End to which they are Ordained, farther than God and Nature have Constituted
and Proposed them to our Observation, least we should seem to arrogate to our
selves any participation with his Counsels: To which he judiciously adds, That
God is to be acknowledged the Efficient Cause of all Things, yet so, as that he
has not extinguished the Natural Light of our Understandings in being
familiarly acquainted with such Attributes and Effects of his Omnipotent Power,
as he has manifestly exposed to our Apprehensions: All which are undoubtedly
requisite to our Duty.

But how does this concenter with his single Idea of God, as here he requires
the concurrence of our Reason and Senses, to the useful Exposition of such
Objects as are manifest to us?

And what can be employed from thence, other than that the abundant Operations
and wonderful Effects of a Supreme Cause are evident in the apparent Being and
Works, within the Compass of the Universe, that must necessarily depend on it;
without which it were impossible for us to have the plenitude of a sensible
Conviction? Insomuch, that I think it not improper to insert the Opinion of
certain a Astrologer; who Affirms, That if the fixed Stars had not a constant
Distance, or that the Diurnal Motion of the Celestial Sphers did not
perpetually move in Time, no Individual Thing would last a Moment; which
Notion, of this Astrologer, if but conjecturally Allowed, has a far more
significant Relation to the Proof of the Existence of God, as a Supreme Cause,
than can be appropriated to any Idea of the Mind that abstracts the Immense
means and Facts of Providence from the obvious Concurrence they have with our
Contemplation of the Being of the Almighty, and the superlative Disposer of
whatsoever we can behold, or Imagine: And I should be glad if the contrary had
not been the mistake of the Learned Descartes.

His next Considerations is, That God is supremely True, and the Illuminator of
our Understandings; and therefore cannot deceive us, or at All the Cause of
those Errors that we are of our selves obnoxious to. Which is undeniable, if by
the Enlightening of our Minds, he means the Conviction we have from the Works
and Operations of Providence, that conspicuously assure us, That Omnipotence is
their Supreme Cause and Author. But if he explains fully his meaning, as he
seems to do, by what follows in his next Particular; his Sense is, That if we
have a clear and distinct discernment of any Object, by the Faculty of Knowing
given as from God, we cannot be deceived. Insomuch that he Affirms, That God
were a Deceiver, if he had bestowed on us a perverse and false Conception of
Things, instead of a true One.

If This Opinion of his were sound, and that God had so empowered the Humane
Mind, that it could, of it self, serenely distinguish Truth from Falsehood:
What Reason can be given why All Men should not equally be perspicuously
Intelligent, as most suitable to the Capacious Munificence of the Almighty? And
consequently every Man's Reason and Senses irresistably compliant: Since it is
not Imaginable, That such a Gift, Authorized by God, could be less than
Universal and perfect, as it must needs affect the Understandings of All
Mankind; and next complete an Equality of Knowledge and Goodness, with all
other requisite Endowments of the Soul: The possibility of which is strenuously
asserted by this Author in his 30th Particular, where he Affirms, That these
admirable Gifts may be accomplished as well Sleeping, as Waking, if duly
adverted how our clear Thoughts may be distinguished from such as are confused.
Which Direction of his, if rendered practicable, would amply tend to Humane
Felicity, by cleansing the Minds of Vicious Persons, Fools, and Knaves; nay,
abrogate the use of Bedlam, by a Recipe from the Pen of Descartes: Who
Affirms, That it is but being thoughtfully Industrious and Imaginatively
separate, either Sleeping, or Waking, the Purity of Thoughts from such as are
confused.

But were it Interrogated, Whether any Sorts of Men, (before mentioned) since
none are excepted by him, might not Affert, with as much Confidence as he
undertakes to direct them; That they had either Dreaming, or Waking, a clear
Idea of Truth, in one Kind or other; which could not be mistaken if avowed by
them that the Notion was clear and distinct, and therefore perfect? Because not
otherwise, as he alleges, the Gift of God, whereby the Mind of Man, is Enabled
to separate, by pure Imagination, Truth from Falsehood.

If Distinction of Thought, from Thought, by any Power of the Mind, can be
termed a certain Representation of Truth, and principally meant of God, or
whatsoever is ordained by him; it must as has been already proved, be grounded
on some admirable Prospect of the Works of the Omnipotent, and thence conclude
as a mighty Truth, That he wonderfully Exists, or it could fix on nothing.

In Sum, should a Man endeavor to Refine the clearest Conception that he
could possibly have of a Spiritual Existence, his Imagination might not be so
Immensely dilated as to meet with no Corporeal Stop from the prone Concurrence
of the Intellect with the Senses, and the familiar Admittance that is yielded,
by the Mind, to their Objects: Yet such a Man might assure himself, That he as
certainly discerns the Truth of Bodily Objects Entertained by his Imagination,
as can be pretended, by any Method of Thinking, prescribed by this Author.

And thus it is. too commonly the Fate of many to be seduced by the
over-curiosity, and search made by particular Persons who would build their
Esteem on the Novelty of their Tenants; the usual allurements of Inconstancy in
the Humane Soul: Till rejected by Time they are held no farther useful than
Almanacks out of Date.

Whether the same Success may not be expected, relating to some Parts of the
Writings of Descartes, where he undertakes to Improve Knowledge by Methods
more Consonant to Fiction than Science, not a little to the disrepute of,
otherwise, his vast Abilities; I leave to the Reader to determine.

In his 9th page, he gives us this Caution, That notwithstanding God can be no
Deceiver, yet, frequently it happens that we deceive our selves; which is no
less Divine as to God, then certain that Mankind are diversely Erroneous; as
more or less their Frailties are incident to their Dispositions and Natures.

But if granted according to his often repeated Maxim of Humane Knowledge, That
Perfection of Thought is so clearly applicable to the Humane Mind, that the
cumber of sensible Objects, may, by Idea, be totally emptied from it, and
nothing remain but perfect Intelligence: How, according to that Tenent, can he
Affirm, That the Mind does admit Deception? If suitable to his common Notion,
not seldom Instanced by him, the Mind may be so notionally and wonderfully
Illuminated, that it cannot be without Certainty; because its perfect
Apprehension must be given from something more perfect, which is God: And no
Body can think otherwise, if the means, that God has Ordained by his Works, be
regardfully considered; On which account, it is not to be understood, how his
manner of Thought can have else any contiguity with our Reason, or Senses. And
which, I suppose, has been enough before Confuted. In his following Words he
endeavors to be plainer understood by granting, That in the Intellect is
Volition, as well as Imagination, which by its Impulse on the Humane Mind,
renders it erroneously obnoxious. But can it be consistent with the Notion, so
much applauded by him, of a perfect Idea of Truth essential, as he defines it,
to the Humane Mind, and notwithstanding that Perfection, to admit the
possibility of being Imposed on by the Will: Is, in effect, to acknowledge,
That there is no such perfect Determination in the Mind whereby to distinguish
Truth from Falsehood; or if there were, how can it be supposed, That the
Certainty of the Imagination, when filling of the Mind, would not subject the
Will to the reality of Truth conceived by it? Which to deny, were no less
absurd than to Assert, That the Soul, by its own consent, did Rebel against its
main Prerogative, and Renounce the highest Propriety of its Dominion: So that
no Notion of Truth, in a Natural Course, can have any stedfest Assurance in the
Mind, if liable to the Refractory Contradiction it may have from the Will:
Insomuch, That had he named the Notional Idea, he so much contends for, an
Irresistible Inspiration; he must have been more Divinely understood by his
Reader: By which he might have inferred, That by a zealous Contemplation of the
Mind, there would have been wanting no perfect Certainty or Conception, of all
Matters tending to Holy Religion and Life: Things very necessary, and
exceedingly conducing to Universal Satisfaction and Repose of the Soul, if such
an agreeable and unerrable Idea could manifestly have Issued from the mere
Result of Thought; without being beholding to any Intermediate Work, or Conduct
of Providence to sublimate the Speculation. But enough has been before
Inserted, in Opposition to the manner of Thinking, prescribed by his Pen; and
for which, as his main fund, he requires no more than that a Man should
Imagine, That there is something, in being, more Perfect then himself: All
which he assures might be accomplished by all Mankind, as a Gift, from above,
conferred on the Soul; did not the peremptory. Sway of the Will resist the
clear discernment of Truth Inherent in the Mind. For whose single and
unconfinable Perfections, notwithstanding he had averred them before, he soon
afterward acknowledges their Limitation in these Words. -- The Intellect,
(says he,) extends its preception but to few Things offered unto it.

What he would mean by Things offered unto it, unless actual Objects, is not to
be understood; neither does he signify how he would otherwise be apprehended
by the Epression; which can have no numerical, or specifical Construction,
except he had Nominated any real Thing or Object represented by the Imaginary
Faculty of the Mind. From whence it may be concluded, That, he does, in this
Place, in his own terms, however dissentaneous to what he had formerly
Asserted, enough concede, That there can be no other than a limited Idea to
Things consisting of Matter, Form, and Bodily Parts: It being no less Unnatural
than Impossible, That the Intellect should, at one Time, be conversant with
Objects of Sense, and at another, be wholly intent on mere Speculation without
them.

Yet he undertakes to Inform, How this unnatural repugnancy of Thought may pass
on the Authority of his Tenent; by Impeaching of the Humane Will, for Arbitrary
Compelling of the Mind to be Confused and Finite; whereas it would otherwise
distinguish by clear and distinct Certainty whatsoever was imagined by it.

And yet he could not but know that it is Inconsistent with the Essential
Method of Rational Understanding, to averr, That the Judiciary Part of the Mind
can be so compulsively managed, or straightened by the Will: Notwithstanding
that the contrary is far more Intelligible, in respect that there can be no
actual tendency of Thought, in the Soul of Man, but must have a necessary
Consent of the Will: It being absurd to Imagine, That a Man can Think of any
Thing without its Assent and Concurrence; which were no better Sense, than if
one could be said to Think, and not be a voluntary Thinker.

If duly considered, the Faculties by which the Understanding is completely
Executed; it is very demonstrable that the Mind is not more Annexed to the Will,
than furnished by the Memory; whose Office is to keep the main Records of the
Soul, and from their numerous Catalogue present such Memorials as are
occasionally proper to Attract the compliance of the Understanding and Will.
There being no real Thought on whatsoever Object employed, other than what has
been, in Substance, or Similitude, by the Memory precedently retained.

And therefore unwarrantably Asserted the Supposition of this Author, whereby
he would Infer the separate Actings of the Faculties of the Soul, or the
possibility of clear Perception without their Concurrence.

True it is, that Humane Understanding is too frequently Swayed, Impedited, and
Corrupted, by the impetuousness of the Will, as it conspires with the Appetite
and Senses, which by their plausible, and importunate Temptations, so prevail
on the Understanding, that its Rational Excellence is, in many Kinds debased,
as it allows their Sensual Admittance; but still no otherwise than as it
consents with the Will: And therefore not, truly inferred by this Author, that
the Intellect is so wildly guided, and imposed on by the Will, that it
absolutely resigns, or deserts its Rational Throne; or any clear Intelligence
that by the Gift of the Almighty is naturally Inherent in the Mind of Man: But
rather betrayed by the Treachery of the Will and Senses, to impare by its frail
compliance the requisite Intelligence and Prerogative that ought to be
inseparable from its Supreme Dominion.

Wherefore this Learned Monsieur, after he thoroughly labored the most concise
Criticisms of his Brain, by endeavoring to prove That the Faculty of clear,
and distinct Perception was Inherent in the Mind; He does notwithstanding
acknowledge, in diverse Passages of the Treatise I deal with, That the Mind
cannot so exert its Jurisdiction as not to be Perplexedly, or Confusedly
prevailed on by the Will: Which he fully Attributes to the Inveiglement of the
Understanding caused by the Conspiring of the Will with the Senses, and the
natural Freedom by which it Operates on the Intelligent Capacity of the Humane
Soul: Which is, in Substance, the complete Sense of several Particulars Written
by him; but most especially in his 38 Head, where he grants, That the
perspicuity of Discernment conferred on the Soul, by Divine Appointment is no
farther Absolute than as it meets with a voluntary Assent, by which it is
either made our perfect Apprehension, or on the contrary, evaded by the Actual
Freedom of the Will: For which he gives this Instance, in this manner
Embellished; The Will, (says he) together with the Senses, ought to complete
the Allegiance they owe to the Sovereignty of the Humane Intellect, as God's
select and natural Vicegerent over the Body and Members; which being frequently
violated by the irregular Conduct of the Will and prevalent Compliance it
obtains from the Appetite and Senses; the genuine Duty is renounced that ought
to be perfectly paid to the native Monarchy of the Mind; and instead thereof, a
Foreign and Sensual Usurpation raised by the confused Mobile of the Senses.

This Paraphrase may be Emphatically allowed on his Words; nor can it be
denied, That the excellent Faculty, with which the Understanding is imbued is
not by innumerable Depravations erroneously misguided by the proneness of the
Dispensation it gives to the Importunate Sensualities Incident to Humane
Constitutions: Which is very manifest in the different Qualifications and
Tempers of the Body and Mind; as by common Experience, some Individuals of
Mankind excel in Prudence and Moralities of Life the Dispositions of others.
Insomuch, that it may be questioned, Whether, or no, from a Natural Course of
Providence the different temperatures of Body and Mind do not proceed? And
therefore more prevalent, if not hardly to be Resisted.

All which, upon the Matter, is precedently acknowledged by himself, where he
confesses, That notwithstanding the Soul of Man is Enlightened by God, with
clear Perception, it is liable to the depraved Conduct of the Will and Senses.
But how he can exempt the Understanding from such a contiguous Depravation, and
require its separate Intelligence; yet grant, as he does, That the Humane Body
and Soul are Conjoined and Exist, as all Things do, by the Ordination of God;
though no one Body and Soul but operatively different from others, and no less
various than Corporeal Features are ocularly distinguished. So that the Soul,
though given by God, has no absolute assurance of unerrable Perfection;
notwithstanding that, according to his Doctrine, it cannot be destitute of
perfect Discernment tending to all requisite Certainty in whatsoever it
Determines.

But had he been asked, Why every Thinking Man who grants that he Exists, and
all Things else, by the admirable Dispensation of the Omnipotent, should not be
proportionably completed by his Understanding and Senses, whereby there might
result an unerrable Perception or Notion of Things evident from such as are
confusedly understood? The Quere would doubtless pose as Learned a Thinker as
was this Author. As also, if supposed such a positive Certainty in Humane
Understanding, as he undertakes to Assert, Why it should be thought to be so
insufficient a Gift of God, that it should not at all Times be able to
overrule, or not absolutely suppress the Imperfect Assaults and erroneous
Temptations of the Will and Senses?

Notwithstanding that Experience assures, That there is no Universal Humane
Perfection, either known or practiced: And as certain it is, That he would not
have presented the World with so many Inventions of his Brain, whereby to
explain the Principles he Avowes; if he had thought, That every Man's
Intelligence, or Capacity of Thinking, had been evident, or not wanted the
Instructions of his Pen: It being absurd to conceive, That the Soul should be
sufficiently Capacitated from God, to distinguish betwixt certain and uncertain
Cogitations, and want any Advertisement from Man more Methodically to advantage
its Intelligent Faculty: Of which, he amply concedes, That no Man can be
assured of its perspicuous Execution, by reason of the powerful Reluctance and
Impediment it receives from the Will and Senses.

To as little purpose does he offer his Distinction betwixt the Act of Volition
and the Assent to be deceived, that proceeds from the Inclination that the
Understanding has to be swayed by the Senses: But how any Man can be said to
Assent without the voluntary Freedom and Concurrence of his Will; is more like
a Contradiction than rationally to be Apprehended. And must, in his own Phrase,
tend to the defeating of the Amplitude of Knowledge bestowed by God on the
Humane Mind, if rendered conditional, or subordinate to our voluntary
Compliance.

By which manner of Discussions, he has confusedly Involved the Serenity he
would allye to his Principles, in order to the unerrable Perception Attributed
by him, to the Intellectual Faculty. Yet after several Passages of this Nature,
he seems to Recant them in his 43 Particular, where he peremptorily Affirms,
That it is as impossible to the mistaken, if we yield our Assent to such Things
as we clearly understand, as to believe, That God is a Deceiver.

If this Tenent were true, the Brain of every Man would, as it were by Divine
Decree, be filled with Certainties: But how assured of this Infallible
Discernment; the Answer that must be given, from the Principle of Descartes,
is, by clearly distinguishing of Things by the perspicuous Faculty of the
Humane Intellect: Because, (says he) it rarely happens, That any Man will
yield his spontaneous Aslent to any Thing of which he has not a veritable
assurance from his Understanding: But if duly considered how numerously the
World is Replenished with Mankind, of all Ages and Complexions, that give up
their Assents to the Dictates of others, as they conceive them to be more
Intelligible than themselves; and yet, in so doing, however they err, may not
be less confident of direct Perception than any of their Tutors.

To be plain, were there such an absolute Gift conferred on the Soul by Divine
Appointment; it is not to be denied, That Men, Women and Children, would be
equally Gifted, and accordingly distinguish by the undeniable Clearness of
their Intellects, all Notions of Things certainly to be apprehended, or
dubiously to be rejected: Because God, as he Affirms, Has endued the Soul with
a separate Jurisdiction, and perfect Determination without the Assistance or
Concurrence of the Will and Senses; and therefore as a complete Donative from
Above, might have a ripe Discernment before the Bodily Parts grow to Perfection.

And if so, there is more Reason to expect, That it should Actuate, alike
perspicuously, the Intellectual Faculty in the Youth, Age, and Sexes of
Mankind, than that they should be differently Judicious, or disagreeably
subject to the Imbecillities of their Natural Compositions, as they appear to
common Observation: Yet this Conclusion has as near a Resemblance to his
Premises as Grass to Grass.

This Reflection may well have a pertinent Allowance; if considered with what
confidence he Averrs, That God has so disposed the Soul in the Body of Man,
that it can exactly distinguish of Truth and Falsehood in every Consideration:
Whereas the contrary is rather manifest as our Corporeal Existencies are
providentially sustained: By which it appears, that, in Course of Nature, the
Life is no otherwise Ensouled in the Body, than as it is Complicated with the
Affections and Tinctures of the Senses: And from whence the Act^ons of the Mind
suitably Exert their Operations: And this is very apparent from the Natural
Concourse of Elementary Ingredients that mix with our Dispositions and
Moralities of Life. So that it is not to be doubted, That by a Natural Conduct,
and Capacity appropriated to their Bodily Constitutions, some Men are more
Scientifically Intelligent, Discreet, and Temperate than others: As contrarily,
the vast Numbers of Inconsiderate, Imprudent Idiots, and Frantic Persons in
several Kinds, are every where Evident; which can have no other Cause than
Issuing from the Irresistible Sourse of their Corporeal Tempers, together with
the Tides of Commotion and Disturbance, on which the Soul, as on so many
Impetuous Billows, is more or less perpetually Fluctuated. Wherefore it is not a
little bold in this Author, who peremptorily Affirms, That there is a clear and
distinct Perception, on all Accounts, Resident in the Understanding, if as he
requires, the Prejudices we have from our Constitutions, and Bodily
Imperfections were distinctly avoided by separating the Intelligence of the
Mind from all Intermixture of the Senses; as a Faculty, conferred by God, on
the Humane Intellect: Which to deny, according to his Notion, were all one as
to term God a Deceiver. I called this his Tenent bold before, and I may add to
it Presumption, and Ignorance, beyond expectation in so Learned a Writer: Might
he not as well have Affirmed? that a Man can have an unerrable Prospect and
Conception of the manner of the Existence of the Omnipotent, as also of the
Original Being of the Universe, together with Mankind, and every Individual
Animal and Thing within its total Extent; had there been such a Divine Gift
bestowed on the Intellectual Faculty: And must have been far more Infallibly
manifest in the Uniting of Religion tending to the Worship of God; which
doubtless, as the most necessary Intelligence, would have been Conferred by the
Almighty, whereby he might be more unanimously Adored by all Mankind. But this
is not so Decreed by God, nor in the Power of Man to accomplish by Resisting,
as he Insinuates, the Prejudices and Incapacities incident to our Innate
Tempers of Body and Mind. Not that I deny, that there is a constant visible
Conviction palpably discernable in the Works of the Almighty, by which the
total World is Miraculously Constituted; from whence may be fully concluded,
without any help of the Method, or Idea of Thought delivered by Descartes;
that God does Exist, and is to be Worshipped: And he that otherwise Inferrs must
Repine against the Measures of Knowledge Providentially Ordained; which were
all one with the Incongruous and Exorbitantly absurd Assertion of this Author,
That implies a Deceptiom in God, if, in effect, he did not deceive the
determined Progression of his Providence, in its Natural Conduct and Operation;
by dispensing to All Mankind an unerrable Apprehension of every Truth, that
ought to be most requisitely understood, however disproportioned to the Tempers
of Mind and Body; or experimentally repugnant to the Ordained Course of Nature,
differently manifest in the Faculties of the Soul, Science, and Gifts; as they
are variously specified and proportioned in Humane Persons. Not that the
Intellectual Capacity is thereby so generally or naturally Disproportioned as
not palpably to discern all requisite Truths expanded in the Miraculous Works
of the Omnipotent; which otherwise had been Impertinently exposed to the
sensible Conviction of our Understanding: Insomuch, that every vulgar Sense, if
not Slothful, or Regardless, or not naturally deprived of their Intellectual
Faculty, or not made so Happy as to be induced by proper Instruction, and
Teaching; cannot but acknowledge from the Facts and Conduct of Providence, that
they are the Effects of an Infinite Cause; and consequently no other than so
many Infallible Convictions that the Deity does Exist, and ought to be Adored.

And whosoever Affirms to the contrary, does in effect Arraign Providence, or
term it a Deceiver, together with such visible Wonders as are Externally
manifest, and whereby we receive sensible Apprehension of the Being of a God,
though Invisible to our Eyes.

Wherefore the Tenent of this Author, That there is a Power in the Mind of Man
to distinguish, by mere Idea, Truth from Falsehood, must be a very Imperfect
Notion; there being nothing more difficult, if not Impossible, than for the
Humane Soul to be so far Disrobed of its habitual Impediments, the Senses; as
clearly to discern at all Times, the most requisite Truths: Because, if at any
one time the Idea of the Mind, as he defines it, be less Perfect than at
another; it is impossible for any Man, by that manner of Speculation, to be
secure, That he does not Erroneously Contemplate, by not effectually separating
the Purity of mere Imagination from all the Defects Incident to Humane Nature.

Notwithstanding, if you will rely upon the Notion of Descartes, he tells you,
That God were a Deceiver, unless the Soul of Man, given from above, were not,
by Executing his Manner of Idea, an Infallible Discerner of Truth from Error.
Which he is no more able to prove, than if he had undertaken to convince the
World, That by Imagination the Soul may discharge it self from its
Co-habitation with the Senses; or that in a Notional Conception both Parts of a
Contradiction may be determined true: Which is the same with his peremptory
Contradiction of the open and powerful Truth of God's Existence, manifest in
the Being of the Universe, and all it contains, by Affirming, That it is
possible, by mere Thinking to apprehend that there is a Deity; without the
wonderful Objects and Means of Providence evidently conveyed to the Eyes of our
Reason and Senses.

True it is, That the Intelligible Faculty has a fervent and Indefatigable
Desire of apprehending in the most Spiritual and divinest Conception, such
Things as might sublimely accomplish the Understanding: Which restless
Endeavor in the Humane Soul is no less apparent than endlessly continued in
various Searches and Inquisitions whereby to Determine, on the most
considerable Accounts, whatsoever, the divided Tenants and Notions of Men would
most satisfactorily Reconcile.

But such is the Infelicity of the Soul, that as it is Incumbered or Clogged
with the Senses; it cannot, by its best Conceptions, be absolutely divided from
them; and therefore incapable of acquiescing in agreeable Concord, otherwise
than as the Soul is United with them in the most sensible and familiar way of
Conviction.

Had Descartes been asked Whether or no it was not far more facile to
Demonstrate the Geometrical Measure of so many Acres of Land, than
Mathematically to Compute the Immense Distance, from us, of the Sphere of the
fixed Stars? He would soonhave granted, That an Account of the Former was much
easier to be performed than of the Latter. How much more remote, from the most
accurate Prospects of our Understanding, are the Infinite Attributes of the
Omnipotent! Or not possibly to be discerned by any Idea of Mind, otherwise than
as they are effectually Published, to our Useful and Holy Admiration, in the
Miraculous and Immense Consistency of the Total World.

The next considerable Undertaking of this Author is, briefly to deliver such
Notions of which All our Thoughts are most especially produced or compounded:
And how by them are to be distinguished such as are Clear, from others Obscure,
or by which we are deceived.

To which purpose his main Maxim in his 48 Particular, he thus expresses, --
Whatsoever they are (says he,) that Relate to our Perception, are to be
considered as Things, or as certain Affections of Things, or as eternal
Verities having no Existence without our Cogitation. Of those that are to be
considered as Things, the most general are to be comprehended by the
Denominations of Substance, Duration, Order, Number and the like, as they may
be understood to appertain to All other Things. And these he annexeth unto two
Generalities, the One of which he defines, in reference to Things as they are
only conceived by Thought of the Mind, or, as he terms them, wholly belonging
to a thinking Substance; the Other, as it respects Materiality, or Body: But
Perception, Volition, with all their Modalities, he refers to what, he calls
the Substance of Thinking, either as to Magnitude, or Extension; as they may be
considered in Length, Breadth, Height, Figure and Motion; Situation,
Divisibility, and the like. Other Things there are which by experience we find,
that do neither solely appertain to the Mind, nor to the Body; and which
proceed from the strict Intimacy and Union that the Mind has with the Body; as
the Diversities of our Appetites and Passions, which have no Consistence with
sole Cogitation.

And this is the full Sense, of the Place I treat on, as near as his Words can
be properly Englished.

The first Remark that ought to be Judiciously tendered on this Part of his
Treatise, is, Whether according to sound Reason, or essential Rules of
Philosophy, he has duly defined what he calls Substantial Thinking, by the
Epithet he gives it, appropriated to the Mind?

But if to a Thinking Substance be annexed, according to him, the Essence or
Propriety of Thought; the Quere may be, How any Thing that is Substantial can
be genuinely supposed to Employ Thought, otherwise than on something that is
also Substantial? And if so, why not likewise Corporeal? Except he could
sensibly make it appear, That Substance can be separated from Corporeal
Existence: Which he has not been able to Explicate, notwithstanding that he has
attempted to do it with the most Refined Method of his Philosophical Science;
as may be seen in this Tract of his, which has occasioned my Remarks, and I
doubt not, in the Sense of a Judicious Reader, precedently by me disproved.

But to go with him as far as his Assertions require; and next suppose, That
the Humane Soul is a Substance; but in what manner Substantial, is not Defined
by this Author, in any Kind, either as Incorporeal, suitable to the Dialect of
the Schools; or otherwise as the Rational, Sensitive and Vegetative Soul are in
the Body entirely United.

The Proof that he offers for giving to it a Substantial Denomination is
grounded on the Proprieties or Qualities, he annexeth to it: Because whatsoever
is not something can neither have those nor any other Attributes: All which in
his 13 Particular, he farther undertakes to Explain; and where he expresses. --
That Substance is not to be understood but as it Relates to some Attribute or
other, which chiefly declare its Nature and Essence; and to which they
appertain: Adding, That as Length, Breadth and Depth, constitute the Nature of
Body; so by Thought is Constituted the Nature of Substantial Thinking. From
whence he concludes, That whatsoever can be Attributed to Body presupposes
Extension, or the manner only of something Extended; but what are to be found
in the Mind, are so many various Modalities of Cogitation. The Example he gives
is, That Corporeal Figure cannot be understood but in the Thing that is
Extended; nor Motion but in whatsoever is moved; contrarily, Extension may be
understood, by the Mind, without either Figure, or Motion.

This Paragraph, though written by the Pen of Descartes, cannot have so
favorable an Interpretation as might render it Congruous to common
Understanding.

That the Rational Soul may be Substantial is not Philosophically to be denied:
Nor so Defined does it lessen the possibility it has of being Immortal; because
equally in the Power of the Almighty to give the Souls of all Mankind
Immortality, together with the completing of the Dust of rotten Carcasses,
according to the Doctrine of the Resurrection, unto the same Bodies they
Animated in Lifetime, and to Restore to them, each Individual Soul that was
precedently theirs.

But to Affirm, with this Author, That mere Cogitation, is a Substance of it
self in the Humane Intellect, is a very Irrational Conjecture: For how can
Thought have any Similitude with Sense, but as thereby it may be Imagined to
Relate to some sensible Object? Nor can it Actuate in any other Kind, if the
Soul be Substantial; it being Impossible, That Substantial Cogitation, whatever
Phrase he gives it, can, otherwise, be Impioyed than on something that must
Assimilate its own Nature: And that must be either Consistent of Bodily Parts,
or of Substance equivalent to it. Nor is it possible to apprehend, how any
Thing called Substance can be distinguished from what is quantitively
Corporeal; or not have suitable Attributes, in every Consideration. So that his
Idea of a mere Thinking Substance, in the Soul of Man, can have no significant
Congruity with Thought: It being totally Irrational to suppose, That any
deliberate Conception of the Mind should be fixed on no Object.

Should a Man Contemplate on France, or Holland, who had never been personally
in either of those Countries; he must distinguish, as he had received
Information, or Read of them, the Nature and Situation of those Regions,
together with such necessary Considerations as were requisite for him to
understand; or he could not have any Intelligible Apprehension of any of those
Places: So that the Position of this Author, That there is in the Soul such an
abstracted manner of Cogitation, or Threadbare way of Thought, which by his
Notion, is Defined a Thinking Substance; were no other than to allow the Soul a
Substantial Nature, but a very Impertinent or Idle Being in the Body: Or which
is much the same, to be capacitated to Think, though without Cogitation of any
Thing besides it self: Yet on this separate way of Thought, depends the whole
Structure of his Idea, whereby he would prompt the Intellect to distinguish
betwixt Thoughts Confused, or such as Intrigue with the Senses, from those that
have a sole and pure Residence in the Mind.

As frivolous, if duly Examined, are the Modalities of mere Cogitation
delivered by him, where he Intimates, That whatsoever can be Corporeally
applied, must be understood to have Extension and Bodily Parts; and must
therefore Relate, in one Kind or other, to the Thing moved or extended. And is
it possible to Imagine, That the Soul should be endued with Speculative
Thinking, yet unperceptible of any proper Object to entertain its sensible
Contemplation? All which is required by Descartes, who positively Affirms,
That Extension may be understood by the Mind, without Figure, or Motion: By
which he would imply, That clear Cogitation may be apprehended without
Application to any Imagined Thing or Conception by the Sense, That it is really
such: Which Words of his, if rightly considered, imply a very singular
Contradiction; it not being in the Power of Thought exactly to Judge of any
Thing but as it appears in Extension, Figure, or, if moved, in Motion: How else
can any of these Particulars be Mathematically computed; which could not but be
known to so great a Geometrician as was this Author?

In his 14 Particular, he confidently enough offers to Explain his most
sublimated Notion of Thinking, in these Words, -- It is very facile, (says he)
to distinguish betwixt two clear and distinct Ideas; the One relating to a
cogitative Created Substance, the Other to a Corporeal Substance; if
distinction be made of all Attributes of Cogitation, from those of Extension:
And thus he supposes, That a Man may have a perspicuous and distinct Idea of an
uncreated and independent Thinking Substance, by which he means God. But should
I Interpret, according to him, the Deity to be a Thinking Substance; I must
also Imagine the Deity of such a Substance as may be comprehended by sensible
Cogitation: And next, notwithstanding all the Refined Caution given by
Descartes; I can have no other than a Corporeal Notion of God, or in
Resemblance to Bodily Substance; because, in any other Consideration, it were
Incompatible with the Humane Soul, as it Acts its Cognition by the aid of the
Senses.

I may therefore well admire, Why he Defines the Deity an Uncreated Substance,
and not Explicate to his Reader what Kind of Substance he intends by the
Definition: Which can be no otherwise Interpreted than that he took care to
avoid the Critical Objection, or Absurdity, in the Opinion of not a few
Eruditely accomplished; by not supposing, That there may be such an Existence
that can be truly Denominated both Incorporeal and Substantial: By reason that
Matter and Form, Extension, and Parts, are the Proprieties of Substance, as it
can be conceived by Thought; and whatsoever is said to be Incorporeal can have
none of those Attributes; because nothing but Body is capable of them.

Wherefore it is no less naturally Improper to Assert the Being of an
Incorporeal Substance, than to Affirm, That there may be such a Thing as body,
without Body; which how far repugnant to the common Dictates of Reason and
Sense, is obvious to every Man's Understanding. And which could not but be
foreseen by Descartes, who, to avoid that grand Reflection, covers his Idea of
God with the general Notion of an Uncreated Substance; notwithstanding that it
is equally Impossible to Imagine a Substantial Existence, however it came to
pass; without the Qualifications of Body, before mentioned. Because the Term
given by him, of Substance Uncreated, takes nothing from any Corporeal
Propriety that might appertain to it. Insomuch, That whether Substance be
deemed Created, or Uncreated, it may be Denominated Corporeal, for ought that,
by this Author, is proved to the contrary: Who, by his Undertaking to call the
Soul of Man a separate Thinking Substance, though confined to the Body, and
perfectly Empowered to distinguish, after his Method, Truth from Falsehood;
does in effect appropriate to God, whom he supposes to have committed that
Animated Substance into the Body of Man; no other difference of Epithet than by
denominating the Deity an Uncreated Substance: The grossness of which Tenent,
if uncensur'd, were enough to Infect the Brain of Man; by Insinuating, That
neither the Almighty, or any Humane Individual, with whatsoever may be named
Animal, or Vegetal, is other than Corporeally Existing: The Reasons already
given being of sufficient Validity to Convict Mankind, That there can be no
evident Distinction made, betwixt the Word Substance and Body.

How much more Judiciously safe, had it then been, for the Learned Descartes,
had he Asserted the Infinite Consistence of the Omnipotent, rather by the
Epithet of Incomprehensible Admiration; than to have delivered, its more than
wonderful Being, by the Philosophical Notion of something substantially
Existing? Because the Word Substance takes from the Immense Nature of the
Almighty; as it may relate to Body and Commensurable Parts, whereby he has
exposed it, to no small contest; for Reasons already Inserted: It being a far
surer Aphorism to define what the Deity is not, than by any Term of Science to
express what it is, or any clear Idea of its Miraculous Being.

In his next Head, which is the 55 of his Discussions, he farther dilates on
his Thesis of mere Cogitation; as he would separate it from all Corporeal or
sensible Concomitancy: And this he attempts to Explain, by Affirming, That
Duration, Order, and Number, may be distinguished without annexing of them to
any conceived Substance. Which if duly considered, are but so many
Insignificant Varations of his former Positions: For how can any Corporeal
Thing be said, perfectly to endure, or to have Orderly, or Numerical Being;
unless the Substance, or Body, to which they appertain, be also understood in
every of these Considerations?

Can it be properly Justified, That any quantitive Thing is to be apprehended
as to the time of its continuing such; but as there may be perceptibly deduced
from it, a real Intelligence why it so long in that manner Remained, or was
Altered, or Changed into another?

Is It possible to perceive the Flame of a Candle extinguished, and not at the
same time Discern, That the Matter that fed the Flame is alterable with it? Yes
certainly, did it burn by Hours or Minutes accounted from a Watch or Dial.

And is it not plainly manifest, by the precedent Example, that Duration,
Order, and Number, essentially appertain to the entire Consistency, or
Alterative Nature and Qualification of the Matter unto which they belong?

A Tree may be older than I can Compute, though not to the Man who, in past time,
did plant it: But if its Decay, or Withering, in any of its Parts, be visible
to me: I may be able to account the Day or Season in which I perceived it did
Alter. Wherefore to conclude, as does this Author, That Duration, Order, and
Number, are but the Modalities of Substance, is a very fantastical Conceit;
since they must have an Inseparable Tendency, more or less, by their Co-herent
Attributes, to the Perfection, or Imperfection of whatsoever does Exist.

If a Sixpence be broken into two Parts, there will remain in either of those
Pieces, a different Proportion in Number, Orderly Figure, and Duration, than
when it was whole. And though this is but an Artificial Instance, as it may have
Reference to any Thing broken or severed; it is not impossible that, by Time,
might naturally be produced the same Effect; because whatsoever does
Corporeally subsist, must be subject to Alteration in all its Capacities.

So that what he simply calls the Modalities of Being, is indeed Essential to
Substance and its Bodily Parts; or no other than necessitated Change, sooner or
later, of all Individual Things that are extant to Humane Observation. The
Stars that Illustrate, as the most Refined Jewels of Illumination, the
Firmament above, and least apprehended, by Thought, to vary in any of their
Proprieties; cannot be certainly exempted from Present or Future Alteration;
either as they have, or may vary in their Order, Influence, Motion, or what
besides may be Incident to their Essence and Nature.

How Insignificantly then is argued by this Author, That neither Order, Number,
or Continuation, in any Thing that Exists, is otherwise to be understood, than
as so many Modalities of Substance? Though to every Man's Reason there can be no
Variation or Change in any of These, but there must be also a substantial
Alteration in whatsoever may be called Body, or Substance.

In his 56 Particular he undertakes to make out what he farther means by the
Modalities he gives to Things; which he grants, In some respects, may be
Interpreted Attributes, or Qualities; and as Substance may be said to be
Affected or Varied by them not Improperly called Modalities: But most
generally, he allows them, when considered as Inherent in Substance, the Terms
of Attributes.

And what would he infer from this puzzle of Words, and perplexing of Terms,
otherwise than he has precedently mentioned? For if Modalities, Qualities, and
Attributes, may be applied to Substance in all its Capacities, Proprieties, and
possible Variations; how is he able to make good his former Assertion, where he
denominates them the mere Modalities of Cogitation? So that whatsoever
Alteration is either Naturally, or Essentially Incident to Substance, is no
farther Real, in the Judgment of Descartes, than what may have the empty
Notion of Modality; though both in substance and manner of Being, the Thing does
not continue the same as it was before: Which is a perfect Contradiction to
sensible Evidence, if duly apprehended the precedent Instances; which, as I
conceive, are amply satisfactory.

There yet remains a Part of this Head that may well be Interpreted somewhat
Crazy. Notwithstanding that he undertakes to explicate the soundness of its
Importance as he intends: To which purpose his Expression stands briefly thus,
-- In God, (says he) cannot be any Modalities or Qualities, but only
Attributes; because in him, there can be no Variation: And no less Excellency
of Subsistence, does he appropriate to Things Created; if no different
Modalities, or Diversity of Existence and Duration is to be found in them; and
consequently exempts from thom all Qualifications and Modalities, and instead
of those, he Dignifies their Being by the Name of Attributes annexed to their
Natures.

If this Doctrine could be verified, there might be no distinction betwixt the
Substance of God, as Defined by this Author, and any other Thing of whose
Existence and Duration we have no variable Prospect: Of which the Universe, for
ought can be proved to the contrary, affords many. And who can doubt, but it
may be so Affirmed, not only of Stars, that have unchangeable Magnitudes above
us; but also of the most Durable Rocks of Adamant, which by their Permanency
and lasting Continuance, admit of no certain Computation, whereby may be
Implied their Temporary Alteration, or Change? And it is no wonder, if with the
Modern Philosophical Mine, pretendedly discovered by this Author, there be
discerned some Rubbish amongst the Diamonds which he endeavors to polish by
his Brain.

For what is more gross, than to render, as he does, the Attributes of an
Uncreated Substance, or of God, the same with Created; and next to grant, That
there is no other Distinction betwixt Substance and Substance but as they
differ in Attributes; which if true, there could be no exact distinguishing of
Uncreated, and Created Existence: By reason that a Corporeal Being might,
according to his Affirmation, have the same Attributes. Nor is there any
Discussion more Philosophically difficult, than to explicate, how Substance and
Body may be differently apprehended by any Intelligible Distinction of Science:
But whosoever will rely upon the Opinion of Descartes, must wipe out of the
Essence of his Intellect all actual Perception of Objects represented by the
Senses; and next be so far reconciled to his Idea, as to Denominate the Humane
Soul a peculiar Substance committed to the Body by God, but nothing allied to
Corporeal Nature; though naturally actuating the Body of Man: As if it were no
Contradiction to determine, That Substance, not to be understood Body, can
operate on Body. To evade which obvious Objection, he frequently labors, as
may be observed by the Remarks precedently made on his Treatise, to sublimate
his conceived Idea, by supposing, That the Faculty of separate Thought was so
disposed by God as a perfect Thinking Substance Inherent in the Mind: To which,
as a Gift of Perfection, he Imputes unerrable Conception; asking no other
Conditions, whereby to remove the Misapprehensions and Frailties of Thought,
than very considerative and discreet Thinking: Which is the utmost performance
that can be rationally attained by any Contemplative Act; but not with that
complete Assurance required by him, whereby Thought may arrive to such a
Veritable Certainty, That it may not at all be Complicated with the Senses; or
beholding to them for any Object of their Conveyance to the Judgment Seat of
the Understanding: Which is no less Inconsistent with Humane Capacity, than to
believe with Descartes, That it is possible so to Discipline the Mind, as to
be one of his Thinking Proselytes: Though not able to Demonstrate, That there is
any sensible Certainty in that speculative Mode of Thought, which by a main
Artifice of his Brain he endeavors to promote.

Nor less discrepant from the soundest Opinion grounded on Divine and
Philosophical Science, is the Denomination he gives to the Deity, which he
defines, an Uncreated Thinking Substance; or as he would intend, the Almighty
an eternal Thinker: Which is very like a Contradiction in Terms: It being
impossible to allow to Thought, by common Acceptance, other than a temporary
Attribute; or not to be otherwise Defined than Exerted in Past, or Present
Time: Which, if applied to God, were all one as to Impute to the Deity a
temporary Thought; and must Imyly Solicitude and Care suitable to the Nature of
Contemplating on something to be Improved or Perfected by Thinking, that was
not before exactly considered: Which how far destructive to the Attribute of
Omnipotent Perfection, I suppose was not duly weighed, by this Author, when he
penned this Paragraph. I find a Conceit in Plato much more passable, than what
is written by Descartes, who being asked, What God did? His answer was, That
the Deity exercised Geometry. On which, the Learned Gassendus, has this
Comment, That Geometry as it Relates either to Contemplation, or Action, may
not be incongruously understood of God; as he may be said to Contemplate, and
chiefly consider himself in that Act, Emphatically expressed, in the Being
given by the Omnipotent to the Universe; together with the proportional
Conservation it has from Supreme Power and Conduct.

Which is a better Exposition than that of a thoughtful Deity, delivered by
this French Philosopher; who makes no such sublime Distinction betwixt an
Uncreated and Created thinking Substance, as does in any kind Attribute to God,
what he means by Uncreated Thinking, or how, or in what manner to be
apprehended; as it may be applied to the Deity: So that according to the
Latitude of this Author's Idea of Thinking; perfect Thought may be Inherently
Attributed to the Humane Mind, no less than to the Almighty; with this only
difference, That Man is not an Original but a Created Thinker: And it is as
possible, if granted, as this Writer determines, That perfect Thought, bestowed
on the Soul by God, may be filled with Perfection, as it solely resides in the
Intellect, no less Created than if it had been eternally such.

To conclude, it is far more congruous to the Propriety of the Diety, if said,
That he has for ever determined, than by any Notion Affirmed a Thinker: It
being not to be denied, That Thought can have other Construction but as
Implied, by its Past, Present, or Future Contemplation on something in Being:
Which cannot be an Object of Omnipotent Thinking; because nothing could really
Exist that was not, by him, so foreseen and Established.

Whereas Humane Reasoning must necessarily proceed from Principles deduced from
apposite Conclusions gradually made and depending on Antecedents and
Consequents of Proof in every Consideration: Which can have no resemblance to
the Science of God; whose perfect Knowledge is perpetually the same: And
therefore admits of no successive Degrees, or Qualifications, tending to the
Method of Argumentative Confirmation.

In his 60 Particular he attempts to surprise his Reader, but how Improperly
may be gathered from the Expression he delivers in these Words, -- Whosoever
(says he) does acknowledge, That God could make us certainly Intelligent of
whatsoever we may distinctly Apprehend; must, for Example, grant, That we may
have an Idea of Substance extended, or Corporeal; although we do not, as yet,
assuredly know that any such Thing does really Exist; though certain of the
possibility of its Existence.

And I may well Reply, That it is as far from my expectation to find in
Descartes, so weak an Argument, in order to the Grandeur of the Matter, he
would prove; by his Affirming, That we can have no absolute Assurance, unless
the Intellect be immediately Empowered by God, that Bodily Substance and
Extension have other than a possibility of being such: Which has so very
opposite a disparity to natural and sensible Conviction, that it appears no
less Irrational, than if he had undertaken to Argue Mankind into the Belief,
That it is possible to have Senses and yet be destitute of their Use.

Can a Man live and not be sensible, That Substance, in its Bodily
signification, has a proper Being? Or can he feel, and eat the Food that
nourishes his Corporeal Composition, and not be Knowing, otherwise than by mere
Cogitation, that he subsists by it, or that there is any such Thing, but in
possibility Existing? Yet so determined, by the Dictates of this Author,
however Contradictory to common Sense; or as Unsound, in his Way of Reasoning,
as if he had declared, That a Man might have Corporeal Life, but be dead as to
all Bodily Consideration; whilst by sole Ccogitation in the Mind, he may have
only a living Notion of the possibility of the Being of Substance and Body; as
they may be distinguished by their natural Capacities.

Which Opinion of his he would Confirm, as he presumes, with no greater
difficulty, Than as any Man may judge that he is a real Thinker, and by that
Thought exclude from himself all other Substance, either Thinking or Extended.
On which Supposition or Consistency of Thought, as he intends it, he certainly
concludes, That every Man may distinguish himself, not only from every Thinking
Substance, but also from all others of Corporeal Denomination.

Had a Poet been Author of this Conceit, he had not farther surpassed the
Excesses of Fiction, than this French Writer has done by the liberty he allows
to his Invention, deviated from Principles of Reason and Philosophy: For what
is more preposterous to Both, than to conclude as he does, That it is possible
for a Thinking Man to separate himself, by mere Thought, from the substantial
Similitude he has to all others of Humane Nature; as also from whatsoever can
be said Corporeally to Exist. And may not the same Person by as good
consequence Determine, That he is a Thinker in Body, without being sensible,
that any Bodily Life, Composition, or Parts, appertain to him? Which requires
no plainer Confutation than what has been already observed on Passages of this
Author, precedently tending to the same purpose; as may be discerned by
whomsoever shall heedfully inspect these Papers.

All which, in effect, is conceded by himself, before he comes to a Period of
the Head I Treat of; where he thus Expresses. -- That although we suppose, That
God has so strictly Joined to the Cogitative Substance other Corporeal
Substance, that they cannot be more firmly Connected; and from their
Conjunction Constituted their Union: Notwithstanding they may remain absolutely
distinct, because God may reserve a Power to separate their Beings, though
Corporeally Enclosed: Or to confer Conservation on both as United, or
separated; however they participate, by Existence, with the Extent of the Body.

These words, in Sum, can have no other Signification than what may be
conster'd a Distinction without an apparent Difference, and therefore Logically
Unintelligible; there being no Notion more perplexed than his manner of Uniting
Substance to Substance, in a Corporeal Figure, and yet expect, that they ought
to be requisitely distinguished.

The Reason he gives in Sum, is, That it may be so Ordained by God, That
whatsoever are Conjoined by him takes not from his Power to disunite their
Conjunction, by capacitating their Separation; or as the Soul may singly Act
without any Assistance or Concurrence of the Senses appropriated to the Body.

If this be the best Argument that he can Allege, by which he would heighten
the Notion, so much Celebrated by him, of the Minds operating by a distinct and
clear Idea from all Corporeal Concomitancy; it is more than Intricately, in
this Place, urged by him; who grants the firm Union, Constitated by God, of
Soul and Body; yet will needs Imagine; that their Separation is also determined
by God: And thus, by Descartes, the Act of God is rendered contradictory to it
selt.

B^ now does he undertake to Explain his Proposition? Why verily, by no better
Assurance than that it is possible for the Almighty so to dispose the Humane
Mind, that it may operate divided from the Body and sensible Parts; though
naturally United to all of them: Which, in effect, does annex Contradiction to
the Act of God; it being palpably evident, That the Understanding Faculty does
actuate its Intelligence with the Concurrence of the Senses: But no such
manifest Assurance, that by any separate Power of the Mind the same can be
Effected. Let a Man Imagine, by his utmost Force of mere Thought, That by the
Speculative Act of the Mind, is represented the Shape, Proportion, Likeness,
and Color, of any Object, whether it be Moving, Standing, or Lying; it is not
in his Power so perfectly to discern all their several Proprieties, as if they
were visibly perceived by him, and considered as proper Objects to entertain
all other requisite Parts of his Senses: But very Impossible to Contemplate, of
any of these, by any separate Act of the Understanding distinct from Sensation:
Because there could be no Idea or Notion of such Things that had never been
conveyed to the Intellect by the consent of the Senses; as by Seeing, Feeling,
Smelling, Tasting and Hearing, are occasionally completed the useful
Appurtenances to the Humane Intellect: Wherefore it might be well admired, Why
the useage of Eyes, Hands, and Ears, with other of the Senses, should be
naturally Incident to the Bodily Parts and Composition of Man; if the Mind
could solely be perfectly apprehensive without them? And doubtless these
Excellent Gifts had been Insignificantly conferred on Mankind; if Thought,
abstracted from Sensation, might be alone exactly apprehensive. Nor can
sufficient Reason be given, Why the Mind should not have been solely bestowed,
however Ordained to Exist; if by its single Intelligence it could have
performed the diverse Operations, and Actual Capacities that are jointly Exerted
by the Soul and Senses?

It Is not to be denied that the Existence of the Mind, unconfined to Body, had
been as easily accomplished by Providence, had it been so determined, as it is
now Resident with the Society of the Senses: And questionless, if so
established, had, exalted Humane Felicity to a paramount degree: Nothing
tending more to the detriment of Mankind, than the complicated and prone
Inveiglement of the Soul by the Allurement of the Senses: So that could the
Mind have been exempted from Corporeal Conjunction, it had certainly, by a
glorious Act of Providence, been discharged from its Bodily Confinement;
together with the exorbitant, and wicked Temptations, it receives from the
Appetites and Senses. But this being repugnant to its Decreed, and natural
Station in the Body of Man; no room is to be found there for the Idea of
Descartes, by which he does incompatibly infer, That the Humane Soul is of a
distinct Substance, though Co-herent to the Body of Man, and actually concomitant
with Corporeal Operations.

In his 64 Particular, he farther attempts to Explain what he would mean by his
Definition of a distinct Thinking Substance; his Allegation is, That Cogitation
and Extension may be understood as one and the same Mind may have diversity of
Thoughts; or as one and the same Body, retaining its own Quantity, may be
diversely Extended; at one time in Longitude, at another in Latitude, or
contrarily less in Latitude than in Depth, and the like, by which they may be
distinguished; as also considered as Modalities of the Substance to which they
belong.

Can this be Judged a proper Method, in order to the Improving of Humane
Understanding, according to the undertaking of this Author; as he Defines the
varied Proprieties of Substance, whether in Length, Breadth, or Depth, no other
than different Modalities applicable to the same Substance? Whereas the
contrary is Mathematically certain; because the Extent and Proportions, in one
and the same Body, must necessarily have a Commensurable Alteration.

If the Basis of a solid Substance be supposed to be lengthened one Foot more
than it was before; the Latitude and Depth of the same Body cannot but have as
to its Proportion, an Essential Variation: Which evidently proves, That what he
Terms mere Modality, or accidental Change of local Parts in the same Substance,
is neither Arithmetically, or Geometrically true: It being no less absurd to
Affirm, That the half of a Number is all one with the whole; or that the
different Situation, Measure, and Being of Substance, were neither a
quantitative or formal Alteration in reference to the reality of Place, Figure,
or Motion; as they ought to be apprehended in all their Capacities. On which
consideration, the Idea of this French Writer, is fo far from tending to a
significant Modality, as he would apply it; that it rather vanishes as a
fictitious Comment, or Shadow of his Brain.

To be plain, should a Man Collect a numerous Sum of Refined Notions, with the
most Artful Curiosity that could employ his Imagination, whereby he would
dignifie the Humane Intellect; he might find the Undertaking no less difficult,
to the finest Thread of his Reasoning; than to Invent a more wonderful Passage
into an obscure Labryinth than could be ever attained by rational Conduct:
There being no passabler or clearer Prospect by which the Soul of Man may
discern the Manner of its actual Being and Exercising of the Intellectual
Faculty; than as it is operatively Conjoined, with the temper of the Body and
Senses: To whose united Concurrence may be Attributed, more or less, the
qualified Abilities of the Understanding in every Consideration. Do we not
Experimentally know, That Judgment, Wit, Passions, Affections, virtuous or
vicious Inclinations, with all the Moralities of Life, are Influenced by the
Mind; as it does participate with the Elementary Composition Inherent in the
Body and Senses: Insomuch, That their several Inclinations may be termed the
Effects of Heat, Cold, Moisture, or Drought, as they adhere to our Natures.

Is not a Wise Man distinguished by the Judicious Temper of his Thoughs; the
vain by their Levity and insipid Conversation? No less discernable than one
Man's strength of Mind, or, Corporeal Vigor, has a natural Variation from
another: To which may be Emphatically added, the experimental Observation as it
respects the Intellectual Faculties; of which some are Empowered with a more
considerable vivacity of Apprehension, Judgment and Wit, in Age; than was
manifest in Youth: But in others, contrarily, a Decay, or Withering of their
Understandings no less apparent than the Wrinkles of their Brows and Cheeks:
Which could proceed from no other Cause but as the Vigor of the Mind does
naturally Impair, in diverse examples of Age; with the Strength and Temper of
the Arteries, Nerves. Members and Senses, that appertain to the Body: Yet not
universally so, because, not seldom observed, That some Persons, who have lived
to Antiquity of Years, have rather been completed, in all Kinds, by their
Intellectual Abilities; for which there can be given no better Reason, than,
that notwithstanding they have some Corporeal Deficiencies incident to Age; yet
none in the Principal Assistants of the Brain, and its Contiguity with the
Senses.

All which is far more evidently demonstrable than a supposed Thinking
Substance, separately acting in the Body of Man, according to the Tenent of
Descartes; together with his Imaginary Modalities, by which he would insinuate
a distinct Thinking Faculty to the Humane Soul, without any specifical
Assistance received from the Senses: A Notion no less absurd, than it is
impossible to Think, and not be exactly sensible of the Thing, or Object
Thought on: Either as it had been at the same time conveyed to the
Understanding by some One, or more of the Senses; or their Impression, by the
Memory before retained.

Which fully Confirms the Philosophical Maxim; That nothing is in the
Intellect, but what was before in the Senses: Yet not so to be Applied, or
Instanced here, as might, in any respect, derogate from the Excellency of the
Humane Soul, or its Immortal Estate, when Life departs from the Body; it being
in the Power of the Almighty to Eternalize its Being; howsoever it was
Composed, or the manner of its Existence when Resident in the Body of Man.

I find no other Discussions in this Treatise of Descartes, that require a
more pertinent or accurate Observation, than may be Implied from what is
already Written: Wherefore to avoid unnecessary Repetition, I descend to his
Conclusion; where he briefly Sums the most considerable Principles on which he
had founded his precedent Arguments; committing them, as very advisable, to the
perusal of his Reader.

The First of his Counsels is, That we should be very cautious, how we adhere
to Former Opinions that have not been strictly Catechized and found true by a
subsequent Examination: Which I confess is plausibly Advised.

But how does he make good these Admonishments? Why, by heedfully regarding, as
he prompts us, such Notions we have in our selves, by which, he would suppose,
We are enough enabled to arrive to clear and distinct Knowledge.

Here he Epitomizes the main Force and Application of his Former Ideas, in
order to erect perfect Understanding in the Humane Intellect; and by which he
undertakes so to Cleanse it, that the Senses may have nothing to do with its
orderly Perception: As if the Determination made by the Intellect, with the
Assistance of the Senses; were no less detrimental to the Principality of the
Mind, than the loose Advice of a City-Mobb would be to their Monarch: Whereas,
by a surer Inference, the bare Idea of the Mind, introduced by Descartes; if
duly considered, does Imply such a License of Thought, as is no way consistent
with the orderly Rule of Man's Understanding: It being possible, That the
Body-Politick of Reason, or perspicuity of Thought, in its orderly Method,
should be performed without the Concurrence of the Senses; no more than a Man
can be assured, he lives, and not sensibly demonstrate, both in Soul and Sense,
that he does so. But so fully, I conceive, has been, by what is Written before,
refell'd the Conceit, of this Author, relating to his so often Inserted, or
rather devised Tenent, or Manner of certain Thinking, under the Notion of an
Idea; that it appears too like a Fable Invented by himself.

Toward the Close of his Treatise which he takes to be, on diverse accounts, a
very Irrefragrable Advancement to Humane Understanding.

He much Celebrates this Instance, viz. That amongst all the Notions, by which
Man is enabled to discern Propositions of Eternal Verity; there is none more
signally applicable than the certain Affirmation, That out of Nothing, comes
Nothing: Which Allegation, of his, if maturely considered, will be found
Improper, nay, absurd: As what can be more opposite to Reason and Sense, than
to suppose, That a Notion, or Thought of the Mind, can have nothing for its
Object? Because whatsoever is conceived, by Intellectual Thinking, must be
really Existent; it being all one as to Imagine, That Nonentity, or Vacuity,
has a Natural and Certain Being, notwithstanding that the Universal World is
replenished with Bodies of diverse Kinds, and no room left either in the
Universe, or Brain of Man for the Conception of Nothing. So that to derive a
Notion from what can be Interpreted by no Word, Etymology, or substantial
Thought; is no other than as if Monsieur Descartes had Imagined himself
Nothing, in Body and Mind, when in order to manifest a certain Truth, he Penned
his Contemplation of Nothing.

And it is much to be admired, That this Author, who endeavors to Embellish his
Opinion by a new Way of Reasoning, should comply with the Obsolete, and no less
Impertinent Position of some Former Philosophers; by which they would Infer,
That the Term or Accent of Speech, that Verbally did Relate to Nothing, was
contradictory to whatsoever had Essential Being: Whereas there can be no
Contrariety or Opposition, betwixt Nothing and any Thing that may be said,
either as a Cause, or Effect, to have real Existence. On which ground it may
aptly be required, That the pretended Philosophical Tenent, that would Assert,
That out of Nothing, comes Nothing; should be as clearly Expunged out of all
Discussions of that Nature, as if a Man should undertake to Argue, that one
Impossibility could produce another: Or Celebrate a Nonentity, under the
Notion of Eternal Truth, and Crown it on the Pate of Nonsense. Besides all
which Absurdities, it is very apparent, That this supposed Principle is
absolutely Inconsistent with the most general Belief of Mankind, that allows
Perfect Creation, from Nothing, of the Total World: Which how Incompatible with
the Tenent, here mentioned of Descartes, I leave to the Judicious Peruser of
this Treatise.

And thus I Conclude my Remarks on the First Part of his Philosophy, called,
The Principles of Humane Knowledge.

REMARKS On the Second Part of the New PHILOSOPHY OF DESCARTES. Concerning the
Principles of MATERIAL THINGS. PART. II.
THE Magnitude of the Title appertaining to the Second Part of the Philosophy
of Descartes, creates in his Reader, an Egregious Expectation of a superlative
Method, and undoubted Assurance; whereby the Humane Mind might satisfactorily
apprehend the admirable Consistence of the Material World, providentially
Disposed for the vast Habitation and Benefit of Man and Creatures.

Which is so Important a Knowledge, That the Misdemeanour of the Intellectual
Faculty cannot be excused from being Impeached by the Assembly of the Senses;
if negligently Regardless, or not industriously Apprehensive, as far as can be
Extended its Solid Contemplation; How Mankind is sensibly Sustained by the
peaceable Order and Conduct of Nature: And next to that Philosophical
Speculation, the Soul of Man ought to bewail its Infelicity, in Bodily Life;
when perniciously allured by Covetous, or Ambitious Desires, to Possess more of
the Earth he treads on, than ought to be his, to the Detriment or Ruin of
others: Instead of deducing from the regular Constitution of the World, in
which he Subsists, How unnaturally he Lives, by Infringing the Rights of Humane
Society: Which ought to have an Impression on the Soul, in a Philosophical, and
Moral Conception. This is as a Proaemium fitly annexed to the ensuing Treatise,
I thought not Improper to Insert; before I come to the First Particular of
Descartes, which as a Platform or main Fund to his subsequent Notions, he
Compiles; by undertaking to Explain the Reasons by which the Existence of
Material Things may be certainly understood.

His first Words are these, -- Although there is no Man that does not fully
convince himself, That Material Things do really Exist, notwithstanding that it
has been dubiously rendered by me, in the precedent Discussions, or accounted
amongst the Prejudices incident to the Childhood, or Greenness of our Years; it
is now Incumbent, on me, to search for the Reasons that may produce its perfect
Intelligence: To which purpose he infers, That whatsoever we apprehend, must
necessarily proceed from something, that is not the same with the Humane Mind;
nor is it in our Power, as he Affirms, to think of one Thing more than another;
but as from some other Thing we are Affected, or receive Impression on the
Senses: And makes this Quere, Whether that Thing be not God, or differently to
be conceived?

This Part of this Head, may be pertinently Answered, by demanding, On what
ground Descartes undertakes to conclude, that the Soul is so disposed, as it
operates on the Senses by the Idea it has from God? Which perfectly contradicts
the Notion delivered by him in the 7th Particular of his First Part, and
Remarked by me, accordingly; where he declares, That it is in our Power to
reject whatsoever we doubt of, or feign that it is false; and thus we may
suppose, that there is no God, no Heaven, no Bodies, and that we have no Hands,
no Feet, or Bodies Constituted.

But in his Second Part, which I now deal with, he restores the Senses, that he
had Abdicated before, to the uses of the Mind. By which it appears, that he was
conscious of his former Mistake; and that it is not possible to discourse, as he
does, in this Part, of Material Principles, without allowing the Association of
the Mind to its sensible Discernment.

The Reason that he mentions is, That because we sensibly, and distinctly
perceive, from the Impulse of the Senses, any certain Matter extended into
Length, Breadth and Depth, whose Parts are diversely Figured, and variously
Moved; as also how they affect us with different Conceptions that we have of
their Colors, Smells, Griefs, and the like: If God should Imbue the Mind with
an Idea of such Extended Matter, and afterward should cause any other Thing so
to dispose the Humane Intellect, that it might fix its Imagination on what had
neither Extension, Figure, or Motion; no reason can be given, why God might not
be thought a Deceiver.

This Passage can have no excusable Defense, if judiciously Examined: The
Question he offers being so ill Stated, or Inconsistent with the accurate Part
of Reasoning, That it cannot amount to Refined Sophistry. For however he might
conceive. That the Soul, together with its Mental Idea, might be placed in the
Body by God; it could not be without assurance, that the World is replenished
with Corporeal Beings that cannot be Denominated such, but as Length, Breadth
and Depth, Color, Taste and Smell, are their natural Proprieties: So that
where the Intellect and Senses are jointly Illuminated, in whatsoever Method,
by the Act of God; they must be far more certain than to admit any room for
Misconception, or the If, or Quere, Inserted by Descartes; by which he would
Infer, That could a Man, Ensoul'd by God, Imagine by any other means, that
there is no such Thing as Longitude, Latitude, Depth and the like, appertaining
to Corporeal Substance; he might call God a Deceiver: Which were all one as to
suppose, That a Man duly apprehensive, of any Object, should by the Will of
God, voluntarily Determine, that he is not; which is no less Irrational, than
Impossible to all of competent Understanding: But no disallowable Tenent if
applied to other Particulars of Mankind, whose Intellects are not of sufficient
Ability, if not naturally stupid, or accidentally unsound, or phrenetically
distempered; as is the condition of such as are Distracted, and, in a manner,
totally destitute of the Use of their Rational Faculty: And who can doubt, that
not a few of these, want Capacity to define Length, Breadth and Depth, as
Inseparable to Bodily Existence? Which could not have been, if Mankind were
Universally endu'd by an Impartial Course of Nature, Ordained by God, and so
committed to the Humane Body: Where it must have had a more excellent Residence
than could be impedited, or debased by Corporeal Attributes; and must have
likewise been completed with as perfect an Idea, in every respect, as this
Author endeavors to prove: But not being performed, his manner of Argument
turns the point of a Dilemma against his Assertion, by which he would annex a
more general and perfect Idea to the Soul of Man, than is experimentally
Certain; and whereby, in effect, he Terms God a Deceiver; because, according to
his Doctrine, every Soul, within a Humane Body has not a patallel Idea of exact
Knowledge.

A Blessing much to be wished, or rather Implored by Prayer, were it not
repugnant to the Methods of Providence omnipotently determined; by which the
Intellectual Faculty is differently Empowered, as its Corporeal Dominion is more
or less Absolute; either as it commands, or is weakened in Rule, by the
Conspiracy of the Senses: Which cannot be otherwise, the Mind being surrounded
and continually endangered by the frail Composition and Temperatures of the
Bodily Parts, in which it operatively Resides.

On the contrary, were there such a clear Idea, from above, infused into the
Soul of Man, as is Instanced by Descartes; by which every requisite Notion, or
Truth, might be perfectly apprehended: It were not consistent with the Justice
of the Almighty, if every Individual of Mankind were not equally Intelligible;
on which account, one Man, might be as wise, in every Consideration, as any
other: And if so, there would be less necessity for Superior Magistracy, or
Rule; could every Man be alike Discreet in governing of Himself.

In the mean time, Descartes has introduced a new Character, on the Stage of
Philosophy, more complete in Thought than is univocally Consistent with the
Figure of Humane Composition; by which is Personated the Dress and Mode of the
Mind, as it is Clothed by the Senses: From whence it is apparently manifest.
That the Powers of the Rational Soul are frequently exerted suitable to the
diversity of Tempers that sensibly Exist, Improve, or Decay, in the Body of Man.

And this as Naturally Certain as Animal Creatures of the same Kind, vigorously
Grow, or Impair; or are more Subtle, Active and Strong, proportionable to the
Elementary Mixtures by which they Subsist. And therefore as highly
presumptuous, as to Argue against the Methods of Providence, if discussed, Why
Men and Creatures are so Constituted in their Several Capacities of Being, and
Life? Which is above the search of Man's Reasoning, and only known to the
Omnipotent Disposer of whatsoever the Universe contains. All which, if duly
considered, sufficiently explodes the Novel Scene of this Part of the
Philosophy of this Author, together with the Actual Character he gives to
Mankind, in his Modalities of Intellectual Apprehension, as it is Personated by
his Pen.

His Second Particular begins with a Truth, but ends with a Falsehood: Where he
grants, That the Mind, or Soul of Man, is more strictly United to its peculiar
Body, than to all other Bodies: The Reason he offers is, Because we have an
Apprehension of Griefs, and other sensible Advertencies that happen unthought
on by us; of which the Mind, he conceives, could not be Intelligent, as it is
merely Cogitative, but as it is Conjoined to a Certain extended and moveable
Substance called the Humane Body.

The Antecedent Part of this Head is undoubtedly true; which signifies no more,
than that our Souls have more to do with our own Bodies, than with any other:
And who could have expected, that Descartes could have presented his Reader
with so vulgar a Speculation? Which has no other Tendency, than that every Man
is as far apprehensive as the Compliment of his Soul and Senses will extend;
and thus are Griefs, Passions, Affections, sensibly distinguished by us, when
Appertaining to others: Because the Rational Faculty sympathetically complies
with the Senses in Conveying their Intelligence to Things, of that Kind,
without us; as he that has felt a Wound or Pain in any of his Corporeal Parts,
will judge of the same in others. But how to think of any Thing that appertains
to our selves, and not to perform it by help of the Mind, as a sensible
Thinker; is a Riddle not to be unfolded by the Writings of Descartes.

In his Third Particular he attempts to clear the Point; but, in effect weakens
it, by this Feeble Proposition of his: The Perception of the Senses does not
direct us to Discover what is really in Things, but as they are rendered
profitable, or detrimental to Humane Composition: Unless sometimes, or by
accident, we are Taught by the Senses what those Bodies are, and how they
Exist. And therefore (says he,) we must Depose the Senses, and solely Judge by
help of the Intellect according to the Ideas that are Incident to it, by Nature.

Whosoever is Master of a Grain of Reason, must be convinced, That a
Contradiction is Implied by the manner of Argument, here urged by this Author:
Who grants, That by the Conjunction of the Soul and Senses, we perfectly
Discern what is Beneficial, or Hurtful to us; but in that Act, do not certainly
apprehend what those Things are: Which is all one as to Affirm, That we may be
Intelligent, yet not undoubtedly assured of what we understand: Unless the
Intellect be Refined by Idea, after his manner, as the most natural Way of
being clearly Apprehensive; and with such disparagement to the Senses, That
they may be, in his Opinion, neglected: Though common Experience might have
convinced him, that they are, by Nature, Constituted Assistants and real Proofs
of whatsoever is openly and demonstratively understood.

But it seems he omitted these Considerations: And therefore in his next
Particular, which is his 4th, he positively directs, as he would intend the Use
of his Idea, by which he Argues, That the Nature of Matter, or Body, does not
Consist in that it is Hard, Ponderous, or any other Manner affecting the
Senses; but only as it is a Thing extended in Length, Breadth and Depth: And
for durition, or hardness, the Sense discovers it no farther, than as the Parts
of a Hard Body Resist the Motion of our Hands meeting with it.

Here he would exalt his Idea to the height of Dominion in the Mind, and level
the Senses below the Capacities that Nature has allowed them: Nothing being
more Philosophically Irrational than the Supposition he Inserts, That the
Nature of Body is only to be understood as it has Longitude, Latitude and
Depth; and why not also as it is Weighty, Hard and Colored? Is not Air as much
a Body as Iron, and yet perfectly distinguished by the compact Durition of the
Latter, as its Essential Propriety? And as absolutely different in Color,
could the diaphanous Substance of Air be as visible to the Eye; and although it
be not, we may conceive the Distinction, much surer, than we could by intruding
on the Mind a conceited Idea; because we are sensibly Assured, That no
Corporeal Thing can have Being in Nature, without its colorable Property: And
this as familiarly Certain, as that a Bay-Horse cannot be Denominated a Horse,
if his natural Color could be separated from his Substance.

There are many Things that may be said to have Color, that are not genuinely
their own: And so a painted Cheek, whether in Man or Woman, is no Dye or
Complexion of Nature, but Artificically Colored: And we Judge of Pictures as
they Resemble the Life by the Colors applied to them by the Skill of the
Painter.

And it is no less evident, that Descartes has presented his Reader with a very
Fictitious Varnish of his Pen; if he meant no other distinction of Colors,
Relating, or Applied to Material Substances, than in this Place he mentions:
And in Sum concludes, That Weight, Color and such like Corporeal Qualities
may be separated from their Inherence in Matter; so that the Nature of the
Substance, to which they belong, does not depend on any of them.

And is not this a concise Manner of Idea, in this Author, by which he would
have us believe, That Bodily Substance may have Existence, and be sensibly
perceived without being discerned by its genuine Shape, and Figure? If Color,
Hardness and Weight, with other Qualities appertaining to Matter, are defined
Accidents in a Philosophical Sense; yet allowable such as, when natural, are
inseparable Proprieties from Bodies to which they appertain? And it is some
wonder, that this Learned Monsieur should forget, on this occasion, That noted
Logical Maxim, -- Quod omni sola et semper accidit subjecto.
So that the Idea of this Author, as it is here Applied by him, is so far from
a Weighty, or indeed a Colorable Notion, That it is as surely Confuted as a
White Plum may be distinguished by the Act of Nature, from a Black one.

The next Step he takes, is to present his Reader with the Doubts of some
Persons, who Determine, That Bodies may be so Rarefied, or, Condensed, that
they may have, by Rarifaction more Extension than when Condensed. To which
Number of Dubitants I desire to be added: Because I conceive nothing more clear
than the doubt he Delivers.

Is it not very evident, That Snow when dissolved, by Rarifaction, into Water
is substantially Extended farther than before; as it may be observed falling
from a Hill into a River? And is it not as manifest, That some Parts of Wood,
when Thinn'd and Rarefied by Fire, convert to Smoke? So that it is impossible to
deny, that Corporeal Alteration is not Incident to Rarifaction, which gives it
a variable and different Extension, if compared to the space it Precedently
filled; and this amounts to Demonstration, instead of Opinion.

But he that will be Proselyted, by the Doctrine of Descartes, must, in this
Case be such a compliable Sceptick as to Renounce his sensible Conviction, and
accord with him where he contends to Argue, That whosoever, will attentively
Think and admit nothing but what he clearly understands, will Judge, That no
more is Effected by Rarifaction and Condensation than Change of the Corporeal
Figure. And this, in few words, is the sum of what is contained in his Fifth
and Sixth Particular, that is worth a Remark.

The Reason he offers is, That Rarefied Bodies, having many Pores, are there
Replenished with other Substances; and by that means become Condensed.

This Conceit of his is as distant from Proof, as Fiction is from Truth: And
nothing more obviously Answered; since it is Philosophically Certain, That
Condensation is added to Bodies which are made more or less Solid, as their
thinner Parts are proportionately expelled by Rarifaction: And thus a tenuous
Substance is gradually rendered more compact, and hardened by the Fire; as is,
in diverse Kinds, Experimentally Observable: Which however producing Alteration
of Figure in their Corporeal Extent; it is as they receive Solidity or Durition
from the Capacity that their tenuous Parts have in order to Rarifaction: So
that it is not, as this Writer Infers, from any Intervals, or Cranies in Bodies,
filled with other Bodies, that causes Condensation; but so much of the Tenuity
of their Compositions as being vanished by Rarifaction, leaves them more
compactly Hardened.

Suppose he had been asked, Whether the thin Substance of Air, or Fluid Body of
Water, did Exist with any such Pores or Inlets in them that might be
Receptacles for other Bodies? He could not probably have solved the Question,
notwithstanding it is very apparent, That Air is Thickened by Moisture that
exhaled, by the Sun, is mingled with it. But Water being a grosser Substance,
is Condensed as its Thinner Parts are by Heat extracted from it; and this may
be discerned in every standing Pool, or Puddle.

All which is Equivalently acknowledged by him in his Entrance to his Seventh
Head, Where he grants, That there are no Pores in Air, or Water, that may add
to their Amplitude, by giving Reception to other Bodies whereby they may be
more Replenished: Yet would have it pass, in being supposed, for a Rational
Fiction; but I expected his Proof, and therefore must be excused, if I reject
his Fable.

As for Corporeal Extent, caused by Rarifaction; he seems to allow none
otherwise than as he would a new Body so Extended: Which is not Universally
true; and may be so understood from the Example given already, of Snow
Dissolved, by Rarifaction, to Water; which, when Snow, was but Water Congealed:
So that it cannot be properly said to have a new Body but altered to the Fluid
Substance which it had before.

The like may be Affirmed of Lead, or other Materials, that when melted, and
enlarged by Extension, do not lose the Denomination of the same Corporeal
Substance; in which Sense, Lead, when Dissolved, is as truly Lead, as it was
in its precedent Existence.

Examples might be added, on this Subject, did the Reply that I have made
require farther Illustration; wherefore I proceed to his next Point, which he
thus States: -- Quantity and Number differ, only in Reason, from the
quantitative or numbered Thing; This Position he procceds to Explicate by
Affirming, That the whole Nature of Corporeal Substance, may be considered, as
contian'd in the space of ten Feet, although we attend not the Measure of any
such Number of Feet: And by Converse, (says he,) the Number Ten may be
understood, as well as a Quantity of so many Feet, although we are regardless
of its Determinate Substance.

Here the gentile Monsieur renews his Address, to his Mistress of Thought,
under the Notion of Idea: Which he endeavors to Complete by such a refined
Mode of Philosophical Courtship, That like a Platonic Lover, he separates
Sense from the Motives he Endears. But I presume, that his Amor has met with
diverse coy Reprimands from Reason, the most Celebrated Mistress and Beauty of
the Understanding.

And it is no presumption, I conceive, if I Attribute a rational Success to my
Pen, which has, more than often, refell'd the Cartesian Idea in diverse
preceding Discussions: Wherefore I might refer my Reply to what I have already
Written: Did not the respect that I have to the Abilities of this Author, though
none to his Mistakes, oblige me to prolong my Inspection; together with an
earnest Desire of being convinced, might I find Cause, from his Proposals. But
instead of meeting with any Motives of his, sufficient to reconcile me to his
Assertions, I may justly observe an Erroneous Relapse to his former Principles.

And thus in his 8th Particular, that occasions my Debate; He supposes, That
the whole Nature of Corporeal Substance contained in a space of Ten, or any
Number of Feet, may be understood without any Computation of it, as locally
Commensurable; and this to be accomplished by a sole Idea of the Mind, in his
Opinion. But is it possible to promote mere Thought, by an Insensible Act,
suitable to the purpose he intends it? Can a Man that never understood how a
Plain Superficies may contain Body, or is produced according to his Example, to
a space of Ten Feet; Conceive, or Delineate such a Figure, without knowing that
it is Completed by Multiplying of 5 by 2?

Should a Mathematical Tutor Inform his Pupil, That it would be sufficient for
his Instruction, if by Mental Speculation he Imagined that there was, in
Nature, such a Thing as a Plain Superficies, though he did not apprehend that
Longitude and Latitude were its Numerical Proprieties: Could Science be
Improved by such an Impertinent and Idle Idea that can signify nothing either
to Theory, or Practice?

On the contrary, every Man must be as competently Intelligent, as was this
Author, of the Qualifications of Lines that appertain to superficial Content;
and as certainly too, as the Dimensions of any Number of Acres may be
figuratively Included in a Square or Parallelogram, or he will profit little on
this Question, by Reading of Descartes:

Who next proceeds to inform us, That notwithstanding it is a certain Truth,
(and so I think too,) that nothing can be taken from Quantity, or Extension,
but the Substance, to which they belong, must also be Leslen'd: And
convertibly, not the least Part of Substance can be exempted; but as much of
Quantity and Extension will be taken from it.

This Opinion of his he alleges as opposite to the Tenent of others, of whom
he says, there are some that consider Corporeal Substance as distinct from its
Quantity: Which Conception of theirs causes them confusedly to think, that the
same Substance may be termed Incorporeal.

Whether there was ever Man of such a wild Imagination may well be questioned:
Since nothing can be more absurd than to Imagine, That Substance might remain,
in any Kind Substance, without its proper Quantity; and next, notwithstanding
that Contradiction, or as he calls it confusion of Thought, to suppose, the
same Substance Metamorphos'd, by a mysterious Way of Thinking, to Incorporeal;
which is no less contradictory to the natural Being and Definition of
Substance, than if a Man should determine, that Body could cease to be Body:
Because Substance is inseparable from Quantity, as its Corporeal Propriety; and
therefore by no Notion, or Object of Sense, can be deemed Incorporeal. But
notwithstanding that the Incomprehensible Idea of Incorporeal Substance is
reproved by Descartes, as Notionally Confused; the Sense that he delivers in
the 64th Particular of his First Part, or Treatise of Humane Cognition, is
allied to the same Absurdity, as may be observed from my Remarks on that Head:
Where he supposes That Cogitaion and Extension may be considered as Modalities
of Substance; because, as he Affirms, The Humane Mind may have diversity of
Thoughts; by which the Cogitative Substance, as he Defines it, may at one time
Employ its Idea of Things, clearly distinguished, without the Assistance of the
Senses; at another, operate in Conjunction with the sensible Parts of the Body:
Is not this such a manner of Idea as would render the Thinking Substance of the
Mind with, or without Quantity; as pleases the Thinker? Which little differs
from the Irrational Notion of Incorporeal Substance; if any Thing, by excluding
of Quantity, might be possibly Imagined substantial.

From whence it may be inferred, That the Criticisme offered by Descartes, in
this Place, in order to refell the Opinion of others, does considerably reflect
on his own.

And thus I proceed to such of his Particulars as occasion my Remarks; which I
shall Insert no oftener than the Subject requires.

In his 11th Head, he reminds us of the Idea that we may have of Body, by the
Example he gives of a Stone, from which we may reject all that is not Essential
to the Nature of Body: As if a Stone be melted, or pulveris'd, it does not
therefore cease to be Corporeal: We may also reject Color, because we
frequently observe Stones that very pellucidly shine, as if they were without
Color. And so we may reject Gravity, Lightness, Heat and Cold, with All other
Qualities; because they are either not considered in the Stone, or being
Changed, the Corporeal Nature of the Stone is not altered with them.

Here methinks he makes a great Pudder to little purpose; or no other than to
prove that which no Man ever denied: If there can be any Thing more
Experimentally manifest than That Substance, by what means soever varied or
Changed, will still retain Quantity, as its Corporeal Propriety, not to be
separated from it by Force or Fire: So that the Essential Nature of Body cannot
be destroyed, though it be lessened or divided into Innumerable Particles of the
same Substance: But not so continue in the Qualities of Color, Weight, Heat,
Cold, Moisture, or the like, that were its former Appurtenances: Because
Alteration must necessarily Change its accidental Qualifications, consonant to
the Philosophical Maxim, a non esse tale ad esse tale: Which signifies, that it
is otherwise, than it was in Figure or Dimension, together with such like
External Qualifications as it precedently had, and are naturally diversified
according to Corporeal Alterations.

But amongst the Examples which he presents to his Reader, as so many select
Jewels of Thought, I cannot but observe the blemish that I find in the Diamond
of his Idea; where he supposes, That the Substance of such a Stone may be so
Transparent that its Color might not be visible: But how any Thing can be so
refinedly splendid as not at all perceptible by its Color; is not less absurd,
than to Affirm, that something is seen without being discerned: It being
Optically, and Physically, impossible to be sensible of any Object of Sight,
unless its Color be sufficiently visible with its Substance.

True it is, That a Diamond may be severed into Parcels of its Substance, and
that its Splendours will proportionably lessen with its Corporeal Parts: But
not suitable to the Alterations made as to Figure, Color, or Extent, in Bodies
of weaker Complexion and Substance: For Example, Straw, or Stubble, will sooner
yield, in all their Capacities, to the Alteration enforced by Fire, or to any
natural Method of Change; than Wood or Coal. So that it is not provable, as
Affirmed by Descartes, That with every Corporeal Mutation may equally be
rejected the abovementioned External Attributes, that did appertain to their
Substance; and nothing continue with them but Length, Breadth and Depth, the
common Proprieties of Body.

To which he adds this Incompatible Proposition; That by Idea of Space, not
Corporeally Replenished, may be comprehended an Idea of what is called Vacuity.
Was ever Fiction so perfectly supposititious as to Fancy, That Space had a
Being, and not the Local Continent of Substance? Or that the Universe, the vast
Womb of Nature, might, by its miscarrying admit of Vacuity? Which, properly
Conster'd, amounts to the Production of nothing. Wherefore the Appellation, or
Word Vacuity, can signify no more than a cursory Accent of Speech: Or such an
empty Idea, as I may modestly say, is not seldom obtruded into the Writings of
this Author.

Some of his subsequent Particulars, where he differenceth Space from Place,
are indeed more nice, if not frivolous, than could be Thought to drop from the
Pen of the Learned Descartes, who takes it for granted, That if any Corporeal
Thing be removed from the Local Being, in which it was; we are not therefore to
conceive, that its Extension does depart with it.

Which Position of his may be pertinently waved, by Affirming the contrary to
be true: As what is more Essentially annexed to the Comprehension of Body; than
its due and proportionable Extension as it Relates to the Place by which it is
contained? Wherefore if a Stone be moved from the Local Situation it
precedently had; its Extension or proper Space, as its natural Capacity, does
Inseparably remove with it; and not remain, as this Author would Imply, as the
same Extension, or Place, might be possessed with other Bodies: Or under the
confused Notion of Space not filled, with any Thing readily Imagined, we may be
so vain to suppose, as he gives License to the Conception, That Indeterminate
Space, if so Apprehended, may be thought Vacuity: Which he Infers, by
Reflecting on the misapprehension we may have, that the same Local Extension
does not Remain, though the Body, to which it appertained, be Removed.

A manner of Inference Philosophically unfound; because, no Corporeal Substance
can be taken from its due Place, unless its proper Extension, and Space, to
which it belongs, be movable with it: Not that it may not leave behind, or
after its Removal, the like Local Capacity; as it may at large, be said to have
been contiguous to that Substance: Or instead of its continuance there, the
Space, that it before possessed, is immediately replenished by the Accession of
some one, or more Bodies: And this perpetually Executed by the Act of Nature,
touched by the Scepter of Eternal Providence: Which otherwise, must cease to
be, or vanish with the World, her Universal Habitation, by Annihilating her
Existence. And therefore exorbitantly Impossible to allow any Epithet to
Vacuity, That by all the Representatives of Nature is determined to have no
Propriety within her spacious Dominion.

As improper is the Example he gives, in the same Paragraph, Of a Person
supposed to be seated in a Ship, and moves not although the Ship removes whilst
he sits still.

But were his sole Corporeal Extensions, in Length, Breadth and Depth, in
Motion, as he late in the Ship; his Local Space would Remove with him, without
depending on the Sailing of the Ship.

Before he makes a Close on this Head, he gives a more than ordinary Instance
of a Ship under Sail, and the Earth in Motion, at the same time, which,
according to the Copernican System he would Insinuate; but in general Affirms,
That if a Ship sails as far from East to West as the Earth Revolves from West
to East, according to its Motion in the Ecliptic, as the Copernicans Imagine,
a Man sitting in the Ship does not Change his Place, because the Local
Determination both of the Motion of the Ship and Earth is to be considered as
relating to some Immovable Points of Heaven.

This Ship according to his Supposition of the Earth's Motion, must be
committed to the desperate Conduct of a Copernican Pilot: For if the Ocean,
together with all the Rivers and Streams that the World affords, be Affirmed to
complete in Conjunction with the Earth, one Globulous Circumference and Figure;
as is the Opinion of many Learned Philosophers: The rapid and mounting Motion
that the Sea must have, in being contiguous to the Earth's Revolution,
considering that it is naturally Lighter, and therefore Higher than the Earth,
would soon overwhelm the Ship, with vast Mountains of boisterous Waves, in
spite of the best Mariners Skill and Compass; and doubtless, in that
Irresistible Storm the Man he supposes seated in the Ship would be totally
tossed from his Station. So that, if granted the Copernican Hypothesis as it
Implys the Conjoined and Revolving Motion of the Superficies of the Earth and
Ocean, it is impossible to conceive how a Naval Voyage could be at any time
performed; or the Intercourse and Trade of Nations by Sea at this Day, or
heretofore practicable; an Objection that gives no Inconsiderable Confutation
to the Copernican System: Which whether or no perceived by this Author, he
seems, at least, in this Place to be Indifferent, as to that Opinion, by
granting, where he Concludes this Particular, That it may be Thought if we
please, that in the Compass of the Universe there are no such Imaginary Points,
and consequently no Permanent Place as to the Being of any Thing; otherwise
than by Thought we so determine.

To which it may be Answered, That as to any fixed Points, in any Caelestial
Orb, there is no Cause to Imagine them, but as they Relate to the Commensurable
Motion of some other Thing, or by conceiving Imaginary Points in the Orbits of
the Sun and Planets: Yet not at all true, if otherwise Applied; because it is
Philosophically certain, That Motion, generally Considered, must be made from
Point to Point gradually Moved with whatsoever is Moving; otherwise there could
be no Mathematical Computation, or Time, estimated as Proprieties of Motion: In
which Sense it may be likewise Asserted, That the Sun and Stars no less than
every other Thing, may be judged to Remove with such Movable Spaces as
naturally appertain to the Measure of their Extensions, however their Diurnal,
or Annual Revolutions, may be terminated by such Points as may be deemed fixed
in Orbits above. In sum whatsoever is Moved, must have an actual Beginning and
determinate Period, or in a Philosophical Sense, a quo, et ad quem: Which is no
other than the Movable Progression, from Space, to Space, of any Individual
Thing with all its Parts: Yet so as it may be said, though in Motion, still to
continue the Place Incident to its proper Extent: And therefore incongruously
Conceded by Des Carts, That by License of Thought we may Think, that there is
no such Thing as Permanent Place appertaining to any Thing; which in some Sense
is as unnaturally Absurd, as it one should undertake to Contemplate, that there
is no Corporeal Being: Since Body cannot be understood, either Moving, or not
Moving, but as contained by Place, nor Place without Local and Bodily Existence.

The difference that he makes in his 14th Particular, betwixt Place, and Space,
is, That in his Sense Locality more expressly signifies Situation, than
Magnitude or Figure; and contrarily, these are more noted by us, when we speak
of Space: And thus we frequently mention one Thing as succeeding to the Place
of another, although it be not of the same Magnitude or Figure.

All which, amounts to no more than a Quibble of so many Words, that ought to
have one and the same ordinary Application: And therefore very incongruously
Asserted by this Author, That by Place is more appositely understood Situation,
than Magnitude or Figure But how can any Thing be said to be duly Situated,
unless its natural proprieties be Locally understood? Nor less dissentaneous is
it to common Experience, should his Notion be allowed, or manner of Thought; by
which might be supposed, That one Substance could genuinely supply the room of
another, though not of the same Magnitude, or Figure: Which is a contradictory
Supposition; because naturally repugnant, or rather Impossible, that any one
Thing should be said to possess the Local Being of another, and not have its
proper Attributes.

In his 12th Head, he had allowed, That if any Corporeal Thing were removed
from the Space, or Place, in which it was; that we may believe the Local Being
that it had before, possessed by some other Body, or Bodies, or termed Vacuity:
Which as a Notion fit to be Enrolled amongst Modern Absurdities was Remarked
accordingly.

But in his 17th Particular, having precedently granted, That in a
Philosophical Conception there could be no such Thing as Vacuity, or where no
Substance does Exist: He seems in few words, to Recant what he Inscribed in his
12th Head; acknowledging That by customary Manner of Speaking, is not to be
understood by the Term, or Word Vacuity, That Place, or Space can be
Apprehended by it, in which there is nothing; but in which there are none of
those Things that we conclude ought to be there: And thus a Vessel is said to
be empty, that appointed to contain some other Thing, is filled only with Air;
or a Fish-Pool empty, though full of Water, because no Fish in it.

So that in effect, he grants, That the Cursory wording of Emptiness, or
Vacuity, under the Phrase of nothing, ought to be referred to the Predicament
of Nonsense.

But vulgar usage of Words is, and will be more practicably Retained, by the
generality of Mankind, than any Concise, or Philosophical Language of the
Schools: Wherefore this Author might have spared much of the Instructions of
his Pen on this Subject; because surer known to Men of Science than any
Reception it may probably meet with in the Dialect of common Persons.

It was ever an undoubted Maxim, That Vacuity is Inconsistent with the
Essential Being of Nature; because Substance must be Attributed to whatsoever
Exists by her Prerogative; and this as an old Truth, is sufficiently
acknowledged by Descartes: Notwithstanding that throughout his New Model of
Philosophy, there are few Tenants of the Erudite Ancients, however Celebrated
by Time, that he does not undertake to Confute.

But where he Refells the obsolete Opinion, or rather Conceit of Epicurus, and
some of his Predecessors, concerning the World's Original from the accidental
Concourse of Indivisible Atoms, his Pen Conspires with the Vogue of Learned
Antiquity; which unanimously determined, That there could be no natural
Existence but in Quantitative and Corporeal Beings. So that the Opinion of
Innumerable Atoms, or Thing next to nothing, as they were deemed Inconsistent,
or Exempted from having divisible Parts; in Future Time became the Subject of
Invention, or such Poetical Allusions, as by the fantastical Poem of Lucretius
are committed to Perusal. There we may Read how, by admirable Conceit, Things,
called Atoms, destitute of Corporeal Proprieties, had Motion and Flight as
their Wings were Imp'd by the Artifice of Fiction: And next, to fill the World
with their supposed procreative Faculty, how they met and embraced like Male
and Female.

I confess, That a fabulous Process of the Original of the Universe may be more
excusable; because the most exquisite, and penetrating Ingenuities of Mankind
have been to wonder, posed in the account they have given of the World's
Beginning; insomuch that the utmost Inquisition they could make has led them to
such an Ecstasy, or Stand of Thought, That they have only been able to admire
the Constituted Perfection of the World, they Inhabit, instead of discerning in
what manner it was produced.

Whether the Imagination or Principles of Descartes, as they have Reference to
this stupendous Subject, will expand a prospect to the Eye of the Intellect
more requisitely open than has, as yet, been explicated by the profoundest
Industry of Humane Science; will be seen, in such of his following Particulars,
where he Treats of the vast Consistency and Appurtenances of the Visible World.

And thus I come to his 21st Particular, by which he would have us understand,
That the World we Inhabit is boundless in Extension: Because, as he states his
Argument, wheresoever we suppose its Limits, we must necessarily grant, That
beyond those Imaginary Limitations are real Spaces, and such as contain
Corporeal Substances indefinitely Extended.

Against which, I offer a brief and obvious Exception, by sensibly proving,
That as we cannot Imagine any Indefinite Extension or Space in the World in
which we have Being, so were another World equally Vast and Contiguous to this,
it were impossible to apprehend a boundless Corporeal Space within its total
Continent: By reason that uncircumscrib'd Space cannot be the Receptacle of
Material Substance; because whatever includes Body must have commensurable
Attributes, or such as, in a Geometrical Sense, may be defined a Superficies
terminated by Length and Breadth: Which demonstrably profligates his pretended
Idea of Indefinite Space or Extension. So little is, in this Case, the Doctrine
of Nature beholding to the Philosophy of Descartes.

His next Conception, produced by his fruitful Idea, is, That Heaven and Earth
are of one and the same Matter, and that there is no possible Being of more
than one World.

The first of this Head he no otherwise proves, than as he takes it for
granted, That if there were Infinite, or Innumerable Worlds, they would be all
of the same Matter; wherefore he concludes there can be but One.

The Objection that may be made against his Affirmation, that the Matter of
Heaven and Earth is the same; is, because Heaven can be no otherwise understood
than as it has a Select and Primary Distinction from all Bodies of Elementary
Composition: Which is apparently manifest in its Figure, Motion and Height,
absolutely different, and far more Excellent than can be compared with other
Substance: Wherefore Zanchius, writing of the Works of God, gives to its most
Sublime and Refined Perfection, a spiritual Epithet; to which purpose the
Learned Pena, in his Preface to Euclid, defines it an Animated Spirit
universally diffused: To these may be added the Authority of Jamblichus, a very
considerable Author, who in admiration of its Substance, allows to its
Perfections, the nearest Attributes to Incorporeal Existence.

And who can doubt that the Judgment, of any one of these erudite Persons, in
being more speculatively Refined, and naturally suitable to the wonderful
Objects, Immensly distant from the Earth we tread on, should not have a
deference from our Understandings highly Superior to the gross Definition given
them by Descartes? Who determines, That the Substance of Heaven and Earth
alike proceeds from the Heap of Nature's common Materials.

And whereas he Asserts, in the latter Part of this Head, That it is not
possible to Imagine more Worlds than One.

I think the contrary may be as certainly Affirmed, as that the World we reside
in, has a natural Confinement: A Truth no less facile to Thought, than it is
easy to delineate a Circle that in any Point shall touch another, and yet
leave, betwixt them, no Intervening Space that is not substantially repleted.

But this Speculation, however readily exerted, cannot be the proper
Entertainment of the Mind; unless I imagine a Similitude of Things and Beings,
Correspondent to the World in which I am: As by the diligence of Thought I
might observe, in a devised World, the same Persons, Creatures, Trees, and
Fields, with such other Objects, that had been visible to me in this. Wherefore
I take liberty to think, contrary to the Opinion of this Author, That the
Intellect strengthened by the Senses, is sufficiently enabled to Transport its
Prospect to the plurality of Worlds. To avoid which Imaginative Power of the
Mind, he annexes to his Idea of Matter undeterminate Extent. A Notion
absolutely Inconsistent with the Nature of Substance in all its Capacities;
which cannot have an Indefinite Being: And therefore no less absurd than if
supposed, that Matter, or Substance, could be actually Infinite.

In some of his following Particulars, he bestows many Words on the Motion of
whatever may be deemed Matter, or Substance; but finding nothing of Consequence
to observe in most of them, or that occasion any considerable Remark in being
Dissentaneous to what he delivers: I pass to his 25th Particular, in which he
Comprehends the main Fund of what he intends by Corporeal Movement; the
Instance which he gives, is, That any one Body, or Substance, in his Sense, may
be said to Move out of the Vicinity of other Bodies, that were contiguous to it
before, and as at rest, into the Vicinity of others.

By this Definition, he proclaims an endless War in the Campains of Nature;
where the opposite Commotions and Powers of Individual Bodies, endeavor to
possess the natural Beings of their quiet Neighbors. From which Problem, could
it be proved, might be deduced a better Disciplined Argument, in behalf of
Exorbitant Potentates, when Molesting, or Intruding into the peaceable
Vicinities, and Provinces of others, than has, as yet, been urged on their
Part: Because it might be dexterously grounded on the Toleration and Conduct
dispensed, by Imperial Nature, amongst her subordinate Dominions.

This War of Nature, denounced by so Eminent a Philosophical Herald as
Descartes, could not but Incense many Combats in the Schools of Science: But
how far prosperous there, or disallowed, is not requisite, in this Place, to
Discuss.

I shall therefore Employ the Force of my Understanding, without being obliged
to the Assistance of any Tribe or Scholastical Association, to attack his
Arguments, where they deserve the most Emphatical Opposition.

My first Assault, on this Head, shall be against the main Fort of his
New-Modell'd Fortification; where, to defend his Principles, he Exerts the
Artillery of his Idea, which, according to the Level of his Notions, must
batter to pieces the entire Confederacies of Nature; and so separate their
Societies and Rooms in the Universe: That unless a more pathetical Expedient
can be found than what he offers; Towns and Countries, with whatever they
contain, may as soon be Removed out of this World, and Situated in another, as
one Corporeal Substance can Usurp the Province, or Being of another: Because no
quantitative Matter but must, if Moved into the Place of any other, possess the
Space that naturally appertained to its Existence.

And whether, could he suppose, That a Bodily Thing could Remove, that is, by
any means, Expelled, by the Motion of another Substance from its proper
Appartment? Since neither his Brain, or any other Man's, can by an empty Idea
so diminish the World as that any Particle of it might be conceived to vanish
to Vacuity. Nor less Intolerably opposite to the Proprieties of Nature, is the
Maxim he Inserts of the Translation of Material Things, into the proper
Residence or Place of others.

Not that it is deniable, that Bodies are alterably Moved, or Changed by Effects
of Rarifaction or Condensation, and other ordinary Methods of Nature, as to
their manner of Extension and Figure; but not as to the Space that
Circumscribed their Substances; because it is Impossible for them, for Reasons
before mentioned, to be naturally provided for, by any other Room, for their
Existence: And thus if any Receptacle, or Vessel, be supposed filled with
Earth, or Water, and those Materials afterward Removed; the Air will as
completely replenish the same Compass or Space, as if it had been filled by the
others before.

The last Example, given by me, ought to be understood of a preternatural, or
violent Motion, enforced by the Hand of Man, or other Accident; by which a
Substance that might be precedently in its proper Sphere, or Place of Rest, is
forcibly dispossessed of its Room by some other; when Nature to prevent
Vacuity, her main Abhorrence, supplys the Place of the Body, Irresistibly
Removed, with another Substance: Which in her natural Method is never effected
by her ordinary Alterations caused by Generation, Corruption, Rarifaction,
Condensation, and the like; or by which the more Weighty Body is Expelled by
the Lighter: No more possible then that the Earth, or any Part of it, should
mount from its Center unto the Ambient Air above it.

Wherefore the general Maxim of Descartes, by which he would Infer the
Transition of Bodies into the Vicinities and-Spaces of others; is no less
absurd than contradictory to the Established Course and Laws of Nature in order
to her Preservation of Things either as they Move or Rest: Which should (...)
otherwise admit, or according to this Author, there must be a Confused
Interruption, if not a Penetration of Bodies, Philosophically impossible, not
only of those that surround the Earth we Inhabit, but also of the Celestial
Luminaries that Immensely Move above our Heads; if they Revolved into higher or
lower Vicinities and Orbs than are naturally their own.

So perplexedly Inconsistent is the Opinion of this Writer, with the Beings of
whatsoever the World contains. As Incompatible, to common Understanding is the
Notion that he delivers in his 26th Particular, where he undertakes to prove,
That there is not more Action required to Motion than to Rest: Which seems, at
first sight, a Paradox of a Novel Edition. But had he seriously considered,
after the Inscribing of this Sentiment; and next had been asked, whether his
Pen had not been more commodiously Enclosed in his Desk, and his Hand in his
Pocket, than acttually Employed when he Writ this uneasy Sense? he would have
clearly distinguished betwixt Motion and Rest; as Words that Imply their
difference both in Name and Nature.

And it is some wonder, that Descartes, who largely abounds with Fanciful
Niceties, should have so narrow a Perception as not to discern the broad
Contrariety that Interprets Motion and Rest sensibly opposite. To which
purpose, Aristotle defines Rest as the privation of Motion in whatsoever is
naturally apt to Move. Wherefore the proper tendency that Things, in Motion,
have to acquiesce in their genuine Place, is rendered by some Philosophers, as
their final Perfection: Because nothing can be said to Move, but it does also
to its utmost Power, expedite its Innate Propensity to be sedate in its due
Station.

If a Stone falls from any considerable Height, Experience assures, that it
swiftest Moves when nearest to the Earth, the Center of its Being: But of its
self incapable of Active Movement when it comes to its resting Place; all which
is Heterogeneous to the Doctrine of this Author, who allows to the Acquiesence
of any Thing no less Motion than it had when it Moved.

The Instance he gives is, Because we persuade our selves, that our Bodies, at
our Will, Move and Rest, for no other Reason than that they adhere to the
ground in being heavy: And continues to say, That our Corporeal Weight, and
other Causes, not Animadverted by us, resisting the Motion that we would incite
in our Members, effect our Fatigues or Weariness, whilst we Impute more Action,
or greater Force to Instigate our Motion, than to cause it to Cease.

Here he creates an Idea, not unlike to the Poetical Fable of Ixion's,
embracing of a Cloud instead of Juno; for what can be more obscure to sensible
Conception, than to Infer, as he does, That the Body by suspending of its
Motion, does as indefatigably Move as when tired by Action? Which is much the
same as if he had undertook to prove, that it is possible for a Man to feel as
uneasy a Movement sitting still as when he was weary of Walking. Nor is the
Weight of the Animated Body, as to it self, or as it may be Diseased by Motion,
the only Cause of the Appetite it has to be relieved or eased by Rest; but as
Nature compells it, in being ponderous, to promote its lowest Acquiescence in
its Immovable Place Essentially Centered in the Bosom of the Earth, as the
Body has Room or Capacity to Descend: Nor would its Motion, till thither
arrived, be Impedited or Fatigued by the Labor of its Corporeal Parts, any
more than a Stone, as it falls downward, can be weary of the Motion of its
Substance. So totally Irresistible is the Power of Nature, that no longer
appropriates either Rest, or Life, to any Individual Thing, than is necessarily
consistent with its Place and Being.

If by her Indulgence she has Empowered Mankind and other Animated Creatures
with Corporeal Faculties and Parts, whereby they may diversely Execute their
Local Movements, as her gracious Distinction and necessary Endearments
peculiarly conferred for the convenient Support and continual Subsistence of
Living Individuals; it is contrary to the gross Allay of their Bodily
Compositions. Thus the Body of Man or Animal, may Move on the Surface of the
Earth, or by the extraordinary Energency of Life be exalted toward a
Mountain's top, when their Corporeal Substances, could they depart from the
Conduct of Life, would with far more Acceleration tumble downwards.

Let a Man, of the most expert and vigorous Agility, take a Leap upwards, his
Person shall come to the ground by swifter and easier Degrees than his
Activity, by its utmost Force, could Ascend.

Wherefore it is no painful Action, as this Author Insinuates, by which a living
Substance acquires its Rest; but rather a natural and Irresistible Motion that
inclines it to attain its proper Residence: Which proceeds from no other Cause
than the Quantitative Magnitude and Weight that Imposes the Descent of every
Corporeal Thing, as near as it can be promoted, to the Inferior Place of its
Repose.

If a Feather falls from any Height, allowing for the hinderance that its
Levity may receive from the Commotion of the Air; it will Descend no less
proportionably to its Weight than a Lump of Lead must do if dropped from the same
Altitude. And this is Mathematically certain, because no Substance, whatever,
can be said to Move but as it has Commensurable Parts.

These Examples are sufficient to Totter his Arguments on the Fund he erects
for them: Of which there remains One that he concludes this Head with, and in
his Sense, very apposite to his purpose. I wish that I had so found it, because
I love not to Dispute where it can reasonably be avoided. His Words are these,
-- There is as much Action required to the Removing of a Ship, that stands
Still on Water any Length Forward, as it is to Move it as far Backward. From
whence he would conclude, That a Corporeal Substance, in being Moved from and
to the Place where it Rested before, is equally Active.

Who could have expected that a Notion so Counter to direct Sense should be
Inscribed by Descartes: Since it is not the Motion of the Ship, as he puts the
Case, but the force of Hands that compells its Movement from and to the Place
where it remained before. And therefore a pretty kind of Supposition; or if
Termed a Ridicule, the Application might well be excused, by which he would
Intrigue his Reader to be Conceited with him, that any Corporeal Thing might
Philosophically Move, though naturally it did not Move at all.

Which perfect Contradiction, to approved Reason and Principles of Science, is
very apparent in the Example he gives of the Ship enforced to Remove; which, of
it self, might have stood Still; or contrarily, had it not been supported by
Water, would have sunk, in being ponderous, as far downwards as it could
Descend.

Which gives us a sound Assurance That the Proprieties of Motion and Rest, of
old determined, will not be discomposed by the Novel Institutions of this
Author; whereby he would Change the very Grammatical Construction in the Words
of Motion and Rest, by Converting their Significations into mere Modalities, or
diversified Actions of the Thing Moving, or as it ceases to Move.

But had it been demanded of him, Whether, if supposed he were fast-a-sleep
when he Dreamed of this Tenent, his Body had no less Action than as if he had
Imagined it to be really Walking or Running? I believe he would have otherwise
distinguished Motion and Rest than fancied, by him, in this Treatise.

Nor is the Similitude Incompatible with the Explanation he offers at the End
of the Page I write of; where he tells us, That by Motion is to be understood
Corporeal Transition, or as he calls it Translation, out of the Vicinity of
Contiguous Bodies into the next Approximation of others; but not out of one
Place into another: Which is allowable if applied to the fixed Capacities of
Nature, as potentially she may be Imagined to Circumscribe every Individual
Substance; though not, in common Understanding, actually True: Because no
Corporeal Thing can properly Move, unless its Commensurable Place does Remove
with it.

In which Sense, no Substance can be conceived to Move into the Vicinity, as he
Terms it, of another, but it must necessarily carry its Bodily Space and
Comprehension with it: No otherwise than a Man can be said to step into his
Neighbor's Ground out of his own, and not Transfer with him the Inseparable
Space that before Circumscribed his Body; though the Ground, that contained his
Person, could not Remove with him into his Neighbor's.

Yet nothing can be deduced, from any of these Instances, that Implies, That
Rest and Motion are equally Active, and not Contrarieties; or only different
Modalities, according to him, of whatsoever does Move or cease its Motion.

But if his Idea of Corporeal Movement be followed to the Vicinity unto which
he guides it; it is possible it might have acquiescence there; since he
undertakes not to prove, that it actually Moved after it came thither.

Other Particulars I find of his, relating to his preceding Notions of the
Motion of Bodies; and to which he has annexed the delineating of a few Schemes,
or Diagrams. But finding in them no Demonstrative Proof, or other concernment
than what I have before Discussed, or Answered: I therefore avoid the
perplexing my Reader with such obscure Diversities, which in my Judgment, he
delivers on this Subject, or as extravagantly distant from either
Philosophical, or Mathematical Certainty, as Fiction is from Truth: And thus I
come to his 31st Head, which I had also omitted, had I not observed, that he
there attempts to unvail more speciously his Mysterious Idea, than he had
formerly done: The Proposition he endeavors to prove, is, That in one and the
same Body there may be Innumerable diversities of Motion.

Notwithstanding, he grants, That no Individual Body can be understood, to have
more than one proper Motion; because, as he Affirms, it must be understood,
when Moving, to recede from several Bodies resting contiguous to it: However it
may participate of Innumerable Motions if it be part of other Bodies that have
diversities of Motion.

The Example he gives, is, Of a Man walking in a Ship, having a Watch in his
Pocket; the Wheels of the Watch Move but by one proper Motion, but participate
of another, whilsi being Conjoined to the Person that walks they compose one
Part of Matter, and another as they are Adjoined to the Ship, as also to the
Ship fluctuating on the Water, and likewise as it is joined to the Sea, and
lastly as it is so to the Earth, if the whole Earth be Moved.

To which, if Replied, That in the entrance he makes into this Particular, he
starts an Argument against himself; the Consequence will make it good.

For although it be true, That all Corporeals, whether Animate, or Inanimate,
of ponderous Compositions, have a natural and direct Inclination to Move
downwards; but not their sole motional Property: A Man by the Power and Faculty
that enables him locally to Move, can step upwards as well as downwards; and by
innumerable Actions and Motions of his Parts can abundantly vary his Postures,
together with his Feet, Limbs, and Fingers: Empowered with useful diversities
that admirably proceed from the Provendential Support, that is, to wonder,
bestowed on Humane Life; which could not without those accomplishments,
conveniently Subsist: To which purpose, enough has been Inserted in my
precedent Remarks.

But as to the other Part of this Head, where he insists, instead of other
Proof, on the Example he gives of the Instrumental Movement of the Wheels of a
Watch in the Pocket of a Man, as participating of the Motion of the Person, and
also of the Ship: Is sufficient without troubling my Reader with other of his
Instances of like signification, to terminate my Reply: Which briefly is thus,
-- The Argument he offers, is neither rationally, or Philosophically applicable
to what he Asserts; if considered, That the Motion of the Parts and Wheels of
the Watch are totally Artificial, and therefore cannot be naturally Contiguous
to the Motion of the Man or Ship: No more than Invention attained by Art can be
certainly deemed the Method of Nature, that allows no participation to the
Motion of Things, but as they are genuinely disposed and influenced by her
proper Conduct: Which cannot be equivalently Counterfeited by Humane Artifice,
no more than it is possible for the Brain of Man to create a Fabric suitable to
the Structure of the World, together with the Innumerable Materials and their
distinct Capacities and Operations, contained by it.

A Speculation of such undeniable Excellency, That had it been thought on by
Descartes, his Reason and Abilities in Science had otherwise disposed the
Credit of his Pen, than to have Inserted the Incongruous Comparison by which he
would Parallel, in his Sense of Motion, the Performance of Art, with the Action
produced by Nature. Which is very different from the Epithet he gives to Motion
and Rest in his 38th Paragraph, where he determines, That, by the Ordainment of
God, Matter together with Motion and Rest were, as to their ordinary Course,
originally Constituted. From whence he concludes, That all Parts of Material
Things, were primarily so disposed by the Will of the Almighty, as by their
diverse Conservations, the World's total Matter might be continually preserved
by the same determined Method, that every of its Particulars received when
first Created.

From which Immutable Decree of the Omnipotent he derives several Laws or Rules
of Nature.

The First of which he considers as her constant Industry and Prerogative,
whereby she would, as far as her Regalia's extend, unalterably continue every
particular Thing in its Manner of Being: And thus, whatsoever Moved, should, by
her Intention, be always Moved. So that if any Part of Matter represented its
Motion in a Square, or other suitable Figure, it would so perpetually continue,
did not some other Thing interrupt its Movement.

All which might be conceded, were not Nature obliged to dispense with, for
Universal Convenience, such Alterations, in her Methods of Rule, that she
accommodates to the frail Disposition of her Elementary Subjects; whose
Distempers, unless so prevented, would be more disorderly, or confused.

For which Reason, she necessarily waves her Original Intention as to the
permanent continuance of her Subordinate Individuals; by Exercising, in a
manner, against her Will, a Tyrannick Power, by which she kills some Beings, to
give Life and Repose to others: Which could not otherwise have room to Exist,
were the Compass of the World far greater than its conceived Dimension.

And thus we ought to apprehend the various Effects of Motion, as also such
Alterations as relate to Generation and Corruption, by which Things cease to
be, and others have Being. Though neither Motion, or any of its Concomitants, or
Tendencies, here mentioned, can be reasonably supposed, according to the
Opinion of this Author, to endeavor incessant Movement, did not some other
intervening Thing put an end to their Motion by obstructing its farther
progress: Which were to Affirm, That Motion were void of Design, if any Thing
Moved regardless of its proper Residence.

If granted, That the Motion of one Thing may cause the Motion of another to
cease; it is not to be understood as any hindrance that its natural Capacity can
receive, or the Intendment it has to Arrive where it ought to remain.

It being absurd to suppose, That Motion, as it is appropriated to Material
Composition, of which only we can be sensible, should be actually, or
potentially Imbued with a perpetual motional Faculty; which were to allow it
Indeterminate, and therefore Infinite; contrary to the undoubted Philosophiaal
Maxim, non datur Infinitum actu in rerum Natura: And as experimentally certain,
as that a Man cannot always Run, or Walk.

The Second Law, which he Attributes to Nature, he thus delivers, Every Motion,
of it self, is in a straight Line, and therefore whatsoever circularly Moves,
always endeavors to depart from the Center of the Circle it describes.

Before I enter my Replication to this Head, which, in some respects, is very
questionable; I think fit to Inform the Reader, how he does here Dissent from
what he delivered in his 32d Particular, where he grants, That Motion may be,
not seldom, exceedingly Contorted, Twisted, or Wrested; which he must intend by
such a lineal Movement as might be neither Direct, or Circular. And therefore
it must have such a kind of oblique Curvitude as cannot be comprehended by the
Definition of regular Curv's, or such as may be termed Geometrically
Commensurable; which by Learned Mathematicians is solely Attributed to the
Circle, Parabola, Hyperbola, and Ellipsis: The Reason they give is by
demonstrating, That no other Curvitudes can, in every of their Points, have a
due Relation to straight Lines; as it may be equally proved.

On which Mathematical Certainty is grounded their rejecting of all other
Curv's, as Mechanical; because, in particular, they cannot be Geometrical by
right Lines applied to such Figures; and therefore not to motional Things and
Parts, by Indistinct Commensurations; and such as may express their common
equality.

Whosoever desires to be assured by Geometrical Delineament and Proof, to this
purpose, he may Inspect the Commentary of Van-Schooten, a Dutch Mathematician,
on the Geometry of this Author. In the mean time this Observation is sufficient
to explain the egregious Mistake of this Writer, as to the Place
beforementioned: Where contrary to the actual Performance and Method of
Nature, that allows to every Thing Moved Commensurable Space and Parts; he
Allys the possibility of Motion to such a perverse and irregular Figure, as
would render it absolutely confused, instead of being orderly consistent with
the Certainty of Measure.

But now in the abovementioned Second Law of Nature, as he defines it, he
thinks it is very manifest, That Motion, by its simplicity of Operation, should
be conits simplicity of Operation, should be continued in a straight Line, but
never in a crooked.

Which is true, if meant of such Things, that by their Inherent Proprieties of
Length or Weight, Ascend, or Descend; which are always continued in a straight
Line: But are not so in every Thing that Moves, as may be evidently perceived
in that admirable Providence by whose Conduct the Celestial Motions of the Sun
and Planets have a constant Circular Revolution. Which sublime Manner, and
excellency of Motion, is no otherwise naturally theirs; than suitable Gravity,
or Lightness, is the Cause that Things so composed Move upwards, or downwards.

These Examples are sufficient to refell his general Hypothesis, by which he
would limit the genuine Action, of whatsoever does Move, to a direct Line;
without excepting the Orbs above, That he well understood did Move otherwise.

To which purpose, he delineates a Diagram the same in Effect, with this that
follows.



Let a Stone be supposed to Move by any Force, according to his Example, in a
Sling, as E A Circularly Moved in the same instant in which it is in the Point
A determined to Move, any whether, in a Right Line toward C; so as the Right
Line may be the Tangent of the Circle. It cannot be imagined to terminate
Motionally Contorted, though it first comes from L to A, by a crooked Line;
because nothing of that Curvitude can be understood to remain in it whilst it
is in the Point A. But should it then be out of the Sling, it would not Move
forward toward B, but toward C. -- From whence he concludes, That whatsoever
does Circularly Move, would always endeavor to depart from its Center.

Here he undertakes to give Nature a Law against her natural Legalities; if not
such a fictious Swing as would whisk her ordinary Operations, out of their
usual Course, into the Region of Fables.

It being very Demonstrable that both Parts of the Proposition, to which this
Diagram Relates, are erroneously Applied.

As to the First by which he would prove, That all Motion does of it self
proceed in a right Line; it is broadly untrue, if considered, that it is no less
Naturally than Mathematically Certain, That whatsoever Moves, must be
progressive with the Proper Superficies and Space, in every Kind, that
appertains to its Substance: When a Man Walks does he not suitably Move to the
Height, Breadth, and Depth, which, at that Instant, exposed the Proportions of
his Figure? The same may be Affirmed of the Motion of Animate, or Unanimated
Bodies.

On which ground, Geometricians determine, That a Line, of it self, has no
Commensurable Proportion compared to a Superficies; and therefore to no
substantial Velocity, or Motion, in any Consideration; otherwise than as,
betwixt two different superficies, lines may be allowed a Relative Proportion;
as in Squares, Parallelograms, and other Figures, that assimilate in Height,
and Breadth. Wherefore to Assert as he does, That by Intendment of Nature, all
Corporeal Motion is comprehended in a straight Line; were all one as to Affirm,
that a Mathematical Line, which, by Euclid is defined to consist merely of
Points, that have no Parts, otherwise then supposed, should singly Measure a
Superficies the Continent of Body. Not but in a genuine Philosophical Sense, a
Material Composition may have a direct Motion, allowing its requisite
Extension, Place, and Superficies transferred with it, either upwards or
downwards, according to the Nature of its Substance, but no other lineal
Rectitude, as is already Demonstrated: Where I Instanced the natural Tendencies
that Things Light, or Ponderous, have to their proper Stations; and therefore
Inconsistent with the Example he gives in the Diagram of a Stone Enforced, by
other Material Thing, or in a manner sling'd from its direct Movement into the
obliquity of a winding Figure; which must so detain it as never to depart, or
it is not to be doubted, that the Weight of the Stone would cause it to Move
downward toward its resting Place: On which account, the Stone may be supposed
to be taken from the Sling and flung at the Head of his Argument.

As intolerably extravagant is his other Principle, or rather Conceit that he
annexes to the Law of Nature; whereby he would take it for granted, That
whatsoever does circularly Move, has, in its self, an Inherent proneness to
Recede from its Center: Which is totally opposite to the Supreme Perfection of
Circular Motion, if compared with whatsoever is directly Lineal: Because it is
the Measure of Lineal Movement without separating its Terminations as the other
does. Which is obviously evident in the Motion of a Wheel, where the Terms of
its Motion are not so distinct that any one can be thought separated from the
other. But when a weighty Thing directly Move's from a Superior Place to an
Inferior, it may truly be Affirmed, that the Terms, of any such direct Motion,
are by their Interval and Distance considerably separated; which Separation
Imports Composition of Terms; but none to be found in Circular Movement, as is
manifest by the precedent Example.

Wherefore Aristotle acutely Defines the excellency of Circular Motion, by
considering, that it is more Absolute, or simply Complete, than can be
Attributed to any other Figure; by reason it is more Equal, and therefore less
obnoxions to Irregularity, and consequently more durable: From whence he
concludes. That it was the most perfect and first of Motious: As likewise a
possibility of Being Eternal; because no Part of a Circle can be said to be its
Beginning or Period; and where neither the First and Last, of any Thing, is
discernible; it may be allowed, in a manner, Eternal. To which purpose, the
Poet Virgil compendiously expresses the admirable Revolution of the Hours,
Days, and Seasons of the Year, by no more Words than, In se ciroumvolvitur
Annus.

Which shows, that Circular Motion is not effected by any forcible Cause or
Inclination that any Thing Moved can, by that means, be endu'd with, whereby to
depart from its Center, according to the devised Maxim of this Author: But
rather a continued Providential and Natural Method in order to the Computation
of Time, together with the Innumerable Benefits that from thence accrue to
Mankind, with whatsoever the World Comprehends. And if otherwise reputed,
'twere as easy to believe that Providence might receive a forcible Period; or
that the Sun and Planets have as natural a propensity to drop from the Orbs in
which they Revolve, as the Stone might have to fall out of the Sling, in the
precedent Diagram. So that the Principle which he would Entitle to the Law of
Nature, does more concenter with the Tenent of a Philosophical Renegado,
outlawed by her regulr Ordainments, than could be expected from the Pen of
Descartes.

I endeavored to be as piquant, as I might be, in my Remark on this Subject,
because he owns it for a main foundation on which he Erects not a few of his
ensuing Discussions.

The Third Law that he gives to Nature, is, That any one Substance, meeting
with a Stronger, loses nothing of its Motion by its Occurrence to one of
greater strength, but lessens its Motion by as much as it Transfers to the
other.

Here he continues a perpetual War amongst the Subjects of Nature; and with
that exorbitant violence, that he allows Victory to the Stronger on all
considerations: Whereby he Interprets the ordinary Course of Things, tending to
the Universal Preservation and Conduct of Nature, no other than so many
Hostilities Executed by the Strong against the Weak.

If Bodies are altered by the movable Effects of Rarifaction and Condensation,
they are not so Moved, or Produced by a preternatural and varied Violence; but
rather usefully Conveyed and Disposed to such Receptacles of Nature where their
Beings were wanted, and could not be supplied without the convenient
Alterations of Material Things. The like may be said of Generation and
Corruption Incident to all Elementary Compositions.

And though Nature, in some Sense, may have the Artribute of Perpetuity; there
can not be the same permanency allowed to Particulars within her Dominion,
whereby they might be equally Everlasting with her self; which would level her
Incessant Prerogative, in common with her Subjects, or imply the Dissolution of
her superlative Dominion: Too profound to be fathomed by the most skilful Brain
of Man, or be disordered by any Speculation inconsistent with her Perfections:
Which had this Author requisitely considered, he would not have enterpriz'd the
Imbroyling of her Rule with so many turbulent Diversities, or Anarchical
Violence, that may be Imputed to his Principles as they derogate from her
operative Contrivements, and Motion of Things in Reference to their due
continuations and apt disposure, agreeable to the Capacities of their Existence.

But notwithstanding he has frequently Catechis'd Nature according to the Model
of his invented Principles, and especially, in this Place, where he attempts to
enact Laws as if Confirmed by the touch of her Scepter: As also to present his
Reader with several subsequent Rules, by which he would be understood to have
prevented what might be Alleged against them.

All which I inpected with the clearest Eye of my Understanding, being no less
desirous that my Pen should have been convinced by his, than he endeavors the
Estimation of his own.

But finding, by the strictest Inquisition I could apply to his offered
Probations, That I was led into a Wilderness of Notions, out of which no
Thought of mine could give me Passage: I concluded, That it would be no small
ease to my Reader, and my self, if I omitted such of his Intricate Discussions,
and delineated Schemes, as might have perplexed the utmost Diligence of the
considerate Peruser. For which I have, in some Part, his own consent; as may be
seen in his 53d Particular, where he acknowledges that his precedent Rules, as
to the Nature and Motion of Corporeal Substances, are not easily understood.
And where there is not a facility of Perception, relating to the intended
purpose; it can have no other Construction than Impertinent, or Trivial, or at
least, not worth a labored Explanation.

And thus I pass to his Conclusion, where I observe, in general, That he is
more confident of his Premises than was to be expected from so Ingenious a
Writer.

In the Assertion he closes with, he delivers this Affirmation, That no other
Principles are admitted by him than are both Physical and Mathematical
Certainties; because by them not only all the Phaenomena's of Nature are
explained, but also Certain Demonstrations given from them.

If this peremptory Assurance be true; the Author of these Remarks has taken no
small pains to little purpose; but if not so, the commendation he has bestowed
upon his Undertaking will be as little to his advantage, as the Indulgent
Applause, usually is, that Men Attribute to their peculiar Wit or Science: To
which I might Reply, without disrespecting this Author, or the Modesty that
becomes my Pen, That I am not more in the Right than he is in the Wrong,
wheresoever I have differed from him, either on the Philosophical or
Mathematical Account: As in reference to both, I may, without Ostentation,
Aver, That his Idea's, Propositions and Allegations, as they are taxed by me;
are rather Improbabilities, if not fictitiously introduced by him than
naturally Allied to Proof or the Being of Things.

For though Mathematical Operations cannot be Refin'dly Contemplated, but as they
have an Immaterial, or Spiritual Eminency relating to the proportionable
Dimensions which they unerrably give to whatsoever may be regularly Defined of
substantial Existence: Yet by a distinct Excellence, partake not at all of
Matter howsoever Commensurated by them. And thus may a Proposition in Euclid be
proved, if only, in Thought, delineated: But when applied to any Material
Being, the Substance unto which it Relates, must as really, and in the same
manner Exist, as is suitable to the Certainty of its Demonstration.

But not to be so understood by the Doctrine of Descartes, who sets Nature at
Work as he fancy's her Operations. Insomuch that a Substance cannot directly
Move toward its proper Place of Being, but he conceives it more or less
obstructed by some other Body, or whirled in a Line, of a different
Denomination, to another Point of the Compass, or not to be Imagined whether:
Much of the same Similitude with the Figure of the Stone in the Sling, as it is
inserted in the preceding Diagram.

All which exorbitant Modalities and Motions of Things, as he supposes them to
Act as they are either Hard, Flexible, Condensed, or Fluid; are rather singular
Fictions, or forcible Contrarieties, Complicated by his Brain, than concentring
with the prone Facility of Natural Operations: Absolutely Inconsistent, by a
Philosophical Maxim, with the prodigious and continual Violence imposed on
Causes and Effects; as by this Author is devised the Conduct of Nature. Yet
after all, he is no less confident than to Affirm, that his Philosophical
Hypothesis is Mathematically Certain in every Consideration: Which, without
other rebuke to the Phrase of his Boasting, is as far from being proved by
Rules of Science, as Fiction may be from undoubted Truth: Or as if he had
undertook to have delineated, out of Euclid, a Coat for the Moon, that should
have demonstrably fitted her Figure in every Change of her Appearance.

If I have dealt freely with Descartes where his Notions and Proofs were
questionable; it is agreeable to his Example, who spares no Author where he
thought him Taxable. Though I have been favorable in not extending my Exceptions
so far as I might have taken occasion: Which I hope the Reader will excuse, or
think himself obliged; because I Entertained him with no more Words than I
thought sufficient to give a Period to my Remarks on the Second Part of the
Philosophy of Descartes.

REMARKS On the Third Part of the New PHILOSOPHY OF DESCARTES. As they Relate
to the VISIBLE WORLD. PART. III.
IF admirable, even to ecstasy of Thought, by what manner of natural Operation,
or superlative Act of Providence, the Humane Composition, in Soul and Body, was
Originally produced to that transcendent Degree, That his Intellectual Faculty,
by lineal Descent and Right, continues him an absolute Monarch of
Understanding, in Reference to the Government of himself and other Creatures:
It Is highly incumbent on Man, to be not only gratefully considerate of his
being such; but also to acknowledge his utmost Celebration of the Supreme Cause
of his wonderful Existence. Which mighty Consideration ought to transport the
Prospect of Thought far beyond the Excellency conferred on Mankind in Soul and
Person: Which can be but narrowly compared with the vast complex of the
Universal World and the Innumerable Wonders surrounded by it.

Wherefore, if the best Inspection made by the Humane Intellect, in
Contemplating the manner of its rational Being, be posed, by its own Riddle,
above its Power to unfold: How stupendiously must then be Involved the most
elaborate Attempt of Man's Understanding; when to the peculiar Wonder that is
Exerted from his own Existence, he adds the Innumerable Miracles conspicuously
visible in the Structure of the Universe? And what is yet more Transcendent,
the admirable Author of what we are, and all we behold, seems Envelop'd, from
the Eye, by his wonderful Fabric and Works.

If the Learned Descartes, in the beginning of this Treatise, seems not a
little fond of his own Applause, by signifying to his Reader, That he has
Invented certain Principles, by which, he conceives, That Nature is unveiled in
her, as yet, unknown Recesses: He is far more modest, in his subsequent
Expressions, where he bows the Knee of his Philosophy to the Infinite Power,
Amplitude, and Beauty, of the Works of the Almighty: Concluding withal, That
it is highly requisite to avoid all such confident Imaginations, whereby we
might undertake, by uncertain Suppositions, to limit Omnipotent Power, or
Abstract in any Kind, from its Incomprehensible Performance.

This Conclusion I submit to, but cannot approve the confidence of his
Introduction contained in the Entrance he makes into this Paragraph; as the
Reader may perceive by the Remarks I have made on his First and Second
Treatise; where, I presume, I have effectually demonstrated, That his
Principles could not have an entire Birthright from the Womb of Nature: Which,
in substance, he does acknowledge by the Advice he gives, before he ends this
Page, That we ought not to believe, That, by Divine Determination, the World
was Created merely for our sakes; or that it is possible, by any Thought of
ours, to apprehend the End for which it was Ordained: Adding this Reason, That
many Things are now in Being, and heretofore, that were never seen or
understood by Man, or any Use they could yield to him.

In his 4th Particular of this Third Part of his Philosophy, he confidently
assures us, That his Principles are so vast, and fruitful, that they not only
Imply many more than are to be perceived in the World we behold; but also far
more numerous than we can Imagine: To which purpose, he begins, in his Method,
with the Phenomenon, or the main natural appearances; the Causes of which he
commits to his subsequent Investigations, or as, he intends them, Proofs of
such Effects as he, in this Place mentions.

And next; he pertinently Rebukes the too common Ignorance of such that by
their ocular simplicity erroneously judge, that the Sun and Moon, as they seem
to appear, are therefore much bigger than other Stars. Which vulgar Mistake is
easily prevented by duly apprehending the Distance of the Sun and Moon from
the Earth, and comparing of their Diameters as they are now observed; to all
which I fully agree.

Wherefore to recount how far remote the more than wonderful Celestial
Luminaries are from our Earthly Habitation; I will not dispute the Computation,
he delivers, by opposing against his Account, the Elder Observations of Learned
Astronomers: But rather so to compare Ancient and Modern Calculations, as
thence may be apprehended the Indefatigable Endeavor and Industry of Men to
render a sublime Account of the wonderful Height, Figure, Beings, and Motions,
that, to the amazement of our Eyes, continue their shining Bounties innumerably
influenced for the Support of Humane Life, with whatsoever subsists within the
Compass of the World: Which universal and admired Munificence, being highly
considered by Persons famously Erudite, both in past and latter Times, exalted
the Ambition and Gratitude of their Science to be as far, as was possible for
them, requisitely Intelligent of the conspicuous Embellishments of the Skies;
that they might be, from thence, the more Supremely sensible of the Blessings
they received from Above.

But whilst in this Transcendent Inquisition of Thought, they Employed the best
of their Skill and Diligence, 'twas soon found too distinctly Excellent to be
exactly Computed, howsoever they varied the Schemes of their Hypothesis: As not
being able by Art, Conception of the Mind, or any Instrumental Assistance, though
proper for Commensuration of Things familiarly near to our Eyes and Senses, to
reach, suitable to common Certainty, the most Approximate top of the Spheres of
Heaven.

The distance of the fixed Stars are allowed by exquisite Astronomers, as also
by this Author, to be too Immensely remote for any accountable Measure that can
be given of them. And therefore I shall only take notice of the Sun and
Planets, together with their Magnitudes, and Distance from the Earth; but as to
their Distance from us, because it is usually by Astronomers accounted by
Diameters, or Semidiameters, of the Earth, yet seldom declared by them, the Sum
of their Measures as they may be applied to Leagues, Miles, or the like: I
think fit for the advantage of the Reader, to Impart how much in English Miles,
as the most useful Computation, a Diameter of the Earth does amount to. Which I
proved by this Method; it having been Experimented by Judicious Observators,
That one Degree of a great Circle above, correspondent to the Superficies of
the Earth, Answers to a direct Journey of 73 Miles, which multiplied by 360
Degrees, allowed to the orbicular Form, or Circle of the Earth, the Sum will
be 26280 Miles for the total Compass of the Earth: And because the proportion
of the Diameter of a Circle to its Circumference is, by approved
Mathematicians, accounted as 7 is, very near to 22: According to which Method I
computed a Diameter of the Earth to contain about 8327 Miles; and her
Semidiameter somewhat more than 4163 Miles.

To apply which to Ancient Astronomical Observations, or such of the accurate
Arabians, mentioned by Learned Gassendus, as observed suitable to the
Ptolemaick Principles, they are thus Inserted according to the Mediocrity of
each Planet's Distance from us.

Distant from the Earth. In Semidiemeters of the Earth. Distance in English
Miles. The Moon. 49 203987 Mercury. 115 478745 Venus. 618 2572734 Sun. 1165
4849895 Mars. 4584 19083192 Jupiter. 10423 43380949 Saturn. 15800 65775400

After these, the most signal Astronomer was Nicholas Copernicus, a Canon of
Torunense, who lived about 190 Years past: Some of whose Observations, as I
read, were made at Frueburg in Prussia in the Year 1525, where the Elevation of
the North Pole is 54 Degrees. 19m: He was a Man of vast Ingenuity, however
questionable his Hypothesis of the Motion of the Earth; but if applied to the
Sun instead of the Earth, there is no better Astronomical System, and so
approved, by the Learned at this Day. Nothing Remakable is found in him as to
the Magnitude and Distance of the fixed Stars, more than that the Earth was as
a Point if compared with the great Orb above; judiciously conceiving them too
Remote for his applying to them any certain Rule or Demonstration whereby to
compute their mighty Distance: Of the Planets, he chiefly regarded the Sun and
Moon; defining the Sun to be 3240 times bigger than the Earth; and the Moon no
less than 860 greater, in which Computations he doubtless Erred, as may be seen
by the following Examples; but most egregiously mistaken in the Account he
gives of the Moon; she being certainly discerned much less than the Earth ever
since the approved Invention and Use of the Telescope:

His next famous Astronomical Successor was Tycho-Brahe, a Noble Man of
Denmark; who is said to have been learnedly Accomplished, as also furnished by
his large Expense, with abundance of Instruments excellently proper for his
great Undertaking: Wherefore the Computations he mentions are highly esteemed
at this Day.

The Observations he made of the Distance, and Magnitude of the Planets, are
these according to their Mean, or Mediocrity of Distance.

Distant from the Earth. In Semidiameters of the Earth. Moon. 56 Mercury. 1150
Venus. 1150 Sun. 1150 Mars. 1745 Jupiter. 3990 Saturn. 10550

Whosoever is desirous to Convert the Planetary Semidiameters into English
Miles, may readily perform it by the preceding Example.

The Magnitude of the Planets compared to the bigness of the Earth, are these
that follow,

Moon. Lesser. 42 Twenty Times. Mercury. 19 Venus. 6 Sun. Greater. 139 Mars.
Lesser. 13 Jupiter. Greater. 14 Saturn. 22

By these disagreeable Computations, of so many eminent Persons, may well be
discerned how far beyond, the reach of Science, are the shining Wonders above
our Heads: Not more Impossible to be exactly Computed, than if a Man should
undertake to touch the Center of a Star with the end of his Finger; or to
extend a Line, by any prospect of Art, to the nearest Verge of boundless
Omnipotence.

Nor is it in the Power of Geometry in many Cases, though more clearly
demonstrative than other Sciences, to express its due signification and Extent
by numerical Computations, as is evident by abundant Theorems: Of which, these
may be thus signally Inserted.

In a Square, or right Angled Parallelogram, the Diagonal that, in either of
those Figures, is drawn from one Point of its Termination to another, is
potentially equal, in such Delineaments, to any two Sides that include the
right Angle; as may be Demonstrated, by these Examples, grounded on the 47th
Proposition of the First Book of Euclid, from whence it is proved, That the
Square of B D, in either of the Figures, is equal to one half of the Figure to
which it appertains: So that the Square of the Line B D, in both of them, is
equal to the half of 16 which is 8: Though there be no such Square Number as 8,
or any true Square Root to be given of it; but instead thereof such an
Irrational Root as is 2, with a large decimal Fraction Annexed thereto.

The like might be Affirmed of a Line divided according to the 11th of the 2d
Book of Euclid, by extreme and mean Proportion, so that the Square of the
greater Segment may be equal to the Product of the whole Line and lesser
Segment: Which may be lineally Demonstrated, though incapable of being Equaled
by any numerical Sum, or the literal Powers of Algebraical Equations: Which
admirable Dignity of Lines, caused incomparable oughtred to Entitle the latter
Proposition, almost Divine; and as much is here proved in commendation of the
Precedent.

These Instances I think sufficient to express the excellency of Geometry; and
withal of such occasional Importance, in reference to my Remarks on some
Passages of this Author, that it Incites me to apply, according to the nearest
Epithet and Derivative of the verbal Name of Geometry; its most undoubted, and
perfect Use, to the dimension of a plain Superficies: Which, in the Sense of
the great and wise Philosopher Socrates, in whose celebrated School the admired
Euclid was said to Instruct, is surest employed on such Supputations that have
convenient Extents and Periods on the Ground we tread, and possess; and
therefore more sensibly Computed, by the familiar Measure that may be taken
from our Steps and Paces, when any Portions of Land are, by that Method, to be
disposed or accounted. But no such lineal Certainty, was ever Invented, that
could so elevate the Side of a Triangle, that it might undoubtedly ascend to a
Celestial Superficies, or Angles to be taken from above, by any Instrumental
Perfection, whereby the Geometrical Proportions, of its other Sides might be
duly resolved. All which may be undeniably concluded by whomsoever shall
Inspect the Planetary Magnitudes, and Distance from us; as I have before
Inscribed them out of the different Records of famous Astronomers: From whence
it may be evidently Asserted, That no Geometry, or Science of theirs, could
demonstrate their Systems, or Astronomical Calculations. Notwithstanding, it is
Ordained by the Almighty in Power and Conduct, that the Sun, in giving
comfortable Light to our Eyes and Splendour to our Days, should be more Certain
in Motion, and usefully computable, by never progressing from his Ecliptic
Line, than any other of the Celestial Luminaries. And thus by the Prince of
Stars, the Sun, are the Accounts of Time and seasonable Blessings of the Year
continually dispensed.

Which is Emphatically expressed by Ovid, in the Second Book of his
Metamorphosis, in these Verses.

-- Purpurea velatus vest sedebat
In solio Phoebus, claris lucente smaragdis:
A dextra laevaque dies, et mensis, et annus,
Saeculaque, et positae spatiis aequalibus horae:
Verque novum stabat cinctum florente Corona:
Stabat nuda Aestas, et spicea serta gerebat:
Stabat et Autumnus calcatis sordidus uvis:
Et glacialis Hyems canos hirsuta Capillos.
But it is to be noted, That although the Sun, by the Munificence of Heaven, is
the refulgent means whereby the Solemnities of Time are distinguished, and
celebrated by us: Yet no such absolute exactness, tending to the Measures of
his sublime Motion, can be computed by us, as may render his just Place, or
Movement equal to his Revolution in his mighty Orb, Termed by Astronomers the
difference betwixt his mean and apparent Motion: Which proceeds from his slower
Progress in one Semicircle of his Annual Course than in the other; or because
his proper Journey in the six Northern Signs of the Eccliptick is somewhat
longer, before dispatched, than in the Southern; which is a certain Proof, that
the Center of his Excentricity is different from the Center of the World.

But no such Incongruity has ever been observed betwixt the due Motion of the
Sun, and that which appears to us, as renders it Insufficient for the
convenient Use of the Dial, Hourglass, or Clock: Which ought to be signally
considered, as a peculiar Benefit of uncomputable Providence, that permits us
not to Err, where we can give no exact Account, in the necessary Computation,
even by ordinary Means, of our Hours, by Day and Night.

He were much to blame that instead of being pertinently satisfied with the
Extent of Science in Things of nearest concernment, or because the Sun, so far
as is requisite for him to understand, Illuminates his Time; would therefore
Judge, to the grievance of his Brain, That he could as approximately compute
the Arithmetical Distance of the Orb of Light, from any Part of the Superficies
of the Earth, as by a Quadrant he could find the Sun's Horizontal Exaltation or
Hour of the Day: Though Experience assures, that the most transcendent Skill has
been variously frustrated in the Attempt; as may be perceived by Examples in
this Treatise, by me Inserted. Wherefore the sublimest Admiration of the far
distant Wonders above us, is more certainly our Duty than any Task that can be
given to Science, by which Men would reckon the remote Distance of the
Neighborhood of Heaven. But notwithstanding these discouragements, it may be
allowed commendable in such, That by the Eruditeness of their Skill would
Ascend to the most complete and nearest Admiration of Things, no less obvious
than perspicuously visible, as a welcome Discovery to all Mankind.

These considerable Particulars I thought fit to mention, as a proper
Parenthesis, before my return to Descartes; whom I find, as if somewhat
deterred by the Mistakes of others, to offer his uncertain Computation; and
which he only Applies to the Distance of the Moon and Sun, from the Earth.
Which converted into Miles by the Rule before given: The Moon's Distance from
the Earth is 249810 Miles. And the Sun's Distance, by taking a mean
proportional Number betwixt 600 and 700 Diameters, because he Inserts no
certain Number; I conceive to be nearest the Truth of what he intends: Which
mean Proportional is very near 648, which multiplying 8327, the Earth's
Diameter in Miles, as before found, the Distance of the Sun from the Earth is
5315896 English Miles. Which Distances, according to this Author, Relate to the
Copernican System of the Earth's Motion: The Truth of which Hypothesis will be
effectually questioned by what succeeds.

But these Distances, if true, and compared with the appearing Diameters of the
Sun and Moon, as they may be perceived by the Telescope, will prove the Sun
much greater than the Earth, and the Moon much lesser: And so they were found
by the Observations of Tycho, precedently Inscribed.

The Distance of the Five other Planets, from the Sun, as they relate to the
beforementioned System, he thus accounts: Mercury above 200 Diameters of the
Earth, Venus above 400; Mars 900, or 1000; Jupiter above 3000; Saturn 5, or
6000 Diameters of the Earth, distant from her. The Copernican Hypothesis is so
much the same with his; and so frequently Inscribed in Almanacks, that I shall
desire my Reader rather to Inspect any one of them there, than to trouble my
self with delineating of a Diagram, to so thread bare a Purpose here.

The difference that he allows the Stars, not only as some of them are greater
than others, but as the Planets receive their Illuminations communicated to
them by the Light of the Sun; Concenters with the general Opinion of all
Astronomers.

Nor will I directly oppose the Imagination he Annexes, by which he Attributes
to every of the fixed Stars, a particular Fountain of Light; and as distant
from the Sun, as the Sun is from us: Concluding, That were we Situated as near
the six'd Stars as we are to the Sun, we might observe any one of their
Magnitudes as much Illuminated as the Sun appears to our Sight.

On which ground, it is possible he may be, though but in Conceit, as much in the
right, as any certain Argument, or Proof that can be urged to the contrary; by
reason of the wonderful appearance, and immense remoteness of the fixed Stars
from us. Notwithstanding that the famous Tycho, as far as his accurase
Observation could elevate his Computation, determines in general, that the
fixed Stars are not nearer the Earth than 13000 of her Semidiameters.

But in the 11th and 12th Particulars of this Treatise, this Author delivers a
more unparalled Paradox than ever was Imputed to a Learned Pen: The First is,
That the Earth, though a very opacous Body, is as perfectly enlightened by the
Beams of the Sun, as the Moon; wherefore he conceives the Earth to be also a
Planet: And why might he not have Affirmed the same of Glass, Iron, or any
other solid Substance? since we are assured by common Experience, That every
one of these are not only capable of being Illuminated by the Sun, but will
also have their Shadows: So that according to his Opinion, any gross opacous
Matter may be estimated on a shining Day, no less a Madam, in Composition and
Feature, than the Moon or Planet Venus.

It seems he forgot that these Stars continue their Light, whilst the Earth has
not Sun-Light longer than the Sun shines on her. But why he so cheaply compares
the Dominion of the bright Queen of Night, with the dull Earthly Lamp, on which
we Inhabit, I connot guess; unless by some one of those, which he calls
distinct, and unerrable Ideas, he imagined, That his Person was elevated to a
Market in the Moon, and there observed some Utensils, in a Ihon of all
Trades-Shop, marvellously reflecting the Illuminations and Beams of the Sun:
And surely he might as well allow the possibility of these Examples, with
whatsoever besides has Being on Earth, as perfectly Existing in the Moon: Since
by his Tenent; a very capacious World may be thought encompassed by Her.

His other egregious Mistake depends on the Former, which is, That he fancies,
that the Earth performs the Part of the Sun, by Illuminating the Face of the
Moon, beheld by us, when she is in her New Estate, or Conjunction with him.

Which Notion is very false, both in a Philosophical and Astronomical
Consideration: Nothing being more unnatural, than to Attribute Planetary Light,
either Communicable, or Inherent, to the unrefin'd Body of the Earth; which can
be no otherwise understood, by reason that there is no such Thing as a pure
Element of Earth; but rather its Substance grossly Commixt and Corrupted, by the
Intercourse of the other Elements: And thus Air, Earth, Fire, and Water; as Use
and Observation assure us, are impurely mixed. And should the Earth, as she
does, and must necessarily so Subsist, receive Light or Flame from the Sun, in
common with the Planets: Her corrupt Frame and combustible Materials would have
been long ago totally burning; to the utter dissolution of the Figure and
Composition that she now possesses: However Antecedent to the Opinion, of some
Learned Divines, that defers her Conflagration to the Day of Judgment.

And this might have been effected with as much Facility, as a Burning-glass
kindles a Pipe of Tobacco: Especially if granted, the Earth a Planet, according
to this Author, and always Moving; because Motion where it is sufficiently
continued, Inflames every Thing that is materially capable to be set on fire;
as is visible in the Axletree of a Wagon caused by the Movement of the Wheel
that round it turns.

The like might be determined in reference to the Moon, and other Motional
Stars; if their Compositions were Elementarily mingled: But their Substance is
more Sublime, and Excellent; if not superlative to any Definition that can be
given of their Nature and Manner of Existence: As I doubt not is Emphatically
proved by my Remarks on the 21th Particular of the Second Part of this Author's
Philosophical Treatise: To which I refer the Reader.

And whereas he would confirm his Assertion, by pretending, That the Earth
Illuminates, some part of the Moon, when she is in Conjunction with the Sun:
It Is no less diametrically opposite to what we behold, in that State of the
Moon, than it is to Astronomical Certainty; and why might not the Moon as well
receive Light from the Earth, according to his Doctrine, when at her Full she
is sometimes so Eclipsically opposite to the Sun, as twice A Year he passes by
the Nodes, or is near unto them, called the Dragon's Head and Tail, that she
appears totally Darkened? Which can be no otherwise caused, than as the Earth
is betwixt her and the Sun: But could she then receive any glimpse, or sign of
Light from the Earth, it would be as discernible as at any other Time: Which
enough Confirms, That the Earth is no Luminary Planet, and therefore none at
All; as will be proved by what is to come.

In the mean time, it is not improper, on this Occasion, to Explain the Phases,
or Figure of the Moon, especially when in Conjunction with the Sun; which,
without the trouble of a Diagram, may be thus readily Expressed.

It Is not to be doubted, That the Moon, as she moves round the Earth, has
always one half of her Illuminated by the Sun; but not so as that half is
always visible to us: Though sometimes more, or less, or nothing of her
Enlightened Half appearing toward us; by reason, that as so many Semicircles,
or as it were Semiglobes of the Moon's Compass, are turned to the Eye, or
Earth; they cannot, considering their Curvitures, be discerned, in Plain, by
the Eye. And this differently happens, as the Light of the Sun to Sight, may be
obstructed by the Unequal, or Mountainous Part of the Earth; or by the
Intervening of Aerial, Vapors which cause the Face of the Moon, that is turned
toward us, to be Represented more Dark and spotted, than otherwise, she would
appear. Which several Phases, or Figures, observable in every State, or Age of
the Moon, almost never the same; proceed from no other Cause, than the
diversity and swiftness of her Motion, far exceeding all other Stars; as is
well known to Astronomers.

Whence it is, that after her Monthly Change and Renovation of her Figure, she
sooner or later Describes, as it were, a Glimpse of Light in a small Arch of
her Circumference: And suitably increased and varied, according as the
Diversities of her Motions, and other accidental Occurrences, permit her to be
beheld by us.

Which Manner of Appearance, in the bloome of her Light, does sufficiently
demonstrate, That her Figure and Motion are Orbicular, and not Elliptical; as
some of the Copernicans, or Cartesians, too confidently Determine.

The next Application of my Pen shall be in fitting my Observations to such
Particulars, as suitable to the main Intention of my Discussions, ought to be
most considerably Inspected, either as orderly Examined, or as I find them
dispersed in his Treatise; omitting such Things as are either Inconsiderable in
themselves, or not to be repeated, because formerly Answered by me.

Of which the First requires a Supreme Mention, as it egregiously directs the
Prospect of the Humane Intellect to the contemplating of the resplendent
Fountain of Light, diffused by the Sun; by whose munificent Beams our Days are
Blessed; and the Moon and Stars, the wonderful Torches of Night, kindled for
the direction of our Eyes.

How difficult is it therefore to conceive the remote Nature or Being of so
Transcendent a Miracle notwithstanding that we receive its commodious Benefits,
as they grow with our Hours? Which shows how far, beyond the reach of our
Understandings we are made happy from Above. On which account I cannot but
admire the cursory Definition that is delivered by Descartes, by which he
would Attribute to the Sun an Epithet not more Refined, than what may be
signified by his general Notion of a flaming Substance: But grants, as he
cannot do otherwise, That the Sun does not Inflame in resemblance to Fire we
use: If it did; our Earthly Habitations and Subsistence would be consumed to
Ashes.

But, notwithstanding, the Word Flame, as he Inserts it, is not allowable,
because we cannot be sensible of any Thing that flames, but we must also
apprehend, that it has a burning Capacity: And so we understand the Flame that
proceeds from Lightning that bursts thorough Clouds with Thunder. But no such
kind of violent Heat or Burning can have Emanation with the Innumerable Rays
or Beams of the Sun. There are diverse Things that may be said to have Heat, and
yet no Flame: As the Warmth that a Man feels, or resides in the Temper of his
Body: And thus Heat may be properly termed a Corporeal Quality; as also, that
it may be communicated from one Material Being to another: But in the Sun there
can be neither Flame, or Heat, diffused from his Substance; which is very
evident in Mountanous Situations, that, however high they Extend, and therefore
nearer to the Sun, are far Colder than Inferior Regions: Which could not, be if
the Substance of the Sun were naturally Hot, or a Flame, in any kind, as
defined by this Author.

Against whom the general Opinion of most approved Philosophers is fully
opposed by denying, That the Elementary Qualities of Heat, Cold, Moisture and
Dryness, are either Inherent or directly proceeding from the pureness of Light
transmitted from the Sun and Stars: As also that Experience assures us, That
sometimes, when the Night is abundantly enlightened by the Moon and Stars,
their Nocturnal Motions account colder Hours than if the Night had been Dark
and Clouded. And comparatively the same may be not seldom observed in a shining
Day, when the Aerial Cold is not at all profligated by the Splendors of the
Sun; but rather continues more frigid than if his Diary of Hours had, for that
time, Revolved in a Mist.

How then does it come to pass, that the Sun and Stars, which only dispense
their Illuminations to the Day and Night, and refinedly Existing above
whatsoever Purity that can be supposed most Excellent in Elementary
Compositions; should notwithstanding be conceived to Influence such Qualities,
or other Substances, which they have not in their own?

The best Account given by the Erudite in Philosophical Science is, That the
shining Radiations of the Sun and Stars by their Motion, together with such
Parts of the Air and other Bodies most contiguous to their Revolutions, and the
commixture of Celestial Beams conveyed, do operate in a wonderful Method, on
inferior Substances, which is the soundest Reason, that they can render, or
cause of the Variations of Heat, Cold, Moisture and Dryness, that as so many
accidental Effects, and admirable Operations, are beneficially disposed from
above.

On which stupendous Consideration, the safest Determination should be rather
sublimely to admire, than to Define the miraculous shining of the Stars and
Sun; or Term their Illuminated Substance, according to the Tenent of
Descartes, no other than may be liken'd to a Flame produced by Fire: Nothing
being more unadvisably Rash, than to be inquisitive of such Existencies, Causes
and Effects, that, by the Conduct of Heaven, are concealed from us.

His other Mistake, and I presume so to name it, is, That he Affirms the Sun as
absolutely fixed to a Point, in his Orb, as the Stars are in the Firmament
above him: By which determination he takes from the Sun the Glory of his
Ecliptic, or Annual Progression. And as to his Substance, and Manner of Being,
he defines it no other than very fluidly Composed and Moveable; as also
perpetually Discipated and extinguished by some circumjacent Matter: But so as
when any Part is dispersed or extinguished, the Sun is immediately replenished
with other: And I conceive he would be thought to Imagine the same manner of
Existence relating to the Number of Stars and Planets. But as to the Term of
Fluid, which he apply's to the Substance of the Sun; it can neither in a
Grammatical, or Philosophical Sense, be otherwise Conster'd than as the Word is
appropriated to some moist, or wet Matter that Moves with a feeble Current: And
thus as he states the Case, something is always sliding into the Sun, whilst as
much slips from his Substance.

But could he judge, or any Man for him, That the Alteration he mentions in the
Sun, might not too nearly resemble, or be properly Interpreted an Elementary
Change, in as mean a Source as concurs with Corporeal Alterations familiaar
with us: It being impossible so to distinguish the Supplement, or Diminution of
any Material Thing, that it may not have a Natural Tendency to Generation, or
Corruption; which must be Implied, as the Proprieties of Substance, wheresoever
it is alterably varied in Proportion or Figure.

The fixed Stars he grants, more Immensely distant from us than can be probably
Computed; and I believe he is in the right. But I think he may be as much in
the wrong by his Inventing of so many separate Orbits, Motions, and Distances,
upwards and downwards, from one another; as by Imagination he has removed some
Thousands of Stars from the Constellations to which all Former Astronomers
determined them fixed: As also, by defining of them no other, to whomsoever
will accept his Hypothesis, than in Grandeur and Refulgency equal to the Sun,
were they as near our Eyes; but wherever they are, he continues them fasten^d
to their single Circumferences in the same manner as he allows the Sun: So
that, according to his Opinion, had we longer Optics, we might behold every
one of them, in a separate Sphere, as fully Conspicuous as the Days bright
Phoebus. But after all, he offers not so much as a plain Triangle to prove his
Conceit.

Some Schemes he has raised in which he so confusedly Represents, and as it
were Embroiders the abovementioned Spheres of Stars; and by so many
Obliquities and Figurative windings, together with their Curvitures on all
sides, upwards, and downwards, that there cannot be discerned, amongst them,
one Section of a Cone, or conical Figure, that can be Geometrically described.

The Substance of the Heavens, as also their Vicinities, he calls Fluid; into
which he Infuses abundance of liquid Matter, that may be compared to a
Whirl-pool, and these he denominates Vortices: And next, lets go, amongst them,
as he finds occasion, such deminutive Substances, which he Terms Moving
Globuli; or rather swimming Spawns of Matter, much of fictitional Resemblance
to the devised Atoms of Epicurus.

By these Things, fancifully Employed, he undertakes to Revolve all the
Motional Stars, together with the Earth, which he takes for a Copernican
Planet, instead of the Sun, that he exempts from Motion whether Diurnal or
Annual.

His Diagrams, to this extravagant purpose, I leave to the Inspection of the
Reader, as they are to be found in his Book; being not desirous to Cumber mine,
or punish my Brain and Fingers, by copying of such of his Draughts that I
conceive are Improperly Applied.

The main concern that I shall chiefly insist on, shall be the Plea that he
makes for the Motion of the Earth instead of the Sun; which I shall question,
before a very Supreme Tribunal, as he ought to be Philosophically and
Mathematically accountable.

That the Earth is Globulous, or naturally Round by the Coition and Knitting of
its Parts to its Center; is also Astronomically proved, because to such as
directly Travel toward the North or South Points of the Meridian, the Pole
appears either more or less Elevated or Depressed: Moreover that going farther
Eastward, or Westward, the Eye may behold some Stars Rise sooner, or Set later
than others. To which may be added, that the Moon, the more Easterly Eclipsed,
is, by her proper Motion, as it were backward from West to East, more Hours
from the Meridiam, or Midnight, than Westerly Eclipsed.

By the Globe of the Earth is comprehensively meant, as Cosmographers
Determine, its being surrounded, or being continued with the Orbicular
Superficies of Water, as its Parts appertain to one and the same Center with
the Earth: To which may be added the common Experience of Navigators, who
Sailing from a Port discern the Unequal Superficies of the Water above the Land.

That the Earth is placed in the Center of the World is Philosophically proved;
because whatsoever is ponderous, within the Compass of the Universe, naturally
tends downwards, or which is all one, to the Center of the Earth; from whence
should she Ascend 'twere no less than to Recede from her Center, on which she
is poised by her own Weight, in Moving upwards; all which were absurdly
Impossible.

By undoubted Astronomical Observations it is certainly proved, that the Earth
is the Center of the Universe: Otherwise the World could not be divided into
two Hemispheres; because neither more nor less than six Signs of the Zodiac,
above the Earth, are at any time visible: As also, that the Moon could not be
Eclipsed in Diametrical opposition to the Sun, if the Earth did not Intervene.

And though the Globe of the Earth does Circumferentially contain near 26280
English Miles; it is but, as it were, a Point if compared to the Firmament, or
Orb of the Sun, above: To which may be added the obvious Observation
Demonstrated by the Hour Lines of every Dial; from whence it is very
perceivable, that the Shadow Moves no less Regularly, about such Centers, than
it surrounds the Center of the Earth.

Nor could any Artist, for the Use of his Profession, raise a direct
Perpendicular applied to any Height, or Level; if his Hand, Line and Plummet,
were rapidly Revolved by the Motion of the Earth: Which must, by its swift
Acceleration, were there Truth in the Copernican Hypothesis, Move, according to
Learned Computation, at least 1111 of our Miles in one Minute of an Hour: A
Revolution far more allowable to the Sun, as his Substance is defined, in a
manner Spiritual, by erudite Authority, than to the heaviest of Bodies, the
Earth. Some undertake to allege, That the Motive was, because that by his
System he avoided some Epicycles and Circles that had been with greater
difficulty used by Ptolemy: Which may be allowed on that Consideration, or as,
mutatis mutandis, Astronomers at this Day apply his Theory to the Sun instead
of the Earth.

And if Affirmed, as the Copernicans usually argue, That extraordinary Motion
ought rather to be Conceded to the Earth than the Sun, by reason that the Earth
is so very small, if compared to the vast Dimension of the other: The Answer
is, That a swift Horse will sooner dispatch a long Journey, before an Ant can
go a Yard.

Whosoever would adhere, notwithstanding the convincing Allegations here
mentioned, to the Copernican, or Cartesian System; might find his Opinion
Ridiculed by very young Experience: Insomuch that the Boy, who found the Roost
or Nest of a Bird this Minute, might seek it, if he could, above a Thousand
Miles at the next. Nor could the Bird find, by the swiftness of its Wing, when
the Earth rapidly moved Eastward, better then the Boy, its Roost, or Nest; as
it designed to fly toward either Westward. And doubtless the Brain of the Boy,
and Bird, might be giddily discomposed by the hasty Progression of the Earth,
which could not but totter every Thing that belonged to her Surface: And much
more easily Imagined, that Men had their Heels struck up as she Revolved, than
that one of Mankind could, in that wonderful Circumstance, Stand, or Walk, on
her Superficies. But what might become of Houses and Edifices, if Revolving
with the Durnal Motion of the Earth? Why surely the best that could be hoped
from the Hypothesis, by the World's Inhabitants, would be, That their Chimneys
might smoke when arrived with them, to their Antipodes: Since, as sure as
Check, the Copernican System would whirle um thither.

But it is a Doubt, they would be confusedly shattered and tossed from their
Foundations, before swing'd to that Point of the Earth's Diameter. If Men will
not be laughed out of the Conceit of the Earth's Motion; they may, if they
please, consider the soundness of the Reasons here offered, in a Philosophical
and Astronomical Sense: And it is probable they may, that way, confute their
precedent Tenent.

To be plain, I have mentioned no Absurdities that are not naturally Incident
to that Hypothesis; as certainly, as no Habitation, in the known World, could a
Moment continue its due Situation, either as to Heaven or Earth, if they were
granted: To prove which, let the following Diagram be well Inspected, in which
the Circle W, E, B, Represents the Horizon, E, Ae, W, the Equator; B, Z, P, the
Meridian; E, W, the East and West Azimuth. Let the Earth, according to the
Copernican System, be supposed to be in the Equator E, Ae, W, on any one of the
Equinoctial Days of the Year, and in any one of the Hours of the Day, on both
Sides of the Meridian B, Z, P; as they are here signified on the Equinoctial W,
Ae, E: Let Z denote the Zenith, Z, Ae, the Latitude of London 51 degrees. 30 m. The
Lines drawn from the Zenith Z, and continued by the pricked Lines to the
Horizon W, E, B, on both Sides of the Equator, are vertical Circles or
Azimuths: The Points where they touch the Place of the Earth in the Equator, in
any of those Hours, if the Earth be supposed to Move; are to be understood as
they are Numbered by Hours, in the Diagram. Of all which, one Example may
serve, instead of more: Wherefore in the Spherical Triangle Z, Ae, 1 there is
given Z, Ae, the Latitude of London, or Distance of the Zenith from the
Equator, W, Ae, E, 51 degrees. 30 m. Ae 1 the Hour on the Equator 15 degrees. with the
right Angle Ae, the Interfection of the Meridian and Equator, by which may be
found Z 1 the Distance, in that Hour of the Azimuth of the Earth from the
Equinoctial W, Ae, E, the difference betwixt it and Z Ae, the true and fixed
Latitude of London, should the Earth Move, by resolving of the spherical
Triangle Z, Ae, 1, and comparing of the Side Z 1, when found, with Z Ae, will
be 1 degrees. 33 min. in one Hour's time: In two Hours, 5 degrees. 53 min: In three 12
degrees. 24 min: In four 20 degrees. 22 min. If the several Triangles be Resolved
suitably to those Hours: So that the Zenith and Elevation of Pole, as also the
Meridian, must accordingly vary, together with the Points of the Compass and
Situation of Countries throughout the World; if the Earth be supposed to Move:
All which sufficiently Refell, or totally Confute, the Copernican Hypothesis.

And though by this Calculation, the Earth is Imagined to be in the Equator; it is
not to be doubted, if the Earth were thought to describe, by her Ecliptical
Declination, any Parallel to the Equator, that there could be wanted suitable
Proportions; if applied by whomsoever understands the Doctrine of the Sphere.
At present it is enough proved, by me, how much, in any time given, the Earth,
by Moving, must transfer and alter the Zenith and Elevation of the Pole, as may
be perceived by the Diagram here delineated: And perfectly Demonstrates the
Copernican Absurdity, or rather the Impossibility of Motion in the Earth;
however complied with by the Opinion of Descartes: So that the Earth may be
confined to her Immovable Station, to the expunging of the Planetary Room
given her, in any Scheme, by this Author, betwixt Mars and Venus; from whence,
by his Hypothesis, he removes the Sun, and places him below the Planets as
their common Center. But the Proofs that I have Inserted, are, I presume, in
all kinds, so perspicuous, that I need not Catechize any Delineation or Diagram
of his in order to a clearer Confutation: So that if the Earth does not Move,
and surely no Proof of his has been weighty enough to Remove her, she must be
no Vagrant from her Place, whatsoever becomes of his Hypothesis.

For which Reason, I hold it Impertinent farther to Employ my Ruling-Pen,
Compass, or spherical Calculation in Opposition to his Planetary Theory: Had he
not added to his Novel System the Superfetation of Comets, which he denominates
Planets, with no less assurance than if by a Convention of Stars it had been
signified to him, That they ought to be Naturalized into their Number; though
formerly reputed spurious intruding Foreigners, and confined by the Learned
Ministry of Science, to Exercise their Motions and Posutres far below the
nearest Palace of Heaven; till advanced by Descartes to Superior Orbs: Who
assures us, That it is expedient to allow, to their irregularity and rambling
Above, as vast a Sphere as can be supposed betwixt Saturn, the sublimest of
Planets, and the six'd Stars. But by what means he exalts their Substance to
that Height, shall be considered, when I Treat of the Materials with which he
undertakes to furnish, and, in a manner, Compose the visible World.

Which he tells us, in his 54th Particular is by such an unerrable Idea
committed to his Understanding, That it were all one as to question an
Inspiration dispensed by the Almighty, as to doubt of the Principles and Causes
that he delivers: Though he could not but know, that he was their first
Communicator. But had he been asked, Why God should so limit his Providence as
not precedently to Illuminate other Men, with as much scientifical Certainty as
he imputes to the Novel Discoveries made by his Pen? He might have been
somewhat out of Countenance, or posed to Reply: Which in effect he confesses
afterward, where he acknowledges, That it is not safe to be confidently
conceited, or too far pr esume on private Opinion; but rather as a Philosopher,
or by way of Hypothesis to propose such Notions, which if supposed untrue, they
may be equivalent to Truth, if deduceable from them such Things as may be
experimentally useful.

Here he seems to depose Fiction from the Throne of Reason, by depending on
such Certainties that are above whatsoever Fund, can be erected by Humane
Imagination; and this he briefly signifies, by attributing Creation to the
World with such absolute Perfection, that originally completed the Sun, Moon
and Stars: As also, that the Earth was primarily embellished with Vegetables of
all Kinds, maturely perfect: And that the first of Mankind which he believes,
was Adam and Eve, were Created in the exactest Bloom of Man and Woman: Of all
which he grants himself Religiously, and Rationally assured. But
notwithstanding he advises us, as our more ready Expedient, rather to consider
by what means Things might be produced, than in what Method they were
originally Created by God.

In my Opinion, he had better have acquiesc'd on the Miracle of the Creation,
than to have prepared the expectation of his Reader, as he does in this
Paragraph, by inviting him to attend on the Seminary of his Brain, from whence
he under takes to Expose the Principles, Beginnings, Ingredients, Vegetations,
etc. of whatsoever the Universe contains; as likewise out of what Materials the
Humane Composition was first effected: Avowing, that his Principles are very
Concedable.

And so I grant, could any one Miracle be understood by undertaking to prove it
by admitting of another: It being as Impossible to Explicate, by any material
Process, the Original Production of an Atom, as any Star of the First Magnitude.

And such I doubt may be found, not a few, of his Incomprehensible
Suppositions; as unaccountable, perhaps, to Man's Understanding, as if he had
undertaken to Enumerate the Points that are contained in the unknown Circle of
the Universal World. The main Phoenomena's of his stupendous Philosophy,
Relate to the Primitive Existence of Matter; which Matter, he abundantly
divides into diversities of Parts, and them again as variously divisible: To
these he appropriates different Motions; but supposes, that every Substance of
which the visible World is Composed, might, by Divine Appointment, be very near
equal: Of which he Imagines, that the Heavens and Stars were produced; and of
the most fluid Materials; applying the more Gross or Thick to inferior Things.

All which, in his Opinion might be no less orderly determined; than if they
had Originally slipped out of Chaos with all their several Capacities and
Motional Dexterities.

Thus far I have Extracted the quintescence of his Hypothesis; or indeed but a
revived Model, as it may be well understood, of the Doctrine of Epicurus; there
being little difference betwixt his Theory of Atoms and setting them on work,
as he opens the Door of Chaos, than as diminutive Particles of Nature, they are
busily Modeled by Descartes.

And I think, that the Poetical Fancy of Ovid may be admitted to share, in
Principles, with both, where he expresses the first Start of the World's
Individuals out of the confused Seeds of deformed Chaos in these Verses:

Unus erat toto Naturae vultus in Orb
Quem dixere Chaos; rudis indigestaque moles,
-- congestaque eodem
Non been Junctarum discordia semina rerum.
But should the fanciful Monsieur Descartes be questioned for the Chaos of his
Principles out of which he deduces the Constituted World; the Infancy of Nature
would be as oddly understood from his Positions, as in the fantastical Doctrine
of Epicurus, or in the Lines of Poetical Ovid.

Wherefore, as I conceive his Maxims to be too innumerably perplexed and
entangled for my Brain, or a better to explicate; I shall wave them accordingly
by confining my Observations to a cursory Consideration of some Particulars
that I judge most useful, and therefore fit to be separated from the rest.

The Primitive Ingredients annexed by this Author to the Original Consistence
and forming of the Visible World, together with every Individual Substance,
within its vast Circumference, are comprehended in three Elements no otherwise
different than as they are more or less fluid.

The First of which he conceives so forcibly acting, that in meeting with other
Bodies it is divided into very diminutive and numberless Particulars:
Accommodating its various Figures to the replenishing of all Angles that were
caused by them.

The Second Element he supposes divided into very small spherical Particles;
but of certain, and determinate Quantity; and divisible into many less.

The Third he defines more Gross, or Thick; consisting of Figures not very
inclinable to Motion: Of the first of these he conceives the Sun and fixed
Stars Composed; the Heavens, or Firmaments above of the Second; the Earth,
together with the Planets and Comets, made up of the Third.

Which Catalogue of Elements he thinks very significant; because, as he
conceives, that only the Sun and fixed Stars properly emit Light; the Heavens
transmit it; and by the Earth, Planets, and Comets, remitted, which difference
he judges may be discerned; and therefore believes it well referred to Three
Elements.

If Nature has accommodated us with Four Elements, of which we are as certainly
Intelligent as that Heat, Cold, Moisture, and Dryness, are incident to her
genune Production of Things: This Author has exempted one out of her Catalogue;
and what is more, has complicated a Trinity of Elements into one Substance,
which he no otherwise distinguishes, than as in some Operations and Capacities,
it is more Fluid than in other; as he applies it to the primary Production of
the Visible World, and whatsoever had Being in it. So that the First Star that
twinkled in the Universe, was, in his Judgment, but such a refined Part of
Fluid Matter, which if sufficiently thickened might have grossly produced an
Elephantick Constellation in the Firmament. But of such Particulars more
hereafter, or when I Inscribe my intended Remarks on the Fourth Part of his
Philosophy, where he Treats of the Earth and its Appurtenances.

In the mean time, I shall briefly Elevate my Observations to the height of his
Suppositions as they tend to the Method delivered by Descartes, whereby he
would conceive in what manner the fixed Stars and Sun might be Originally
formed and completed.

In the beginning, he means of the World, the Matter of the First Element
increased, by reason that the Particles of the Second Element, by their
assiduous Motion did impair one another: From whence it ensued, that the
Quantity of the Second Element was greater in the Universe than was necessary
to fill up such exiguous Spaces that were between the spherical Particulars of
the Second Element, as they were mutually Incumbent: So that whatsoever did
remain, after those Spaces were so replenished, had a Recourse to certain
Centers: And there Composed the most Fluid spherical Bodies, the Sun on one
Center, and six'd Stars on others: But afterward when the Particulars of the
Second Element were more attrited, or worn, and receding equally from their
Centers, they left such spherical Spaces as were, from all Circumjacent Places,
by the flowing thither of the First Element, exactly filled.

His Words I have delivered in as clean English as I could fit, or contract
them to his purpose; but that being done, I must confess that I cannot Conster
their meaning: It being very unconceivable, how he could furnish his Brain with
a speculative Idea of such Particles of Nature separately and fluidly Moving;
since whatsoever is Fluid must necessarily Imply a continued material Emanation
of the same Substance; as in purest Water it is impossible to imagine any
separate Fluidity in any of its Particles; no more than the most diminutive
Bubbles, when discerned on a flowing Spring, or River, can be said to be
separately Fluid. And next to Affirm, as he does, That such Materials could
movingly Atteriate or Rub one another less; there being no such Capacity in any
Fluid Substance: Wherefore if he had used the Epithet of washing, or dashing,
of greater into smaller Particulars, though somewhat Improper; the Expression had
been more pardonable than his calling them Rubbers of one another into any
Fluid Diminution. And what is more, he undertakes by their reciprocal Motions
to fill up every Corner amongst them: But how to find an Angle in any continual
Fluid Matter, cannot be understood by Geometrical Delineation; wherefore I
wonder to find in so knowing a Mathematician, as was this Author, so
undemonstrable a System.

But howsoever Interpreted, he undertakes abundantly to Replenish, with such
petit material Quantities, no less than three of the Superior and vastest
Heavens: And next by his Invented Vortices, which in a Grammatical Sense, may
be denominated Whirl-pools, he Circumvolves Clusters of them, until he has
disposed them capacious enough to be Metamorphos'd, by Motion, into the Figures
of the Stars and Sun.

Against the main of his Opinion that the Heavens are fluidly Composed, on
which the rest of his Phaenomena's depend, there is farther to be objected,
That it is unnatural, and clearly Inconsistent with undeniable Philosophical
Principles; and as contradictory to ocular Evidence: By which we are assured,
as perfectly, as by Sight we can discern, that the Sun and Stars must be of the
same Celestial Substance with the total Heavens; and which is not denied by
Descartes otherwise than as he supposes some Parts of it, which he calls the
first or most fluid Element; and therefore ought not to be so defined by him:
Because whasoever is Fluid is also dissipable, and consequently may be more
Extended, Dilated, or Contracted; but neither of these are to be observed in
the Figure or Appearance of the Sun, that always continues exactly Spherical;
though at some times, the clearness of his Figure is not equally perceivable by
reason of Exhalations and Vapors that interpose, betwixt his Splendors and the
Eye of the Beholder. Moreover if any Part of the Celestial Substance were
fluidly dissipable; Nature would be necessitated, to prevent Vacuity, the
detested Opposite to her Existence; that some inferior Matter, or Body, should
Ascend to supply that place in the Heavens where the Parts were separately
removed: Which were repugnant to Providence, that has ordained, that no other
than the Substance of Heaven, by any Natural Motion, shall possess the Supreme
Part of the Universal World: If it could, the Elementary and Corporeal Mixture
of Bodies below, might be corruptly intermingled with the refined Nature of the
Heavens, which are apparently unalterable, undiminish'd, and as totally
uncorrupted: In which Sense it may be concluded, That the Heavens are
Immutable, and therefore Impatible; as being of supremest Excellency, or not at
all partaking with the distempered Compositions, or Ingredients that constitute
other Bodies.

If the Heavens are determined to be of the most tenuous Subtilty and
Perfection, as necessarily they must be, because far supremer than all other
Beings of the Visible World, and therefore a Propriety inseparably conferred on
the Superiority of their Existence; insomuch as they never can Descend; which
is absolutely contrary to all other Quantitative Magnitudes that Move
downwards, or, like the heavy Composure of the Earth, naturally tend or reside
in the lowest Place: Yet in a wonderful manner the Substance of the Heavens may
be deemed no less Tenuous than excellently Solid, by reason that the entireness
of their simplicity admits not other Substance to be Coherent or Moving with
them: For which Reasons, had this Author defined, in the same manner, the
Substance of the Heavens, it had been far more concedable, than to have
determined them, in any kind, Fluid; as being an Epithet not at all Concentring
with the Notion we ought to have of the sublimity of their Motions, and
refin'dness of their Appearance. To Sum, in a Word, my Objection, nothing can
be Termed Fluid, but must have a moist Propriety, and Moisture, in whatsoever
Substance, is nearly Allied to Water, and therefore of some weight: Whereas it
is possible to allow Admirable, or Incomprehensible Tenuity, not at all
ponderous; which claims a Dignity perferrable to any Opinion that can be
alleged to the contrary.

The other Mistake of this Author is, That he is positive in Affirming That the
Motions of the Particles, or Globuli, as he names them, of the Celestial
Substance, have a natural propensity, to depart from their Centers:
Notwithstanding, he grants them, however diminitive, to be spherically Figured;
by which Inclination or Endeavors of theirs to be excentrically Removed; he
Affirms, That the Light of the Stars and Sun is both attained and consistent
with them.

Which Maxim of his, in effect, were all one, as if he had determined circular
Motion to be preposterously and forcibly Conferred; as he would suppose the
prone inclination of Things to relinquish Central and Circular Movement: A
Tenent highly unnatural, and contrary to the Method of Providence, that
doubtless does, in a manner, Celebrate the most sublime and excellent Substance
of the Heavens with the most perfect Motions. How Stars then should attain
their wonderful Light, or exactness of their Figure, by an irregular Motion;
were to debase the Omnipotent Cause of their Illuminated Existence: As I have
remarked, on his Notions of the Laws of Motion, in the former Second Part of
this Treatise.

As also, by what I proved a little before, in this Part, by undoubted
Principles of Philosophy in opposition to his Idea, or Supposition, of the
exorbitant Motion of such Fluid Globulous Particles of Matter, that by their
Flux and Reflux, he would imagine the Light of the Sun continually preserved
and replenished: Is the reason, as I precedently instanced, why I think them
impertinent, and consequently avoid the giving of my self the trouble of
delineating diverse of his perplexed Diagrams; as being sufficiently, I believe,
confuted, together with his Methods of Motion, and the Funds on which he erects
them: All which, to the best Eye of my Understanding, seem no less obscure, or
uncomputable, than if a Man should undertake to Demonstrate the several
Movements, Obliquities, Situations and Figures of innumerable multitudes of the
most diminutive Sands, when scattered, by Winds, throughout the largest African
Desert.

On which account, I may well omit such Theories, Systems and Schemes of his,
that I take to be insufficient, or such as, in his own Words, he declares
rather probable than Certain: Wherefore the passing from whole Pages of them,
to what may be more Intelligible, or sensibly communicated; cannot be
unacceptable to my Reader, if I that way exempt the Labor and Toil of his
Eyes, from Inspecting of such Things, as might, in no kind, satisfy his
expectation, or deserve the pains of the Inscriber.

And thus I pass to his 115th Particular, where he undertakes to tell us, how a
fixed Star may be converted into a Comet.

The Cause he renders, of such a blazing Prodigy, being no other, Than that it
is a Globulous, Opacous, and hard Substance congeriously Composed of abundance
of Spots rapidly moved by some whirling Vicinity, or Vortex, of his
Denomination; which moved irregular, and if so descending, passes to inferior
Vortices, where making a stop he determines it a Comet.

But if it afterward descends to a certain distance from any Star, to which
the Center of that Vortex does belong, it then remains there, and Revolving
about it, is an absolute Planet: This, in brief, is the substance of this Head,
as he delivers it.

What considerate Man is there, that by reading of those Words, would not
Interpret them of a complicated, dark, or heavy Sense; if compared to the
admirable Celerity, of their Import, by creating of a Comet, or on his
Conditions, a Planet? Unless by favoring the Pen of the Learned Descartes,
some gentle Reader might deem it the most sublime Stuff that ever was written
by any Author. And such, I doubt, are the Ingredients by which he Composes, in
any of his Considerations, the Substance of a Comet.

But if there are in the Heavens no such Materials, of which he undertakes to
Metamorphose fixed Stars into Comets, or into Planets, and constitute Vortices
and Globuli, together with the Motions he annexes to them; all that he has
written on that Subject, may signify no more than Vapors of his Brain; and
Comets no other than spuriously produced by sublunary Exhalations sublimely
elevated, as not a few of the Learned have Written; and perhaps, as surely so
Composed, as that the Body of Descartes consisted of Elementary Parts; into
what Vapourous, or Crude Imaginations must then vanish his Hypothesis of Comets!

That there is no such Substance in the Heavens, as he distinguishes them by
his Trine of Elements, before mentioned, is very manifest, both as he defines
them Fluid, and from the Motion he annexes to them: Which if granted to Move as
supplemental or diminishing of any Material Thing, they must partake of
Elementary Nature and Mixture: Because whatsoever is dilated, or contracted,
must likewise vary Extension; and nothing but what is Elementary can be so
understood, or be properly the Object of Sense: On which ground, the most
Judicious Philosophers have defined the Heavens, with all their orbicular
Vicinities, of a distinct Essence from the rest of the World, which cannot be
Affirmed of the Vortices or Globuli devised by this Author, of which he
declares some more fluidly, thin, opacous, gross, or thicker than others: And
where lives the Man, that pretends to the least Philosophical Sense, that would
admit any of these Definitions or Qualifications, otherwise than as Elementary
Proprieties incident to the alteration and corruptible Tempers of Things in
that manner Constituted?

But so much has already been Written to this purpose, of the Nature of the Sun
and Stars, to which I can add nothing here, unless I reiterate my former
Discussions; though I am as little a Friend to Repetitions, as I am to tedious
Penmen: A Reflection that might be pinned on some Treatises of this Author,
without being pronely Satirical: Who seems to vary his Fluid Phaenomena's,
Vortices and Globuli, in several Diagrams; but if duly considered, are to no
better purpose, than where the Fund of any one of them proves unfound, the
others are disproved: And I have dealt with some of his Tractates accordingly,
by waving diverse of his Particulars, where I thought they might be, in a small
compass, significantly Answered.

The Substance of what he delivers of the various Appearances and prodigious
Motions of Comets is briefly thus; granting that by the most accurate
Observation that can be made of them, no exact Rule is to be given of their
Transmigrations from one part of Heaven to another, as in a few Months or Days
they frequently vanish from our Sight; and sometimes not much more, or at other
times, Move less than amounts to a middle part of Heaven; as also, that when
they are first seen they usually seem of greatest Extension: But toward their
Period, gradually diminish, and as in the beginning of their Appearance, their
Motion is swiftest; about the end, they are observed to Move slowest.

All which admirable Diversities and Phaenomena's, he considers as caused by
such Vortices and Globuli, as I have already mentioned, and for the Reasons
given by me, shall totally be declined, together with the Imaginary Proofs that
he would deduce from them.

But in their stead, as far more explicitly satisfactory, I shall present my
Reader with the most considerable Opinions of Learned Philosophers, in
reference to the Cause, Effects, Being and Motion of Comets.

That they are Prodigies of an extraordinary Nature, is unanimously determined
by the Famous in Science.

Seneca, of all the Latin Writers most spiritually Ingenious, writes to this
purpose, in the 7th Book of his Natural Questions. -- As of many Things, says
he, that we grant in Being, we are Ignorant, and in particular of the Mind, or
Soul within us, by which our Persons and Actions are guided: As also, of what,
or how produced that Mind or Soul: How then can we undertake certainly to know
other mysterious Existencies, so far removed from us, when the Mind within us,
as to its own Being, is a Mystery to it self?

And therefore not to be admired, if Comets, the most rare and surprising
Objects, are so visible to us, that by no certain Rules, their Intervals,
Beginnings and Periods, are understood by us.

And well may the Humane Mind, as Seneca infers, if deficient by not
apprehending the manner of its Existence, as imperfectly consider Things above
us; and especially such as are highly distant from our Eyes, and use of our
Senses. Wherefore Aristotle, in his Treatise, de Coelo, acutely determines,
That Celestial Objects, as they are, of all others, most Remote from sensible
Perception, so no less distant from any evident Demonstration, or Science, that
can be Affirmed from their Observation. That Comets are produced from
Elementary Exhalations, as their Principal Cause, is the general Opinion of
many of the Learned Ancients and not a few of like Repute amongst Modern
Authors: Because in Figure they diversely vary as their Substance Inereases, or
Diminishes, according to the time of their Appearance, until their Matter, as
it were consumed, they totally vanish: Which they frequently do, when in their
highest Elevations; and therefore never observed to Rise or Set as does a Star
or Planet, and consequently not of their Substance, no more than a Star can be
defined mixed or elementarily Existing. Whereas, to the contrary, it is ocularly
evident, that the Matter of Comets is gradually Extinguished; which proceeds
from no other Cause than that Comets are natuturally alterable, and decay as to
their extent, bigness, fading of their Color, and shining Appearance; in such
a manner as can be Attributed to no other Cause than the variety of their
Elementary Compositions; which nothing can have but what may tend to a
corruptible Period: More properly ascribed to the extraordinary Phoenomena's of
Meteors, then converted, from the Substance of Stars, into Comets, or changed
from thence to an absolute Planet; suitable to the wonderful Supposition of
Descartes.

The exalting of Comets to Celestial Rooms and Etherial Movements, may be
imputed to the mistaken Supputations of their Heights and Distance from us;
either as they have not been or cannot be exactly observed: In respect that the
Progressions of Comets are so instantly and perplexedly various; as
precipitately, in some Moments of Time, they are motionally downwards; and, in
other, as immediately Ascendant: From which uncomputable difficulties the
endeavored Calculations of Famous Astronomers, as to the exactness they
intended, have been doubtless frustrated.

Which may well be admitted, if judiciously weighed, how hard it is to give a
true Account of Things far above us: Insomuch that it is almost as facile to
Compute their remoteness by the Eye, as to render it Arithmetically or
Instrumentally Certain. Should a Jacob's Staff be made ten times longer than
Salisbury Steeple, it might prove too short by any Proportions, it could give,
were it applied to the surveying of the Distance of a Comet from the ground we
tread on; though no other than a Meteor in the supremest Region of the Air:
Because we do not certainly know, how far the Lowest, Middle, or Sublimest Part
of the Areial Region is distant from us.

Suppose a high Cloud did Diametrically Intervene betwixt the Sun and us, and
let a Man be imagined, as near as possible, by the most approved Instrument to
take its central Altitude above the Horizon: And the very next Moment that the
Cloud removes, let him also, in the same manner observe the Horizontal Height
of the Sun; it is not to be doubted, that he might find, by comparing, little
difference betwixt their Altitudes.

And if this be probable, we may be assured of the uncertainty of Astronomical
Observations that would higher Ascend.

The uncertainty of the Place of Comets, and their Distance from us is also
more or less by reason of the different Inequalities of the Superficies of the
Earth, which is a main Cause of the Erroneous Computation both of their
Quantity and Distance; by reason that the Eye ought to be in the Center when
Observation of Comets is any ways performed: As also, that the Eye is hindered,
or obstructed by Reason of such gross and fuliginous Matter as is naturally
incident with Comets: Since all Vision by optic Principles, must necessarily
be disposed and formed according to the Disposition of the Medium by which it
is received and conveyed to Sight: And thus the irregular and various
Disporportions that appear in the Figure, Quantity and Distance of Comets, are
diversely beheld, or in a manner by Refraction, not unlike the viewing of a
piece of Money in Water, it seems to be greater than it is, and at the top,
when it is really at the bottom: According to which Similitude the
parallactical Angle, or the difference betwixt the true and apparent Place of a
Star, though the best Geometrical Method in order to its Calculation, is very
uncertainly found by accurate Astronomers, when applied to Comets; and
notoriously evident if compared their Observations; which are so exceedingly
Discrepant, that even to Infinite Degrees and Miles their Computations differ
as they Relate to the Magnitude and Distance of Comets from the Earth. All
which may be egregiously apprehended if conferred the Observations of Famous
Tycho with other Learned Astronomers that were before, and after him, of
Eminent Reputation.

To which may be added the ocular Experience of Ages past, whereby it is
assured, that Comets together with their blazings, are Dissipated and
Extinguished, when they nearly approach to the Ecliptic or Equator: Which is
contrary to the Motion of the Planetary Luminaries that regularly Move in
respect of those Circles, about the Sun; from whose Beams they receive the
brightness of their Splendors: So that Comets either in Place, Nature, or
Motion, can be no other than elevated Meteors and therefore of no Similitude
with, or Derivation from Celestial Substance; or at all Composed by such
unexplicable Methods as are Instanced by the Scheme, Diagrams and Notions of
Descartes.

Lastly, the Matter of Comets may be indisputably Affirmed, elementarily Mixed,
and obnoxiously Distempered and Composed, from the malevolent Effects that, too
frequently are consequent to their Appearance: As Plagues, Famine, Destruction
of Cattle by killing Diseases, scarcity of Grain, and the like: And sometimes
superlatively omnious as they presage the Death of some Prince: Whose Period as
Ptolemy is quoted by Albertus Magnus, is most especially signified, when a
Morning Comet is in the Sign that did Ascend at his Nativity. In Sum, that
Comets are terribly Prodigious, and extraordinary Prognostics dispensed from
Above; or as severe Emblems of the displeasures and punishments of Heaven
inflicted on the Iniquities of Kings and Subjects; are no less true than
signally Recorded by credible Historians. Of which wonderful Examples, together
with their portentous Attributes, I find nothing said, in this Treatise, by
this Author; though otherwise, perhaps, too far inquisitive of the Production and
Nature of Things, however Remote from common Understanding.

And here I would Close my Remarks on the Third Part of his Philosophy; were
not I obliged to Note, or indeed Reprehend his Conclusion; in which he infers,
in Confirmation of his former Doctrine, That the Planets, although inclined to
Circular Motion, never perfect any such Movements, either in Longitude, or
Latitude.

To which I Reply, by a necessitated Reiteration, being not desirous, that his
Conclusion should have the better of my Pen, by which I have judged, or rather
proved, his Premises taxable: Wherefore I thus briefly repeat my former
Assertion, which was, That the Attributing in his Method, of imperfect Motions
to the Planets, by contriving their Movements in Figures not exactly Circular,
was an erroneous lessening of the Perfection of Providence; which could not but
ordain, to the most Refined Existencies of Stars and Planets, such Movements as
might be comprehended by the most absolute of Figures, which must be the
Circle: Because there cannot be otherwise so useful a Computation of their
Motion, as, is Demonstrated by many celebrated Astronomical Observators; by
whom the new Mode of confining the Planetary Motions to an Oval, or Ellipsis,
was never thought o^ or wanted by them. Nor can I apprehend, how the Account of
our Days and (...) could be so commodiously rendered, as by Circular Motion
they are computed. Which might be some Reason, why judicious Euclid did not
mention, in any Part of his Elements, the Ellipsis, or any sort of Curv's,
frequently found in the Schemes and Diagrams of Descartes; as either certainly
to be Enumerated, or Geometrically explicable: Whereas in his Third and Fourth
Book he demonstrates Circular Commensurations, and also such Lines as usefully
relate, or may be applied to them.

It Is said of Plato, who being asked, what God did? Answered, that he exercised
Geometry; as by Man might be considered the Proportions of his Conduct, and
Motion of his Works: But had Descartes been so Interrogated; he must have
Replied, according to his Hypothesis, That the irregular Figures, Schemes and
Delineaments, that abundantly replenish his Diagrams, ought to be received as
the Geometry of Heaven: However inconsistent with the soundest Notions, that
Men can have, of the Conduct, Order and Motions above us.

Other Objections might have been Inserted, as due Reflections on the Idea's,
Principles, devised Theories, and Problems of this Author; which, to deal
freely with my Reader, have more reference to the boundless Sphere of Fiction,
than to any common Place of Science, or methodical Probation. Wherefore I have
been thirftily cautious, and I presume not Indiscreet, by separating such
Things from other of his Imaginations, on which I could more commodiously
ground my Remarks, and thereby facilitate their Use to public Understanding:
An Instance not improperly Annexed to the Close I give to the Third Part of the
Philosophy of Descartes.

REMARKS On the Fourth Part of the New PHILOSOPHY OF DESCARTES. Of the
Principles of the EARTH. PART. IV.
WITH no small Labor and Diligence, according to the best of my Understanding,
I have thoroughly Inspected, and carefully Contracted my Remarks, to such
Particulars as I judged of most familiar Consideration, to whomsoever should
peruse what I have Written. And as in my precedent Tractaets I omitted such
Maxims, Arguments, Premises, Conclusions, Schemes and Diagrams, of this
Authos, which I conceived rather obscure Repetitions, or posingly Composed,
than obviously perspicuous to the Apprehension of the Reader; an Oversight that
ought to be highly avoided by a judicious Writer. The same rational Method, or
separating of diverse complicated Tenants, Assertions, and pretended Proofs of
this, otherwise, Learned Frenchman, from what I have more Compendiously, and I
presume, usefully Inserted; I shall continue in this Fourth Part of my
Observations on his Philosophical Principles.

The Works of his Composing, that I have to do with, being so frequently
intermixed with diverse Modalities by him Proposed and Invented, that neither
concenter with Old, or New Probabilities; that should the ablest Penman
undertake to Paraphrase, or Comment on them, 'twere much the same as the
attempting to explicate one Solecism by alleging another.

It Is said of Lucretius, That he was the first of Philosophical Poets; and it
may be as pertinently Affirmed, of this Author, that he is the first of
Fictitious Philosophers: The main Bulk of whose Treatises, for the most part,
are rather thickened by his affected Imaginations, than rational Conjectures
deducible from Rules of Science; which in diverse Places of his Writings,
however indulgent to his Devisings, he is so ingenuous as to acknowledge; but
with this confident manner of excuse, That he supposes his Inventions ought to
be more allowable than whatsoever can be urged against them; which I have, as I
believe, and shall endeavor farther to disprove. And thus I proceed to
consider his Hypothesis of the Being and Production of the Earth.

In the first Page and entrance, he makes into his Fourth Part of his
Philosophical Treatise, he transfers the Principles which he had applied to the
Constituting of Superior Beings, in his Third Part, to the original Forming and
Existence of the Earth we Inhabit: Which, in his First Paragraph, according to
his designed Imagination, in Substance is thus: Let us feign (says he) That
the Earth was primarily Constituted solely of the Matter of the first Element,
(which has been mentioned by me, in the Third Part of his Philosophy) as was
the Sun, though much less; as likewise to have a vast Vortex, or whirling
Substance, about her; the Center of which Vortex was the Center of the Earth:
But as some Particulars, or Globuli, as he calls them, were channell'd, or
hollowed, and some, but not all, very diminutive, of that First Element, they
adhered, and so were converted into the Matter of the Third Element; (which I
likewise noted in the foreg-oing Tractate,) and from thence, first of all, were
the opacous Spots engendered on the Superficies of the Earth, resembling those
we behold continually to generate and dissolve about the Sun. And next tells,
how such Particulars were Thinn'd, or Condensed, Ascending, and Descending,
some to Etherial Parts; some to the Higher, others to the Lower Region of the
Air: As also, how the thicker of their opacous Spots covered, and darkened the
whole Surface of the Earth.

Thus I have briefly summed his Sense; the doing of which, has caused such a
wonderful Confusion in the utmost extent of my Intellect, that I cannot there
find room for the whirling of his Vortices and Globuli: Or were the Brain of
Man as big as the Earth, it might prove too small for the comprehensive
Understanding of his Hypothesis: By which he displays his Scene of Chaos,
together with the diffusion from its Womb of such Particles, or Seeds of
Nature, That by their Motions and continued Involutions, and Revolutions, Thin,
or Thicken, without the operative concurrence of Heat, Cold, or any other
Elementary Quality; until a sufficient quantity of them meet in a Lump, that
might produce the Figure and Magnitude of the Earth.

But from what shadow of Reason, or Philosophical Authority could Descartes
fancy, That either the Universe, or Earth, part of the whole, might be
Constituted, or any ways generated by Motion unless of Bodies Composed of such
Elements that are common to our Apprehensions? Because nothing if not so
tempered, is capable of Motion, or computable by Time, the natural Propriety of
Motion; and therefore not of such Chimerical Maaterials, or unqualified
Particles of Nature, as he numbers in the actings of his devised Triplicity of
Elements: Which if granted, 'twere, in effect, to Assert, That Motion, Time,
and the Elements we usually understand, and by which we subsist, were operative
and original Causes of the World's Existence: So that the Earth, together with
Mankind, and whatsoever it contains, might have had, in the Opinion of this
Author, a capacity of subsisting, or wonderfully forming it self, without a
miraculous Creation.

Nor can his Supposition be excused, by alleging, That the Almighty might
Ordain the Fabric and Structure of the Earth, by any Motion of Substances that
were not Elementary: Because impossible to conceive any other temperature of
Things, that could be motionally capacitated to produce other Beings. But of
what Composition, or how established, the Heavens above; are Thoughts too
remote and spiritual, as I have proved, by Learned Authority, in the precedent
Treatise, to be definitively reached by the Humane Intellect: Notwithstanding
which sublime Consideration, the Earth is placed by Descartes above; and
instead of the Sun, as a Planet, according to the Copernican System, in as
lofty a Room as is the Orbite betwixt Mars and Venus.

In answer to which, enough I believe has been objected in the former Third
Part: But now, having supposed the Matter of the Earth before intermingled with
that of the Heavens; he tells us, how the Materials of the Earth delaps'd, or
slipped from above, toward the Inferior Place, according to his Phenomenon, of
the Sun; and next distinguishes the Earth into three Regions.

The First of these which he calls the most Inward, he supposes to contain so
much of the Matter of the First Elements, not otherwise there Moving, or of
other Nature, than as it was in the Sun; except that its Substance was less
pure: But thinks that the Earth in passing from the Sun; and surely, in his
Sense upwards, because by his Hypothesis he has preferred the ministerial
Situation of the Terrene composition, much Superior to Phoebus the King of
Illuminating Beings, as also that it continually became spotted, and could not
be purged or cleared of them: From whence says he, I am easily persuaded, That
the Earth was then full of the Third Element, did not it follow, that she could
not, if at that time so solid, be so near the Sun, (he means downwards) as now
she is. To which purpose, he has devised a Right-worshipful Scheme; but left by
me, to the Inspection of such as have no other Employment for their Eyes.

The Second Element of the Earth, he determines opacous and thickly
Substantiated, as consisting of diverse Minute Particles that appertained to the
first Element: And this, in his judgment, Experience assures by the Spots in
the Face of the Sun, which excepting their refin'dness and subtility, are the
same with those of the Earth: Yet notwithstanding hinder the Light that would
else more appear in the Sun.

But concludes, after some offered Reasons, which I do not mention, because I
think 'em Irrational, That these two Elements have little to do with us;
because no living Man ever ascended to their Stations.

But by what Authority does he present us with a Theory of Things that he
confesses no Body could ever be assured of: And for that Reason, I might pass
from them with no less neglect than the Man, who reading an Inscription at
Athens that was Dedicated to the unknown God, thought it had little to do with
his Contemplation: And no more my concern what this Author delivers here; these
Elements having been sufficiently, I doubt not, Remarked by me, in the Third
foregoing Part of his Philosophy.

Notwithstanding I will briefly add something, avoiding, if possible,
Reiteration of Words, on the same Subject already written: Or only by way of
Interrogation, were Descartes present, desire to be informed in what Mint of
Nature, he Coined these Elements, and as her Bank-stock Pay's them off, in
Parcels, to his Reader? In doing of which, he introduces, and a while
continues, the original Empire of Nature, in Power and Credit, numerously
attended by very inconsiderable Subjects, which he calls petty Globuli,
surrounding her Throne, and immediately committed to the Government, and
disposal of revolving Vortices that whirled them, without any orderly Method,
or Proportion, either East, West, South, or North; or sometimes only upward, to
the height of Heaven, and as soon precipitately downward; by which medly of
Motion he conceives abundance of their Fluid Substances exceedingly thinn'd;
whilst others were as nimbly thickened. As if the Hands of Nature had been
busily employed in kneading of their Clusters till thoroughly condensed.

Yet grants them so insipidly tempered, that by no proper Term, Naturally, or
Philosophically Intelligible, he determines them either light or heavy; as he
distinguishes their Elements from whatsoever is Elementarily Composed: And
thus, according to his Method, he imagines, That Nature made her first Entrance
out of the Closet of Chaos; and having not thoroughly washed her Face, he
supposes some of her Spots might afterward visibly remain in the Figure and
Substance of both Sun, Moon and Earth.

If next he had been asked, on what account he attributes Spots to the Luminary
of Day, or Night, together with the Terrene Sphere of our Being; that are
within no compass of reasonable Apprehension, he must have returned a motly
Answer. Since undeniable, That whatsoever is capable of Spots, as its
propriety, must be naturally colored, and therefore of a mixed, Elementary
Composition; by reason that nothing can be observably spotted, but is also
colored by mixed Ingredients, and consequently the Object of Sight.

But the Sun and Moon, were never held, by found Opinion, Elementarily
Constituted; wherefore not of any of his supposed Elements, no more than it is
possible to conceive, how Air could be alterative, or operate on Air, or Water
on Water; without partaking of Elementary Mixtures: A Truth confirmed by
Experience in every Thing that is Thinn'd, Thickened, Ascends, or Descends; as
sure as Earth is more ponderous than any of the other Three Elements ordained
by Providence to exert all such Operations of Nature, as are with clearest
Evidence understood by us. From whence may be concluded, that the seeming Spots
in the Sun, or Moon, are no other than meteorous Exhalations or Vapors that
interpose betwixt the Luminaries and the Eye of the Beholder; as surely as we
frequently discern more or less clear, in Appearance, the Sun and Moon, and
therefore no Spots Inherent in their Substance.

As for the Spots that he annexes to the outward Complexion of the Earth, what
Man ever heard of any of their Colors, except of such Things as have Being and
Growth on her Surface; as Trees, Plants, Men, Women, Beasts, Grain, and such
other Things, as might from Causes, be produced? How to Reply, had he been thus
Interrogated, I dare Answer for him, he could not have told.

And thus I come to the farther Examination of his Third Element, by which he
undertakes to Exspand the Original of all Things within the Compass of the
Earth.

To which purpose, I will briefly Sum the Order and Materials, by which he
forms his Phaenomena's of the Earth's Production.

All which he supposes, were produced of the Fragments of a certain Thinn and
Fluid Composition, which he Entitles, The primary Element of Nature: These
Imaginary or Globuli- Fragments, proceeding, (as he derives them) from Spots in
the First Element, and descensively operating on the next, termed by him a
Second Element, they confusedly, and exceedingly disordered in Motion and
Figure, tended downward, from their first sublime Height, till at last they
became more congeriously Thick, suitable to the grossness of the Earth's
Composure, and Settlement; where it now remains.

So very intricately obscure, or vainly perplexed, does this conceited Monsieur
debase the original Wisdom and Conduct of Nature, both as to her own
Establishment, and the Production of her Works; which could never be so
disproportionably and irregularly effected by the prudent Diligence and
Intendment of her Operations: Which, as this Author commits them to her
peculiar Conduct, I do not see why they should not have been, by her
Management, as highly refined and continued, as he delivers the Materials of
her first purest Celestial Element: And consequently of them, so sublimately
ordained, have produced the Substance of Man and Woman, that being exalted to a
Superior Room in the Etherial Heaven, the Eyes of Beauty might have there
shined instead of Stars, now beheld, of the first Magnitude: And next to these,
why should she not have gradually Illuminated the Substance of Animals, with
all other Materials and Plants, that being naturally cleans'd from such
Terrestrial Ingredients, Alterations and Mixtures, that are now in them, they
might have remained splendent Parts above, instead of being Revolved and
whirled in globuli's, or dispersed Fragments of Nature, downwards, until they
closed in a Lump that completed the Earth, in Figure, disposition of Parts,
and Situation, suitable to the Opinion of this Author?

Such Queries may not be unfitly urged against his total Hypothesis, with all
its Appurtenances; to which I add these palpable Objections.

First, that it is egregiously preposterous, if not an Impeachment or lessening
of the Dignity of Nature, supposing that by her voluntary Actings she debased
the superiority of her Existence, by crumbling of her Materials into
innumerable Bits, or Particles, in all kinds, of impurer Substance, and next
dispose them, by a rambling, or giddy Progression, so grossly to meet as they
might constitutively finish and sustain the small inferior Bulk of the Universe
called Earth; or rather denominated the spurious Daughter of Nature, if so
engendered by her actual consent.

Whereas contrarily, it is the inseparable Attribute of Nature, intentionally to
Conserve, whatsoever depends on her Regalia's, in its proper and utmost
Perfection. And although, that by such Elementary Compositions and Mixtures, as
are understood by us, she is necessitated to vary her Conduct, as Things are,
in course, Generated, or Corrupted, in order to produce such Existencies that
could not be continued in themselves; and therefore Providentially convertible
into other Beings: Yet she constantly preserves her most genuine Progression,
which is, that nothing shall so alter as not to have Matter and Form incident
to their Corporeal Proprieties: Not unlike a Sovereign Ruler, within whose
Dominions there is no period of his numerous Subjects by Death, because enough
are begotten that succeed them.

But no such Procreation could be consistent, or produced, as an Elementary
Triplicity is devised by Descartes; and not at allaccomplish'd or seasoned
with such natural Ingredients as are the Elementary Adjunct to Bodily
Existences: But rather of such a simplicity and incommunicable Qualification,
that it is as reasonable to imagine, That Earth should proceed from mere Air, or
Water from Fire, as that his imperfect, and uncompounded Elements, should, by
their Vortices, and Globuli, arrive to any Corporeal Production: Because the
Principles of all Things could be no other than Contarrieties, and therefore
Elementary: Insomuch, that had not Providence otherwise disposed natural
Operations than are contrived by this Author; neither the Heavens above,
however excellent and refined their Essence, or the Earth we possess, with all
its Appurtenances, could have been effected.

The next Objection, is briefly thus, -- Suppose, it were conceded. That his
Hypothesis, relating to the Constituting of the Earth's Existence, were
allowable; could it be conceived, that the diversities of Being and Motion
which he annexes to his Particles of Nature, should be either operative or
motional before the Sun, Stars, World, or any Elementary Composition, a main
Cause of Motion, Version and Alteration of Bodies, as naturally they ought to
be understood, did really Exist? Because nothing can Move upwards or downwards,
but what is Corporeally mixed; and therefore consisting of Commensurable Parts,
whose Movements must be gradually computed by Time, Nature's unerrable
Accountant: But by the Incomprehensible Phaenomena's of this Author, the World
was filled with temporary Motions, before it or Time was, or could be summed by
computable Progression of any Thing, that could be its porportionable Measure;
according to his Suppositions: Which Impossibility is so disregarded by this
Writer, that Time, were his Notions true, might have continued, some thousands
of Ages, before it could be understood to have Being, or his small Globuli,
Circumvolv'd by their Vortices, could have constituted and filled the local
Situation of one Mile of Earth, with all its Materials, from top to bottom,
with their diminutive Particulars.

Which Absurdities, if well considered, might have deterred, as Learned a
Person as Descartes, from posing his Intellect, with so many unexplicable
Imaginations, whereby he would assimulate, however far above Thought, the
stupendous Consistence of the World to miraculous Systems invented by his
Brain.

As for the Elements that he undertakes to deliver as the first Principles
whereby the Earth was Constituted, which, as I have already proved, are neither
Philosophical, or Natural; he tells us in his 13th Particular, That the more
Solid, or thicker of them, are not always Inferior, in Place or Motion, to
those that are thinner; the Reason he gives is, That notwihstanding they are
uniformly Revolved, they so adhere to one another, by the Irregularities of
their Figures, that the Globuli of one Element cannot extricate themselves from
the Compulsions upwards, or downwards, of another.

This Gentleman, who had no otherwise differenced his principal Materials, by
which he would Constitute the Structure of the Earth, than as the Parcels of
his small Globuli, were more or less extended, begins now, in effect, to grant
them Elementarily mixed, as every Thing must be that is Thinner or Thicker than
another, or different in Weight and Measure: But so as by his turbulent
Vortices, the lighter were mingled with the heavier, in such a complicated
manner, that they could neither Ascend or Descend, as they ought to have done
by their Qualifications. But gives no certain reason, why they might not always
have continued so Intermingled, and Confused; and therefore never have
separated from one another? Since he determines no Cessation of the impetuous
Movement of them caused by his whirling Vortices: How then could the Earth be
Composed, or Constituted, by such Irregular Particles of Nature, that neither
by their Motion, or different Temperatures, could be disincumber'd from one
another, and consequently so exactly Embodied as might complete the total
Substance of the Earth?

In his 14th and 15th Particulars, he undertakes to Describe what he means by
diversities of Bodies, which he supposes formed in that, which he denominates
his Third Region of the Earth; and these, he believes might be produced as the
Globe of the Earth, distinguished into three Regions, having been devolved
toward the Sun, and the Vortex, in which it was before, taken from it, variety
of Bodies were distinguished in it: Whose Productions he designs to explain
afterward; but first, he delivers three or four Axioms, on which they depend.

The First is the general Motion of his Celestial Globuli. The Second is their
Gravity. The Third Light. The Fourth Color.
His First Position I am obliged to reflect on, and more severely, could it be
avoided, than I am willing to do; out of the respect that I have to this
Learned Author. But having Geometrically proved, by what I have Written on the
Third Part of his Philosophy, That there can be no Motion, either Diurnal, or
Annual, to be Attributed to the Earth, the Copernican way, instead of the Sun:
I cannot but add, That it is far more egregiously Supposititious, that the
imperfect Agitation of his Globuli, which he Inserts, in the Page I write of,
should perform their Annual or Diurnal Motion about the Sun, correspondent to
his Imaginary System: It being highly improbable, that such different
Particles, which he defines Globuli, both in Substance, Bigness, Quantity and
Measure; as also, irregularly Moving, by his Concession, should completely
finish the Diurnal or yearly Motion of the Sun; because not to be thought, that
they could Revolve suitable to any Figure Geometrically computable: And
therefore impossible, even to Absurdity, the fictitious Circumvolution that he
appropriates to his Region of Globuli, than if without them, he directly had
Asserted the Motion of the Earth: Because the Earth, allowed by the Learned, to
be Circularly Formed, is more capable of Revolution, than that such diminutive
Substances, as are disagreeably Composed, both in Quantity and Figure; should
so perfectly unite their Movements as exactly to Represent, or Conspire with
the Earth's Motion, in the room of the Sun, either Hourly, Daily, or Yearly,
appertaining to Ecliptical Circulation.

In order to which performance of his devised Globuli, he makes yet more gross
their Incomprehensible Phaenomena's; by Affirming, That they incline to Move in
a straight Line, though he grants them not figuratively such; as if Things could
be propense to Move directly, if naturally oblique in Proportion and Figure:
Notwithstanding that it is impossible, that whatsoever Moves, should describe
any other Superficies, or Figure, than is suitable to its Corporeal Parts. Nor
can any Thing be said in a proper Sense, to incline to Move in a straight Line,
but as it must be either upwards, or downwards; according to the Nature of its
Gravity, or Levity.

To be plain, the most favorable Salvo that can be applied to this Broken Head
of his Hypothesis, is, that he judges it safer, for his manner of
Copernicanism, to substitute his whirled Globuli as Assistants, by their
Movements, to the Motion he allows the Earth: Because, as I conceive, he might
apprehend, that Objections to be made against the Earth's Revolution; as also,
that by such an Hypothesis, the Situation of Countries and the Elevation of the
Pole must infallibly alter, as has been already demonstrated, might be rebated,
or not so unanswerably Alleged. Though to Men of competent Apprehension, the
Absurdities are the same, whether the Earth alone, or his Globuli and the
Earth, in any Kind, Intrigue, or conjoyn their Circulations.

Can a Man that has seasoned his Intellect with the least Relish of
Mathematical Principles, conceive it possible for the confused Phaenomena's of
Vortices and Globuli, mentioned by Descartes, to absolve the mean or equal
Motion, which, Astronomy assures, is annually consummated in the Ecliptic? Or,
that the ponderous Structure of the Earth, should be so regularly elevated from
her Center, as that any Point of its Superficies, or its Vortices, and Globuli,
in the Sense of this Author, might at one time have an Apogaeon height, or
utmost Distance from the Center of her Orb, and at another a Perigaeon-nearness
unto it: Which were much the same, as to think it feasible for clusters of
Flies, no bigger than Gnats, when they numerously seem to Circulate in
Sunshine, to remove the weighty firmness of the terrene World; or perform,
instead of the Sun, the Ecliptical Revolution of the Day, or Year.

Yet on this preposterous and feeble Conduct, is erected the main Hypothesis of
this French Writer, both as to the Composition, Being and Motion of the Earth,
with all her Circumjacent Particulars: Which shows, that he takes to himself an
unpresidented Dictatorship in Science, whereby he would celebrate the Fictions
of his Brain, without any requisite or probable assurance, that they ought to
be Conceded.

To which purpose, he Inserts the various Actings of his several Elements, though
by no Body, but himself, so named; and by these, so Invented by him, together
with Vortices and Globuli formed from them, he judges, That the Earth, with
whatsoever it Comprehends, might be totally Constituted; as he their prime
Artificer has contriv'dly set them at work.

The first Action tending to the completing of the most refined Substance, or
Parts of the Earth, he considers, as produced by the Motion of the most tenuous
Matter of what he Terms a Third Element; which he supposes so very pure, that,
even to Transparency, it may cause Bodies, though appertaining to Earthly
Composition, very clearly to Shine.

And thus we have the Earth, according to the Doctrine of Descartes, both a
motional and illuminating Planet. But should I account the numerous diversities
of the fictitious Motions, and shifted Inventions by which this Author confers
a shining Capacity on some Particulars of the Earth's Substance, I might more
than fire, if not abuse, the Patience of an indefatigable Reader. Neither could
I do other than impertinently load my Pen with repeated Objections, and
manifest Confutations of his Theories of Motion, as they have been diversely
applied by him on this, or other Subjects: The Movements of Things, in his
Method, as he annexes their Qualities and Motions, being neither exactly
agreeable, to straight Lines, or their proper Tendencies, or to such Curv's, as
might be of Mathematical Construction; and therefore inconsistent with the
Geometry of Nature: Which, as to her Works, must proceed from a regular
Process; to which purpose, enough has been already written by me.

I will therefore, in this place, briefly Inspect the Fond of the shining
Attributes that he confers on some Particulars of the Earth, as they are stated
by him.

The principal Reason that he offers, is, That it is experimentally found, that
pure Liquor in the Earth, of tenuous Consistence, is also pellucidous, or
shining.

Which cannot be true, if by clearness he means an Illuminating Quality: No
more than the purest Water that can be Imagined, may be said to Shine, because
it is clear. And who ever beheld any shining Part of the Earth otherwise than
by diffused Beams of the Sun' Moon, or Stars, it might be enlightened; though
without any Illumination as to its own Capacity?

Where are the Eyes that in a gloomy Day or Night, ever observed the shining of
a Molehill on the Surface of the Earth: Or such little Morsels of the Ground
as Worms deject; which might be composed of such Materials, as he describes his
diminutive Globuli to consist of, for any reason given, by him, to the contrary?

To confirm these Objections, this one, that includes many, may pertinently be
added.

If, as he imagines, the diaphanous Parts of any of his Celestial Elements, as
they are defined by him, should by any intelligible Movement so operate, as
they might be so qualitatively Constituted, as to embue any particular
Substance, or Places of the Earth with a shining Capacity; since he has
undertook to Metamorphose our terrene Habitation into a Planetary Composition:
How can it be probably apprehended, that his Fluid Globuli, by their feeble
Commotions, should be conjoined to the Surface of the Earth, notwithstanding
that the condense, or crusty Parts of her Surface are thickly hardened and
nourished by the Roots of Grass, Trees, Minerals, Stones of all kinds, diversely
tempered, and not possibly penetrable by any compulsive Motion of his
diminutive, and impotent Globuli; unless so much of the gaping Superficies of
the Earth could be supposed to receive their Fluid Descents, to no other
purpose, than she does Rain when distilled by the Dissolution of Clouds? Which
being done, there could but a dewy gloss appear on the Ground, that might not
more imbrighten any Part of the Earth's Figure, than when, in some moist
Seasons, the Glowworm, with her Light, is engendered.

So that whosoever would persuade himself, that the terrene World, or any Part
of it, was ever primarily completed or motionally disposed by the Globuli and
Vortices comprehended in the Diagrams and Theories of Descartes, may as
readily believe, that the Globe of the Moon was originally produced by the
efficacious Seeds of a Carret-Bed.

Nor does he deny, in some respects, the incongruity of his Principles, as in
his 18th Particulars, he confesses, The Materials, by which he moulds the Frame
of the Earth's Composure, and first Existence, to be confusedly operative; by
granting, that the liquid Parts, which he Attributes to the prime Formation of
the Earth, were disorderly complicated with his Celestial Globuli. Yet might by
their Operations, in his judgment, upwards, downwards, or transversly, be
separately distinguished by the Similitude he Porduces of a Glass of Wine in
the Must, having Dregs not only on the top, and bottom, correspondent to
Gravity and Levity, but also on the sides of the Glass: When afterward the
Wine being clear, notwithstanding that it before consisted of various
Particulars, it becomes pellucidous, or shining: and not more gross or thicker
in any one Part than in another.

Here he presents his Reader with a Philosophical Weather Glass; by which he
would determine the temper of the Season, when the Earth was forming by his
diversified Globuli, and whirling assistance of his Vortices: Which petty
Operators, as he states the Metaphor of their Condition and Conduct, might be
as drunk (as Flies may be supposed) when some of them are, as it were, giddy on
the top of a Glass of strong Liquor, or lean to its Sides, for supportance,
whilst others more ebrietously replenished, heavily sink to the bottom: All
which may be assimulated, without any wrong to the Brain of this Author, unto
the giddiness of his Phaenomena's: It being impossible to conceive, from what
rational Course of Nature he could produce the Substances, together with the
Movements of his debauched Globuli, by which he constitutes the Being of the
Earth: Considering, that he deduces their original Descent from what he Terms
his first pure Element.

In his 19th Head, he positively assures us, That the Third, and main effect of
his Celestial Globuli are so perfectly operative, that they convert liquorous
Drops residing in Air into rotund Figures, the reason as he States it is,
because those Celestial Globuli find more Passages into a watery Drop than into
the Circumjacent Air: And by that means, as near as may be, Move in right
Lines, or in such as most approximate unto direct lineaments; whence it is
manifest, in his Opinion, That such Globuli, that are in the Air, are less
motionally hindered, as they meet with a watery Drop, according to the
continuance of their Motions in a straight Line, or nearest unto it, if that
Drop of Liquor be exactly spherical, than if it had taken any other Figure. But
if any Part of the Superficies of that Drop, be extended beyond a spherical
Figure, the Celestial Globuli by their more forcible discursions, made in the
Air, more strenuously assault the watery Drop, than were it other Substance, and
immediately thrust it downwards toward the Center.

The Reader, I presume, will excuse me, if in this Place, and some others of
his Writings, I deliver the Notions, of this Author, in more uncouth Accents
than I would willingly commit to his Perusal: It having been my care, no less
than necessary Diligence, to render as genuinely, as might be, his Latin
Expressions into English.

If my Remarks on his precedent Praticular had any sharp Allusion, dressed in a
plain and familiar Application; I cannot rebate, on this occasion, the point of
their tendencies: Wherefore, if proved by me, in the foregoing Head, though, by a
comical Similitude, that his Hypothesis had inebriated his Globuli: I may as
judiciously Assert, That his Sense, in the Particular, I now Treat of, may be,
by no extravagant Similitude, termed unnatural, or Philosophically, and
Mathematically Intoxicated; unless I could Affirm, in his behalf, that his
Globuli, which, as he supposes, might by the force of their whirling Vortices,
so dispose their Materials to the Constituting of the Earth, that the very
Grapes that caused drunkenness in the Head of the Patriarch Noah, were
engendered by some of their giddy Compositions.

And as sure, as the Earth is now in Being, Nature might be deemed out of her
Wits, if according to his disorderly Process, she could be thought to Design
the Production of the earthly World.

Or what can be more improbable, than the Tale he tells, of his Celestial
Globuli converting of liquorous Drops, hanging in the Air, into round Figures?

And what Reason does he give; why, no better than as he supposes, That his
Globuli may find more passage in watery Drops than in the circumjacent Air?

But does not common Experience confute this Imagination? Let a strenuous Hand
fling a smooth Peeble-Stone into the Air, and afterward into Water, will it as
soon pass any Part of the Superficies of Water as of the Air? Or will it not,
the Water being of a more condense Substance than Air, have, proportionably, a
longer Motion and Passage, by the ressistance of its thicker Body, than might
be given by the Tenuity of the Air? A Truth so practically evident, that it
could not be unknown to many of the young Contemporaries at School with
Descartes; wherefore I wonder to find him of a contrary Opinion here.

As little concentring, in any kind, with sound Principles, are the Proprieties
that he annexes to his Globuli; which, if, in their Motion, engaging with any
Part of a watery Drop that is extended beyond a spherical Figure, they
immediately, with greater force, assail it, and by compulsion enforce it
toward its Center.

But if any Part of it be nearer its Center than another, his Celestial
Globuli, contained in that watery Drop, forthwith employ their utmost Force to
expel it from its Center; and next altogether concur to make one spherical
Drop.

Here by a perverse Contradiction he notoriously thwarts the surest Maxims of
Philosophy, as they pertinently Relate to the Nature and Motion of Corporeal
Beings. Nor is there any Thing more irrational, if not Philosophically absurd,
than to define, as he does, globulous Materials, and debar them of Motion
natural to their Figures: It being not possible to imagine, that whatsoever is
rotund should be more propense to Move in a straight Line, or the nearest unto
it, than in a circular Revolution. If a Ball be let fall from the Hand, will it
it not rotundly Move suitable to its Figure? And could this Author imagine,
That a Demonstration so experimentally obvious would be waved by any Principle
of his Geometrically Inconsistent; or that the exactness of Things circularly
Moved, of all others most perfect, should incline to deviate from their
Centers? Or if that were granted, is it at all probable, that they could have
freer migrations, according to this Author, through any one of his supposed
watery Drops, than in the tenuous Substance of the Ambient Air? Which being
done, they are, in his Sense, sometimes compulsively enforced toward their
Centers, if their Figures be not absolutely spherical; but if exactly round, as
forcibly removed from their Centers. And thus he Implicates, if not so, crosly
Involves Contradictions, that he determines the operations of Nature, more
consonant to the exerting of a Step-dame's Arbitrary Conduct, than suitable to
the comely Effects, by which she regularly produces the Motion and Being of
Things.

All which must be conceded as Principles of Nature, incident to her Rule and
regular Intention; as surely as some of her Materials are more substantially
heavy, or lighter than others; and will therefore have a natural Recourse,
upwards or downwards, to their Centers accordingly.

Wherefore it may be admired in what Fit, or Heat of Fancy, the Brain of this
Monsieur was Inveigled when by so many perplexed Words, as also opposite Terms
and Methods, he did, in a manner, angrily Impose the Limitations of his
Measures, on the stupendous Productions of the Works of Nature: Insomuch, that
his Maxims, if soberly considered, signify, little other, than a designed Rape
committed on the Grandeur of her Figure and Beauty, together with the
providential Facility, by which she compleats and preserves her Legitimate
Conduct and Operations. So that his Invented Elements, with all his Diagrams of
Vortices and Globuli, seem fictitiously devised, or appertaining to the
Imaginary System of some other World; since not at all probable, that they
could belong to the Composure of this.

But enough has been in this Place, and occasionally before, I believe,
satisfactorily Inserted, on this Subject, that it were impertinently tedious if
more be added.

There remains one Particular, that ere I conclude on this Head, requisitely
deserves a considerable Remark; because it Includes a very curious and subtle
Mathematical Problem: Which he thus expresses; the Angle of Contact by which
the Tangent Line touches a Circle, and by which only it is distant from a right
Line, is less than any Rectilineal Angle whatsoever, and in no Curve Line,
besides the Circle, is every where equal: Wherefore he Affirms, That a straight
Line cannot more equally, and less every where inflect, or bend, from its
Points, than when it degenerates into a Circular.

I have read in the History of Algebra, written by Dr. Wallis, who mentions the
controverted Question, concerning the Angle of Contact made by a straight Line
where it touches the Circle; but in his Opinion, thinks it nothing, if not a
right Angle, in being perpendicular to the peripherial Point of the Circle;
because not otherwise, numerically Computable: He also Inserts his
Disceptation, as I remember, by Letters that passed betwixt him and a certain
Learned Person, who undertook to defend, against him, the Determination of the
famous Mathematician Clavius, in whose Judgment, the Angle of Contact was
properly something, though not Commensurable; and therefore not otherwise
definable, than as being less than any acute Angle whatsoever; which I take to
be the more probable Opinion: By reason that it could not be denominated
Angular without it appertained to something, though but of general or tacit
Application. And thus, in the Judgment of Euclid, the Angle of Contact has a
singular Attribute, where it touches the periphery of the Circle, but not
otherwise accountable or to be summed by Number: The Reason is, that in every
Circle, whether equal, or unequal, the Point in the Circumference touched by a
right Line will be the same in all of them; because no other Line can fall
between the Point of Contact, in any of their Peripheries: And could it be
Commensurable, it would be of one Equality: Whereas, contrarily, in every
direct Figure, or where two right Lines touch one another, the Angle they make
may be Geometrically lessened by any intervening Line, or Lines, that meet in
the Angular Point: But not so to be understood of the Angle of Contact, which
has no proportion in its self, if compared with any other figurative Angle.

To which purpose, the Learned Proclus signally Determines, That the Point in
the Circle, where the Angle of Contact meets with a straight Line, is mixtly
Composed of a direct Line, and the Curviture of the Circle; and therefore not
Commensurable by any distinct Line, that can be numerically computed. So that
the Angle of Contact may be well Termed singular, by reason it has no
proportional Similitude, or Quantitative Propriety, correspondent to any other
Angular Delincament. And the more Admirable, because the wonderful Extent, and
Power of Geometry, computatively Explains by the vastness of its Science, all
other Angles, Mathematically qualified, except that which is lineally annexed
to the touch of the Circle. And what is yet more wonderful, the tangent Line
that Includes, and makes the Angle of Contact, is perfectly Commensurable, though
not the Angle where it touches the Circle; a Geomemetrical Secret that has not
a little perplexed, if not posed the Pens of famous Mathematicians.

Wherefore I think it not improper in this Place, to present the Reader, so far
as it Relates to the Proof I offer, with this familiar Diagram. That E C the
tangent Line, where it touches the Semidiameter A C, is a right Angle, is
ocularly Demonstrative; because it is Perpendicular to the Diameter;
notwithstanding that it makes no certain provable Angle, where it touches the
Circle; by reason that the Curviture of the Circle is betwixt it and the
Semidiameter; and that it is a proportional Line, is proved by the 4th
Proportion of the Sixth Book of Euclid: For as A B, is to D B, so is A C, to E
C; which is also the Tangent of the Angle E A C: Whence it is manifest, that E
C the Line of Contact is Commensurable, but not the Angle made by its touching
of the Circle.

Or this Proposition may be thus demonstrated; the Angle at D, made by the
pricked Line D C, in the Triangle A, D, C, is a right Angle, as is always the
Angle in the Semicircle; therefore the Angle; A, C, D, is less than a right
Angle, though it may be allowed greater than any acute Angle, and the Angle at C
made by the tangent Line, less than any acute Angle that can be given:
Otherwise, the Point where the tangent Line touches the Circle, could not be,
in that Point, singular; as before demonstrated. So that in the Triangle A, C,
D, if D be a right Angle, the Angle at C must be less than a right Angle;
because in every plain Triangle, the three Angles are but equal unto two Right*
Which confirms the former Demonstration.

And from which may be concluded, that of what demonstrative Quantity, the
Angle of Contact does actually consist, is, as yet concealed from Geometrical
Inquisition: Or not to be discovered, until a certain Proportion can be found
betwixt a straight and a curve Line; which perhaps may never be Demonstrated:
If not as impossible, as to prove, a Curve commensurately distinguished from a
Curve.

I confess, I am not a little beholding to this Learned Monsieur, for the
occasion he has given me to discuss, I conceive not unsatisfactorily to the
Judicious, the Question concerning the Angle of Contact so much controverted by
Celebrated Geometricians: And which, by a certain fineness in Science, is more
pertinently applied to the purpose, he would intend it, than any Mathematical
Proposition, Theorem, or Diagram of his that I have met with.

But I cannot thank him for the Conclusion he deduces from thence; or because
he takes it for granted, That a straight Line by reason of the near
approximation that it has to the Circle, in the Point of Contact, never less
inflects from every of its Points, than when it degenerates into a circular
Figure.

By which Inference he does highly disparage the Contexture and Theory which he
devises for the Motions of his Vortices and Globuli, in order to their material
completing of the Universal World: If their Motions, in any kind, tending to a
direct Line, be allowed to degenerate; when from that manner of Movement they
convert to circular Revolution. Which were all one as to charge the motional
Exactness and Conduct of Nature, providentially disposed, with Mistake, or
Imperfection, relating to her Operation and Works: Because no figurative Motion
can be imagined so absolutely complete, excellent, and of certain continuance,
as is circular Movement: By reason that no Part of a Circle can be Termed its
Beginning or End. Whereas contrarily, no Motion can be made in a straight Line,
but must have separate, intervall'd and terminated Parts: Which enough
disproves the Allegation of this Author; as sure as that by Geometrical Dignity
and Proof, the Circle has a superlative perfection above all other Figures. And
were it not to be so acknowledged, there is little reason, why the Wisdom of
Providence should annex the admirable Computation of Days and Years to circular
Revolution. But so much has been said, by way of Confutation, in my former
Remarks, on this Subject, that I need not renew them here.

Nor is it requisite, that I should farther reflect on his elaborate
Expressions, Draughts, Schemes and Delineations, by which he undertakes to
confirm the Motion of Things, in order to the Constructure of the Universe,
together with the Being of the Earth; since, I doubt not, I have refell'd his
total Hypothesis on which his Principles are grounded. Wherefore I shall pass
from all of them, to the Entertaining of my Reader with some especial Thoughts,
relating to the Original of the World, and Earth, we inhabit, as are Ancient or
Modern, of most erudite Reputation.

I. Concerning the Magnitude of the Universal World, the Questions are; Whether
it be Infinite, or Finite, materially replenished or not?

II. As to its Duration, or Continuance; Whether it had any temporary
Beginning, or eternally Constituted?

III. As to Number; Whether it be one, or numerously Existing? Though as to
Number, there can be no Controversy, if the World be granted Infinite; because
there can be but one Infinite.

IV. Another grand Querie is, From what Cause, or Matter, was the World
Originally Composed?

V. And next, From whence, or in what manner that Cause and Matter did proceed?
Of these, Disputes have been raised, till ceased by Conceding of One, or more
Eternity of Causes.

All which Particulars have been exquisitely Treated of, by great Philosophers;
if the labor of their Search, could have been as satisfactorily repaid, by
discerning of what they so earnestly sought: But they soon found that Infinite
Science is inconsistent with Finite Understanding: It being impossible, that in
the most exquisite Imagination of Mankind, there should be an Idea, or
Phantasm, of any Thing of Infinite Denomination, or Being, either as to
Magnitude or Time: Because neither Magnitude, or Time can be Infinitely
Computed: Insomuch, that nothing, but what is Infinite, can have an Infinite
Conception.

So that should a Man, of the most subtle and refined Reason, undertake to
argue from one Effect of an immediate Cause, and next to a Remoter; and by that
manner of Reasoning continually Ascend; he would find, That his Imagination
could have no eternal Progression, but would fail, as if tired, by its
stupendous Journey; or how to proceed farther, not at all empowered to direct
it self.

Nor is it consequently absurd, in the Judgment of Learned Philosophers, if the
Structure of the Universe be thought either Finite, or Infinite; by reason that
both, or either of those ways, of its Constituting, are alike possible to the
Conduct and Operation of the Almighty; as the World now is, or might so have
been, formerly beheld, with whatsoever it contains.

If nothing can properly be said to Move, but as it is Moved by some Cause of
Motion, which must be granted Supreme and Eternal: A main Querie depends on
that Concession; which is, Whether Matter, the subject of Motion, must not be
also allowed Eternal; in which Sense, the World might be held perpetually and
motionally Existing: Contrary to the Opinion of Some; who determine, That the
Omnipotent Cause, or Deity, was eternally Immovable, or not at all Operative,
until the World's total Creation was miraculously completed: But the
Objection, against that Opinion, will be more difficultly Answered; if urged,
That whatsoever may be thought eternally Immovable, cannot be probably
conceded the primary Cause of Motion; which Imply's a temporary, or Finite
Beginning, as applicable to any Date of the World's Creation: A Consequence, in
the Judgment of some, that Confirms the perpetuity of the World's material
Consistence; as also, That, by Omnipotent Power it was always in Motion till
gradually perfected as it now Exists: It being, not at all, Inconsistent with
Divine Power, if so ordained, That Matter should be unaccountably motional, in
order to the stated Disposure, and exact Consummation of whatsoever has Being,
within the vast Circumference of Heaven and Earth: Yet no such Thing as
Infinite Matter, in any consideration, rationally to be supposed the Original,
out of which proceeded the World's Existence, with all its Particulars: By
reason that it were a Geometrical Contradiction, should Matter be defined
Infinitely subsisting: Since absolutely certain, that whatsoever may be Termed
Matter, Substance, or Body, must also be quantitively Commensurable: Wherefore,
in this Case, the World might be, before Time was, materially Consistent; if
duly distinguished betwixt Infinite, and eternal Duration; which by Omnipotent
Will and Power might be effected, by determining a perpetual continuance of
Matter, though not Infinitely Existing.

The great Philosopher Aristotle not a little concentered with the same
Opinion, as he thought it more probable to appropriate Eternity to the material
Being of the World; in opposition to the Sentiments of some Philosophers, who
thought it was generated, according to the Opinion of Plato, by a certain
Mutation from what it had been, to what it afterward was, or now is.

But although, in the Judgment of Aristotle, the substantial Existence of the
World was deemed Everlasting; he could not believe, that its Matter was
actually Infinite; because whatsoever is material must be quantitive, and
therefore Mathematically computable, as before Instanced: So that if Aristotle
be reconciled to Aristotle, he may be understood, to deny the Being of the
World from any precedent Alteration, or Change that could proceed from its
natural Composure, or any generative Faculty, that could be supposed in it, at
all produced: But in this Belief* he does not absolutely oppose its total
Creation.

If he firmly conceived, That it was never effected by any generative Method;
he does not, by that Tenent peremptorily dissent from the possibility of its
Existence, by a miraculous Creation: To which purpose, in his Second Book of
the World, he Affirms, That the World, is the Ordainment of God: And in his
Twelfth Book of Metaphysics, he positively Asserts, That the World, and
whatsoever it contains* depends on God as its Original Cause. Which duly
apprehended, is more contiguous to Divine Allowance, than the Universal
Principels of Catholic Descartes; who having filled the World with one pure
Element, and by that determination left no Space or Room, whereby there may be
imagined any natural Operation, by which the different Qualifications and
Proprieties that he confers on his Vortices and Globuli, could be possibly
deduced.

Insomuch, that it may be Affirmed, That his petty Phaenomena's, together with
his Hypothesis of the World's Production, are more Irrationally fabulous, than
the little imperfect Notions of Atoms, exposed in the Writings of Epicurus; who
teaches, That the World, before it had Beginning, did consist of most
diminutive Places, that were not replenished with Bodies; his Reason is, That
had such Places been filled with any Corporeal Beings, there could not have
been Room for the Motion of his Atoms; because one Body might oppose, in the
Space it possessed, the Movement of another; and so frustrate in every kind,
the progression of his Atoms, in order to the Constituting of Heaven and Earth:
The Modalities of which Particles of Nature, by Epicurus denominated Atoms,
together with their motional Attributes, may methodically be read in the
Writings of the Philosophical Poet Lucretius, to which I refer the Reader.

And next to proceed with Monsieur Descartes, I find that he has not only
elaborately Intrigu'd, if not unsuccessfully perplexed his Brain, as I have
precedently proved, by forming of such Materialities, and their Movements,
whereby he would Embody the Fond, Situation and Existence of the Terrene World;
but also, as he Imploys his farther Speculations on the Elements of Air and
Water, as being of nearest vicinity to the Earth we Inhabit.

The Air, by his Definition, is of a tenuous and fluid Substance, congeriously
composed of his Third Element, already mentioned; and therefore declares it
thin, and pellucidous. That the Air consists of a Fluid tenuity is undeniable;
but not to be allowed glist'ring or shining of it self; which is very evident,
as we ocularly discern the capacious Complex of the ambient Air, more, or less,
Enlightened; and consequently Warmer, or Colder its Temperature and Effects as
it proportionably receives, and is qualified, by Illuminations from Above.

And therefore not true, as inferred by this Author, that because the Air is of
a liquid and tenuous Consistence, that it is therefore naturally, and not
accidentally Lucid: If otherwise, why might not this opiniative Monsieur as
well Attribute Inherent transparency, or shining, unto Water; that is so nearly
allied to Air, in being of a fluid and thin Substance? But who ever observed
any shining in either of these Elements in a cloudy Day, or Night? So that
Experience assures, That neither Air, or Water have, in themselves, any
Illuminating Propriety; unless he could convincs us, That a congeries of his
Globuli, of which he Asserts the vast quantity of Air and Water is Composed,
were glisteringly parcell'd, like studded Diamonds: But allowing, neither them,
nor their Vortices, and Elements from whence he derives them, any such
Capacity, or so much as a Being, in rerum natura, I cannot but totally reject
them, wheresoever I find them, as formerly I have done.

My next remarkable Consideration shall refer to his 48th Particular, where he
delivers the two main specifical Qualities that he annexes to the Nature of
Water; some of which he determines flexible, others inflexible; and if
separated one from another, some of them compose, or produce Salt Water, whilst
others sweet, or fresh.

This Principle of his can never be so perfectly Seasoned, as that it shall not
taste of a Paradox, in the very Sense of the Word; as it is applied by common
Understanding: For what is more distastful to obvious Intelligence, than to
Attribute to the Fluidity of Water, a flexible, or inflexible Qualification?
Whereas Water, by its appropriated Inclination may be properly said to flow,
but not to bend, or considered as absolutely Inflexible: A Stick, or Cane may
be bowed by the Hand; but can a Man so grasp a quantity of Water, as he may be
thought to Inflect, or bend the liquid Material; or feel, in any of its fluid
Substance, such an Inflexible Part; that he could not squeez, or if he did,
immediately observe it stiffen'd into a Salt Composition? Could this be readily
performed by Manual Operation, it would doubtless advantageously facilitate the
Salt-Manufacture, and gratify the Inventer with a Pension and thanks from the
Public, for his beneficial Project.

But I cannot perceive any such assurance in the Writings of this French
Gentleman; if not rather, an Imaginary Perfection conferred by him on the
Actings of his Globuli; as he supposes them sometimes to thin Water into Air,
or thicken Air into Water: Much like the pretended Experiments of Empiricks,
who boastingly teach, That their Operations consist of such a quintessence of
Things, as were never understood before: Whereas indeed, it is a devised Tale of
so many Non-Entities, as to any Use, or Effect, that could be actually
performed by any real process of such Authors.

The next Exterior and Contiguous Element to Air is Water, as it is, by
Philosophers, Elementarily understood; of which, In his 49th Particular he
offers a very confiderable Account, as he applys it to the Ebbing and Flowing
of the Sea: The external Superficies of the Earth being, in some sort,
surrounded by the Ocean, whereby the Globulous Form of the Earth is more
exactly completed.

There is no Speculation, within the Precincts of Nature, that has more
perplexed Learned Authors, than the Discovery they would attain, of the Causes
that effect the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, every six Hours of Day and Night;
as it is variously observed in different Climes, and Situations of the Earth.

But as to the Ocean in general, the same Compass of Time, relating to its
Floating and Refloating is usually expended: Whereas in the Baltic, as also,
in some other Seas, there are no such Egressions and Regressions of the Waves
of the Sea; which failure is by some thought to proceed from the narrowness or
streightness of the Shores, and the adjoining Caverns of the Earth, not large
enough to receive, or be filled with the huge Billows of the rolling Water: Or
because the coldness of those Parts of the World, obstruct the Rarifying of
Exhalations requisitely conducing to the sufficient Tumefying, or Swelling of
the Waves that flow to their Shores.

Whether these Reasons, or more that might be added, have an effectual tendency
in order to the various Fluxions, and Refluxions of the Ocean, observable in
many Places of the Earth, I will not dispute; being more inclinable to believe,
that it is a Secret more deeply absconded by Nature, than can be penetrated by
the most accurate Inquisition of Humane Science.

Notwithstanding it may be Affirmed, That the remote Cause may probably be
derived from the Etherial vigor of diverse Stars; but most especially from the
Moon, when gradually arising above the Horizon she disperses her Beams
obliquely on the Ocean, and by that means warmes, as also exhales from the
bottom of the Sea, such Exhalations, that being Dilated, Tumefy'd, and
consequently so weightily Increased, as, in a manner, they Revolve to Shores.

The next Diversity may be apprehended from the Degrees of Motion made by the
Moon, as she departs from the Meridian, toward the West Part of the Horizon;
by which Movement, she disperses her Rays and Light, less obliquely, and
therefore not so efficaciously transmitted to the Sea, or generative of Vapors;
whence follows such a remission of the Tumidity of the Ocean, that it seems to
Reside, and by so doing causes an Ebb or withdrawing from the Land.

Other Varieties of the Flowing and Ebbing of the Ocean, as they depend on the
Motion of the Moon by Day, or Night, might be mentioned here: But I conceive
the Instances I have given are enough, and which I thought conveniently
interposed; because the most Remarkable Opinion amongst Philosophers, before I
came to the Judgment of Descartes, on this profound Subject.

To which purpose, he rely's on the Phenomenon of his Vortices and Globuli,
together with the Motion of the Earth and Sea, contiguous unto it, and a Scheme
delineated to that end. On all which, I am obliged to Insert no other Remark;
than by insisting on my absolute denial of the total Hypothesis of his Vortices
and Globuli, as also of the Earth's Motion, either Diurnal, or Annual; which by
the Diagram that I have given, in the Third Part, I doubt not, is Geometrically
demonstrated: So that it were a needless Repetition should I reiterate the same
Confutation.

In his 51st Particular, I confess, he has a Conceit, which, as to the Flux and
Reflux of the Ocean, could I Correspond with the dependence it has on his other
Systems, appears to be Mathematically acceptable; by the Instance he gives, and
seeming probation, why in Equinoctial Times, or when the Moon is either at
Full, or at New; the Flowing of the Sea is greater than at other Seasons: Which
he thinks he Confirms, by alleging, That the Moon, at such Times, and
condition of her Light, has always a Vicinity to the Plane of the Ecliptic,
and that the Earth, which he supposes motional, makes its Diurnal Progression,
according to the Plane of the Equator: From whence, says he, it comes to pass,
that those two Planes Intersect one another, but in Solstitial Times are
remotely distant: Concluding from thence, that the greatest Tides and Floatings
of the Sea are in the Spring, and Autumn of the Year.

This Theorem, howsoever it may appear to have some fineness, suitable to the
Copernican Dialect, much endeared by this Author, does undeniably Subvert that
whole Hypothesis: For were it granted true, That the Earth, by its Diurnal
Motion, did vicinely Revolve, (as he Asserts) at the Time of the Equinoctial,
to the Plane of the Equator; the Point, or Zenith over our Heads, must in that
Instant be removed, or under the Equinoctial, and consequently some other
Point, in that great Circle of the Sphere, be made our Zenith: The like may be
Affirmed, if the Earth were Imagined to be, by her Annual and Diurnal Motion in
any Parallel to the Equator: In all of which diversities, both the Zenith, as
also the Elevation of the Pole, must more, or less, vary or alter, in every
Minute and Day of the Year throughout the World; contrary to Astronomical Proof
and Observation: By which, it is very manifest, that both the Zenith and
Elevation of the Pole are constantly the same, suitable to the Situation of
Climes, to which they appertain: All which, in the former Treatise, is lineally
proved by me; as certainly as that there is such a Figure as a spherical
Triangle.

If waved the improbable conjecture of the Motion of the Earth, by allowing the
long received Hypothesis of the Sun's Diurnal and Annual Revolution in the
Ecliptic: It Is not to be doubted, that when the Sun is in either of the
Equinoctial Points, that the Moon is more approximately and directly empowered
by the vicine Illuminations that she then receives from the Sun; by reason that
the Ecliptic, only in those Seasons, meets the Equator in one and the same
Point: And though when in opposition to the Sun, that is to say, at her Full, or
greatest plenitude of Light, she has a greater horizantal Distance, visible to
the Eye, at that instant of Time, than at an other: Yet receiving, in that
remote Aspect, a more direct Illumination than she does in other positions of
her Orb, she operates more powerfully on the Ocean; because the Sun has, at
that time, no declination from the Equator.

The like effect may be attributed to the newness of her Light, the Sun being
in the Equator, when, in Conjunction with him there, she is Illuminated nearest
to a direct or perpendicular Line, wherefore her Beams must necessarily operate
more vigourously on the Sea; and thus, by the observable, Propriety that she
has to dilate, and increase Moisture, the Waves and Tides of the Ocean may well
be granted more Impetuously high and swelled, at Equinoctial Times, than at
other Seasons: As also, that the Earth, allowed the Center of the Equator, as
it is contiguously surrounded by the Ocean, cannot but more efficaciously
receive in that Estate and Position of the Luminaries, and especially of the
Moon, a transcendent flowing of the Waters of the Main, that are nearest to the
Verge of the Earth's Circumference.

In a word, when all is said that can be thought, on this Subject, there is no
such Cause, to be proved, that in all Parts, in every National Being and
Situation of the Earth, can be certainly applicable to the Flux and Reflux of
the Sea, which is Experimentally found so variously different, both as to Time
and Continuance, in all Parts of the Habitable World. Which cannot proceed from
any uncertain Operation descending from above; but rather caused by intervening
Obstructions arising from the diversities of the Temper of the Air, and Wind
that alter and compel, more or less, the Motions of the Watery Element.

Other Reasons and Discussions of Authors tending to the Resolution of the
fathomless difficulty appertaining to the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, might
be here added: But finding them to be rather disputative than clearly
demonstrative: I shall not burden the Ingenuity of a Reader, by Inscribing
their perplexities with my Pen: Having, I conceive, delivered what is of
greatest probability on this wonderful Subject.

Of what Extent or Compass the Sea is I find not, in this, or other Writers.
But that it is larger than the Earth, is evident; because it surrounds the
Terrene World: And it is not to be doubted, that whatsoever contains is greater
than any Thing contained by it.

But as to the Depth of the Ocean, it is Computed, by some accurate Navigators,
not to be more than two and a half of English Miles: Which is very strange, if
the Depth of the Sea be taken for its Diameter. Considering that the Sea, for
the reason here mentioned, is bigger than the Earth; but much less, if by its
Depth be accounted its Diameter: As may be seen by the Computation, of the
Diameter of the Earth, that I have formerly Inserted.

Thus far of the Earth, and its Exterior Parts.

As to the Inferior, I observe diverse Particulars mentioned by Descartes; and
which he supposes might be caused and produced by Materials, according as he
imagines their Operations and Effects: But these being Things of small
Consideration, or Improvement to Knowledge; as also that their Nature and Uses
are, for the most part, as familiarly understood, as that there are Plants and
Minerals of several Tempers, and natural Proprieties: I shall therefore pass
from them, to Things of more Moment; and next, as very commodious Interials of
the Earth, relating to the necessary supportance of Humane Life, examine the
Philosophy of this Author, where he Inserts his Reasons, why Fountains and
Springs that Emerge from within the Earth, should taste liquidly fresh;
notwithstanding that in some Depths, or Wells, the Water is Salt.

To be sure he continues the Phaenomena's of his imaginary Elements, Vortices
and Globuli, in order to the producing of Things, as well under as above the
Surface of the Earth: And thus we have, from him, Fountains and Rivers
replenished with Water. To which purpose, he has exposed to the Eye, some
impressed Diagrams, by which he undertakes to explain such liquid Emanations
underground, in the Cranie's of the Earth, in Similitude to the Circulation of
Blood in the Veins and Arteries of Men and Animals.

But this fanciful Monsieur, having not been able, as I have frequently
observed, to Demonstrate either the necessary Being, Motion, or Capacity of
such Materials, as he very confidently Introduces: I am apt to conclude, That
if the Earth had not been naturally Empowered by other means, than such as are
tendered by Descartes, whereby to sustain, and engender her liquid
Existencies, in all the necessary Parts and Compositions of her Body: She had
been endu'd with no more Moisture, than is to be found in the Sunburnt Sands of
Africa.

Real Causes there are, that may be defined perfectly Elementary, and therefore
not allied to any Impotent Existencies, or such as may be termed procreative
Fathers and Mothers, on whose Mixtures depend all Terrestrial Matter or
Substances delivered with a simple Elementary Name, by this Author.

And thus, in the Sense of approved Philosophy, Springs and Fountains, together
with the sweetness of their Waters, may be derived from Exhalations, which
being Condensed in the hollow Passages of the Earth, are converted into Water;
as may be observed of a kind of Breathings evaporated from a Pot of Liquor,
that by the frigidity of its Cover are thickened into small Drops of a liquid
Nature.

From whence it ensues, that great quantities of Seawater flowing in many
Caverns of the Earth, such tenuous Parts are exhaled from them that being
moistly Condensed are turned into Fountains.

He bids us not wonder, as indeed we need not, if in the bottom of some Wells,
there may be found Salt Water: Which he thinks might there remain, because the
brinish liquidity is not strained or cleared from the Water of the Seas as it
passes to such Profundities.

That Water in some Wells is Salt, notwithstanding they are far distant from
the Sea, is not to be doubted; but the reason he gives for their being so, is
not certain: Because it is very likely, that the Seawater might not pass to
any remote Parts within the Earth, and not be altered or purified from their
saltness, by meeting, as also mixed, with abundance of fresh Water that passes
and repasses within the Earth.

Nor is it impossible, that diverse hot Substances, as Minerals, and the like,
contained in profound Places of the Earth; might not so efficaciously rarifie
such quantities of Water, that the residue would remain thickened, and
therefore more aptly inclined to saltness.

But as the Supremer and not less Important Cause of the saltness of Water in
Wells, especially of some that are farthest distant from the Sea, may be
reasonably thought to proceed from the powerful Exhalations effected by the Sun
and Stars; by whose Influence and Heat, the tenuous Parts of Water are
Extracted, though from deepest Wells, leaving such a crassitudeness, in the
residue as gives to it a Salt Qualification. Nothing being more certain, than
that whatsoever is thickened, and thereby rendered more dryly adust, especially
where Earth has any Commixture with it; saltness, as its concomitant Quality,
will be there found.

The same Reason may be given for Salt, discovered in Mountains, mentioned by
this Author.

Nor is the Cause at all different, if not more obviously exposed, from whence
proceeds the briny Relish of the Superficies of the Ocean: Which openly
Revolving under the Celestial Luminaries, has its tenuous Parts supremely
Exhaled, and consequently the Regions replenished with Clouds; which being
dissolved into Drops of Rain, there is no Salt Acerbity to be perceived in
them; which proves, That the Moisture exhaled from the Sea is of a more tenuous
Substance than that which is left behind, and therefore of a fresher Taste.

To which may be added experimental assurance, that the Sea is less brackish at
bottom than on its superficial Parts: Which sufficiently confirms, that the
Saltness of Seawater is produced by the Motion and Heat that is Influenced by
the Sun and Stars.

That the Waters of the Ocean are rather accidentally than naturally Salt; as
also, that they purge themselves in their passage to Shores, may be signally
noted from the Experiment made by Julius Caesar; who when Besieged in
Alexandria, caused Pits to be dug in the Shore of the Sea, which relieved
his Army with Water potably fresh; by reason that the Seawater had its
Saltness, in a manner strained, as it passed thorough the Sands on the Shore.

That the Southern Ocean is salter than the Northern, can be effected from no
other Cause, than that the Sea, in that Part of the World is Warmer than the
other; correspondent to the Air and Winds, that coming from the South are
Hotter, to Sense, than those which are blown from the North.

There is no Question more Controverted by Philosophers, then the Causes that
limit and confine the Ocean, though by its Elementary Propriety higher than the
Superficies of the Earth, and perpetually supplied with innumerable Springs,
Fountains, Rivers and Floods, that vastly Unite their Currents, as they elapse
from the inward and outward Parts of the Earth: Yet do not so replenish the
Sea, however by Nature elevated above the Terrene World, that it executes that
Prerogative by a general Inundation: Or by particular Exorbitancy, gain more on
any Part of the Earth's Surface than it loses in another.

The Reason of which, as it is rendered by some of erudite Proficiency, is,
because great quantities of the Water of the Sea, are received by Caverns
within the Earth; as likewise, that the Ocean is much commixt with Terrene
Materials, which depress, in diverse Places of the Sea, the outrageous height
and swelling of its Waves, before they arrive to Shores: As also, that the hard
Composition and Dryness of the Earth, contiguously resist the Attacks made by
the Water.

These Instances, I doubt not, are sounder Probabilities, tending to the
Decision of the Grand Question, (before mentioned) than any to be deduced from
the Reasons given by Descartes: Which are so complicated, if not intricately
perplexed, that he might have spared his endeavor to explain them by any
Draughts, or Schemes; which, if duly Inspected, would rather expose their
Obscurity, than Intelligibly clear them to the Sense of the Peruser.

And thus I pass to what he Writes of Things contained in the Internal Parts of
the Earth, together with their Causes: The most principal of which relate to
Earthquakes, the Eruption of Flames out of Mountains, such as are observed of
Aetna in Sicily, and Vesuvius, in Campania. Of these, proceeding from
subterraneous Effects, Operations and Causes; I cannot find, if granted his
Principles, That a more accurate Discovery is explicated by his Pen, than what
has been Written of their wonderful Productions and Consequences by others.

Much he Inscribes of Stones, Minerals, and in Sum, without enumerating of
their several Denominations, of the principal Things that are contained in the
Bowels of the Earth. But most especially, he Treats of the Magnet, or
Lodestone, together with its admired Proprieties.

This precious Stone, above all value for its commodious and extraordinary Use;
whose transcendent Excellencies until discovered, in some few Ages past, was
wanted to the Conduct of most Approved Navigators: Who, before understood the
Sympathetick Virtues and wonderful Attraction of the Magnet, as by its
affectionate Touch, the Points of a Needle are directive on the Ocean; were too
frequently, without a Guide, benighted, and wanderingly tossed on the watery
World; or necessitated to Furl their Sails, and fix Anchors in the bottom of
the Main, until discerned the Munificent appearance of some noted Star, whose
Motion, being Calculated, directed their Journey on the Waves of the Sea.

Whereas now, the Pilot more certainly Sails by the Compass that contains his
Magnetical Needle, than, he could, before its Invention, by any other
Computation. By what means, or happy Accident, this admirable Benefit, whose
secret Cause and Efficacy is so occultly reserved by Nature, from the eruditest
Search of the Learned, was first Discovered; seems rather the beneficial Act of
Providence, than concentring with Humane Invention.

Notwithstanding all which, Descartes is so fondly confident of his supposs'd
Phaenomena's, in every consideration, that he doubts not to promulge, as he
would be taken for a paramount Minister to the Counsels of Nature, such
Secrets, that being enclosed in her Cabinet, could only be Revealed by him. To
which purpose, he presents his Reader with no less than Thirty Four
Particulars, whereby he would explain the mysterious Sympathy of the Lodestone
and Iron.

On which I am obliged to bestow no other Remark, than by taxing of their
dependancies on the Construction and Management he gives to his fabulous
Elements, Vortices and Globuli; by which he attempts to Constitute the World,
and all its Individuals, together with their occultest Qualifications, and
manner of Existence: As surely as he Imagines, that in this Place, he has
Deciphered every Syllable relating to the obscurest Contexture, Being, and
Nature of the Magnet; the most useful Jewel of Stones, with all its
Excellencies.

Had it not been as easy for this Author, having furnished his Brain with so
many Notions, Theories and Systems, by which he undertakes to penetrate and
display the total Recesses of Nature, to have given a Philosophical Reason, Why
the Remora, though one of the least of Fishes, adhering to the Stern or Rudder of
a great Ship, should stop her Course, when under Sail, in a Tempestuous Sea?
Or, Why the Eyes of a Crab-Fish should burst the Stone engendered in the
Bladder of Man? Yet these Experiments are related by undoubted Authors; but so
as they are referred to ocult Causes, or such as are impossible to be
extricated by Humane Comprehension: On which account Pliny, the great
Naturalist, acknowledges, that there are many Things, wholly absconded, by the
Majesty of Nature.

From whence I conclude, That had this Learned Monsieur been as modest, in his
Opinion, he had never propo'sd any Maxims of his, in order to Frame the
miraculous Consistence of the Universal World, by Materials and Operations of
his devising: For doing of which, however the labor of his Pen, and pregnancy
of his Fancy, might in those respects, acquire Applause: Yet, in a Judicious
construction, they cannot be allowed any other Encomium, than may be given to
Ovid, for the first Line, or Introduction, to his fictitious Poem; where he
tells his Reader, that In nova fert animus mutatas dicere formas Corpora -- To
be plain: I would as soon rely on the Metamorphosis of that Poet, by which he
fabulously produces the Universe, with all its Appurtenances; as confide, on
that account, on the Principles engendered by the Brain of Descartes. Not but
I grant, that the most accurate Thinker, even where Causes of Things are
obscurely Envelop'd, will signally attain the nearest room to Philosophical
Reputation.

Notwithstanding, the endeavors of Men are so far unfortunately obstructed;
that where Knowledge is most desired, and would requisitely be embraced, the
greatest difficulties not seldom Interpose: Insomuch that the Faith we assign
to the Zenith of our Salvation above; Encounters, too often, the Soul with
dubious Sentiments, that in a natural Conception are more remote from our
Apprehension; than the absconded Cause that guides the Magnetical Needle to
Epitomize a Line that would direct its Points toward the vastly distant Poles
of the World.

The main Supposition of this Author, and on which chiefly his beforementioned
Thirty Four Particulars, relating to the especial Inclination of the Magnet, or
the Needle touched by it, to regard the Nothern and Southern Points of Heaven;
is, That he supposes two Poles in the Magnet that respect those Parts, or Poles
on which he imagines the Earth to Move. But how the Lodestone should be
accomplished with two such Poles, that Sympathetically affect those Points of
the World, he offers no natural Reason for their Consistence or Operation.

Some of the Learned have thought, that by a secret Sympathy Influenced by
Nothern and Southern Stars, the Magnetical Needle points toward them.

Others have more naturally, appropriated the Cause to vast quantities of Iron
situated, as some think, under the North, or South Pole of the World: From
which Opinion, perhaps as probable as any other, may be inferred, That if one
end of the Needle does steadily Point Northward, the other will as certainly
Point Southward; because the Needle will be then demonstratively in the same
Plane, with the Meridian Line, if not accidentally hindered:

As may be Geometrically proved by the following Diagram: Let the Point of the
Magnetical Needle be in M, in the Line A B; to which Point the Line N M falls
perpendicularly, from the North Pole N, on the Point M: It is manifest, that
the Point in M, if continued to S, as it is here signified by the pricked Line M
S; shall be in the Plane of the Meridian Line extended from N M to S: Because
the Lines C D E F, and A B are perpendicular to the Line N M, in the Point of
their common Interfections at M: So that the other end of the Magnetical Needle
will respect in the same direct Line, the South Point of the Meridian: But if
it had directed its Point obliquely to that, or any other Point in the Line A
B, the Variation would have been equal to the distance of that Point, or Angle
made by it, from the Plane of the Meridian Line N M.

But notwithstanding the strong Inclination, or sympathetical Affection, that
the Magnetic Needle has directly to represent the two Polar Points of the
World: It Is frequently observed, that in some Places of the Earth, 'tho not far
distant from one another, it considerably differed, if compared with what it
does in other Situations.

And what is more admirable, if placed, as near as could be judged, on the same
foot of Ground, it has at one time more or less varied, than at another: And
thus it is frequently observed that very near the same Place, higher, or lower,
or on the contrary Sides of a Wall or Window, that the Magnetical Needle has
pointed on contrary sides of the Meridian: Which might be from different
Azimuths, as the Compass was placed; much like to the Substile of a declining
Dyal on several Plains.

Whether caused by some Aspects and Motions of Stars, Alterations of the Air,
Water, Earth, and Seasons of the Year, or Metals concealed within the Surface
of the Earth: If not, as some have Imagined, diverted, or variously drawn aside
by quantities of Iron that in Towns and Cities, were more, or less, when
Observation has been made, near their Precincts: As was the Opinion of Learned
Gilbert, who is said to have spent 50000 Crowns on his endeavor to find out
the Secret. But whatever were the Cause; I think it not improper to mention the
signal Observation made by practical Mr. Gunter, in the 279 Page of his Book,
where he Writes, that being informed in what place Mr. Bourough, in the Year
1580, had observed the Variation of the Compass at Limehouse near London,
compared with the Azimuth of the Sun, to be 11 dig. 15 m. That he on the 13th
of June, 1622, made Observations on several Parts of the Ground in that Place;
and could find the greatest Variation of the Needle to be but 6 degrees. 10 m.
Which differs from the Observation made by Mr. Bourough 5 degrees. 5 m. And though
betwixt these Observations there was 42 Years difference; it may be
demonstratively concluded from them, that if the Earth be supposed to Move, as
Descartes Imagines, it could not vary its Poles, nor the Magnetical Needle, if
granted, with him, to have Poles also, by the Virtue it receives from the Touch
of the Magnet; because both these Learned Authors made their Experiment in the
same Place.

Having considered these Observations, and not knowing whether, or not, the
Variation of the Compass had been observed at Windsor, where I now Reside, I
made, from a high and convenient Place, these following Observations, by
comparing the Magnetical Azimuth of a Needle six Inches long, and I believe
exactly touched, with the Azimuth of the Sun, from the Meridian Eastward; or
all one, as to Calculation, if numbered from the Meridian Westward, and found
the several Variations of the Compass in this present Year, September the 9th,
1699, betwixt the Hours of Four and Five in the Afternoon, according to the
several Altitudes of the Sun, as in this Table Inserted.

If the mean proportional Alt. Azm. Azm Variat. gr. m. gr. m. gr. m gr. m. 19
11 57 66 32 9 32 17 1 57 69 40 12 40 14 48 57 72 49 15 49 12 33 57 75 54 18 54
10 17 57 80 24 23 24 Number be computed betwixt the first Variation and the
last, as they are Inscribed in this Table, it will be found 14 degrees. 51 m. which
differs but 3 degrees. 37 m. from Mr. Bourough's Observation: Which might be his
Method, as he might observe betwixt Hours: Or else, from a suitable Altitude of
the Sun, made his Observation; which is more probable, the Needle standing at
one and the same Point, as it will do for some time, at least, if it be exact;
than that his Observation, at one and the same Place at Limehouse, should
differ so many Degrees, as are above noted, from the Variation of the Compass
found there by Mr. Gunter: In Sum, I found that Mr. Gunter's Observation of
the Variation of the Compass, at the first place he observed when the Sun was
at 19 degrees. of Altitude, for he mentions several; differed but 3 degrees. 20 m. from
the first of mine, as his Needle might Point Westward from the Meridian, and
mine Eastward, which was at 19 degrees. 11 m. of the Sun's Altitude: From whence I
conclude, That had he made his Observation at the same Altitude and Declination
of the Sun, as was done by me, there had been proportionably the same
difference, if compared with my Table; supposing his Magnetical Azimuth to have
continued at 82 degrees. 2 m. as it was first in his; and his Observations, at his
first Station, at Limehouse, as many as mine.

In a Word, having duly pondered the Calculations made by my self and others,
whereby to attain the exact Determination of this Great, and as yet unresolved
Secret of the Variation of the Compass: I considered, that as the Magnetical
Needle did Point, for the most part certainly, at so many Degrees of Variation,
as it will do for a considerable space of Time, if the Needle be as perfect as
it ought to be; that there could be no surer Method, than to find such a
Theorem, as should, as near as possible, demonstrate the Annual Variation of
the Compass: To which purpose, I devised this Process:

If betwixt the Sun's Declination of 30 m. from the Equator, as also his
Altitude, suppose 30 m. or less, if thought necessary, be taken the mean
proportional Sine, betwixt his Azimuth at 30 m. of Declination and Altitude,
and the Complement in Degrees, of the most constant standing of the Magnetical
Azimuth; and next that the same be done from his greatest Declination, wanting
30 m. and 30 m. of Altitude, and the difference taken betwixt both the Mean
Proportionals so found; it is probably, the most certain way to find the
Variation of the Compass, in any one Place, throughout the Year.

Example.

By my Observation at Windsor, Sept. 9th, 1699: I found the most constant and
fixed Point of the Magnetical Needle to be 33 degrees. Eastward from the Meridian,
or the same if accounted Westward from the Miridian, whose Complement to 90, is
57 degrees. The Mean proportional Sine betwixt the Sun's greatest Azimuth at 30 m.
Of Altitude and Declination and the Magnetical Azimuth was 66 degrees. 19 m.: And
the Mean proportional Sine betwixt the Magnetical Azimuth, and his Azimuth of
greatest Declination wanting 30 m. and Altitude 30 m. was 51 degrees. 21 m.: The
difference betwixt which Mean Proportionals is 11 degrees. 58 m.: Which I take to
be the most approximate Variation of the the Compass at Windsor, in the Place
where I observed, that can be given throughout the Year.

After these Observations, I continued the Needle for several Weeks in the same
Place, and found the difference of its Pointing very inconsiderable, or not
varying a Degree from whence it had stood before; as also, that it sometimes
returned to the very Degree, to which it had precedently pointed: Which as I
discerned was upon Change of Weather; and inclined me to conclude, That as
Clocks and Watches go truest in a serene Season, and temperature of the Air,
that the Magnetical Needle might likewise somewhat vary: It being not less
probable, that it might be so affected, considering its Elementary Temper, as
well as other mixed Bodies. And I am very apt to impute its temporary
Variation, chiefly to that Cause, rather than to any other: Though I well know,
that not a few pretend to other Reasons; or such as I have already Instanced.

As also how they infer, That in Places remote from Towns and Cities, the
Magnetical Needle does more, or less vary: Which Observations were they
Judiciously made, and Methodically collected and compared, might doubtless be a
performance that would be gratefully received; and in some respects forward the
Curiosities of Men to a more requisite Reasoning, or useful discovery of the
Causes and Effects, that are admirably Implied in the Proprieties of the
Lodestone.

But if Descartes had been asked the Cause of these Diversities, or Variations
in the Magnetical Needle, however impossible as he grounds his Opinion, by
reason of the Observations I have Inserted; he would confidently have referred
them to the Consistence and Qualifications that the Magnet, in his Sense,
receives from some one or more of his Invented Elements; by which he supposes
that particular Parts of the Lodestone are channell'd, or craggy, more or
less, suitable to such striated, or hollow Particles of the Earth that respect
its two Poles North and South.

But how comes the Earth to have two such Poles, if by Poles be understood, as
in an Astronomical Sense they ought, Points in the Axis of a Sphere, or
Planetary Orb? I may conclude, that if the Earth be Immovable, as I presume has
been egregiously proved in the Third Part of my Remarks, then the Earth has no
such Poles, as he would provide for her.

Or were I a Cartesian Proselyte, and should grant, according to his
Hypothesis, That the Earth is Imbued with a Diurnal and Annual Motion suitable
to the Vortex, by which, in the Opinion of this Author, she does Revolve: Must
I not also Affirm, That if the Magnet has correspondent Poles with the Earth,
that it also Concenters, in all respects, with the same Motion? But where is
the Man that ever observed, or can reasonably Infer, That any such Movement is
Incident to the Lodestone, more than to a Flint, or Peeble?

The most probable Reason that is given for the diversified Variation, at
several times and places, observed, of the Magnetical Needle, as it
experimentally relates, to different Points of the Compass, may, in Sum, be
referred to what this Author cites from our Countryman the Learned Gilbert;
who chiefly imputes the Cause of the diversities to some Inequalities or
alterable Tempers in the Superficies of the Earth: Or because there are more
Load-stones in some Parts of the terrene World than in other: To which may be
added, agreeable to the Opinion of Descartes, that in some Seasons, more Iron
is dug out of the Earth, and conveyed to distant Places, or Regions for
public and private Uses: Which might contribute much to the changeable
Variations of the Magnetical Needle; as they have been by Learned Observators,
at several times, differently Computed.

Upon the whole Matter, tending to the great Secret of the Needle touched by
the Magnet, I find not, that the Inferences, above mentioned, are more passable
with me, than any Allowance of mine, correspondent to the Opinion, of this
Author of Poles in the Earth, or Affinity with them in the Lodestone, or
Virtue, on that account, conferred by him on the Needle.

Wherefore I judge, that I may with founder confidence adhere to the Reasons
and Observations, precedently offered by me, than on any determination of the
Magnetical Secret, tendered by this Writer: The Maxims and Principles of
Descartes being so entirely deduced and connected by him, that if one of his
Particulars be Answered, he gives no labor to his Opposer to have to do with
more. Which I confess I take for a favor, though possibly against his Intention.
And should I have been more Elaborate in my pursuit, or Conviction of his
Tenants, as I perceive them perplex'dly delivered, and entangled both in the
Sense, Method, Figures and Schemes, by which he does, in a manner, no less pose
himself than his Reader; my Replications would have been no less ungrateful to
a Judicious Peruser, than if I had elaborately undertaken by one obscurity to
manifest another: So that I may safely conclude, that the occult Quality, in
reference to the Magnet, with all its Proprieties, is not more darkly reserved
by Nature, than it is envelop'd in the Writings of Descartes. Nor need I
repeat, that if I have rendered Invalid his First main Particular; by proving,
as I have done, neither the Earth, or Magnet has any such Poles, or Motion,
Incident to his Hypothesis; I may undoubtedly allege, that his other Positions
are totally Ineffectual.

And thus I pass to his 184th Particular, where he mentions some other Things,
as Jet, Rosin, Wax, Vitriol and the like; to which he annexes, in resemblance
of the Magnet, a Propriety whereby they Attract other diminutive Bodies: But of
these not having made such perfect Experiments, as might render them clearly
Intelligible, or grounded no less evidently, in his Judgment, than he has
signified by the Composition, and Motions of Things, deducible from his
supposed Elements, already disproved by me: He does, to as little purpose,
Instance their Names and Natures. And therefore require no farther Discussion:
It being my essential Design to limit, chiefly my Remarks to such Heads and
Places of his Tractates, that I judge usefully conducing to the Improvement of
Science, or whatsoever by the Humane Mind would be most desirably understood:
To which purpose, I will take occasion from the hint he delivers of his
Intention to complete this Fourth Part of his Philosophy, wherein he has given,
(after his manner) the Earth a Formation and Being, together with diverse Things
relating to its external, and internal Comprehension; by adding his Treatments
of the Original Production of Animals, Plants and Mankind.

The last of which I shall principally insist on; though waved, or deferred by
him, in his 188th Particular, to some future Treatises, of which he was not
fully resolved, or, at that time, furnished with leisure, or thoughts proper
for his designed Enterprise on those Subjects: Yet I find, that the Substance,
of what he omits here, and especially that of the Original of Humane
Production, is to be read in the 29th Page of his Distertatio de Methodo, or
the right use of Reason, in order to the Investigation of the Truth of Science:
Which I conceive was written before the Principles of his Philosophy; or indeed
an Epitome, for the most part, of what is to be found in them.

Wherefore, I shall briefly select from thence, so much of his Method, tending
to the primitive Existence of Mankind; as also by what Cause, or operation,
individual Man was originally Constituted in his admirable Form, and, more than
wonderful Intellectual Capacity.

The Sum of all which he comprehends in these Words: viz. That God did form
the first Being of the Humane Body in all things correspondent to what it is
now; both in the External structure of Members, as also in the Internal and
Organical Parts, produced out of the same matter, by which is meant by
Descartes, his first Element, as before remarked by me. The method by which he
supposes that God completed the primary formation of Man, he takes to be no
other than a corporeal substance, without either Sensitive, or Animated
Proprieties, or, such as are observable in Plants, or Beasts, but only endu'd
in the Heart with a kind of Fire without light, which he compares to a
Hay-rick, distemperately warm before it is thoroughly dry; or the calefaction
that is in new Wine, before separated from its Dregs.

But how he comes to give an Existence to Fire, in the original production that
he confers on the Humane Body; is no less contradictory to Sense, than if he
had Affirmed, that Flame could be infused into any Corporeal Thing without its
Illuminating Capacity.

True it is, that Hay ill-digested will smoke in the Stack, or Mow; and if not
prevented set the whole on Fire: And likewise experimentally certain, that New
Wine will ferment, until cleans'd by its Operation; the latter, by reason of
its predominant Quantity of Moisture, not capable of being inflamed, as will
the former; that by prevalent dryness, opposing of its Moisture, smoaks and
burns, by degrees, unless hindered, the Hay's distempered Substance.

And is it not a mean conceited Similitude offered by Descartes, by which he
would render the Corporeal Figure of Original Man, as distemperately
Consistent, though the immediate Manufacture, as he dilivers it, of the
Omnipotent? Yet being so far effected, could have no other Representation, than
as the Material Composition might be Imagined to fumigate, or Smoke at the Nose
and Mouth, in resemblance to the distemperatures of Hay and Wine, mentioned by
him, yet not potentially operative, either by Rarifaction or Condensation; though
impossible to be supposed where any Thing is capacitated to Evaporate, Thicken,
or Harden, that it should not be naturally endu'd with suitable Qualifications:
Which is grossly denied by this Author, as he conceives, That Fire might be so
diffused, by the Act of God, into the Substance and Composition of Original
Man, that it might be destitute of its proper Effects; either as to Alteration,
or Diminution of the Matter that contained it: And if so, he must be very
obscurely conceited, that would imagine a blind Fire uselessly Constituted in
the first Humane Body by Omnipotent Power.

The Material Substance out of which he concludes the primary Being of Man's
Corporeal Shape and Proportion, is doubtless abstracted by him from his primary
invented Element, and which he denominates the sole Materiality of whatsoever
the World contains.

But that Element, according to his Definition, being exceedingly Fluid and
Tenuous, and no room left, by reason of its plenary Existing for any other
Thing, or Substance throughout the Universe, as I have precedently mentioned;
it is very Incompatible with common Understanding, that this simple Matter, and
therefore incapable to produce any other Substance different from its own;
should by Descartes be presumed, if pardoned the Expression, to fill the Hands
of the Almighty in order to Constitute the total World withal its admired
Particulars, in a natural Method: Which seems no less Improbable, than if a Man
should undertake, by grasping of Air, to make it of as solid a Substance, as is
the Flesh and Bones of Man.

But waving that Absurdity, as also, that Fire without Light, was originally
conveyed by God, according to his Supposition, into the then, unliving Heart of
Man, only to warm that principal Part; If Fire could be thought so to reside,
contrary to its elementary Nature and consuming Propriety, until this Author
imagined the whole Humane Body first Animated, by the infusing of the Soul by
the Act of the Almighty: What could be implied by it, more than, that Fire was
Ineffectually disposed into the lifeless Heart of Man by Divine Appointment;
yet not at all operative, otherwise than by impertinently warming of the Part
without either vegetative, or sensitive Heat, as he defines it? Which were all
one as to conceive, That the Omnipotent seemed to do something, by an
extraordinary Method, though nothing farther Excellent, in reference to the
Original Figure of Man's Corporeal Being, than if a skillful Statuary had
Composed the likeness of the Humane Body in any Material Substance.

Wherefore the Fable of Prometheus tending to his forming of Man out of
Elementary Ingredients, not a little resembles the devised Part of the
Almighty, as it is delivered by this French Philosopher; with this difference,
that Prometheus is said at once to complete, by a Celestial Expedient, his
Artificial Man; whereas several Operations are allowed by Descartes, even to
the Work of the Omnipotent; tending to the primary Production of the Humane
Body and Soul.

Nor do I preceive, That this Author, if allowed the fineness of his Invention,
does more sublimely Celebrate the introducing of the Soul of Man into his
imaginary Material Machine, than is Divinely Attributed to the Fable of
Prometheus, the Son of Iapetus, in the Metamorphosis of Ovid; where it is thus
Expressed, --

Natus Homo est: sive hunc divino semine fecit
Ille opifex rerum, mundi melioris origo:
Sive recens tellus, seductaque nuper ab alto
Aethere, cognati retinebat semina coeli:
Quam satus Iapeto mistam fluvialibus undis
Finxit in effigiem moderantum cuncta deorum.
This Fable may be taken as an Imitation of Providence, by the Artifice of
Prometheus: Who, having molded the Statue of Man, could not perfect his Work,
until he had stole Celestial Fire; and by conveying it into the Material
Figure, which he had Composed, the Life and Soul of Man was at once produced:
Which was very agreeable to the Religion of the Ancients, which Celebrated
their Gods, and Goddesses, in the Form of Men and Women; and Ensoul'd them with
no greater difference, compared with Mankind; than as they allowed to their
Deities Immortal Reason and Life. To which Ovid seems refin'dly to allude in
one of his Elegies, where as a sublime Encomium of the excellency of the
Faculties and Gifts, incident to the Humane Soul, he derives its Descent from
above, by Affirming, That -- Sedibus aethereis spiritus ille venit.

This Expression of the Poet is not more Poetical, than Admirable, as he
intends the Soul to the Perfection, Reason and Conduct, evidently discernable
in Stars, the shining Ornaments of Heaven: But should the Soul be supposed
originally Infused by God, as a thinking Substance into the Body of Man,
suitable to the Imagination of Descartes, and not absolutely capacitated to
discharge it self from the innate Depravations and prone Allurements of the
Senses, 'twere some disparagement to its Accession to the Body by the Gift and
Ordainment of Divine Providence.

Yet such an uncertain and complicated Soul is, by this French Writer,
appropriated to the Body of Man, where, in some Actions, he makes it a mere
thinking Substance; but in the sensible execution of Thought, he allows it
Co-operative and inseparable from the Senses: And this, to the utmost force of
his Brain, he Asserts in the 187th Particular of this Part I Treat of, where he
delivers these Words -- The nature of the Mind is such, that by it alone may be
apprehended diverse Corporeal Motions, as also Sensations in many respects. The
Example he gives, is of Words spoken, or written, which may affect us with
Troubles, Griefs, Perils, Sadness, or the like; as also, how their contrary
Accents in reference to Content, Pleasure, and Satisfaction, are verbally
understood by us.

Which signifies no more, however he strains his Inferences, than, that there
is an Inseparable Concomitancy of the Contemplations of the Mind, and their
applications to the Senses. If I open a Book, and view in it a whole Page of
Letters; by a mere superficial Inspection of what is there Written, or Printed,
I can understand nothing; but if I Conster those Words, as their tendency and
meaning Imply, I am soon Intelligent, whether they relate to Sorrow, Gladness,
Pain, or Grief; either as to my self, or any other Person: Because I am
perfectly apprehensive of their Motives, Causes and Effects; as they sensibly
Incite my Conception of them. The Reason is plain, if considered the reciprocal
Allowance and Reference, that any one of our Senses has to another; it being as
easy for me to determine, by seeing a Bone, or Lump of Flesh at distance, that
they are really such as if they had been touched, or handled by me. If I hear
of an Arm or Leg, by any means, severed from the Body of Man; the Connection
that the Senses have with the Imagination, as undoubtedly assure me of the
manner of the Wound, Grief, and Part cut off, as if I had occularly beheld it.
Not that I can directly judge the Quality, or full extent of the Pain that is
not distinctly felt by my self: Yet as the Part is an Object of Sense, and in
which I, as well as another Man, may be in the same kind, grievously Afflicted;
it is very possible, that by a natural Sympathy, which is reciprocally Conferred
on the sensitive Parts of the Bodies of Men; I may, in effect, be as sensibly
Intelligent of the Pain, or Grief, in any Member of another Person; as if with
the Point of a Weapon, I should wound the same Part of my own Body.

And did not the Soul and Senses thus apprehensively Conspire; there would not
be that Reluctance, Defense, and Prevention, used by us, for the safety of our
Corporeal Parts; nor should we be so actually sensible that Mortality is the
inevitable consequence of unsupportable Violence, Wounds, and Maladies, that
surrender our Bodies to Death. And this clearly invalidates the Allegations and
Instances, that he gives, on this Head, together with the Example he mentions
of a Sword that may so hurt, or dismember any Part of the Body, that we may in
Mind, be grievously apprehensive of the local Motion of the Force, or Blow, as
it wounds the Part; though the Motion of the Sword and Body hurt, be very
different: From whence he concludes, That the Humane Mind by a bare speculation
of local Motion, together with its forcible onset made on the Body, may judge
of all Corporeal Afflictions and Sensations whatsoever.

And is not this a pretty kind of Quibble in Descartes, by not considering,
That it was not the Motion of the Blow, or the wounded Part that represented to
the Intellect, or Mind, the hurt received; but as the Pain of the Member, or
Part, assured the Imagination unto which it was inseparably united? It being
very possible, for a Man to be sensibly apprehensive of a Wound, or Blow, though
he does not conceive, or see the Motion of the Weapon that gave it: But as he
is sensible of the Pain, he could not doubt, that it was effected by forcible
means, though no otherwise relating to the Wound; or more diversified from
sensible Conception, than, on this occasion, this Author does render the Mind,
or what he calls a Thinking Substance, by a modality of Thinking without Sense.

Nor is it Imaginable, how any Thing, that is not Elementarily Composed, can
operate on the Humane Body that is so constituted: Wherefore the Word
Substance, applied to the Soul, cannot be understood Incorporeal, by the
determination of Descartes, who, wheresoever he treats of Substance,
appropriates unto it quantitative and dimensive Parts, both in a Plilosophical
and Mathematical Consideration: And particularly, in the last Page of this
Fourth Part of his Philosophy, condemns the Doctrine of Atoms, delivered by
Democritus; because he allows them no Commensurable Quantity.

Had it been demanded of this French Philosopher, What kind of Substance must
be the Essence of the Soul, when separated by Death, from the Body, in whose
Elementary Composition it did precedently Exist? He could not define it
otherwise than quantitative, as every Thing, called Substance, is by his
Opinion allowed to be; and therefore the same after the period of the Body's
Life. And consequently, no less agreeable to his Doctrine, if Affirmed, That
the thinking Substance, called by him the Humane Soul, must have, when
separated from the Body, a Circumscribed, or Elementary Being, suitable to the
Nature of Substance, as it may be conceived quantitatively Dimensive. Which
Objection should a Cartesian endeavor to evade by Affirming, That the Soul
separated from the Body is progressive to the Sphere of Spirits, or Things
superlatively refined and stripped from Matter; and unto which some allow
Definitive, not Circumscribed Beings; he must next grant, That the Soul cannot
have Existence there, otherwise than in a Material Superficies proportionable
to its Substance, and there eternally Circumscribed, where Spirits and
Immaterial Beings are without such Limits; which were all one as to reside
temporally amongst spiritual Existencies. To avoid which Absurdity, he cannot
be thought to mean otherwise, than that the Soul, upon its immediate departure
from the Body, is Metamorphos'd into a Spirit: And next, that it has a
spiritual Passage through all Elementary Bodies that intervene betwixt it and
its immaterial Residence appointed by God.

But here may arise a Querie, Whether Motion can be Attributed to any Thing
without Body? Or in what manner it can Move, where Bodies are, or be in Motion,
without removing of them? Which, in that Circumstance, would render a Soul,
however deemed spiritual, Commensurably Moving; as by Parts of Time it might
have an intermixed Progression, with other Substances, as its temporary Measure.

Certain it is, that Stars, the Luminaries of Heaven, if duly considered their
wonderful Motion, unalterable Essence, and continuation, may be allowed our
most visible and perpetual miraculous Objects; or somewhat more than, in
Nature, can be properly worded. But should those Etherial Beings be supposed,
in any Place, where Elementary Substances might Exist; it were impossible they
could move uncommixt with Things of different Nature from theirs: Wherefore it
must be granted, That the Orbs above, together with the Stars and Planets, are
of one simple Essence, or Manner of Existence; and therefore cannot Mingle, or
Move with other Matter distinct from their own: Though by Divine Appointment, as
Parts of the same miraculous Substance, they are only Illuminated.

But should the Soul of Man be Assimilated, by any refined Contemplation to the
Nature to the Etherial Luminaries, for want of a more obvious, or excellent
Comparison; it is not easy to conceive, how in its Passage from the Body, when
Life departs, it should remove to its appointed Residence, separated from
Intervening Substances, which in their Temperatures and Parts are of the same
Elementary Composition with the Humane Body that had been actuated by it.

Which Objection was doubtless considered as causing some Hesitation in the
Thoughts of Descartes; who, notwithstanding the pretended curiosity of his
Imagination, in reference to the Soul disposed, according to his Method, into
the Original Formation, by God, as he delivers the Operation of the Humane
Body: He does not at all express the Manner of its departure, from its
Corporeal Station, at the period of Life: Or by what means transferred, or
removed to its Immortal Residence; which was to be expected from the process he
delivers: Who having determined, that the Humane Soul is a thinking Substance,
and notionally Active in the Conduct of the Living Body, he might as well have
Inserted the Method of its Progression after Death, from its Bodily Habitation;
and how, being a Substance it arrived to its Immortal Abode, without being
Complicated, Moved, or Moving, in its Passage, with any material Thing by any
resemblance to what it performed, when acting in the Enclosure of the Body of
Man.

All which, according to the liberty he gives to his Invention, might have been
as successfully delivered by him, as the dispatch he gives to his Globuli and
Vortices by variety of Schemes, and Diagrams, that have no better proof than
the Suppositions of Descartes: But it seems, he thought it safer for his Pen
to Inscribe his Imagination of the Soul, primarily conveyed, by the Act of the
Almighty into the Humane Body, than by what subsequent Means, or Pasport from
above, its Substance arrived, after the Death of the Body, to its determined
Existence. Of which I find no mention in any of his Works; other, than that he
leaves the Manner of the Soul's passing from the lifeless Body, together with
its Journey to its Immortal Residence, to the miraculous Conduct of the
Almighty.

And I think it devoutly Judicious, if, according to his Example, I silence my
Querie, on this Incomprehensible Subject: Since by the Will of the Omnipotent
Disposer and Conservator of the Universal World, together with the Being of
Mankind in Soul and Body, our rational Abilities more aptly tend to admire,
than determine the Manner by which we are Ensoul'd to live, or after Death to
remain Immortal.

A Contemplation sublimely incumbent on the Humane Mind, that is enough
Capacitated to understand its Intellectual Dignity; however its Essence and
Operations, within us, are superlative to our Apprehensions, or exact
Definitions to be given of them.

Wherefore I doubt not that my Discussions, on this great Particular, are no
less valid, where I differ from him, than what I have Remarked on not a few of
his main Principles, Maxims, Notions, Hypotheses, and Schemes; or
demonstratively waved, or rejected the Insufficiency of others, on whatsoever
account: So that I dare Affirm, that I have not omitted any significant or
useful Animadversion.

And had I more particularly insisted on any Speculations, or Matter seemingly
varied and Instanced by him; I had, in effect, but increased Words to one and
the same tendency: And therefore, where, in Substance, my Observations, on some
Things include other, I desire that my Reader would ingenuously consider them,
as they ought to be understood.

And though this Author is very inclinable to Celebrate his own Esteem by
frequently Affirming, That his Assertions and Tenants, are Philosophically and
Mathematically certain: I will boast of no Success of mine, to the contrary,
farther than is Equivalent with the Proofs I have made, and to which I refer
the Judicious Peruser.

And thus I conclude the Fourth and last Part of my Remarks on the Plilosophy
of Descartes.

FINIS.

