A Funeral Sermon FOR That very Reverend, AND Most laborious Servant of Christ,
In the Work of the MINISTRY, Mr. MATTHEW MEAD. Who Deceased Oct. 16. 1699.

By JOHN HOW, Minister of the Gospel, and some time Fellow of Magd Coll. Oxon.

LONDON, Printed for T. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside,
1699.

TO The Right Honorable, John, and Frances, The Lord, and Lady HAVERSHAM.
May it please Your Honors,
THE Request of the Mournful Widow, and other Relatives, of the worthy Person,
deceased; concurring with my own Inclination, left, with me, no room to
deliberate, concerning this Inscription.

I easily apprehend, how quick, and deep, a sense You both have, of the loss of
such another valuable person, from off this Earth; having so lately born Your
part, in lamenting the Decease of one You much valued also. Upon which account,
I put into Your Hands, a Discourse on those words, John 11. 16. Let us go, that
we may die with him.

Such Persons leave this World so fast, that it grows a more difficult choice,
with whom to live, than with whom to die.

When, on that sad occasion, I did set my self to consider, that passage of
Holy Scripture, I had seen some Expositors, that made it a doubt, whether that
were meant of Lazarus, or of our Lord himself. Some, of good note, thought the
latter. For which, was plausibly to be alleged, what we find, verse. 8. and
that, in this verse 16. the words were spoken, not to Christ, but to the
Fellow-Disciples

That Doubt was not to have been moved in an Assembly, where was neither time,
nor a sit season to discuss it. And though I might more conveniently, I shall not
say much to it, now. Only I judge, that, without necessity, the present
coherence was not to be torn. When, by the series of Discourse, the same [him]
seems plainly to be referred to, in the close of the 15. verse, and of this 16.
-- Lazarus is dead, v. 14. -- nevertheless, let us go to HIM, verse. 15. -- Let
us also go, that we may die with HIM.

It was little needful to say to Christ, Let us go, whose Mind appeared set
upon going, already, but to the Disciples, who drew ba^k. Besides that
Reverence might restrain from saying this to our Lord, when what was to be
proposed was matter of Hortation, not of Enquiry. Though sometimes they feared
even to ask him a Question, also; as Luke 9. 45. And they might the rather, be
now, under a present awe, from the rebuke, or expostulatory answer, he had
given them, for their objecting against going into Judea. Especially, so as not
to signify a remaining fear, which he had so newly checked Therefore Thomas's
speech, directed to his Fellow-Disciples, but not out of Christ's hearing (for
we have no reason to suppose, that he separated them from him, that he might
say this to them apart) is so ordered, as not to import fear of death, but Love
to the Deceased.

If any should object, that Thomas could not mean dying WITH Lazarus, when he
was told, he was already dead. That scarce deserves answer, to any one that
understands the latitude of the Particle rendered WITH, especially, that it
frequently signifies after, and not always with. And very often notes nothing
of time at all. And therefore may here, mean no more, than let us go that we
may die too, or, die, as well as he.

All this I say, not that I have heard any Person, in our days, object against,
or plead for, this or that sense of these words: But knowing they have been
differently understood; and this being the first opportunity I had to take
public notice of the difference, I am not ill pleased, that I have now, this
occasion of representing it, to so competent Judges, partly to prevent
Objection, or at least, to show with what temper of mind, any such different
apprehensions,in matters of no greater moment, ought to be looked upon.

Nor shall I here vye Authorities of Commentators, that have gone this way, or
that in this matter. Therefore I name none: Only some, of as great name as any,
have judged this the more probable Opinion, which I have followed.

Many Instances might be given, wherein, when matters, extra-essential to the
Sum of our Religion, are delivered, one Sense must be pitched upon, though
another, very diverse, (of which there cannot be two) is not to be demonstrated
impossible.

In which case, I much prefer a tacit following that which one chooses, before
a conceited Confidence, and crying down of the other. For confident Clamor
neither admits light, nor tends to enlighten any body.

In the present case, it makes no difference, to any disadvantage. For if we
desire to be united in death, or in that state, to which it introduces, with
this or that H. Man: To be with our Blessed Lord, in that state, must be much
more desirable.

But the departure of the excellent Ones of the Earth, from it, leaves us less,
here, of present attractive, and gives us a very threatening prospect, and
presage of what we are to expect, for the future.

Your Lordship's great respect to this Servant of Christ, was even hereditary,
and descended to him, by You, from Tour Family; as I have often heard him
acknowledge, with great Sense of Obligation.

And (Madam) Your Ladyship's great value of him, though it might take its first
rise from so near, and judicious a Relative, could not but receive a great
increase, from his known worth, and Your own discerning Judgment.

I pray, (not doubting it) that with whatsoever kindness, You have received any
Prophet, or other Servant of Christ, in that Name, You may have a
proportionable Reward; and am, my most Honored Lord, and Lady;

Your most obliged, humble Servant, in the Work of the Gospel, John How.

A Funeral Sermon On the Reverend Mr. MEAD.
1 TIMOTHY IV. 16. -- Thou shall both save thy self and them that hear thee.
THese words I principally design to insist upon at this time, and on this sad,
and mournful occasion; but not without Retrospection, to the foregoing Verse,
and the former part of this; which run thus, verse 15. Meditate upon these
things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all. V.
16. Take heed to thy self, and thy doctrine; continue in them, for in doing
this, thou shall both save thy self and them that hear thee.

This whole foregoing Context contains Precepts, which reduced to practice,
afford an eminent Example and Pattern of a true Gospel-Preacher: Or as the words
are, v. 6. Of a good Minister of Jesus Christ, nouristed up in the words of
Faith, and of good Doctrine. As these last words show the blessed end and issue
of such a one's Ministry, i. e. that he shall save himself; which must be
looked upon as certain. And them that hear him; i. e. as much as in him lies,
he shall herein do his part, and what is incumbent upon him, to the saving of
his Hearers.

These latter words hold forth the double end which a Minister of Christ is to
pursue, the saving his own, and his Peoples Souls.

The foregoing words, considered in reference to these, contain the proper
means lie is to use in order to this twofold end.

i. e. He is to meditate much on the great things of (...).
the Gospel. He is to be wholly in them, as the words In a better than the
Poets sense, scire tuu^^ nihil est.
literally import, which we read, he is to give himself wholly to them. He is
to be continually increasing in the knowledge of God, and that so as not to
know only to himself, but so as to make known what he knows. He is especially
(though that be the common duty of Christians) to turn all to the use of
Edifying, Ephesians. 4. 29. that his profiting may appear to all. For though Timothy
was at this time a young man, yet the most grown, did always need to be still
growing: None have here, attained their Ne plus ultra, but may still write for
their Motto, Plus ultra, all their days; even Paul the Aged, as he writes
himself to Philemon, tells the Philippians (both those Epistles being dated
from Rome, and supposed to be written about the same time, when he was first
there) that he had not yet attained, in point of the transforming knowledge of
Christ, chap. 3. 10, 11. And unto what pitch soever he grew, it was still in
order to communication. He writes to the Corrinthians, that he determined 1
Cor. 2. 2.
to know nothing among them; which is so to know, as to make known, nothing but
Jesus Christ and him crucified. And to the Ephesians, that he would have them
Ephesians. 3. 4.
understand, his knowledge in the Mystery of Christ; no doubt that their
Salvation might be promoted thereby. And hereupon, in great part, depends a
Minister's own Salvation; as hereafter will further appear. But besides, he is
to take heed to himself, and see to the good state of his own Soul; he is to
take heed to his Doctrine, not to corrupt, or handle deceitfully the word of
God, but represent it sincerely, and as the truth is in Jesus. He is to
continue in them, i. e. in the things he before exhorts him to meditate on, and
be wholly in them; to continue in the Faith, of what was to be believed; and
the Practice, of what was to be done; and in pressing and insisting on both.
And all for the mentioned Ends, that he might both save himself, and those that
hear him.

And it is this twofold End of a Minister's Care, and Labor, that will take
us up at this time. This is that therefore, which as God shall help, I am to
evince and apply, viz.

Doct. That a Minister of Christ is to make it his business, both to save
himself, and his hearers.

I am, as the Text directs, to speak of these two Ends conjunctly: And here I
stall not spend time, or use a a liberty, beyond what is obvious, and useful;
in enquiring into the Counsel of God, why he makes use of such in order to the
saving of others, as need to be saved themselves, also.

But shall principally insist, that since it appears to be God's pleasure to
make use of such, they should, therefore, most earnestly concern themselves,
and be very intent upon carrying on this design; viz. of their own, conjunctly
with that of their Hearers Salvation. Yet as to the former of these,

1. Somewhat it may be requisite to say, concerning this Course and Method,
which we find the Wisdom and Good-pleasure of God have pitched upon, for the
carrying on a saving Design in this World; to make use of such for the saving
of others, as do need to endeavor the saving of themselves. And here I shall
briefly show;

1. How it is to be understood.

2. How the fitness of this Course may be evinced.

As to the former we shall briefly note;

That we must be cautious to understand aright, how, and in what sense any one
can be said, to save himself, or another. Therefore,

1. It must be understood so, as to keep at a remote and awful distance from
intrenching upon a Divine Prerogative. It being most expressly said, Isa. 43.
11. I, even I, am the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior: and Chap. 45.
21, 22. There is no God beside me, a just God, and a Savior, there is none
beside me. Look to me, and be ye saved all the ends of the Earth: for I am God,
and there is none else. Which plainly signifies, that in the highest sense, to
save, is most appropriate to Deity, especially, with an everlasting Salvation,
as it is expressed, v. 17. of this Chap. 45. Israel shall be saved, in or by the
Lord, with an everlasting Salvation. And that to be so a Savior, is equally
incommunicable, as to be God.

How gloriously does he triumph in this excellent peculiarity of the Godhead,
in his Expostulations with Job, Chap. 40. 9. Have thou an arm like God! q. d.
Come let us compare; stretch out that weak withered ulcerous Arm of thine. Deck
thy self now with Majesty and Excellency, array thy self with Glory and Beauty;
try if thou can make thy self shine in God-like splendour: Cast abroad the
Rage of thy Wrath: behold every one that is proud and abase him. Try thy power
upon thy fellow mortals. See if thou can crush all the haughty ones of this
World, bring them down, and bind their Faces in the Dust of the Grave. And (to
recall thee to the greater things mentioned before) try if thou can form me
such another Earth as this, establish its Foundations, lay its corner Stone. If
thou can countermand the Motions, bind up the Influences of the Stars in the
Heavens. Then will I confess unto thee, that thy own right hand can save thee,
verse. 14. It is, it seems, as much above created Power to be a Savior, as to
be the Creator or Ruler of the World.

And how should we dread to think of usurping the Title and Office of the great
Emanuel, the Savior, who is therefore called JESUS, because he was to save his
People from their sins, Matthew 1. 21.

2. Yet there is a true sense wherein the saving Act and Power, are otherwise,
and very variously ascribed. Sometimes to Faith, Luke 7. 50. Thy Faith has
saved thee; sometimes to Hope, We are saved by Hope, Romans 8. 24. sometimes to
Baptism, 1 Pet. 3. 21. Baptism does also now save us, not the putting away the
filth of the flesh, etc. sometimes to Husbands and Wives in reference to one
another, 1 Cor, 7. 16. So is the Gospel called the Gospel of our Salvation,
Ephesians. 1. 13. And to you is the word of this Salvation sent, Act. 13. 26. So are
we exhorted to save our selves, Act. 2. 40. and others, Jud. 23. Others save
with fear.

Thus in lower matters, is the act, of Writing, for instance, ascribed to the
Pen, to the Hand that uses it, and to the Writer himself, that moves both; and
we have no difficulty to understand those different forms of Speech: Nor is
there a greater difficulty in the present case; so to ascribe to the Creature,
the low subordinate Agency, which in distinct capacities may belong to it, as
in the mean time to reserve to God and Christ the supreme Agency, which is most
peculiar and appropriate to Divine Power and Grace, 1 Pet. 1. 5. Ephesians. 2. 8.

2. We now come next to show, That it was very manifestly agreeable to the most
accurate Wisdom of God, to employ such in the design and work of saving others,
as were themselves concerned, and needed to be saved too, that were to be upon
the same bottom themselves with the rest; and to venture their own Souls, and
their everlasting concernments the same way, and into the same Hands.

And this we shall labor to clear and make evident by degrees.

1. It was fit, since Creatures were to be employed in this work, to make use
of Intelligent Creatures, such as could understand their own errand, and act
with design in pursuance of it.

2. Mankind was universally lost, so as all do need being saved themselves.

3. Therefore no intelligent creatures else, could be employed herein, but the
unfall'n Angels.

4. We may adventure to say after God, and when he has so determined the
matter himself, though it was not fit for us to have said it before him, as if
we would direct the Spirit of the Lord, or as his Counselors would instruct
him, Isa. 40. Romans 11. that it was more suitable to make use to this purpose of
sinful Men, than of sinless Angels.

Let us sever and lay aside herein, what may at first sight, seem specious, but
is really not considerable in this matter, as that men, in the same miserable
circumstances with those whom they are to persuade, that they may save them,
will be so much the more earnest, and importunate, use so much the more
pressing arguments, as having been upon the brink of hell, and the borders of
destruction, for we suppose such as are most likely to promote the salvation of
others, to have been made sensible of their own undone lost state, and to be in
a way of recovery themselves. But hereupon it may also be supposed, they will
therefore so much the more pathetically plead with sinners. Their knowledge of
the terrors of the Lord will urge them to persuade men, 2 Cor. 5. 11. and make
them eloquent at it. But what? more than Angels? When the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.
supposes one speaking with the tongue of Men and Angels, does he not intend a
gradation, and signify the latter far to excel? And are we to suppose that the
benignity of their own natures, their kindness to man, and their perfect
conformity, and obediential compliance and subjection to the will of their
sovereign Lord, would not have obliged them to do their uttermost, if he had
sent them upon such errands? we cannot doubt it. But,

1. It is apparent that what the Blessed God does in pursuance of this saving
design, he does to the praise of the glory of his grace, and that it might
appear the more conspicuous, in the whole conduct of this affair.

2. That it is not within the compass of any created, no not of angelical
power, to change the hearts of men, and turn them to God. If Angels were the
constant Preachers in all our Assemblies, they could not with all their
heavenly eloquence convert one sinner, if the immediate Divine Power did not
exert it self. The People are willing in the day of his Power, who was God-man,
as Psalm. 110. 3. The Jews at Mount Sinai received the Law by the Dispensation
of Angels, yet kept it not, Act. 7. 53.

3. Yet if God should put forth his own power, by such a Ministration: If
Angels should appear in glorious array among us, and speak to men with greater
advantage, and more persuasive eloquence, than we can conceive; and mavelous
effects, by divine concurrence, should ensue; Those great effects, among a sort
of creatures led by sense, and who judge by the sight of the eye, would all be
ascribed to the visibly glorious Instrument, not to the supreme Agent, who is
invisible and out of sight; even as in effects of another kind, the invisible
Power and Godhead, that do all, are little regarded by stupid man, whose dull
eye stays, and rests in the visible outside, and fixes his mind there too.

4. Therefore the rich treasures of the Gospel are put into earthen vessels,
that the excellency of the power might be, i. e. might appear to be of God, and
not of the inferior Instrument, 2 Cor. 4. 7.

5. In this way of dispensation, wherein God speaks to men liable to the same
passions with themselves, he accommodates himself to their frail state, who
cannot bear glorious appearances; and to their own option and desires, who say
to Moses, Exodus 20. 19. Speak thou to us and we will hear, but let not God
speak to us lest we die. When they had heard the sound of the trumpet, and the
voice of words accompanied with thunders and lightenings, they entreated that
they might hear no more, Heb. 12. 19. The celestial glory, while our mold and
frame is dust, does more astonish, than instruct. Those soft and pleasant
words, This is my beloved Son -- hear him, spoken by a voice from the excellent
glory in the Transfiguration, made the Disciples that heard them sore afraid,
and fall on their faces, Matt. 17.

How would it unhinge the world, and discompose the whole state of civil
affairs if all conversions were to be as Readiness was, when he became Paul, with
such concomitant effects, not only on himself, but all others present,
especially being wrought (as most Conversions may be) in numerous Assemblies,
the Convert struck blind for some days, and all that were in the place,
speechless! Perhaps we have one such instance to let us see how inconvenient it
were, such instances should be common; or that this should be God's ordinary
way of converting, and saving sinners.

6. The holding of men in this world under the ministry of Men, not of Angels,
in reference to the affairs of their Salvation, is certainly more suitable to
the condition of Probationers; for eternity, and another world; and more aptly
subservient to the business of the Judgment-day, when all the talents men were
entrusted with, their natural endowments, and faculties, as well as additional
advantages, are to be accounted for. We shall hereafter understand better, but
may, in good measure, conjecture now, why there is so fixed a gulf by the
Wisdom and Counsel of God, between the two Worlds, the visible, and the
invisible, and so little commerce between them.

And whereas in the Old Testament, the apparition of Angels was more frequent,
that passage, the world to come, being said, not to be put in subjection to
Angels, seems to signify the time after the Messiah's appearing should be more
entirely left to the conduct of a Gospel-ministery, as the connection, Heb. 2.
verse. 4, 5. intimates.

7. And though the compassions of men, who have been in danger to perish
themselves, cannot be supposed more powerfully to influence them, unto an
earnest endeavor of saving them that are in the like danger, than the kindness
and benignity of Angels would do, if they were so employed; yet their concern
to save others, who are also to be saved themselves the same way, is likely,
more easily, more generally, more sensibly, to be apprehended by those others,
to whom they are to apply themselves, upon this account. They have kinder
thoughts of one another, than they are like to have of a superior order of
creatures. Their own flesh and blood, is nearer akin to them. Yea they are more
apt to love one another (and consequently to apprehend one another love) than
the Blessed God himself. Which is more than intimated in that of that II.
Apostle, 1 John 4. 20. He that loves not his Brother, whom he has seen, how
shall he love God, whom he has not seen? Things affect us, not merely as they
are, but as they are understood. Ministers cannot be kinder to men's Souls, than
the Blessed Angels, among whom there is a joy for the conversion of a sinner,
much more pure, exalted, and sublime, than an humane breast is capable of, and
in proportion, more servent desire of such conversions: But their propensions
toward us, though they should be expressed by Counsels and Precepts that tend to
our good, would be less apprehended by most men; they carrying a severity with
them, which makes them need such insinuative recommendations, as slide more
easily into their minds, from creatures of their own Order.

8. Our Lord himself was so concerned for the saving of Souls, as who could be
besides? But though before the Flood he is said to have preached to the Old
world, 'twas, by his Spirit, in the Ministry of Noah, a Man like themselves,
to whom he preached. But when he thought sit to preach immediately himself, he
put on flesh; and dwelt, or did tabernacle, among men as one of them, Joh. 1.
14. So Moses foretold. A Prophet like to me shall God raise up, Acts 3. 22.
from Deuteronomy. 18.
him shall you hear. So his terror was not to make us afraid. And though his
compassionateness toward us is argued from his being tempted, and compas't
with infirmities, as we are, that Heb. 4. and 5.
cannot be understood, as if hereby he became more gracious and merciful
toward us in himself; but his being so, was the more apprehensible to us.

9. The steadiness of the Course God has taken in this matter, shows, what his
Judgment was of the fitness of it; who does all things according to the counsel
of his will, Ephesians. 1. 11. It Is observable, that when our Lord was now about to
ascend, he fixes a Ministry that he promises his Presence unto, always, or
every day, unto the end of the world, Matt. 28. 19, 20. Ascending on high he
gave (among other) these gifts to men, (even to the rebellious, Psalm. 68.)
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 8, -- 11. And that
he might put an honor upon this Ministry, when he designed the Gospel to be
preached to Cornelius, and his Relatives; though he prepares Peter, by a Vision,
and sends an Angel to Cornelius, 'twas not to preach to him, but to direct him
to send for Peter, to preach to him and his; who tells him, when he fell at his
feet, I also am a man, Act. 10. We are humane Preachers, though from a divine
Master and Lord; and of a divine Word.

2. But now the Mind, and Counsel of God being sufficiently evident in this
matter, both in the fact, and in the fitness of it, to make use of such, for
promoting the common salvation, as do need themselves to partake therein; we
come now to show, That the Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, ought to be very
intent upon the business of their own salvation, conjunctly, with that of them
that hear them; and of theirs with their own.

There is a double obligation meeting upon a Minister of the Gospel; that of
the Law of Nature, and of the Law of his Office; he is to comply with both.
Nature obliges him to intend his own Salvation; his Office, theirs that hear
him. The same Authority lays him under the one obligation, and the other. For
he that is the Author of Nature, is the Author of his Office too.

1. He ought so to mind the concern of his Peoples Salvation, as not to neglect
his own. This is so evident in it self, that it would be supersluous to speak
to it, were it not that we, as well as they to whom we preach, do need to be
put in remembrance of very important things, though we know them, 2 Pet. 1. 12.
To know, and to consider, we not only may distinguish, but do, too often,
separate. And there are diverse things to be considered to this purpose.

1. That the Royal Law, as it is called, Jam. 2. 8. which requires us to love
our Neighbor as ones self, makes love to our selves; i. e. not merely which we
bear, but which we owe to our selves, the measure of that which we ought to
have for our Neighbor. And that which ought to be the measure in any kind,
should be the most perfect in that kind; and must oblige us to love first, our
most noble self, our own Souls.

2. It Is gross hypocrisy to seem earnestly intent upon saving other men, and to
be neglectfull of ones own Salvation. It Is sin only which endangers both; meant
by the mote and the beam, Matt. 7. 3, 4, 5. And our Savior, we see there,
stigmatizes such a one, with the brand of an hypocrite, that is officious to
take out the mote from his brother's eye, but never concerns himself to cast
out the beam from his own eye.

3. It Is a scandalous and an ignominious absurdity, as the Apostle's sharp
expostulations imply, Romans 2. 19, 20, 21, 22. to take upon ones self to be a
guide to the blind, a light to them that are in darkness, to take up with
having a form of knowledge, and of the truth in the Law; and to teach others,
and not to teach ones self! Preachest thou (as he adds) A man should not steal?
and do thou steal? Thou that say a man should not commit adultery, do
thou commit adultery? Thou that abhorrest idols, do thou commit sacrilege?
Thou that makes thy boast of the Law, by breaking the Law dishonourest thou
God? This is that which makes the name of God be blasphemed among the Gentiles;
as he tells us it is written, referring to some Texts in the Old Testament,
Ezekiel. 16. 47, -- 52. Chapter 36. 22. It Is a blackening thing when it can be said, I
was keeper of the vineyards, but my own vineyard have I not kept, Cant. 1. 6.
Our Lord speaks of it as a reproachful Proverb, which he, knowing the hearts
of men, observed some were apt to misapply to him, Luke 4. (noted to have been
in use among the Greeks, and which, with that Empire, had reached Judaea)
Physician, heal thy self. It would be very opprobrious to us, who are in the
Ministry, if it could be truly said to us, we seem concerned at the
diseasedness that appears in our flocks, but overlook the diseases, and
distempers of our own Souls. That was meant for a bitter reproach to our Lord,
dying upon the Cross; He saved others, himself he cannot save. To us, if it
might be truly said, it must be a just reproach, as well as bitter; our saving
our selves being our duty enjoined us, and tending to the saving of others;
whereas our Lords saving himself, in the sense intended by those Scoffers, was
against the Law he was, then under; and against his own design; tending to
overthrow it, and leave them to perish, whom he was dying to save.

4. The observable neglect of the design to save our own Souls, would defeat
and destroy the other design of saving theirs that hear us. For who can think
us serious in our preaching, or that we believe our selves, in what we say; if
we manifestly decline, our selves, that way of salvation, which we propose to
others? we tempt men to Infidelity, if we live like Infidels.

It was a cutting Repartee, made by an Atheistical person, to one, that leading
an ill life, yet professed to wonder, that the other, the Arguments for a Deity
being so plain and cogent, did not own there was a God; The other replied he
much more wondered, that he who did own him, should yet live as he did! This
tends to overthrow all our preaching. Though our Savior directs, to do as they
said, who sat in Moses' s chair, not as they did; because they said and did
not: Yet he did not thereby justify those self-repugnant Teachers; for his
reflection upon them is sufficiently severe. And we are to consider in the
case, not merely what man's duty is, but what their dispositions are. Not what
they ought, but what they are apt, to do. If they think we do but act a part,
when we speak never so movingly to them, they will be little moved by all that
we can say. They will be more apt to conclude, that we who have studied, and
searched into the matters of Religion, more than they have done; have found
some flaw at the bottom, and perceive the very Foundations of it to be infirm;
and therefore practice not according to the Doctrines, and Rules of it. But
that for our gain, because it was the Calling we were bred to, and we know not
how else to live, we are content, and some way constrained, to keep up the
forms, we found in use; and maintain them, that they may maintain us.

5. Yet when it shall be found, as upon strict enquiry it cannot but be, that
the Foundations of Religion, are more firm than those of Heaven and Earth, how
dismal will it be to have preached to others, and our selves to be cast-aways?
1 Cor. 9. 27. For as, by loose, licentious walking, we hazard other men's Souls,
which we should endeavor to save; so we, more certainly, lose our own. God may
save them, some other way, and by other, more apt Instruments; but we have
little reason to expect that we shall save our own; either while we design it
not, (as if we were to be saved by chance) or, much less, if we counteract any
such design. Which we may, most destructively, by that single Instance, which
the Apostle, in that last mentioned place, refers to; an indulged intemperance;
or not keeping our bodies in subjection; in servitude, or in a serviceable
temper, as the word (...) imports; to subdue them into the state of Servants;
wherein, rather than fail, one would use the severity which this other word
(...) there signifies. It is plain that if we live after the flesh we must die,
Romans 8. 13. There is one Law for Ministers and People. And it is only by the
spirit, we are so to mortify the deeds of the flesh, that we may live. How
dismal when a Minister's own breath poisons him! When the very Gospel which he
preaches is a deadly odor 2 Cor. 2. 16.
to himself! how horrid when a Shepherd is the Leader of (...).
the Epicurean Herd!

6. But if by neglecting visibly the Gospel-way of saving himself, he not only
hazard, but actually destroy other men's Souls, together with his own, he then
perishes, under a much heavier load of guilt, than another man can, that was
not under his obligations. As his obligation was double, so is his guilt. When
sinful, vicious inclination, has depraved his mind, put out the eye of his
practical understanding, so that the blind leads the blind, both fall into the
ditch; but he falls much the deeper, having the others destruction charged upon
him, together with his own. Such Teachers as bind heavy burdens for others,
which they will not touch fall under an aggravated woe. And the case is the
same, with them that prepare, and set before their Hearers, the most nutritive
and delectable fare, which they will not taste. And for that Reason, perhaps,
the People will not feed on them, because the Preachers themselves too
evidently, appear, to have no taste or relish of them.

2. The Ministers of Christ ought to conjoyn the serious design, and earnest
endeavor, of saving them that hear them, with the design, and endeavor of
saving themselves. They are not to be so bound up within themselves, as only to
mind their own things, though of this most noble kind.

1. The Law of Nature obliges them to it. Which extends its obligation, as far
as humane nature extends. And must therefore include them with the rest of
Mankind, under the same common notion: viz. them, who are Ministers, not as
they are such; for nature has not made them Ministers; but as they are Men.
Whom the Royal Law, mentioned before, requires to love their neighbor as
themselves: and therefore to seek another felicity; not before, but as their
own. We are taught to count it an unnatural barbarity, when we see any pressed
and pincht by bodily wants, and miseries, to hide our selves from our own
flesh, Isa. 58. 7. How much more, if we see immortal Souls in danger to be lost
and perish, that are of the same make, and capacity, with our own!

2. The Law of Christ as such, obliges Christians to the same thing. Which is
not, in this instance, therefore, a diverse Law, but has a different stamp, and
impress, as being the Law of the Kingdom of God in Christ. We are to bear one
another burdens, so fulfilling the Law of Christ, Gal. 6. 2. What so weighty a
burden can there be upon any man as this, the importance of his eternal
salvation? And which is plainly here referred to, when we are required to
endeavor the restoring of such as have been overtaken, and lapsed into sin; by
which the precious Soul is hurt, and endangered, should they be left to sink
under such a burden. Christians are elsewhere, required to have compassion on
such as they see in such danger, to save them with fear, and pull them as
firebrands out of the fire, Jud. 23. These are obligations common to Ministers
with others. But,

3. The Law of their own Office, lays upon them an obligation, peculiar, as
such, to themselves. What serves their Office for, but this; as the principal
end and design of it? What is it meant for? but to gather in Souls to Christ;
and confirm them in him, because there is salvation in no other, nor is there
any other name given among men by which any can be saved, Act. 4. They are the
Messengers of the glad tidings of peace. Their business is so well known, even
in hell it self, that a Spirit from thence speaks it out, These are the
Servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of Salvation: i. e.
to humane creatures, of whom the possessed person was one, Acts 16. 17.

4. They are obliged by the example of their Blessed Master. Our Lord Jesus
himself, the Primary Savior by Office; whom they are both to imitate, and to
serve in this merciful design. Christians are so far to imitate them as they
do Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. which implies their obligation to imitate him, as the
word there used, signifies. The great Salvation, which none that neglect, (...)
can escape vengeance, began to be spoken by the Lord himself, then by them
that heard him, and so on; by others that succeed in the same Office. This is
following Christ in the way of imitation, as in the mentioned place. And we are
required to have the same mind in us, which was in Christ, Phil. 2. 5. and are
told wherein, v. 6, 7, 8. which read over at leisure, and consider what was
that deep humiliation and suffering for? but the salvation of Souls. And
consider that this is said, as to the Saints at Philippi, so particularly to
the Bishops and Deacons there; which shows their common and their special
obligation both together. And now can we behold with what compassions, and in
what agonies, even unto blood, our blessed Lord pursued this design, and not
feel a constraint in our spirits, in our lower sphere, and capacity, to serve
it also to our uttermost!

5. They are obliged by the peculiar advantages they have for this work, and
those they expect by it.

1. They have special advantages, for it, from their very Calling, being
separated to the Gospel; taken off from other business, to give themselves (as
in this Context) wholly to this. They are supposed therefore, to know more of
the concernments of Souls; of the terrors of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 11. whence,
therefore, they are to persuade men; of the nature of Sin, and how it entang'es
men's Spirits; of the wiles of Satan, and how he waits for advantages to destroy
them; of the foundations of Religion, and by what Arts they are endeavored to
be subverted, or shaken: and by what means and methods, they are to be
demonstrated, and established. Of the Mysteries of the Gospel of Christ, and how
they are to be unfolded; to have more special assistances from Heaven, in their
work, according as they faithfully mind it: Christ's promised presence,
therein, even to the end These are Talents, with others, tending to the
obtaining of these, which they are to be accountable for. And hereby they are
strongly obliged, with their own, to intend earnestly the Salvation of other
men's Souls.

2. They expect great advantages by it. That, since nothing is more grateful
to our Lord Christ, than the progress of this saving work, he will bountifully
reward them that faithfully serve him in it. That if they be steadfast and
immovable, abounding in this work of the Lord (as he has not a greater, now in
doing, in this world) their labor, in him, shall not be in vain. They shall
hear from him, well done good and faithful servant, enter into the joy of thy
Lord. If they turn many to Righteousness (or endeavor it with sincere minds)
they shall shine as Stars in the Firmament. And in the mean time, the honor,
and the pleasure, of serving that mighty Redeemer, and lover of Souls, in so
glorious a design, have in them a very excellent reward; and which cannot but
be esteemed such, by a right mind.

6. They are obliged by the exigency of their own case. They cannot, as that is
stated, neglect the design of saving other men's Souls, without forfeiting their
own. If they warn them not, over whom, as Watchmen they are set, they perish,
but their blood will be required at their hands. it is a mighty trust they
stand charged with, which if they discharge not, they are liable to Accusation,
and Condemnation, as false, and faithless Servants; perfidious to the Souls of
men; traitorous to the King of Kings -- whose Interest they will have betrayed,
being his Agents, and Ministers, in his Kingdom of Grace; about the prosperous
state of which Kingdom, with the successful progress of the Affairs of it, he
is most deeply concerned.

And now from this conjunct consideration of these two great ends, which a
Minister of Christ is to propound to himself. I might proceed to consider them
severally, and a part; but this the case does not require, it being easy to
sever what has been said to the one and the other; nor do our limits allow it.

We, therefore, go on to the (more necessary) Use of the whole. To this
purpose, we collect,

1. That this World is universally in a very miserable state. For it is the
business of Christ's Ministers, to endeavor, both, The Salvation of them that
hear them, and their own.

1. The Salvation of them that hear them. This is very indefinite. Let who will
be the hearers, they are supposed to be such as need to be saved. The Object of
their Ministry is all Nations, and every Creature, viz. that is, or shall be,
capable of being taught the way of Salvation. Therefore all Nations are deluged
by the destructive evils, from which they are to be saved. And the world is
every where inhabited by miserable Creatures. We are told, that sin and death
have passed upon all men, Romans ^. 12. And all the ends of the Earth are invited
to look unto God in Christ (as the application of this Context, Phil. 2. shows)
that they may be saved, Isa. 15. 22. whereas, (...) we, the Ministers of the
Gospel of Salvation, wheresoever they can obtain to be heard, are to endeavor
the Salvation of their Hearers, it shows, they can speak to none, who stand not
in need of saving Mercy.

2. And that they are also to save themselves as well as them that hear them,
more fully shows the absolute universality of the ruin that has befal'en this
World; that there are, among men, none to be found, that may be employed in
saving others, but who are of the lost, themselves, and, so far, drowned in the
c^mm^n deluge of perdition, and destruction, as to need his help, as well as
the rest, who came to seek and save them who are lost; and to stretch out to
him craving hands, with, that crying voice, Lord, save us, we perish.

2. The common stupidity of this wretched World, is, hereupon, most observable,
and amazing* that so few such cries are sent up to Heaven! Men are involved in
a common Ruin; overtures are made to them of a common Salvation; but they are
in reference hereto, destitute of common sense, i. e of such sense as is
common, in less important cases. Their misery lies in their having lost God;
but little do they apprehend this loss. Amidst their other miseries, they cry
out, when some that are mightier oppress others, but none says, Where is God my
Maker, Job 35. 9, 10. The Lord looks down from Heaven, upon the children of
men, to see if any will understand, and seek after God: but they are every one
gone back; or are in an averse posture, none does this good, no, not one, Psalm.
14. and 53. None, till he give an effectual touch to their drowsy Spirits; and
say, inwardly, and vitally, to their Hearts, seek ye my face, so as to make
their Hearts answer, Thy face, Lord, will we seek. Preventing Grace does this,
Psalm. 27. 8. otherwise they feel no need of God, they miss him not, are content
to be without him in the world; yea, say to him, depart from us. Distance from
him is chosen, and desired. From him, whose offspring we are, who is the
Father of Spirits, their Parent, their Life, their Blessedness; of whom they
are, and to whom, if they tend not, they cannot but be miserable. It is the
Salvation of the Soul that is the end of Faith, 1 Pet. 1. 9. that Faith by
which we are to come to God, believing that he is, and will be, the rewarder of
them that diligently seek him; being redeemed to God, by the blood of his Son,
Rev. 5. 9. And who suffered once, the just for the unjust, to bring us to God,
1 Pet. 3. 18. and who upon his suffering, intercedes, for the same purpose; and
is able to save to the uttermost them that come to God by him, because he ever
lives to make intercession for them.

But this Salvation of the Soul, this coming to God, or redemption by Christ,
and his intercession thereupon, who looks after? neither the end, the Salvation
of their Souls, coming back to God; nor his Method for attaining this end, are
regarded, or so much as thought on. To have this Flesh saved from any thing
that is grievous to it, every one covets, and endeavors, in vain. It must,
however, rot in the Dust, and be, in the mean time, a prey to Worms. Its own
Father, Mother, and Sister, will devour it, Job 17. 14. The Father of their
Spirits would save, and satisfy them, but him they shun, and will not know.

Who that observes how men spend their days, even under the Gospel, which makes
their time a day of Grace, wherein they should be working out their Salvation,
can think they have any concern to be saved? Their life is continual trifling,
some pass their days in mirth and jollity; does this signify any sense of
misery, or fear of perishing, and that destruction from the Almighty is a
terror to them? These are not more idle, than others are idly busy, to get
Estates, and a Name on Earth; but what is this to their being saved? They are
liable to the common, more sensible, miseries of life, and they are without
God; but this is no misery with them. This misery is their element, and burdens
them not. Were their present case, and future danger, in this respect
apprehended, and felt, how full of outcries would this World be; O we are lost,
and perishing! Such cries would ring through the Earth, and pierce Heaven! But
the same carnality that is death, and makes them miserable, Romans 8. 6.
makes them stupid too, and insensible of their misery.

And are these reasonable Souls, intelligent, immortal Minds and Spirits, that
are thus stupify'd! turned into such Clods, and Stones! O deplorable case!
Methinks such an Office, set up in the World, of men that are to save their
own, and other men's Souls, should make them consider, and bethink themselves,
what is it for? It must have had an original; and so, it has a Divine Aspect;
a taste of Heaven upon it, and must have an end, suitable to the Wisdom, and
Grace of Heaven, which claims to be entertained otherwise, than with neglect,
and contempt!

And indeed, this leads to take notice more expressly, in a further Inference.

3. That there is a saving design on foot in the World. Set a foot by the
Blessed God himself. Otherwise in so great a ruin as is come upon this
wretched World, what could it signify? for any man, to offer at saving either
himself or others?

How vain an attempt were it! for any man, out of so deep and horrid a gulf, of
impurity, misery, darkness and death, to think of lifting up himself, and of
plucking up others as high as Heaven! This intimation, carries hope with it. It
is a Voice from Heaven to such as are so employed, as Timothy was: O save thy
self, and as many as thou can besides. It takes away all pretense for
despair. God puts not men upon vain attempts. A lively hope ought to spring
from hence. And we are saved by hope, Romans 8. 24. As without Hope no man would
ever design for Salvation, or any thing else. Hope is the Engine that moves the
World, keeps the intelligent part of it, in action, every where. No man could
rationally stir in pursuit of any design, whereof he despaired. But as to other
designs, men's hopes are commonly self-sprung, and end in shame. But when one
can say, Lord, thy word has caused me to hope. Thou have put me upon aiming to
be saved, and to save others, it speaks this to be a just and a hopeful
undertaking. I will therefore set about working out my own salvation (and with
my own, other men's, as far as is within my compass) expecting he will
graciously set in with me, and work in order hereto, to will, and to do, of
his own good pleasure, without which, all mine will be lost labor.

4. We further collect, That the Blessed God is most intent upon this design.

That which this supposes, and that which it imports, speaks him intent. It
supposes he has appointed a Sovereign Savior set over this work; otherwise,
there could be none subordinate.

It imports, he has settled an Office on purpose. Made it some men's special
business, to intend (as every one ought) his own salvation, and withal, to
give himself up to this great work, the saving all he can.

An Office set up for the saving of Souls, ought to be a great thing in our
eyes; and is a standing testimony for God, how willing he is men should come to
the knowledge of the truth and be saved.

5. They that bear this Office should be highly honored for their works sake.

For how glorious an employment is it, to be instrumental to Salvation! To be,
in any kind, Saviors. I could tell you of some great Princes, in the Pagan
world, that to their other splendid Titles, have had the addition, of Soter, a
Savior; as to some other, the Destroyer of Cities, has been given as a name
of reproach. And you do know who has the name of Apollyon, or Abaddon. Rev. 9.
11

6. It highly magnifies the Wisdom, Power, and Sovereignty of God, that he
can, and will, make use of so mean Instruments, for so high and glorious a
purpose. For what end and purpose can be greater, than the Recovery, and
Salvation of Souls, so deformed, miserable, and lost, as the Souls of men,
universally, were? And what Instruments could be meaner, or more vile, than
such as needed to be saved themselves, with the same Salvation? That God should
make use of them who were darkness, Ephesians. 5. 8. to enlighten the world Matt. 5.
14. of such as were but sinful flesh, Joh. 3. 6. to be able Ministers of the
spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6. of such as had minds that were cumity against God, Romans 8.
7. to reconcile men to him! 2 Cor. 5. 20. These are some of the wonders he
works among the children of men. When he has converted some to use them (first
for the converting of others, and then) for the strengthening of their
converted brethren.

7. The Ministers of Christ are to be examples to them over whom they are set.
They are to be so in the beginning of their course, in their first turn to God,
though then, in a more passive sense, that I might be a pattern, etc. says the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. 16. and in their after-course; as in this Context, v. 12. Be
thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, etc. They must be
Leaders in the whole way of Salvation, from first to last.

8. Pride, in the Ministers of the Gospel, and in them that live under a
Gospel-Ministery, is a most monstrous absurdity: For what are we all of us, but
a company of wretched creatures, just perishing, and only (at the best) but in
the way of being saved! What have such to be proud of!

9. Both Christ's Ministers, and their Flocks, are under the greatest
obligation imaginable unto union. For their case is one and the same; their
miseries were the same, their dangers the same. They must all have the same
Savior, the same way of salvation, and the same end; the same state of
salvation, which all the nations of the saved are to be brought to at last,
Rev. 21. 24.

10. It Is an unquestionable thing, that salvation is to be designed for, by all
sorts. Ministers must aim to save themselves, and their hearers. And is the
Minister to design his Peoples salvation, and not they, their own! They have
mean thoughts of Salvation that stumble here, as if they were only to be saved
from hell-flames! but to be saved from sin that makes us unlike God! to have
his Image, and his Love perfected in us, to be with the rest of the elect,
partakers of salvation, with eternal glory, is that mean? 2 Timothy 2. 10.

11. The Ministers of the Gospel must, sometime, or other, be taken away from
their work. It is time, a limited duration, within which their work and
business lies, for the saving themselves and those that hear them. They are to
save themselves. This end they are to pursue; and it must sometime be attained.
They are not always to labor, and never rest: sometime, they are to receive
the fruit of this their Labor, and the end of their Faith, the salvation of
their Souls. As more time passes, their salvation draws nearer than when they
believed; they are not always to be in saving, and never saved. In mercy to
them, God will translate them; and may it not be in judgment to many, whom they
earnestly labored to save, but who rejected their counsels, and strove against
their own Salvation! That they may not, always, labor in vain, for themselves,
and because they have labored in vain for many others, they must be withdrawn
from their hard and toilsome labor, and enter into rest.

12. The loss is great, and grievous, beyond all expression, above all our
lamentation, when such are taken away as have made it their business, to save
themselves, and those that heard them. In their endeavor to save themselves,
they have been great examples. In their endeavor to save others, they may have
been great Instruments, of much saving good to many a Soul. How few are they
that drive such designs! how fast does their number decrease! How fitly may we
take up that of the Psalmist, when the godly man ceases, and the faithful fail
from among the children of men? And what could be said with greater Pathos, I
sal. 12. 1. Help, Lord, as in a common Ruin; help, help, for God's sake, help,
Lord, help! My Friends, are you not sensible you have lost such a one, even
while you are not yet saved! while you yet need to be working out your
Salvation! The effectually called, it is true, are saved, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Who has
saved us, and called us with an holy calling. -- And (which is, in substance,
the same thing) the Regenerate are saved: Not by works of righteousness which
we have done, but of his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and
the renewing of the H. Ghost; Tit. 3. 5.

But, if this were the case of you all, how much yet remains to be done, in
order to your full, and consummate Salvation! You have yet mighty difficulties
to overcome. A body of death, which you are not yet delivered from. For are not
these some of your groans, in reference to it, O, who shall deliver us? A
World, full of troubles, and snares. Your adversary the Devil, that goes about
seeking whom he may devour: All the Principalities and Powers of the Kingdom of
Darkness, that you are to contend with, and with whom you are to dispute every
step of your way to Heaven. And do you not need such a Leader, in that way?

And if any are fallen into drowsy Slumbers, do you not need his awakening
Ministry? If dead, how often has the blessed Spirit breathed life into you, by
his quickening Ministry? How often has God used him, to enlighten you, when
you have been in the dark; to clear up the great Doctrines of the Gospel, when
you have not distinctly understood them? to establish you in the Faith, when
you have wavered, to resolve you in matters of practice, when you have been in
doubt, to encourage you in your fears and faintings, to comfort you, in your
sadness, and sorrows! I wonder not that there are many weeping Eyes, and should
much wonder, if there be not many aching, trembling Hearts among you, for what
you have lost, and from an apprehension, how hard, and, almost, hopeless it is,
your loss should be soon, or equally supplied.

He was long in preparing, and forming, to be what he was when you lost him.

His Station among you in this Neighborhood, when first he undertook the
Pastoral Charge of this Church over which the Holy Ghost made him overseer,
required a man of as much Wisdom and Grace, as any such Station could well be
supposed to do. Considering how numerous, how intelligent, and well instructed
a People, he was to take the care of. I well remember, that about 3 or 4 and 40
years ago, being desired to give some help, on a Lord's Day, to that eminent
Servant of Christ, Mr. Greenhill, whose praise is still, in all the Churches, I
then first heard him preach; and (if my Memory fail not) he had about that time
in hand, some part of that excellent Discourse, of the Almost Christian; I had
then the opportunity of beginning an acquaintance with him.

His excellent good natural Parts, his ingenuous Education, his Industry, his
early Labors in preaching the Gospel of Christ, in his native Country, in the
City, and in this place. His Conjunction^ and Society, for some years, with
that excellent Servant of God before named; above all, the gracious assistances
he had from Heaven, gave him great advantages, to be a Minister of Christ,
approved unto God, a Workman that needed not to be ashamed, rightly dividing
the word of truth.

And his multiplied years, unto the 70th, with the continual addition thereby,
to the rich Treasury of his Experiences, still improved him more and more: So
that there being no decay of his natural Endowments, and a continual increase,
of his Supernatural; you had the best of him, at last, whereby, indeed, your
loss was the greater, but your obligation was also the greater, that God
continued to you the enjoyment of him so long: and that in a serviceable state.
But when he could be no longer serviceable in his stated, delightful work, it
was by the decay, not of the inward, but the outward man; so that when he could
preach to you, and converse with you no longer, he could earnestly, and
servently pray for you, to the end. And God did not afflict you, by leaving,
long among you, only the shadow, the outside of the man, and of such a man!

He took little pleasure in embroiling himself, or his Hearers, in needless,
and fruitless Controversies. The great, substantial, Doctrines of the Gospel,
were his principal study, and delight; such as lay nearest the Vitals, and the
very Heart of Religion, and Godliness; and most directly tending to the saving
them that heard him. The Subjects which he chose to insist upon, from time to
time, in the course of his Ministry, showed, as to this, his Spirit, and
Design. Having formed, from the H. Scriptures, that Scheme of Thoughts which
satisfied him, and gave him a clear ground, whereupon to preach the Gospel,
with an unrecoiling Heart, he loved not to discompose it. His Judgment, in
things which had that reference, being constantly moderate, and unexceptionably
sound; remote from rigorous, and indesensible extremities, on the one hand, and
the other.

Hereupon he drove at his mark, without diversion; not so much aiming to
proselyte Souls to a Party, as to Christ. And to engage men, as much as in him
lay, to be sound and thorough Christians. Hitherto tended his Sermons, from
Year, to Year. The great Subject he had in hand, and which he left unfinished,
when God took him off from his public work, was manifestly pointed this way,
viz. Of the Covenant of God in Christ. And his annual course, of preaching a
Sermon on May Day, to Young Men, had the same manifest scope, and aim, with
which his public Labors were concluded. God so ordering it, that his last
Sermon, was this Year, on that day.

His Judgment in reference to matters of Church Order, was for Union, and
Communion of all visible Christians, viz. of such as did visibly hold the Head,
as to the principal credenda, and agenda, of Christianity. The great things
belonging to the Faith, and Practice of a Christian, so as nothing be made
necessary to Christian Communion but what Christ has made necessary; or what
is indeed necessary to one's being a Christian: What he publicly essayed to
this purpose, the World knows. And many more private endeavors and strugglings
of his, for such an Union I have not been unacquainted with. The
unsuccessfulness of which endeavors, he said, not long before his last
confinement, he thought would break his Heart. He having openly, among diverse
persons, and with great earnestness, sometime before, expressed his consent to
some Proposals, which if the Parties concerned, had agreed in the desire of the
thing it self, must unavoidably have inferred such an Union, without prejudice
to their Principles; and on such terms, as must have extended it much further;
else it had signified little. But this must be effected, as is too apparent,
not by mere humane endeavor, but by an Almighty Spirit poured forth, which
(after we have suffered a while) shall (...), put us into joint, and make every
joint know its place in the Body, 1 Pet. 5. 10. Shall conquer private Interests
and Inclinations, and overawe men's Hearts by the Authority of the Divine Law;
which now, how express soever it is, little avails, against such
prepossessions. Till then Christianity will be (among us) a languishing,
withering thing. When the season comes, of such an effusion of the Spirit from
on high, there will be no Parties. And a midst the Wilderness-Desolation that
cannot but be, till that season comes, it matters little, and signifies to me
scarce one straw, what Party of us is uppermost. The most righteous (as they
may be vogu'd) will be but as Briars, and scratching Thorns; and it is better
to suffer by such, than be of them.

In the mean time, it is a mark of God's heavy displeasure, when persons of so
healing Spirits are taken away. And if it awaken any of us, that will tend to
prepare us for the effects of it, which Preparation, seems a thing more to be
hoped, than prevention.

But this worthy Servant of Christ sees not the woeful day, whatever of it he
might foresee. His removal makes, to many, indeed, a woeful day, and that, all
about him, did long foresee. He was long languishing, and even dying daily. But
amidst surrounding death, as a Relation told me, there was no appearance of any
the least Cloud upon his Spirit, that obscured the evidences of his Title to a
Blessed Eternity. Being asked how he did, he said, Going home, as every honest
man ought, when his work is done. He was much in admiring God's Mercies under
his afflicting hand, saying, every thing on this side Hell is Mercy. That the
Mercies he received were greater than his Burdens, though in themselves
grievous. That he rested upon that promise, that his Father would lay no more
upon him than he would enable him to bear. That he expected to be saved only by
the Righteousness of Christ imputed to him. Though he well understood, as I had
sufficient reason to know, that Christ's Righteousness is never imputed to any,
but where, if the Subject be capable, there is an inherent Righteousness also,
that is no cause of our Salvation, but the Character of the saved. And having
before precaution'd some as were about him, not to be surpised, if he went
away suddenly, he repeated the Ejaculation, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly; and
renewing the former caution, by saying, Remember what I said before; as he sat
in his Chair, with all possible composure, he bowed his head, and without sigh,
or motion, expired in a moment.

The sighing part, he left to others that stay behind. And I do even feel the
Sorrows of his most afflicted Family, his mournful Widow, his sorrowing Sons
and Daughters, his destitute Church, with all others that got good, or might
have done by his quickening, spiritful, piercing Ministry, or had the advantage,
and satisfaction of his acquaintance, and converse.

Your Grief cannot but be measured, by your Love; and your Love by his in the
several kinds, and objects of it. His Conjugal, Paternal, Pastoral, Friendly
Love, as he was an affectionate Husband, a tender Father, a vigilant Pastor,
and a pleasant Friend.

But withal, let your Consolations be measured by the proper grounds thereof.
It is a most improper, irrational, unchristian way of being comforted in such a
case, only to let time wear away our sorrows. It is but a negative, an
heathenish, yea a worse than heathenish method of receiving Comfort. For I have
observed it to be animadverted on, as an intolerable absurdity, by some among
the Heathens, that time should work that cure of Grief and Sorrow, which Reason
and Prudence work not.

And thus it is plain, we shall be relieved, not by holy thoughts, but by not
thinking. So it may, in time, be forgotten, that ever such a Man as Mr. Mead,
was Minister in Stepney! And what is this to Christian Consolation?

But we need not wander from the Text for a positive, and a solid ground of
Comfort. Remember it was his business to save himself, and those that heard
him. As you have no doubt of his. Salvation, which I believe none of you have,
make sure of your own. Put on, with the breast plate of Faith, and Love, that
helmet, the hope of Salvation. You are of 1 Thessalonians. 5. 7, 8, 9.
the day, watch, and be sober, as those that are not appointed to wrath, but to
obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ.

And then consider (as I doubt not many a Soul will bless God for him for ever)
how glorious a sight it will be, to see him, one day, appear in the Head of a
numerous company, of saved ones; and say, (as a subordinate Parent in the
Apostle's sense, 1 Cor. 4. 15.) Lord, here am I, and the children thou have
given me.

In conclusion For you of his dear, and beloved Flock, this may be directive to
you as well as consolatory; would you have a Pastor after God's Heart? put your
selves under the conduct, as much as in you is, of such a Pastor, as you
apprehend will be intent, in all his Ministrations, upon this double end, to
save himself, and them that hear him. And labor to be perfect, be of one mind,
and live in Peace, so the God of 2 Cor. 13. 11.
Love and Peace shall be with you. And remember him as one that has had the
Rule over you, and has spoken to you the word of the Lord, and follow the
Faith of such, considering the end of their Conversation; and that Jesus Christ
is the same, yesterday, and to day, for ever. As you change Pastors you will
not need to change Christ's, so as to have one yesterday, another to day, and a
third to morrow. Pastors under the Gospel, as well as Priests under the Law
were many, because of death. But our B. Lord, because he continues ever, has
an unchangeable Priesthood, Heb. 7. 24. Therefore do you never think of another
Christ, as their doubt was, Matt. 11. 3. but cleave to this your great Lord
with purpose of Heart, till he give you at last, an abundant entrance into his
everlasting Kingdom.

Let his mournful Relatives, and all of you to whom he was dear, consider,
what our Lord offered as matter of Consolation, in the most trying case, of
this kind, that ever could occur to poor mortals; i. e. when he himself was to
be taken away, from his sorrowing Family, and Followers. It is but a little
while, q. d. my words have a plain meaning. Joh. 16.
A little while, and you shall not see me, and again, a little while, and you
shall see me: and because I go to my Father -- Ye now have sorrow, but your
sorrow shall be turned into joy, and your joy no man takes from you.

Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the dead, our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good work, to do his will: working in you that which
is well-pleasing, in his sight, through Jesus Christ; To whom be Glory, for
ever, and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
Books written by the Reverend Mr. J. How, and printed for T. Parkhurst, at
the Bible and three Crowns near Mercers-Chappel.
OF Thoughtfulness for the Morrow. With an Appendix concerning the immoderate
Desire of Foreknowing Things to come.

Of Charity, in reference to other Men's Sins.

A Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Richard Adams, M. A. sometime Fellow of
Brasen-Nose College in Oxford.

The Redeemer's Tears wept over lost Souls: In a Treatise on Luke 19. 41, 42.
With an Appendix, wherein somewhat is occasionally discoursed, concerning the
Sin against the Holy Ghost, and how God is said to will the Salvation of them
that perish.

A Sermon directing what we are to do after a strict enquiry, Whether or no we
truly love God.

A Funeral Sermon for Mrs Esther Sampson, the late Wife of Henry Sampson,
Doctor of Physic.

The Carnality of Religious Contention. In two Sermons, preached at the
Merchants Lecture in Broadstrees.

A Sermon for Reformation of Manners.

A Sermon preached on the Day of Thanksgiving, December. 2. 1697. to which is
prefixed Dr. Bates's Congratulatory Speech to the KING.

A Calm and Sober Enquiry, concerning the Possibility of a Trinity in the
Godhead.

A Letter to a Friend, concerning a Postscript to the Defense of Dr. Sherlock's
Notion of the Trinity in Unity, relating to the Calm and Sober Enquiry upon the
same Subject.

A View of that part of the late Considerations to H. H. about the Trinity:
which concerns the Sober Enquiry on that Subject.

The Redeemer's Dominion over the Invisible World.

A Funeral Sermon for Mrs. Hammond.


