Self-dedication DISCOURSED In the Anniversary THANKSGIVING Of a Person of
Honor For a Great DELIVERANCE.

By J. H.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons in Cornhill over
against the Royal Exchange, 1682.

TO THE Right Honorable JOHN, Earl of Kildare, Baron of Ophalia, First of his
Order in the Kingdom of Ireland.
MY LORD,
I Little thought, when, in so private a way, I lately offered much of the
following Discourse to your Lordship's ear; I should receive the command (which
I am not now, so far as it proves to me a possible one to disobey, or further
to dispute) of exposing it thus to the view of the world, or so much as to
present it to your Lordship's own eye.

It was indeed, impossible to me to give an exact account of what was then
discoursed, from a memory that was so treacherous, as to let slip many things,
that were prepared, and intended to have been said that day; and that could
much less (being assisted but by very imperfect memorials) recollect every
thing that was said, several days after.

Yet I account, upon the whole it is much more varied by enlargement, than by
diminution. Whereby, I hope, it will be nothing less capable of serving the end
of this enjoined publication of it.

And I cannot doubt but the injunction proceeded from the same pious gratitude
to the God of your life, which has prompted, for several years past, to the
observation of that domestic Annual Solemnity, in memory of your great
preservation from so near a death. By a fall from an Horse. December. 5. 1674.
That the remembrance of so great a mercy, might be the more deeply impressed
with your self, and improved also (so far as this means could signify for that
purpose) to the instruction of many others.

Your Lordship was pleased to allow an hour to the hearing of that Discourse,
What was, proposed to you in it, is to be the business of your life.

And what is to be done continually is once to be thoroughly done. The
impression ought to be very inward, and strong, which must be so lasting as to
govern a man's life. And were it as fully done as mortality can admit, it needs
be more solemnly renewed at set times for that purpose.

And indeed that such a day should not pass you without a fall, nor that fall
be without an hurt, and that hurt proceed unto a wound, and that wound not be
mortal, but even next to it, looks like an artifice and contrivance of
Providence to show you how near it could go without cutting thorough that
slender thread of life, that it might indear to you its accurate superintendency
over your life, that there might here be a remarkable juncture in that thread,
and that whenever such a day should revolve in the circle of your year, it
might come again, and again, with a note upon it, under your eye, and appear
ever to you as another Birthday; or as an earlier day of resurrection.

Whereupon, my honored Lord, the further design of that Providence is to be
thoroughly studied, and pondered deeply. For it shows it self to be, at once,
both merciful, and wise, and as upon the one account it belonged to it to
design kindly to you, so upon the other, to form its design aptly, and so as
that its means, and method might fitly both serve, and signify its end.

If, therefore, your Lordship shall be induc't to reckon the counsel
acceptable, which has been given you, upon this occasion, and to think the
offering your self to God, a living Sacrifice, under the endearing obligation
of so great a mercy is, indeed, a reasonable service. Your life by that
dedication acquires a sacredness, becomes an holy, divine life. And so by one,
and the same means, is not only renewed, and prolonged in the same kind of
natural life, but is also heightened and improved to a nobler, and far more
excellent kind. And thus, out of that umbrage only and shadow of death, which
sat upon one day of your time springs a double birth, and resurrection to you.
Whereby (as our Apostle speaks in another place of this Epistle) you come to
yield your self to God as one alive from the dead.

So your New year (which shortly after begins) will always be to you a fresh
setting forth in that new, and holy course of life, which shall at length (and
God grant it to be, after the revolution of many fruitful years, wherein you
may continue a public blessing in this wretched world) end, and be perfected
in a state of life not measured by time, wherein you are to be ever with the
Lord.

Which will answer the design of that merciful providence toward you; and of
this performance (how mean soever) of

Your Honors most obedient, humble Servant John How.

Self-dedication.
Romans 12.1. I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that you
present your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is
your reasonable service.


TWO things are more especially considerable in these words: The matter of the
Exhortation, that we would present our bodies a living Sacrifice, holy,
acceptable to God, our reasonable service. And the pathetick form of
obtestation that is used to enforce it. I beseech you by the mercies of God.

The former I intend for the principal subject of the following Discourse; And
shall only make use of the other, for the purpose unto which the holy Apostle
does here apply it.

Our business therefore must be to show the import of this Exhortation. In the
doing whereof, we shall 1. Explain the terms wherein the Text delivers it. 2.
Declare, more distinctly, the nature of the thing expressed by them.


1. For the terms. By bodies] we are to understand our whole selves, expressed
here (synecdochically) by the name of bodies for distinction sake. It having
been wonted, heretofore, to offer in Sacrifice the bodies of beasts; The
Apostle lets them know they are now to offer up their own. Meaning, yet, their
whole man, as some of the following words do intimate; and agreeably to the
plain meaning of the Exhortation; 1 Cor. 6.20. Glorify God in your bodies and
spirits which are his.

Sacrifice] is not to be understood in this place in a more restrained sense,
than as it may signify whatsoever is, by God's own appointment, dedicated to
himself.

According to the stricter notion of a Sacrifice its more noted general
distinction (though the Jewish be very variously distributed See Sigonius de
Repub. Heb. Dr. Outr. de Sacr.
) is into propitiatory, and gratulatory, or Eucharistical. Christianity in that
strict sense, admits but One, and that of the former sort. By which One (that
of himself) our Lord has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. We our
selves, or any service of ours, are only capable of being Sacrifices, by way
of analogy and that chiefly to the other sort. And so all sincere Christians
are, as lively stones, built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer
up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 2.5. being
both Temple, Priests, and Sacrifices all at once. As our Lord himself, in his
peculiar sacrificing, also was.

In the addition of [ living] the design is carried on of speaking both by way
of allusion, and opposition to the ritual sacrificing. By way of allusion. For
a Morticinum, any thing dead of it self, the Israelites were not to eat
themselves, Deuteronomy. 14.21.
because they were an holy People (though they might give it to a stranger)
much more had it been detestable, as a sacrifice to God. The beast must be
brought alive to the Altar. Whereas then we are also to offer our bodies, a
living sacrifice, so far there must be an agreement. Yet also, a difference
seems not obscurely suggested. The victim, brought alive, to be sacrificed, was
yet, to be slain, in sacrificing: But here, living may also signify continuing
to live. You (q. d.) may be Sacrifices and yet live on. According to the strict
notion we find given of a Sacrifice it is somewhat to be, in the prescribed
way, destroyed, and that must perish, in token of their entire devotedness to
God who offer it. Clophenburg. Schol. Sacrific. and others.
When we offer our selves, life will not be touched by it, or at all impaired,
but improved and ennobled highly, by having a sacredness added to it. Your
bodies are to be offered a sacrifice, but an unbloudy one. Such as you have no
cause to be startled at, it carries no dread with it, life will be still whole
in you. Which shows by the way it is not an inanimate body, without the Soul.
But the bodily life is but alluded to, and supposed, it is an higher and more
excellent one, that is meant; The spiritual, divine life, as Chap. 6.13. yield
your selves to God, as those that are alive from the dead. And verse. 11. shows
what that being alive means, Reckon your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but
alive unto God through Jesus Christ. Alive by a life which means God, which
aims at him, terminates in him, and is derived to you through Christ. As he
also speaks Gal. 2.19, 20. I am dead to the Law, that I might live to God. I am
crucified with Christ. Neverthess I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me,
and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of
God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

Holy] though it be included in the word Sacrifice, is not in the Greek (...),
and was therefore added without verbal tautology. And there were, however, no
real one. For there is an holiness that stands in an entire rectitude of heart
and life, by which we are conformed, in both, to the nature and will of God,
besides the relative one which redounds upon any person or thing, by due
dedication to him. And which former is prerequired, in the present Sacrifice,
that it may be, as it follows, acceptable to God] not as though thereby it
became acceptable, but as that without which it is not so. Yet also holiness,
in the nature of the thing, cannot but be grateful to God or well-pleasing (as
the word here used signifies) but not so as to reconcile a person to him, who
was, (...)
before, a sinner, and has still sin in him. But supposing the state of such a
person first made, and continued good, that resemblance of himself cannot but
be pleasing in the eyes of God, but fundamentally and statedly in and for
Christ, as 1 Pet. 2.5. (before quoted.) This therefore signifies, both how
ready God is to be well pleased with such a Sacrifice, and also signifies the
quality of the Sacrifice it self, that it is apt to please.

Reasonable service] or worship, as the word signifies. This is also spoken
accommodately, to the notion given before of offering our selves, in opposition
to the former victims wherein Beasts were the matter of the Sacrifice. Those
were brute Sacrifices. You (q. d.) are to offer reasonable ones. And it
signifies our minds and understandings the seat of reason, with our wills and
affections that are to be governed by it, must all be ingredient as the matter
of that Sacrifice. Implying also the right God has in us, whence nothing can
be more reasonable than to offer our selves to him.

Present] that is, dedicate, devote your selves, set your selves before God, as
they did sistere ad altar, present at the altar, the destined Sacrifices, make
them stand ready for immolation. You are so to make a tender of your selves as
if you would say, Lord, here I am, wholly thine. I come to surrender my self,
my whole life and being, to be entirely, and always, at thy dispose, and for
thy use. Accept a devoted, self-resigning Soul!

Thus we are brought to the thing it self. Which now

2. In the next place (with less regard to the allusive terms) we come more
distinctly to open, and explain. It is briefly but the dedicating of our
selves. Or as it is 2 Cor. 8.5. The giving our own selves to the Lord. So those
Macedonian Converts are said to have done. And there is a special notice to be
taken therein of the word [first] which puts a remarkableness upon that
passage. The Apostle is commending their liberal Charity toward indigent
necessitous Christians. And shows how their Charity was begun in Piety. They
did not only, most freely give away their substance, for the relief of such as
were in want, but first they gave their own selves to the Lord.

But that we may not misconceive the nature of this act, of giving our selves,
we must know, it is not donation, in the strict, and proper sense; such as
confers a right upon the Donee, or to him to whom a thing is said to be given.
We cannot be said to collate, or transfer a right to him, who is, before,
Dominus absolutus; The only Proprietor and Supreme Lord of all. It is more
properly but a tradition, a surrender or delivery of our selves, upon the
supposal, and acknowledgment of his former right. Or the putting our selves
into his possession, for his appointed uses and services, out of which we had
injuriously kept our selves before. It Is but giving him his own, as 1 Cron.
29.14. All things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. It is
only a consent, and obedience to his most rightful claim, and demand of us,
or a yiedling our selves to him, as it is significantly expressed in the
mentioned 6. to the Romans 13. Though there the word is the same with that in the
Text, (...), or, (...)
which here we read present.

And now that we may more distinctly open the nature of this Self-dedication,
we shall show what ought to accompany and qualify it, that we may be a suitable
and grateful Present to him, in evangelical acceptance, worthy of God such as
he requires, and will accept.

1. It must be done with knowledge, and understanding. It cannot but be an
intelligent act. It Is an act of Religion and Worship, as it is called in the
Text ( Service we read it, which is much more general, but the word is (...),
worship) It Is indeed the first and fundamental act of worship. And it is
required to be a rational act. Your reasonable service. Religion cannot move
blindfold. And though Knowledge and Reason are not throughout words of the same
signification, and latitude; yet the former is partly presupposed unto the
latter, and partly improved by it, nor can therefore be severed from it.

In the present case it is especially necessary we distinctly know, and
apprehend the state of things between God and us. That we understand our selves
to have been (with the rest of men) in an apostasy, and revolt from God, that
we are recalled unto him, that a Mediator is appointed on purpose thorough
whom we are to approach him, and render our selves back unto him. That so this
may be our sense in our return, Lord, I have here brought thee back a stray, a
wandering creature, mine own self. I have heard what the Redeemer, of thy own
constituting has done and suffered for the reconciling and reducing of such,
and, against thy known design, I can no longer withhold my self.

2. With serious consideration. It must be a deliberate act. How many
understand matters of greatest importance, which they never consider, and
perish by not considering what they know!

Consideration is nothing else but the revolving of what we knew before. The
actuating the habitual knowledge we had of things. A more distinct reveiwing of
our former notices belonging to any case, a recollecting and gathering them up,
a comparing them together; And, for such as appear more momentous, a repeating,
and inculcating them upon our selves, that we may be urged on to suitable
action. And this, though of it self, without the power and influence of the
divine Spirit, is not sufficient, yet being the means he works by, is most
necessary to our becoming Christians, i. e. if we speak of becoming so, not by
fate, or by chance, as too many only are, but by our own choice and design.
Which is the same thing with dedicating our selves to God thorough Christ,
whereof we are discoursing. For upon our having thus considered and
comprehended the whole compass of the case in our thoughts, either the temper
of our hearts would be such that we would, hereupon, dedicate our selves, or we
would not; If we would, it is because we should judge the arguments for it more
weighty than the objections, which, without such pondering of both, we are not
likely to apprehend, and so, for want of this consideration, are never likely
to become Christians at all. Or, if we would not, it is because to the more
carnal temper of our hearts the objections would outweigh. And then, if we do
seem to consent, it is because what is to be objected came not in view. And so
we should be Christians to no purpose. Our contract with the Redeemer were void
in the making, we should only seem pleased with the terms of Christianity,
because we have not digested them in our thoughts. So our act undoes it self in
the very doing. It carries an implicit, virtual repentance in it, of what is
done. We enter our selves Christians, upon surprise, or mistake. And if we had
considered what we are, consequently, to do, what to forbear, what to forego,
what to endure, would not have done it. And therefore when we do come
distinctly to apprehend all this, are like actually to repent and revolt. As
they Joh. 6. who while they understood not what it was to be a Christian,
seemed very forward followers of Christ. But when they did more fully
understand it, upon his telling them plainly, went back and walked no more with
him. And he lets them go (q. d.) mend your selves if you can, see where you can
get you a better Master.

3. With a determinate judgment, at length, that this ought to be done. There
are two extremes in this matter. Some will not consider at all, and so not do
this thing; and some will consider always, and so, never do it. Stand, shall
I? shall I? halt between two Opinions. These are both of them very vicious and
faulty extremes in reference to the management even of secular affairs, both of
them contrary to that prudence which should govern our actions, i. e. when men
will never consider what is necessary to be done, and so neglect their most
important concernments; or, when they will never have done considering, which
is the same thing as if they had never taken up any thought of the matter at
all. Indeed, in the present case it is a reproach to the blessed God to consider
longer than till we have well digested the state of the case. As if it were a
difficulty to determine the matter, between him and the Devil, which were the
better, or more rightful Lord! We must at last be at a point, and come to a
judicious determination of the question. As those sincerely resolved Christians
had done, John. 6.68, 69. who also express the reasons that had (before that
time no doubt) determined them. Lord, whither shall we go? thou have the words
of eternal life. And we believe, and are sure, that thou art that Christ, the
son of the living God.

4. With liberty of spirit, having thrown off all former bonds, and quite
disingaged our selves from other Masters. As they speak, Isai. 26.13. Other
Lords besides thee have had dominion over us, but by thee only will we make
mention of thy name. For our Savior expressly tells us, No man can serve two
masters, Matthew. 6.24. When those Dedititii the people of Collatia, Livius, l. 1.
were about the business of capitulating in order to the surrender of
themselves, the question put, on the Romans part was, Estne populus Collatinus
in sua potestate? Are the Collatine people in their own power? wherein
satisfaction being given the matter is concluded. In the present case of
yiedling our selves to God, the question cannot be concerning any previous tie
in point of right, or that could urge Conscience. There cannot be so much as a
plausible pretender, against him. But there must be a liberty, in opposition to
preingaged inclinations, and affections. And this must be the sense of the
sincere Soul in treating the matter of its self-surrender, and dedication, with
the great God, to be able to say to the question, Art thou under no former
contrary bonds? Lord, I am under none, I know, that ought to bind me, or that
justly can, against thy former sovereign right. I had indeed suffered other
bonds to take place in my heart, and the affections of my Soul, but they were
bonds of iniquity, which I scruple not to break, and repent that ever I made. I
took my self indeed to be my own, and have lived to my self, only pleased and
served and sought my self, as if I were created and born for no other purpose,
and if the sense of my heart had been put into words, there was insolence
enough to have conceived such as these; not my tongue only, but my whole man,
body and soul, all my parts and powers, my estate and name, and strength, and
time, are all my own; who is Lord over me? And while I pleased my self with
such an imagined liberty, and self-dominion, no Idol was too despicable to
command my homage. I have done worse than prostrated my body to a stock, my
soul has humbled it self, and bowed down to a clod of clay. My thoughts, and
desires, and hopes, and joys have all stoopt to so mean trifles, as wealth, or
ease, or pleasure, or fame, all but so many fragments of earth, or (the
less-consistent) vapors sprung from it. And whereas this world is nothing else
but a bundle of lusts, none of them was too base to rule me. And while I
thought my self at liberty I have been a servant to corruption. But now, Lord,
I have, through thy mercy learnt to abandon and abhor my self. Thy grace
appearing has taught me to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts. Thou have
overcome, enjoy thine own conquest. I am grieved for it, and repent from my
soul that ever I did put thee to contend for, and conquer thine own. And so
does this Self-dedication carry in it repentance from dead works and toward
God.

5. With a plenary full bent of heart and will. As that, I have sworn, and will
perform, that I will keep thy righteous judgments, Psalm. 119.106. Or, that, I
have inclined my heart, to keep thy statutes always unto the end, verse. 112.
And herein does this Self-dedication more principally consist, viz. in a
resolved willingness, to yield my self, as God's own property, to be for him,
and not for another. Which resolvedness of will, though it may, in several
respects, admit of several names, or be clothed with distinct notions, is but
one and the same substantial act. It may be called, in respect of the
competition which there was in the case, choice. Or in respect of the proposal
made to me of such a thing to be done, consent. But these are, abstracting from
these references, the same act, which, in it self considered, is only a
resolute volition. I will be the Lords. Which resolution, if one do (whether
mentally or vocally) direct to God or Christ, then it puts on the nature of a
vow; and so it fitly called devoting oneself.

It carries in it, as a thing supposed, the implanted divine life and nature,
whereby we are truly said to present our selves living Sacrifices as in the
Text, or as it is expressed in that other place, chap. 6.13. to yield our selves
to God as those that are alive from the dead. (as verse. 11.) alive to God
thorough Christ Jesus our Lord. Which life is not to be understood simply, but
in a certain respect. For before, we were not dead simply, we were not dead,
disinclin'd, or disaffected to every thing, but peculiarly toward God and his
Christ. That way we were without any inclination, motion, tendency, or
disposition. And so were dead quoad hoc, as to this thing, or in this respect.
Were alienated from the life of God. Now we come to live this life, and are
made by his grace to incline and move toward him, of our own accord. Dead
things (or destitute of life) may be moved by another, are capable of being
moved violently, without, or against inclination, hither, or thither. But a
living creature can spontaneously move it self, as, of its own accord, it
inclines.

And whereas there are two more-noble principles, that belong to this divine
life and nature, Faith and Love. (A great and noted pair as may be seen in
diverse places of the New Testament) These have both, an ingrediency into this
Self-dedication. The nature of each of them runs into it, and may be perceived
in it. And it is hereupon a mixed act, partaking an influence, and tincture (as
it were) from the one and the other of them.

Faith respects the promises of God, and what we are, thereupon, to expect from
him. And so our dedicating our selves, to God, is a self-committing. We give up
our selves to him as a trust, as the Apostles emphatical expression intimates.
I know whom I have believed, 2 Timothy 1.12.
and I am persuaded that he will keep that which I have committed unto him
((...)) my pawn or pledge, my fidei commissum against that day. The Soul flies
to God as in a distress, not knowing to be safe another way. As once a people,
not able to obtain tutelage on other terms, surrendered themselves to them
whose help they sought, with some such expression, Si non nostros, saltem
vestros. If not as ours, yet at least as your own, save, protect, and defend
us. Nor, in our surrendering our selves to God, is this any way unsuitable,
either to us, or to him. Not to us; for we are really distressed, ready to
perish; it is agreeable to the state of our case. Not to him; for it is glorious
to him. A thing worthy of God to be a refuge, and sanctuary to perishing Souls;
and is thereupon a pleasant thing, a Godlike pleasure, suitable to a
self-sufficient, and all-sufficient being, who has enough for himself, and for
all others, whom he shall have taught not to despise the riches of his
goodness. He takes pleasure in them that fear him, and them that hope in his
mercy, Psalm. 147.11. He waits that he may be gracious, and is exalted in
showing mercy, Isa. 30.18. He lifts up himself when he does it, and waits that
he may; expects the opportunity, seeks out meet and suitable objects (as with
thirst and appetite, an enterprising, valiant man is wont to do encounters,
for none were ever so intent to destroy, as he is to save) yea, makes them,
prepares them for his purpose. Which he does not, and needs not do, in point
of misery, so they can enough prepare themselves; But in point of humility,
sense of their necessity and unworthiness, great need, and no desert, nor
disposition to supplicate.

These are needful preparations, make it decorous, and comely to him to show
mercy. A God is to be sought, with humble, prostrate veneration. And such an
opportunity he waits for^ It Is not fit for him, not great, not majestic, to
throw away his mercies, upon insolent, and insensible wretches. For, as there
it follows, he is the God of judgment, a most accurate, judicious wisdom, and
prudence conducts and guides all the emanations of his flowing goodness. The
part of which wisdom and judgment is to nick the opportunity, to take the fit
season, when mercy will be most fitly placed, best attain its end, relish best,
be most acceptable to them that shall receive it, and honorable to him that
shows it. And therefore (as is added) blessed are they that wait for him, that
labor to be in a posture to meet him, on his own terms, and in his own way.

Let such as have a mind to surrender and yield themselves to him consider
this. Apprehend you have undone your selves and are lost. Fall before him. Lie
at the footstool of the mercy-seat. Willingly put your mouths in the dust, if
so be there may be hope. And there is hope. He seeks after you, and will not
reject what he seeks, he only waited to bring you to this. It Is now a fit time
for him, and a good time for you. And you may now, in resigning, entrust your
selves, also, to him. For his express promise is your sufficient ground for it.
I will receive you, 2 Cor. 6.
and be a father to you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters. Understand the
matter aright; your presenting, and yiedling your selves to him is not to be a
desperate act. It Is not casting your selves away. You are not throwing your
self into flames, but upon tender mercies, thither you may commit your self.
The thing that is pleasing to him, and which he invites you to (as he invites
all the ends of the earth to look to him that they may be saved) cannot be
unsafe, or unhappy to you. Isa. 45.22.


Again, Love has a great ingrediency into this self-resignation. And as it
has, so it more admits to be called dedicating, or devoting our selves.

This holy, ingenuous principle respects more the commands of God, as the other
does his promises, and eyes his interest, as the other does our own. This
dedition of our selves, as it is influenc't by it, designs the doing all for
him we can, as, by the other it does the receiving all. As by the other, we
resign our selves to him for safety and felicity; so we do, by this for service
and duty to our uttermost. And an ardent lover of God thinks this a little
oblation. My self? Alas! What am I? too small a thing for him, who is all love,
and who, though he has it in hand to transform, and turn me into love too,
such as so drossy, and limited a thing was capable of being made. How mean yet,
and little is the subject he has to work upon! an atom of dust! not
combustible, or apt to be wrought upon to this (to a divine and heavenly love)
by any, but his, flame. And now therefore but a minute spark from the element
of love, that must, however, thus transformed, tend toward its own original
(...) ^ative seat! It shall now flame upward. And this is all the flame, in
which it is universally necessary, thy Sacrifice should ascend. Which will
refine only, not consume it. Though, that it may be offered up in other flames,
is not impossible; nor will it be much regretted by you; if the case should so
require, nor shall be despised by him, if he shall so state the case. To give
the body to be burned, without love, goes for nothing. But if, in that way, we
were called to offer up our bodies, living sacrifices to God, it would (in an
inferior sense) be an offering of a sweet smelling savor, would even perfume
Heaven, and diffuse fragrant odours on earth. Nor would be grudged at by that
love that first made our (...), the whole of our selves, an offering to God.
And whose property it is to be all things, to do all things, to bear all
things, to endure all things for him, whose we wholly are. So that if he design
any of us to be an (...) too, an whole burnt offering, and will have us to
glorify him in the fire, Love will not retract its vow. But say, after our
great pattern, Not my will but thine be done: And as he, in his peculiar case,
and design (not communicable with us, though the temper of spirit should be) Lo
I come to do thy will, O God. A body have thou (it now appears for this very
purpose) prepared for me. He loved us, and gave himself for us. So are we, from
our love of him, to give our selves for him, and his use and service, in
whatsoever kind he shall appoint and prescribe. Every true Cristian is, in the
preparation of his mind, a Martyr. But they are few whom he actually calls to
it. Our love is ordinarily to show it self in our keeping his commandments.
And, with that design, we are to present our selves to him, as the resolved,
ready instruments of his service and praise. As Romans 6.13. Neither yield ye
your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin: but yield your selves
unto God as those that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments
of righteousness unto God.

Thus having been more large upon what was more essential, in this dedication
of our selves, I shall be breifer in most of the other things belonging to it.

6. It must, further, be done with a concomitant acceptance of God. His
Covenant (which is now entered) is oftentimes summed up, I will be your God,
and you shall be my people. And is resembled, and frequently represented by the
nuptial contract, In which there is mutual giving, and taking. We are to
resign, and accept at the same time. To take him to be our God, when we yield
our selves to be his.

7. With an explicit reference to the Lord Christ. We are to dedicate our
selves, after the tenor of a Covenant whereof he is the Mediator. God does
not, upon other terms, treat with Sinners. You are not to offer at such a thing
as dedicating your selves to him, but in the way, and upon the terms, upon
which you are to be accepted. The divine pleasure is declared and known, how
great a one, he must be in all the transactions of God, with men; yea, and
toward the whole Creation. Ephesians. 1.6, 7, 8, 9.10. He has made us accepted in
the beloved. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
sins, according to the riches of his grace. Wherein he has abounded toward us
in all wisdom and prudence. Having made known unto us the mystery of his will,
according to his good pleasure, which he had purposed in himself. That in the
dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather together in one all
things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth, even in
him. We must take heed how we neglect, or over look him, who is by divine
appointment so high in power, and with whom we have so great a concern.

8. With deep humility, and abasement of our selves, in conjunction with a
profound reverence and veneration of the divine Majesty. There ought to be the
lowliest self-abasement, such as that good man expresses, Ezra 9.6. (varied to
ones own case) O my God, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face, to thee,
my God: for mine iniquities are increased over mine head, and my trespass is
grown up unto the heavens. And indeed this is naturally consequent, upon what
was last said, of the regard that ought to be had, in this matter, to the
Mediator. For surely that very constitution, is, in it self, an humbling thing
to us. And we cannot apply our selves to God suitably to it, but with a
self-abasing sense of our own state and case. Our coming, and tendering our
selves to God, in a Mediator, is, in its very nature, an humiliation; and
carries with it a tacit confession that in our selves we have nothing, deserve
nothing, are nothing, are worse than nothing. And that only this constitution
of his could justify our offering our selves to him, with any hope of
acceptance. Or make it less than an insolent presumption, for Sinners to
approach him and expect to be received into his presence, and service. It is
not for such as we, to behave our selves toward him, as if we either had not
offended, or were capable of expiating our own offense. Yea, and if there had
been nothing of delinquency in the case, yet great humility becomes such
applications to him. And that in conjunction with the profoundest reverence and
veneration of him. For our very business in this Self-dedication is worship (as
the word in the Text has been noted to signify.) And it is the first and most
principal part of all the worship we owe to him, (as was noted from 2 Cor.
8.5.) fundamental to all the rest. We must have before our eyes the awful
Majesty and glorious greatness of God. Which Scripture often speaks of, as one
notion of his holiness, and which we are to have principal reference unto in
all the solemn homage we pay to him; as Sacrifices are well observed to have
been offered to him so considered. Out. de Sac.
And therefore, by this consideration, their suitableness to him is to be
measured* as he does himself insist, Mal. 1.14. Cursed be the deceiver, which
has in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt
thing, for I am a great King, says the Lord of hosts, and my name is dreadful
among the heathen.

9. With great joy and gladness of heart. It ought to be accompanied with the
highest gusts and relishes of pleasure, both from the apprehended congruity of
the thing, and the expectation we have of acceptance. The thing it self* should
be pleasant to us. We are to do it as tasting our own act, as they did, 1 Chronicles. 29.9. The people rejoiced for that they offered willingly. The
self-devoting person should be able to utter this as his sense, Glad am I, that
I am any thing, that I have a being, a Soul, a reasonable intelligent being,
capable of becoming a sacrifice to him. And that there is hope of being
accepted; How great a Joy is that! The Apostle makes so great a thing of it,
that he speaks, 1 Cor. 5.8, 9. as if he cared not whether he was in the body,
or out of the body, so he might be accepted. Nuptials (that resemble, as has
been said, this Transaction between God and the Soul, wherein there is mutual
Giving and Accepting) are wont to be Seasons of great festivity and gladness.
The great God himself rejoices in this closure, with such a joy, (Isa. 62.5. As
a bridegroom rejoiceth over his bride, so will thy God rejoice over thee) and
shall not we? How infinitely more amiable and delectable is the object of our
choice, than his. When we are to rejoice in the supreme and most perfect
excellency. He, in what is clothed over (if he did not superinduce another
clothing) with most loathsome deformity!

10. With an ingenuous candor and simplicity, with that sincerity which is to
be as the Salt of your Sacrifice, (Mark 9.) Without latent reserves, or an
hidden meaning, disagreeing to his. Which were both unjust and vain. Unjust;
for we may not deceive any. And Vain; for we cannot deceive him. The case
admits not of restrictions, it must be done absolutely, without any limitation,
or reserve. You have heard this Self-dedication is, in part, an act of love.
And what limit can be set to a love, whose object is infinite? A natural limit
it is true, as it is the love of a creature, it cannot but have; but a chosen
one it ought never to have, as if we had loved enough. You know what kind of
love is, (and cannot but be) due to the all comprehending God. With all thy
heart, soul, mind, and might, etc. So without exception, that Maimonides,
reciting those words, De fund. legis. page 64.
adds etiamsi tollat animam tuam. The stream of thy love to him must not be
diverted, or alter its course, tho he would take away thy very life, or soul.

11. With the concomitant surrender to him of all that we have. For they that,
by their own act, and acknowledgment, are not themselves, their own, but
devoted, must also acknowledge they are owners of nothing else. In that
mentioned form of Surrender in Livie, When Egerius, on the Romans part had
enquired, Estisne vos legati Oratoresque missi a populo Collatino, ut vos
populumque Collatinum dederitis? Sumus -- Deditisne vos, populum Collatinum,
urbem, agros, aquam, terminos, delubra, utensilia divina, humanaque omnia, in
meam populique Romani ditionem? Dedimus. At ego recipi. Live. ubi prius.
Are you the Ambassadors sent by the people of Collatia that you may yield up
your selves and the Collatine people? and it was answered, we are. And it was
again asked. Are the Collatine people in their own power? and answered, they
are. It is further enquired, do you deliver up your selves, the people of
Collatia, your City, your Fields, your Water, your Bounds, your Temples, your
Vtensils, all things that are yours, both Divine, and Humane, into mine, and
the people of Romes power? they say we deliver up all. And he answers, So I
receive you. So do they who deliver up themselves to God, much more, all that
they called theirs. God indeed is the only Proprietor, Men are but
usufructuaries. They have the use of what his providence allots them; He
reserves to himself the property; and limits the use so far, as that all are to
be accountable to him for all they possess. And are to use nothing they have,
but as under him, and for him, as also they are to do themselves. Therefore as
they are required to glorify him with their bodies, and spirits which are his,
so they are to honor him with their substance, upon the same reason. But few
effectually apprehend his right in their persons; Which, as we are therefore to
recognize, in this Dedication of our selves to him; So we are, in a like
general sense, to devote to him all that we enjoy in the world. That is, as all
are not to devote themselves specially to serve him in a sacred office; But all
are obliged to devote themselves to his service in the general: So, though all
are not required to devote their estates, to this or that particular pious use,
they are obliged to use them wholly for his glory, in the general, and for the
service of his Interest in the world. We are obliged neither to withhold from
him, nor mispend, these his mercies; but must live righteously (wherein Charity
is comprehended) soberly and godly in it, decline no opportunities that shall
occur to us, (within the compass of our own sphere, and station) of doing him
(though never so costly, and hazardous) service, must forsake all and follow
him, when our duty, and our continued possession of this worlds goods, come to
be inconsistent; must submit patiently to our lot, when that falls out to be
our case; Or to any providence by which we are bereaved of our worldly
comforts, with that temper of mind, as to be able cheerfully to say, The Lord
has given, the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.

It is indeed the greatest absurdity imaginable, that they who are not Masters
of themselves should think it permitted them, to use what comes to their hands,
as they list; for the service of their own lusts, and the gratifying of a rebel
flesh, that has rejected the Government of their own Reason, and of all divine
laws at once. Or that he who has so absolute a right in them, should not have
that right in what he has committed to them, as to prescribe rules to them, by
which to use and employ it. At the same time, and in the same sense, wherein we
make a Dedition of our selves; We do the same thing as to all that we have.
Even according to common, humane estimate, according to what interest men have
in others, or power over them they have a correspondent interest in what they
possess. They that absolutely surrender themselves to the power of another,
leave not themselves capable of proper dominion as to any thing. Therefore says
the Civil Law, Non licet Dedititiis testamenta facere. They were so under
several notions it is true, but they that were strictly so, had not power to
make a will* as having nothing to dispose of. No man has certainly a power to
dispose of any thing (and when they surrender themselves by their own act and
deed to God, they acknowledge so much) otherwise than as divine rules direct,
or permit. They have a right in what is duly theirs, against the Counterclaim
of man, but none, sure, against the claim, and all disposing power of God,
whether signified by his Law, or by his Providence. Therefore with this temper
of mind should this Self-dedication be made. Lord I here lay my self, and all
that belongs to me, most entirely at thy feet. All things are of thee (as they
are brought in saying who make that willing joyful offering, 1 Chronicles. 29.)
What I have in the world is more thine, than mine. I desire neither to use, nor
possess any thing, but by thy leave, and for thy sake.

12. With befitting circumstantial solemnity, i. e. it ought to be direct,
express and explicit. Not to be hudled up in tacit, mute intimations only. We
should not content our selves that it be no more than implied, in what we do
otherwise. And run on with it as a thing that must be supposed, and taken for
granted, never actually performed and done.

It is very true indeed that a continued, uniform, course and series of
agreeable actions, an holy life, and practice carries a great deal more of
significancy with it, than only having once said, without this, conceptis
verbis, Lord I will be thine. Practice, whether it be good, or bad, more fully
speaks our sense, and expresses our hearts, than bare words, spoken at some
particular time, can do. For they at the most speak but our present sense at
that time, and, perhaps, do not always that; but a course of practice shows
the habitual posture and steady bent of our spirits.

Nor do I think that a formal explicit transaction, in this matter, whether
vocal or mental, with circumstantial solemnity, is essential to a man's being a
Christian, or an holy man. A fixed inclination and bent of heart toward God,
followed (as it will be) with a course of practice becoming them that are his,
will no doubt conclude a man's state to be safe and good Godward. As one may,
on the other hand, be the devils servant all his days, without having made a
formal covenant with him.

But yet, though so explicit, and solemn a transaction of this matter be not
essential to our Christianity (as what is said to belong only to the solemnity
of any thing is therein implied not to be of the essence of it) yet it may be a
great duty for all that, and I doubt it not to be so.

And it may here be worth the while, to insist a little; that, if this indeed
be a duty, it may obtain more in our practice, than, perhaps it does. Some,
thorough mere inanimadvertency, may not have considered it; others that have,
may possibly think it less needful because they reckon it was formerly done
for them. They were born of Christian parents, who dedicated them to God from
their birth; and they were, with solemnity, presented to him in their Baptism.
What need we, then, do over again, a thing already done?

Let us reason this matter therefore a while, and consider whether,
notwithstanding any such allegation, Our personal dedicating our selves to God,
in Christ, be not still reasonable, and necessary to be performed by our selves
also, as our own solemn act and deed?

It were, indeed, much to be wished, that our baptismal dedication to God were
more minded, and thought on, than it commonly is. When, with such sacred
solemnity, we were devoted to the trinune Deity, and those great and awful
names were named upon us, the name of the Father, the name of the Son, and the
name of the Holy Ghost. Baptisms are, it is to be feared, too often in the
Christian world, turned into a mere Pageantry, and the matter scarce ever
thought on more, when the show is over. And, very probably, because this great
succedaneous duty is so unpractised among Christians.

And first, Let it be considered, Are there no like cases? Do we not know that,
though all the Infants in a Kingdom, are born Subjects, yet, when they arrive
to a certain age, they are obliged, being called, to take the Oath of
Allegiance, and each one to come under personal obligation to their Prince; And
do we owe less to the God that made us, and the Lord that bought us with his
blood?

Again, Though all the sons of Israelites, were, in their infancy, dedicated to
God by the then appointed rite for that purpose; Yet how frequent were their
solemn, personal recognitions of his Covenant? their avouching themselves to be
his people, as he also avoucht himself to be their God. Which we see Deuteronomy. 26.
and in many other places.

It Is remote from me to intend the pressing of a Covenant, that contains any
disputable, or doubtful matters; or any other than the substance of our
baptismal Covenant it self; consisting of the known essentials of our
Christianity; all summed up in taking God in Christ for our God, and resigning
our selves to him to be inviolably his. No more is meant than, that this may be
done, as our own reasonable service, and worship; as our intelligent,
deliberate, judicious act, and choice.

And consider further, to this purpose, the great importance of the thing it
self, compared with the lesser concernments, wherein we use to deal most
explicitly. Is it fit that a man's Religion should be less the matter of his
solemn choice, than his inferior concerns? That when he chooses his dwelling,
his calling, his servant, or master, he should seem thrown upon his God, and
his Religion, by chance? And that least should appear of caution, care and
punctual dealing, in our very greatest concernment? How great a day in a man's
life does he count his marriage day? How accurate are men wont to be, in all
the preparations, and previous settlements, that are to be made in order to it!

And since the great God is pleased to be so very particular with us, in
proposing the model, and contents of his Covenant, the promises, and precepts,
which make his part, and ours in it, how attentive should we be to his
proposals, and how express in our consent? Especially, when we consider his
admirable condescension in it, that he is pleased (and disdains not) to
capitulate with the work of his hands, to article with dust and ashes. Is it
reasonable we should be slight and superficial, in a Treaty with that great
Lord of heaven and earth; or scarce ever, purposely apply and set our selves to
mind him in it at all?

Moreover it is your own concernment, and therefore ought to be transacted by
your self. So far as there is any equity in that rule, Quod tangit omnes debet
ab omnibus tractari, What concerns all should be transacted by all, it resolves
into this, and supposes it. Quod tangit meipsum debet tractari a meipso. That
which concerns my self should be transacted by my self.

Again, your being devoted by parents, no more excuses from solemn personal
self-devoting, than their doing other acts of Religion for you, excuses you
from doing them for your selves. They have prayed for you, are you therefore
never to pray for your selves? They have lamented your sin, are you never
therefore to lament your own?

Further Scripture warns us not to lay too much stress upon parental privilege,
or place too much confidence in it, which it supposes men over apt to do,
Matt. 3.7, 8, 9. Abraham's Seed may be a generation of Vipers. Joh. 8.37.44. I
know you are Abraham's Seed, yet he finds them another father.

Consider moreover, the renewing work of God's grace and spirit upon Soul's,
consists in sanctifying their natural faculties, their Understandings,
Consciences, Wills, Affections. And what are these sanctified for, but to be
used and exercised? and to what more noble purpose? If there be that holy
impress upon the Soul, that inclines all the powers of it Godward; What serves
it for, but to prompt, and lead it on to the correspondent acts? to apprehend
and eye God, to admit a conviction of duty, and, particularly, how I owe my
self to him, to choose, love, fear, and serve him, and what does all this
import less, than an entire self-resignation to him? so that the genuine
tendency of the holy new nature is, in nothing, so directly answered, and
satisfied as in this.

And it ought to be considered that the faculties of our reasonable souls have
a natural improvement and perfection, as well as a gracious. And for their
highest and noblest acts, it is fit they should be used in their highest
perfection. It Is possible, that in the chilren of religious parents, there may
be some pious inclinations, betimes; and the sooner they thereupon choose the
God of their fathers, the better, i. e. if you compare doing it, and not doing
it, it is better done, than not done. But because this is a thing that cannot be
too often done, nor too well, The more mature your Understanding is, the better
it will be done, the grace of God concurring. Our Lord himself increased in
wisdom, etc.

Moreover, let it be seriously thought on (what it is dreadful to think) the
occasion you should give, if you decline this surrendering your selves, to have
your neglect taken for a refusal. It Is impossible, when you once understand the
case, you can be in an indifferency about it. You must either take, or leave.

Nor can it be denied but personal self-devoting, one way, or other (more, or
less solemn) is most necesssary to the continuing serious Christianity in the
world. Without it, our Religion were but res unius aetatis, The business of one
age. For how unlikely were it, and absurd to suppose, that a man should
seriously devote his child to God, that never devoted himself? And if that were
done never so seriously, must one be a Christian always, only by the
Christianity of another, not his own? Some way or other then, a man must devote
himself to God in Christ, or be, at length, no Christian. And since he must,
the nature of the thing speaks, that the more solemn, and express it is, the
better, and more suitable to a transaction with so great a Majesty.

And has not common Reason taught the world, to fix a transitus, and settle
some time, or other, wherein persons should be reckoned to have past out of
their state of infancy, or minority, into the state of manhood, or an
adult-state; wherein, though before, they could not legally transact affairs
for themselves, yet afterward they could. This time, by the constitutions of
several Nations, and for several purposes, has been diversely fixed. But they
were not to be looked upon as children always. Some time they come to write
man. Is it reasonable one should be a child and a minor in the things of God
and Religion all his days? always in nonage? Sometime they must be men in
understanding, 1 Cor. 14.20. and have their senses exercised to discern between
good and evil, Heb. 5.14.

Yea, and there is far greater reason we should personally, and solemnly,
transact this great affair with God, than any concern we have with men. For,
among men, we may have a right by natural descent, or by valuable
considerations, to what we enjoy, which may be clear, and little liable to
question. From God we have no right, but by his favor, and vouchsafement. You
are his children, if ever you come to be so, but by adoption. And humane
adoption has been wont to be completed by a solemnity; The person to adopt,
being publicly asked (in that sort of adoption which was also called
arrogation) utrum eum quem adoptaturus esset justum sibi filium esse vellet --
Whether he would have this person to be as his own very son? Call. Lex. Jurid.
And again, ille qui adoptabatur -- utrum id fieri pateretur? he that was to be
adopted, whether he was contented it should be so?

Nor again is there that disinclination toward men, as toward God, or that
proneness to revolt from settled agreements, with the one, as with the other.
Whereas Love sums up all the duty of both the Tables; or which we owe both to
God, and Man; it is evident that, in our present lapsed state, our love to God
is more impaired, than to Man. Indeed this latter seems only diminisht, the
other is destroyed, and has, by nature, no place in us; grace only restores
it. Where it is, in some measure restored, we find it more difficult to
exercise love toward God, than Man. Which the Apostle's reasoning implies, He
that loves not his brother, 1 John 4.20.
whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? Who sees not
that sensuality has buried the rational world! Unregenerate man is said to be
in the flesh, not as being only lodged in it, as all are alike, but governed
by it, under its power. (As the holy Apostle is said to have been in the spirit
on the Lord's day. Revel. 1.
) To be in the flesh is expounded by being and walking after it. Romans 8.
Hence men only love and savor the things within this sensible sphere. They
that are after the flesh do only savor the things of the flesh. Where the
regenerate, divine life is implanted, it does male habitare, is ill lodged, in
conjunction with a strong remaining sensual inclination. So that where the Soul
is somewhat raised by it, out of that mire and dirt, there is a continual
decidency, a proneness to relapse, and sink back into it. Impressions therefore
of an invisible Ruler and Lord (as of all unseen things) are very evanid; soon,
in a great degree, worn off. Especially where they were but in making, and not
yet thoroughly inwrought into the temper of the Soul. Hence is that instability
in the Covenant of God. We are not so afraid, before, nor ashamed, afterward,
of breaking engagements with him, as with men, whom we are often to look in the
face, and converse with every day.

Therefore there is the more need here, of the strictest ties, and most solemn
obligations, that we can lay upon our selves. How apprehensive does that holy,
excellent Governor, Joshua, Josh. 24.
seem of this, when he was shortly to leave the people under his conduct!

And what urgent means does he use, to bring them to the most express, solemn
dedication of themselves to God, that was possible. First representing the
reasonableness and equity of the thing, from the many endearing wonders of
mercy (as here the Apostle beseeches these Romans by the mercies of God) which
he recounts from the beginning to the 14th. verse of that 24th. chapter. Then,
thereupon exhorting them to fear the Lord and serve him in sincerity, etc. in
that 14th. verse. Telling them, withal, if they should all resolve otherwise
to a man, what his own resolution was, verse. 15. And if it seem evil unto you
to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve, whether the Gods
which your Fathers served, that were on the other side of the flood, or the
Gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell: But as for me and my house, we
will serve the Lord. Taking also their express answer, which they give, verse.
16, 17, 18. But, fearing they did not enough consider the matter, he, as it
were, puts them back (esteeming himself to have gotten an advantage upon them)
that they might come on again, with the more vigor and force. Ye cannot serve
the Lord, for he is an holy God: He is a jealous God, he will not forgive your
transgressions nor your sins. If you forsake the Lord, and serve strange Gods,
then he will turn and do you hurt, and consume you, after that he has done
you good. Verse. 19, 20. Hereupon, according to his expectation and design, they
reinforce their vow, Nay but we will serve the Lord. And upon this, he closes
with them, and takes fast hold of them, Ye are witnesses (says he) against
your selves, that ye have chosen the Lord to serve him. And they say, We are
witnesses, verse. 22. He exhorts them afresh, and they engage over again, verse.
23, 24. Thus a Covenant is made with them, verse. 25. After all this a record is
taken of the whole transaction, it is book'd down, verse. 26. And a monumental
stone set up, to preserve the memory of this great transaction. And the good
man tells them, Behold this stone shall be a witness unto us; for it has heard
all the words of the Lord which he spoke unto us: It shall therefore be a
witness unto you, lest ye deny your God. So he dismisses them; and lets them go
every one to his inheritance.

Nor is it to be neglected that Isa. 44.5. (which is generally agreed to refer
to the times of the Gospel) it is so expressly set down, One shall say I am the
Lords, and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob: and another shall
subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of
Israel. In the rendering of which words [Subscribe with the hand] the versions
vary. Some read Inscribe in their hands, the Lords name, counting it an
allusion to the ancient custom, as to servants, and soldiers, that they were
to carry stamped upon the palm of their hands, the name of their Master, or
General. The Syriack reads to the same sense as we -- Shall give an hand
writing, to be the Lords. That the thing be done, and with great seririousness,
distinctness and solemnity, is, no doubt, highly reasonable, and necessary,
about the particular manner I prescribe not.

Nor can I imagine what any man can have to object, but the backwardness of his
own heart to any intercourse, or conversation with the invisible God. Which is
but an argument of the miserable condition of depraved Mankind (None that the
thing is not to be done.) For that backwardness must proceed from some deeper
reason than that God is invisible. A reason, that should not only convince, but
amaze us, and even overwhelm our souls in sorrow and lamentation to think what
state the nature and spirit of man is brought into! For is not the Devil
invisible too? And what wretch is there so silly and ignorant, but can, by the
urgency of discontent, envy, and an appetite of revenge, find a way to fall
into a league with him! Is this that God is less conversable with men? less
willing to be found of them that seek him? No surely, Read considerately Heb.
11.6.
but that men have less mind, and inclination to seek him! And is this a
posture, and temper of spirit toward the God that made us, (the continual
spring of our life and being!) In which it is fit for us to tolerate our
selves? Shall not the necessity of this thing, and of our own case, (not
capable of remedy while we withhold our selves from God) overcome all the
imagined difficulty in applying our selves to him?

And upon the whole if we agree the thing it self to be necessary, Use.
It cannot be doubted but it will appear to be of common concernment to us all;
and that every one must apprehend it is necessary to me, and to me, whether we
have done it already, or not done it. If we have not, it cannot be done too
soon; If we have, it cannot be done too often. And it may now be done, by
private, silent ejaculation, the convinced, persuaded heart saying within it
self, Lord I consent to be wholly thine, I here resign, and devote my self,
absolutely, and entirely, to thee. None of you know what may be in the heart of
another, to this purpose, even at this time. Why then should not every one fear
to be the only person of those who now hear, that disagrees to it. If any finds
his heart to reluctate and draw back, it is fit such a one should consider, I do
not know but this self-devoting disposition, and resolution is the common sense
of all the rest, even of all that are now present but mine. And who would not
dread to be the only One in an Assembly, that shall refuse, God! or refuse
himself to him! For, let such a One think, what particular reason can I have to
exclude my self from such a consenting Chorus? Why should I spoil the harmony,
and give a disagreeing vote? Why should any man be, more willing to be
dutiful, and happy than I? to be just to God, or have him good to me? Why
should any One be more willing to be saved than I? and to make One hereafter,
in the glorious, innumerable, joyful assembly of Devoted angels and Saints,
that pay an eternal gladsom homage to the throne of the Celestial King?

But if any find their hearts inclining, let what is now begun, be more fully
completed in the closet; and let those walls (as Joshua's stone) hear, and
bear witness!

Lest any should not consent, and that all may consent more freely, and more
largely; I shall in a few words show what should induce to it, and what it
should induce.

1. What should induce to it. You have diverse sorts of inducements;

Such as may be taken from necessity. For what else can you do with your self?
You cannot be happy without it, For who should make you so but God? And how
shall he, while you hold off your selves from him? You cannot but be miserable,
not only as not having engaged him to you, but as having engaged him against
you.

Such as may be taken from equity. You are his right. He has a natural right
in you, as he is your Maker, the Author of your being. And an acquired right
as you were bought by his Son, Who has redeemed us to God. Rev. 5.9.
And who dyed, rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord of the living and
the dead, here, to rule, hereafter, to judge us. Both which he can do whether
we will or no. But it is not to be thought he will save us against our wills.
His method is whom he saves, first to overcome, i. e. to make them willing, in
the day of his power. And dare we, who live, move, and have our being in him,
refuse to be, live, and move to him? or deny the Lord who bought us?

And again, Such as may be taken from ingenuity, or that should work upon it,
viz. (what we are besought by, in the Text) the mercies of God. How manifold
are they! But they are the mercies of the Gospel especially, mentioned in the
foregoing Chapter, which are thus referred unto in the beginning of this, the
transferring what the Jews forfeited and lost, by their unbelief, unto us
Gentiles That Mystery (as this Apostle elsewhere calls it, Ephesians. 3.4, 5, 6.)
which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, as it is now
revealed unto his holy Apostles and Prophets by the spirit; That the Gentiles
should be fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in
Christ, by the Gospel. In reference whereto he so admiringly cries out a little
above the Text (chap. 11.33.) (...), O the depth both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out! The Mercies of which it is said Isai. 55.1, 2, 3. Ho every one
that thirsts come to the waters, and he that has no money: Come ye, buy and
eat, yea come buy wine and milk without money, and without price. Wherefore do
ye spend your money for that which is not bread? and your labor, for that
which satisfies not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is
good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness. Incline your ear, and come
unto me; hear, and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting
Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Which free and sure Mercies
are heightened, as to us, by the same both endearing and awful circumstance,
that these mercies, are offered to us, viz. in conjunction with the setting
before our eyes, the monitory tremendous example of a forsaken Nation that
rejected them, intimated verse. 5. Behold thou shall call a nation that thou
know not, and nations that know not thee shall run unto thee. A case whereof
our Apostle says, in the foregoing Chapter Esaias was very bold, Romans 10.20.
when, speaking of it (in another place Isai. 65.1.
,) he uses these words, I am sought of them that asked not for me: I am found
of them that sought me not: I said; Behold me, Behold me, unto a nation that
was not called by my name. He was bold in it indeed, to mention such a thing to
a people, unto whom a jealous gloriation in the peculiarity of their privileged
state, their being without partners or rivals, for so long a time, in their
relation, and nearness to God, was grown so natural. And who took it so
impatiently, when our Savior did but intimate the same thing to them by
parables, Mat. 25.45, 46.
as that they sought immediately to lay hands on him for that very reason. So
unaccountable a perverseness of humor reigned with them, that they envied to
others, what they despised themselves.

But, on the other hand, nothing ought more highly to recommend those mercies
to us, or more engage us to accept them with gratitude, and improve them with a
cautious fear, of committing a like forfeiture, than to have them brought to
our hands, redeemed from the contempt of the former despisers of them; and
that, so terribly, vindicated upon them, at the same time; as it also still
continues to be. That the natural branches of the Olive should be torn off, and
we inserted. That there should be such an instance given us, of the severity,
and goodness of God. Chap. 11.
To them that fell, severity; but to us, goodness, if we continue in his
goodness, to warn us that, otherwise, we may expect to be cut off too! And that
we might apprehend, if he spared not the natural branches, he was as little
likely to spare us! That when he came to his own and they received him not, he
should make so free an offer to us, that if we would yet receive him (which if
we do, we are, as has been said, to yield up and dedicate our selves to him at
the same time) we should have the privilege, to be owned for the sons of God!
What should so oblige us to compliance with him, and make us with an ingenuous
trembling fall before him, and (crying to him my Lord and my God) resign our
selves wholly, to his power and pleasure.

And even his Mercies, more abstractly considered, ought to have that power
upon us. Were we not lost? Are we not rescued from a necessity of perishing,
and being lost for ever, in the most costly way? Costly, to our Redeemer, but
to us, without cost. Is it a small thing, that he offers himself to us, as he
does, when he demands us, and requires that we offer our selves to him. That
he, in whom is all the fullness of God, having first offered himself for us,
does now offer himself also to us. That he has treated us, hitherto, with such
indulgence, waited on us with so long patience, sustained us by so large
bounty, And now, upon all, when it might be thought we should be communing with
our own hearts, discoursing the matter with our selves, What shall we render?
that he should say to us so shortly and compendiously render your selves! Is
that too much? Are we too considerable to be his, or his Mercies too
inconsiderable to oblige us to be so? The Mercies that flow so freely from him,
for he is the Father of Mercies. The Mercies that are so suitable to us, pardon
to the guilty, light to them that dwell in darkness, life to the dead, a rich
portion and all-sufficient fullness, for the poor, indigent and necessitous:
the Mercies that we are encouraged to expect as well as what we enjoy. The
great Good laid up in store! The Mercies of eternity to be added to those of
time. The Mercies of both worlds, meeting upon us! That here, we are to keep
our selves in the love of God, waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ
unto eternal life! That, Jude 21.
looking for that blessed hope, our life may here, in the mean time, be
transacted with him. That we may abide in the secret of his presence, and
dwelling in love, may dwell in God who is love; till the season come, when we
shall be able more fully to understand his love, and return our own!

Nor are the favors of his providence to be thought little of, in the time of
our earthly pilgrimage.

And now, if all this do effectually induce us thus to dedicate our selves.

2. We are next to consider what our having done it, ought further to induce us
unto.

In the general, it ought to be an inducement to us (as we may well apprehend)
to behave our selves answerably to such a state, as we are, hereby, brought
into, if we now first dedicated our selves to him, and are confirmed in, by our
iterations of it. For he takes no pleasure in fools, therefore having vowed our
selves to him, to serve, and live to him, let us pay what we have vowed. Better
it had been not to vow, than to vow and not pay; and, instead of the reasonable
sacrifice he required of us, to give him only the sacrifice of fools. We are,
upon special terms, and for special ends, peculiar to the most high God. They
that are thus his, are a royal Priesthood, He has made us Kings and Priests.
Rev. 1.6.
Both those offices and dignities have sometime met* in the same person. And to
God and his Father, i. e. for him. Not that both those offices do terminate
upon God, or that the work of both is to be performed toward him, but our Lord
Jesus, it being the design of his Father we should be brought into that high,
and honorable Station, has effected it, in compliance with his design, and
has served his pleasure, and purpose in it. He has done it to, i. e. for him.
So that, to God, and his Father may be referred to Christ's action, in making us
Kings and Priests, not to ours, being made such. Yet the one of these refers to
God immediately, the other to our selves. Holy and good men are Kings in
reference to themselves, in respect of their Self-dominion into which they are
now restored, having been, as all unregenerate persons are, slaves to vile, and
carnal affections, and inclinations. The minds of the regenerate are made
spiritual, and now with them the refined, rectified, spiritual mind, is
inthroned; lift up into its proper authority, over all sensual Inclinations,
Appetitions, Lusts and Passions. A glorious Empire! founded in conquest, and
managed, afterward when the victory is complete (and in the mean time, in some
degree, while judgment is in bringing forth unto victory) by a steady sedate
Government, in most perfect tranquillity and peace.

But they are Priests in reference to God, the business of their office, as
such, terminates upon him. For him they worship and serve.

Worship is either social, external and circumstantial, that of worshipping
Societies, considered according to its exterior part. Herein One is appointed
by special office to do the part of a Priest, for the rest. In this sense all
are not Priests.

Or else it is solitary, internal, substantial and spiritual wherein they
either worship alone, and apart by themselves, or being in conjunction with
others, yet their own spirits within them work directly, and aspire upwards to
God. And as to this more noble part of their worship, every holy man is his own
Priest.

And this is the double dignity of every holy, devoted Soul. They are thus
Kings, and Priests; govern themselves, and serve God. While they govern, they
serve. Exercise authority over themselves, with most submiss veneration of God.
Crowned, and enthroned; but always in a readiness to cast down their Crowns at
the footstool of the Supreme, Celestial Throne.

Into this State they come by Self-dedication. And now surely it is not for such
to demean themselves at a vulgar rate. They are of the (...), Hebr. 12.
the Church of the firstborn written in Heaven, i. e. the Church of the
firstborn ones, that is, all composed, and made up of such (as that expression
signifies.) Firstborn in a true (tho not the most eminent) sense; being sons
by the first, i. e. the prime and more excellent sort of birth, in respect
whereof they are said to be begotten again by the word of truth, Jam. 1.18.
that they should be a kind of first fruits of the Creatures of God. And this
twofold dignity is the privilege of their birthright (as anciently it was.) Are
you devoted to God? have you dedicated your selves? hereby you are arrived to
this dignity. For in the abovementioned place it is said Ye are come, you are
actually, Hebr. 12.
already, adjoined to that Church, and are the real present Members of that
holy community. For you are related and united to him of whom the family of
heaven and earth is named; Ephesians. 3.
are of the household, and the Sons of God, his, under that peculiar notion,
when you have dedicated your selves to him. You cannot but apprehend there are
peculiarities of behavior, in your after-conduct, and management of your
selves that belong to you, and must answer, and correspond to your being, in
this sense, his. Some particulars whereof I shall briefly mention.

You should each of you, often reflect upon it, and bethink your self what you
have done; and whose you now are. I am the devoted One of the most high God. It
was one of the Precepts given by a Pagan to his Disciples. Think with your
self, upon all occasions, Epict.
I am a Philosopher. What a world of sin, and trouble might that thought, often
renewed, prevent, I am a Christian, One devoted to God in Christ. Your having
done this thing, should cloth your mind with new apprehensions, both of God,
and your selves. That he is not now a stranger to you, but your God, that you
are not unrelated to him, but his. I was an enemy, now am reconciled. I was a
common, profane thing, now holiness to the Lord. It Is strange to think how One
act does sometimes habit, and tincture a man's mind; whether in the kind of
good, or evil. To have committed an act of murder! What an horrid complexion
of mind did Cain bear with him hereupon? To have dedicated one self to God, if
seriously, and duly done; would it have less power to possess One, with an
holy, calm, peaceful temper of mind?

You should, hereupon, charge your self with all suitable duty toward him. For
you have given your self to him to serve him, that is your very business. You
are his, and are to do his work, not your own, otherwise than as it falls in
with his, and is his.

You are to discharge your self of all unsuitable cares, for will not he take
care of his own, Who has put so ill a note upon them that do not? He that
provideth not for his own, (his domestics) those of his own house, has denied
the faith, and is worse than an infidel? Will you think, he can be like such a
One? Who? if not the Children of a Prince, should live free from care?

You should most deeply concern your self about his concernments, without any
apprehension or fear that he will neglect those that are most truly yours. And
are not to be indifferent how his interest thrives, or is deprest in the world;
is increast, or diminisht. They that are his should let his affairs engross
their cares, and thoughts.

You should abandon all suspicious, hard thoughts of him. When, in the habitual
bent of your spirits, you desire to please him, it is most injurious to him, to
think he will abandon, and give you up to perish, or become your enemy. It Is
observable what care was taken among the Romans, ne quid dedititiis hostile
illatum sit. That no hostility might be used toward them that had surrendered
themselves. Can men excel God in praiseworthy things? You can think nothing of
God more contrary to his Gospel, or his Nature, than to surmise he will destroy
one that has surrendered to him, and bears a loyal mind toward him. And what
a reproach do you cast upon him, when you give others occasion to say his own,
they that have devoted themselves to him, dare not trust him? You are taught to
say I am thine save me, not to suspect he will ruin you. They do strangely
mishape Religion, considering, in how great part, it consists in trusting God,
and living a life of faith, that frame to themselves a Religion made up of
distrusts, doubts and fears.

You should dread to alienate your selves from him. Which (as Sacrilege is one
of the most detestable of all sins, a robbing of God) is the most detestable
Sacrilege. You are to reserve your selves entirely for him. every one that is
godly he has set apart for himself. Psalm 4.


Yea, and you are not only to reserve, but, to your uttermost, to improve, and
better your selves for him daily. To aspire to an excellency, in some measure,
suitable to your relation. To walk worthy of God who has called you to his
kingdom and glory, 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. remembering you are here to glorify him, and
hereafter to be glorified with him.

And who is there of us that finds not himself under sufficient obligation, by
the mercies of God, unto all this? Or to whom he may not say, in a far more
eminent sense, than the Apostle speaks it to Philemon, thou owe even thy self
also unto me? Will we refuse to give God what we owe? Or can we think it fit,
in it self; we should be no otherwise his, than (as one well says) Fields,
Woods, and Mountains, and brute Beasts? And I may add, can it be comfortable to
us, he should have no other interest in us than he has in Devils? is there no
difference in the case of reasonable creatures and unreasonable? theirs who
profess devotedness to him, and theirs who are his professed enemies? The one
sort, through natural incapacity, cannot, by consent, be his? and the other,
through an invincible malignity, never will? Are there no mercies (conferred or
offered) that do peculiarly oblige us more? Let us be more frequent, and
serious in recounting our mercies, and set our selves on purpose to enter into
the memory of God's great goodness, that we may thence, from time to time, urge
upon our selves this great and comprehensive duty.

And at this time, being here together on purpose, let us consider, and reflect
afresh, upon that eminent mercy, which you are wont to commemorate in the
yearly return of this day.

And that I may, more particularly, direct my speech the same way, that the
voice of that memorable providence is especially directed. You are, my Lord, to
be more peculiarly besought by the mercies of God, that you would, this day
dedicate your self to him.

I do beseech therefore you, by the many endearing mercies, which God has so
plentifully conferred upon you, by the mercies of your noble extraction, and
birth, by the mercies of your very ingenuous and pious education, by the
mercies of your family, which God has made to descend to you from your
honorable progenitors ( which, as they are capable of being improved, may be
very valuable mercies.) By the blood, and tender mercies of your blessed, and
glorious Redeemer, who offered up himself a sacrifice to God for you, that you
would now present your self to God, an holy, living Sacrifice, which is your
reasonable service. I add, by the signal mercy, which has made this a
memorable day to you, and by which you come, thus long, to enjoy the advantages
of all your other mercies. How came it to pass that this day comes not to be
remembered, by your noble relatives as a black, and a gloomy day, the day of the
extinction of the present light, and luster of your family; and of quenching
their coal which was left. You had a great preserver, who, we hope, delivered
you because he delighted in you. Your life was precious, in his sight. Your
breath was in his hand; he preserved, and renewed it to you, when you were
ready to breath your last. And we hope he will vouchsafe you that greater
deliverance, not to let you fall under the charge which was once exhibited
against a great man, Dan. 5.23. The God in whose hands thy breath is -- have
thou not glorified. And make you rather capable of adopting those words, Psalm
42.8. Yet the Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time, and in the
night his song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life. Your
acknowledgments are not to be limited to one day in the year; but from day to
day his loving kindness, and your prayer and praise are to compose your (...),
the one, to show you, the other, to be unto you your morning, and evening
exercise. Let this be your resolution, Every day will I bless thee: and I will
praise thy name for ever and ever, Psalm. 145.2. or that, Psalm. 104.33. I will
sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will sing praise unto my God, while I
have my being.

Yet your more solemn acknowledgments are, justly, pitched upon this day. God
has noted it for you, and made it a great day in your time. You have now
enjoyed a Septennium, seven years of mercies. And, we all hope, you will enjoy
many more, which may all be called the posterity of that days mercy. It was the
parent of them all; so pregnant and productive a mercy was that of this day.

You do owe it to the mercy of this day, that you have yet a life to devote to
the great Lord of heaven and earth; and to employ in the world for him. And
would you think of any less noble Sacrifice?

Aeschines (the Philosopher) out of his admiration of Socrates, when diverse
presented him with other gifts, made a tender to him of himself. Less was
thought an insufficient acknowledgment, of the worth and favors of a man! Can
any thing less be thought worthy of a God?

I doubt not you intend, my Lord, a life of service to the God of your life.
You would not, I presume, design to serve him, under any other notion, than as
his. By dedicating your self to him you become so, in the peculiar sense. It is
our part, in the Covenant which must be between God, and us. I entered into
Covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine, Ezekiel, 16.8. This is the ground of a
settled relation, which we are to bear toward him, as his servants. It Is
possible I may do an occasional service for one whose servant I am not. But it
were mean that a great person should only be served by the servants of another
Lord. To be served but precariously, and, as it were, upon Courtesy, only,
true greatness would disdain; as if his Quality did not admit to have servants
of his own.

Nor can it be thought a serious Christian (in howsoever dignifying
circumstances) should reckon himself too great to be his servant, when even an
Heathen pronounces Deo servire est regnare, Sen.
To serve God is to reign. A Religious Noble man of France (whose affection I
commend, Monsieur de Renty.
more than this external expression of it) tells us he made a deed of gift, of
himself to God, signing it with his own blood. He was much a greater man that
so often speaks in that style Thy servant, that it is plain he took pleasure in
it, and counted it his highest glory. Stablish thy word unto thy servant, who
is devoted to thy fear, Psalm. 119.38. Thy servant, Thy servant, O Lord, the son
of thy handmaid ( alluding to the Law by which the children of bond-servants
were servants by birth) thou have broken my bonds, Psalm. 116. have (q. d.)
released me from worse bonds, that I might not only be patient, but glad to be
under thine.

Nor was he a mean Prince Cantacuzanus, Whose life also, among many other
remarkable things, was once strangely preserved in the fall of his horse.
, in his time, who, at length, abandoning the pleasures, and splendor of his
own Court (whereof many like examples might be given) retired and assumed the
name of Christodulus, A servant of Christ, accounting the glory of that name
did outshine, not only that of his other illustrious titles, but of the
Imperial Diadem too. There are very few in the world, whom the too-common
atheism can give temptation unto, to think Religion an ignominy, and to count
it a reproach to be the devoted servant of the most high God; but have it at
hand to answer themselves, even by humane ( not to speak of the higher
angelical) instances, that he has been served by greater than we.

You are, my Lord, shortly to enter upon the more public stage of the world.
You will enter with great advantages of hereditary honor, fortune, friends with
the greater advantage of (I hope) a well cultivated mind, and (what is yet
greater) of a piously inclined heart. But you will also enter with
disadvantages too. It is a slippery stage; It is a divided time; wherein there
is Interest against Interest; Party against Party. To have, seriously, and with
a pious obstinacy dedicated your self to God, will both direct, and fortify
you.

I know no Party in which nothing is amiss. Nor will that measure let you think
it advisable, to be of any; further than to unite with what there is of real,
true goodness, among them all. Neither is there any surer rule, or measure for
your direction, than this; to take the course, and way, which is most agreeable
to a state of devotedness to God. Reduce all things else, hither. Wheresoever
you believe, in your conscience, there is a sincere design for the Interest and
glory of God; the honor, or safety of your Prince, the real, good and welfare
of your Country, there you are to fall in, and adhere. And the first of these
comprehends the rest. You will not be the less inclined but much the more, to
give Caesar the things that are Caesar 's, for your giving God the things that
are Gods. And that is (as has been said) principally, and in the first place
your self; and then all that is yours, to be used according to his holy rules,
and for him, whose you are.

And what can be to you the ground of an higher fortitude? Can they be unsafe
that have devoted themselves to God? Dedicate your self, and you become a
Sanctuary ( as well as a Sacrifice) Inviolably safe in what part, and in what
respects, it is considerable to be so. And who can think themselves unsafe
being, with persevering fidelity, sacred to God; that understand who he is; and
consider his power, and dominion, over both worlds, the present, and that which
is to come. So as that he can punish, and reward, in both; as men prove false,
or faithful to him. The triumphs of wickedness are short, in this world. In
how glorious triumphs will Religion, and devotedness to God, end, in the other!

FINIS.

