HOW THE MEMBERS OF THE Church of ENGLAND Ought to behave themselves under A
ROMAN CATHOLIC KING, With reference to the TEST and PENAL LAWS.

In a Letter to a Friend by a Member of the same Church.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall.
1687.

THE TITLES OF THE SECTIONS.
SECT. I. THe Character of an old Loyalist of the Church of England. Page 1.
SECT. II. How such behaved themselves, during the Transaction of the Bill of
Seclusion Page 4. SECT. III. How the Bishops and Clergy behaved themselves in
those times. Page 14. SECT. IV. The Calumnies against the Loyal Members of the
Church of England in the foregoing times. Page 18. SECT. V. The Affrightments
and Arts now used to make Subjects believe that the Protestant Religion is to
be extirpated here. Page 22. SECT. VI. That the Church of England has been in
a disturbed condition under Protestant Princes. Page 27. SECT. VII. That it is
in a more flourishing condition now. Page 33. SECT. VIII. The self-denial of
the King in the Exercise of his own Religion. Page 36. SECT. IX. The difficulty
of effecting a change of Religion. Page 40. SECT. X. Two Objections answered.
Page 56. SECT. XI. That the Kings dispensing with the Test is no Argument of
his design to Extirpate the Protestant Religion. Page 62. SECT. XII. That it is
not the Kings Interest to extirpate the Protestant Religion. Page 72. SECT.
XIII. Concerning the Test. Page 78. SECT. XIV. Concerning Sanguinary and Penal
Laws against Roman Catholics. Page 143. SECT. XV. The Inconveniences that will
attend the not Repealing of Penal Laws, and particularly the Test. Page 165.
SECT. XVI. The Practicableness of Roman Catholics and Protestants, living under
one Secular Government. Page 180. SECT. XVII. The Character of his Majesty.
Page 191. SECT. XVIII. The Conclusion. Page 205.
ERRATA.
PAge 15. Line 7. for assured read afraid. P. 22. the last line but one, for
These r. There. P. 31. l. 17. for confirmed too r. conformed to. P. 40. The
Title of the Section should have ended at the word Religion, and the rest be
placed in the Margent. P. 79. l. ult for it r. them. P. 94. l. 7. for naturally
r. natural. P. 113. l. 12. for But r. yet. P. 117. l. 1. after we, put in may.
P. 178. l. 7. for preached r. practiced. P. 182. l. 3. for attemps r. attempts.
P. 183. l. 11. for Budifir r. Budifin. P. 185. l. 7. for Abbey r. Abbot.

HOW THE MEMBERS OF THE Church of England Ought to behave themselves under A
ROMAN CATHOLIC KING: In a Letter to a Friend.
SECT. I. The Character of an old Loyalist of the Church of England.
SIR,
SINCE our first acquaintance, we have seen the Revolution of almost fifty
years: In all which time your unshaken Loyalty, and steady Adherence to the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England have been most conspicuous.
You equally hated the Flatterer, who by stretching the Length of the Scepter,
made it unweildy; and the Factious, who by continual filing, made it too
slender, and of no more force than a Reed; or so shortened it, that from a
Sovereign Battoon, it scarce equalled a Sergeants Mace.

You valued him most, who paid a just Deference to the Regal Prerogative, and
was infinitely thankful for all the gracious Enfranchisements of the Subject.
You knew too well the Injustice, and Illegality of taking Arms against King
Charles the First, and settled your Judgment so firmly then, that none of the
Designers Arts, to cajole the Multitude, made any impression on you. And
however great your Sufferings were then, and thereby by your Disability to aid
the Banished Prince: yet you were as forward as any to assist him in all things
serviceable to his Interest, not only in confirming your Neighbors and
Acquaintance in their Allegiance (when their Enemies success made them dispond)
but in making Converts of those who had been deluded by the specious pretense
of Liberty and Reformation. So that you helped much to prepare Men's minds
earnestly to wish, and effectually to promote, the late Merciful King's
Restoration, and when in his later time he was so Embarrassed with some of his
Parliaments: you were an eminent Abhorrer, and as strenuous an Opposer of the
Bill of Seclusion; and though you were branded with the name of Papist in
Masquerade, and a Janizary for Arbitrary Power, yet you kept your Post, and
assured those that conversed with you, that Loyalty (which you had been taught
in the Church of England) was so firm a Basis to you, that the attacks of
Slander, and Obloquy, should never remove you one hair's breadth from your
Duty. It was the very Polar Star, to which you directed all your Actions
without trepidation, the Axis on which you designed to move.

SECT. II. How such behaved themselves during the Transaction of the Bill of
Seclusion.
GIVE me leave to remind you of some of those Answers you used to make to those
Speeches were sent you from one of the Clerks of the Commons House, when the
debate was hottest about the Bill of Seclusion: for it was at that critical
Time, the truest Sons of the English Church, were discriminated from the
Latitudinarian Protestants, Non-Conformists and Commonwealth's Men.

S. W. J. Collection of Speeches.
When that overgrown Lawyer said, He took it for granted, that it was impossible
that a Papist should come to the Possession and quiet enjoyment of the Crown,
without wading through a Sea of Blood; and without occasioning such a War, as
for ought he knew, might shake the Monarchical Government: You then replied,
This was more like the Bellowing of a Bull, than a Responce from an Oracle of
the Laws, and that who ever lived to see the Duke Succeed, (as in course of
Nature it was likely) would find the True Sons of the Church of England, so far
from listing up an hand against him, that if his Right were opposed, they would
with as much Zeal and Concern as any, fight under his Royal Standard; and if
any such Bouteseu's as he, raised a Rebellion; they would only afford Trophies
to his Victorious Sword, and fall as Sacrifices to the Justice of his Cause.

When that bitter man's Speech was urged, That a Popish Head, on a Protestant
Body, would be such a Monster in Nature, as would neither be fit to preserve,
or be preserved: and it as naturally followed, as the Night did Day, that the
Head would Change the Body, or the Body the Head

You answered, That we ought to consider the Royal Headship, abstractedly from
the Subject-Body, as we do the sublimed Animal and vital Spirits from the gross
Blood, and the grosser composition of the Body. The Sovereignty being as a
Presiding Celestial Power, fitted to govern Members of various Temperaments
and Constitutions; and that it was as easy to conceive how a Popish King might
benignly govern his Protestant Subjects, as it was for a Father to govern, with
Paternal Care and Indulgence, his Children of different Humors and
Inclinations; and that whatsoever Latitude, other Churchmen might take to obey
Princes, only so far as they were Nursing Fathers to their Church; yet the
Principles and Doctrine of the Church of England (contained in its Homilies)
obliged all the Subjects to be dutiful, bear Faith and Allegiance to their
Sovereign, and support his Crown and Dignity, though he were of a different
Religion and it taught absolute, and unconditionate Obedience for Conscience
sake.

When some thought to touch you more closely in your Private Col. B.
Concerns; as knowing you had some Church Lands, and showed you the Colonels
Speech, who said, He took it for granted, that we have nothing of our own, if
Popery come in; not only the Church Lands, but all the Lands we have will be
little enough for them, for they will never want an Holy, Sanctified, Religious
pretense to take them from us.

To this you answered, That the unpractitableness of restoring Church Lands is
apparent, in the possession of those in Germany, got into by Hostilities, and
established by Treaties; and seeing that in Queen Mary's days, when the Romish
Government, and the Popes Supremacy was re-established, and the individual
Parcels (disseiz'd from the Church) easily known, in the Reign of a Princess so
zealous to remove the Guilt of Sacrilege, that she actually restored what was
in her Possession, and proceeded to the Rebuilding of some Religious Houses,
seeing, you said, that she, thus earnest upon the Work, and who had the
Interest of the Pope, and the Zeal of a much vaster number of Catholics then
are now, to assist her, was yet so far from being able to obtain an Act of
Parliament for that purpose; that the Pope himself by Bull confirmed them.
Certainly if this then was unpracticable, (when Protestantism was at so low an
Ebb) what could be expected after almost 150 years quiet possession? So that if
there were no other obstacle but the inextricable confusion, it would be
impossible that any Court of Claims could adjust the Title of any Religious to
them, by any color of Law or Equity: and no Catholic Prince whatsoever, would
disquiet, and disoblige the whole Body almost of his Subjects, (both Catholics
and Protestants,) for the advantage of three or four of his English Subjects in
every Monastery: for if he should recall all the Religious of his Subjects out
of all the Foreign Convents, they would not supply them to a greater number.

S. H. C.
When you read another Splenetick Gentleman's Harangue, That Misery and Slavery
were the Concomitants of Popery; And when in answer to a Gentleman that urged
against the Bill, That it would lay the foundation of a miserable Civil War:
The aforesaid zealous Knight replied, That the Barbarousness exercised in Queen
Mary 's Reign by Fire and Faggot, might be put in the Balance with all the
inconveniences that ever happened by any Exclusion-Act.

I remember you pitied the Contlemans short Memory, or want of perusing our
Histories, where he might have found in many of the Skirmishes (besides the
sixteen pitched Battles, fought betwixt the Houses of York and Lancaster, upon
the Usurpation of King Henry the Fourth against Richard the Second) that more
were slain in one day, and more Families ruined in one year, than in the whole
Reign of Queen Mary: And however the matter should fall out (as we had no
shadow of Reason to suspect) it were better to die, as Sufferers (guilty of no
other Crime than the Adhearing to our Religion) then to die by the Sword,
Bullet, Ax or Halter for Rebellion.

You farther said, That we ought to consider the difference betwixt a lawful
Hereditary Prince, and an Usuper: The one being obliged, by Interest so to
govern, that he may have a peaceable and comfortable Reign, and have willing
and wealthy Subjects: Whereas the other (having the establishing his Usurpation
his sole scope) enslaves all he can, studying only to aw all into Obedience by
force, and strong hand: But it would be otherwise in the Succession here, where
the Princesses his R. H. only Daughters, who, or their Issues, were in the
course of Nature (if he had no Son) to succeed him were married to Protestants;
so that he would have as great regard to their peaceable Possession, as his
own: And let the Motives be what they could, he would content himself with the
Public Exercise of his own Religion, and affording Liberty, Countenance and
Protection to all Catholics, and employing some of them, and suspending the
execution of such Laws as were heavy upon them: And if this were not opposed,
you doubted not but his Reign would much increase the Wealth, Glory and
Military Discipline of the Nation.

How scrupulous now.
Yet after all this, since you have lived to see so much of the Prognostics
verified; of late, you have expressed apprehensions of the danger of your
Religion; and the concern for that, has made you hearken to the suggestions of
some Churchmen, and others who really believe all which the Seclusionists then
(without crediting a Tittle of it) most artificially spread abroad.

I think my self therefore bound to offer you my Reason, why you ought not to
fear this, and in the first place, think fit to remind you how the Clergy of
England (that surely considered consequences) behaved themselves then, and
after shall answer the best Arguments I have met with to the contrary.

SECT. III. How the Bishops and Clergy behaved themselves in those times.
THe Deportment of the Bishops, and the Loyal Clergy, may be best known by
their adhearing to the Crown-side, and the endeavors that were used to render
them less credited by the People.

It is very well known how strenuously they opposed the Bill of Seclusion, both
in the City and Country, and how few (if any) of the Bishops in the House of
Peers countenanced that Bill, which occasioned such bitter and biting Speeches,
or such sly insinuating Girds against them, as if they were ready to enroll
themselves under the Banner of St. Peter, and betray the Protestant Interest,
rather than be deprived of the warming Beams of the Rising Sun.

Sr. F. W.
Hence one of the Active Members said, They might be assured of their Religion,
if the Fathers of the Church join in being against the only means to preserve
it; and he desired the Church might not be scandalized, for they did not
disinherit the Prince for his Religion; but to save their own. And further
said, That he thought it a kindness to the Church, above all other Acts
whatsoever: And lest in this, he might not be understood aright, he added, that
he meant the Protestant Church: which showed that these men considered the
conformable Clergy of England, as a different Body from the Protestants at
large; And so the kindness of that Act would operate to them, though not to the
present Bishops and Clergy of the Church of England, who defired no such
indirect proceedings to secure them.

W. H.
Another said, He was unwilling to detract from the Merits of Churchmen, for
whom he had a great Veneration; yet he could not but observe however since the
Presbiterian Plot, they preached up the danger of Phanaticks to be more than of
Papists, and that to disinherit the Duke was against the Law of God: Which said
oppinions, said he, If they should be Imbibed by the People, what would the
Associating Bill signify, or any other Law against Popery.

J. B.
Another said, That People were come to know, that the Clergy may be good
Divines, but not so good Politicians: And that the Clergymen might be in a
possibility of being advanced by Popery (if they submitted) but the Laity,
under a probability of loosing all notwithstanding all Submission: And added,
That he doubted not, but that many of the Beshops and Clergy, would as soon die
for the Protestant Religion, as any Person in the Nation: but he was jealous
there was some overruling Power, yet amongst them, something answerable to
that of a Popish Successor.

This Gentleman seemed kinder than the rest, in that he charged them mostly
with want of foresight and inadvertency, that some Leading Men of their Order,
were decoying them to overlook their Interest. But surely in this they Acted
like good Politicians, as well as Divines, in that thereby they saved a great
effusion of Blood, which necessarily must have followed such an unjust Bill:
And I hope they will retain the same Integrity and Wisdom, with a good
Conscience, as to afford no occasion to their Enemies to censure their defect
of Religion or Policy, or allay the King-Affection and Grace to them for that
Service then done to him.

SECT. IV. The Calumnies against the Loyal Members of the Church of England in
the foregoing times.
I Think it not unfeasonable here to refresh your Memory with a Summary of the
Calumnies laid upon the Loyal Members of the Church of England, in the Reign of
the two late Kings of Glorious Memory. In King Charles the First's Reign, the
People, being wrought upon to repine at some ways of levying Money, not usual,
and some Rules of Uniformity either disused, or not so Universally practiced
before; chose in most places such Members of Parliament, as they thought, would
be most ready to redress those Grievances; who, no sooner were met, but the
Designers amongst them, set the People upon petitioning against Innovations.
Then the Bishops, and most of the dignified Clergy, were accused of an
intention to bring in Popery, and to make some approaches to a Conformity to
the Church of Rome. Every where hideous Cries were heard, of the apprehensions
of the Inundation and Inflowing of Popery, when the thousandth Man scarce knew
what it was, or who were the Preservers of the Banks which most powerfully kept
it out; and having got Power by those Suggestions, and gained an Aversion in so
many against them, before they had over powered the Monarchy, voted down, and,
in the effectualest way they could, totally overthrew the English Hierarchy:
And all that asserted the Government then exercised in Church and State, were
branded as Betrayers of the Subjects Birthright, Privileges and Liberties, and
Favorers of Popery, and Arbitrary Government: Which Epithets they never failed
to interweave, and on whomsoever they fastened such of their Petars, they were
sure to have their Reputation blasted, and all their subsequent Actions rendered
odious to the Commonalty, who the soonest of any Mortals are blearcy'd, and
distorted with the suspicious squint.

In the late Kings time, all Loyal Men, who professed most strict conformity to
the Church of England, and were not for the Bill of Seclusion or Comprehension,
were stigmatized with the names of Papists in Masquerade.

How efficacious these Calumnies were to Arm so great a part of the Subjects
against the blessed Martyr of his People, and bring him to that tragical end,
is too fresh in our Memories to need a recital. And when we found the
powerfulness of those Fictions and Imaginary Goblins in both Kings Reigns, to
endanger the Subversion of the Monarchy and Episcopacy: Have we not reason to
believe, that there are a great number of Republican Spirits yet at work, who
subtily mingle themselves with all Malcontents, and dissatisfied Parties; and
by their sly insinuations inflame every small Scratch, and rancle it into a
venomous Boil, by their pestilent and contagious Breath? Those are continually
raking into the Ashes of every of these bypast Designs, keeping some Brands
always in the Embers, ready upon every light occasion to be blown into a Flame.
Can we believe those to be now at rest and quiet, to have hushed or mortified
their eager Concupiscence of advancing the Good Old Cause? No, no, let us not
believe the Fox has forgot his Shifts and Wiles, or the Crocodile his Tears,
or the Asp his venomous Bite: Let us fear the gilded Snake in the Grass, yea,
rather lurking in every Thicket, where repining, murmurs, sears, jealousy or
discontent can lodge.

SECT. V. The Affrightments and Arts now used to make the Subjects believe that
the Protestant Religion is to be extirpated here.
THese are a set of Men, who by their whispering dissatisfaction and suspicions
of the danger of the Protestant Religion, are but fitting their Mouths, and
preparing their Lungs to blow the Bag-pipe of Sedition: And when they have
allured the Crowd, will endeavor to decoy them into the same Designs with
themselves, and excite us to follow the Methods they used in our Fathers days.
That new Japan does much resemble the old Varnish, only they have found out new
Exotic, affrighting Figures: And whereas before the Emblem of Venient Romani
was placed at so great a distance from the Sight, that it was but faintly
delineated, as in a remote Prospect: Now they think they may be bold to place
it in a nearer Light, and hope to allure the Tender-sighted, and well Affected
to the Church of England, to believe the reality of the Representation: which
is no other, but that the Roman Altars are to be placed where Communion Tables
now stand. That the great Fabric of St. Paul's is to have a Cupula with the
Sword of that Saint, and the Keys of St. Peter upon it: That our Common Prayer
is to he changed for a Mass Book: And in fine, that the Protestant Religion is
designed to be extirpated.

The Plausible Inducements they pretend to have to believe this, are the
Liberty the King grants to all his Catholic Subjects to Exercise their
Religious Worship; the suspending the execution of all the penal Laws against
them, and the placing of Catholics, contrary to the Provision made by Act of
Parliament to exclude them.

These Proceedings of the King, they would make us believe, are manifest
Demonstrations of his intentions to recede from his Royal Promise of protecting
the Church of England: and consequently that it will crumble to nothing, by his
withdrawing it.

This they endeavor to infer, by the consideration of the influence the Pope
and the Catholic Fathers may have upon his Majesty, who will be continually
instilling into his Royal Mind, how glorious an Enterprise it will be, rowsing
his slow and unresolved Thoughts, with the Consideration, what a perpetual
renown it ever will be to King Henry the VII. that he united the Houses of York
and Lancaster: and how glorious the memory of King James the I. ever must be,
who united the Kingdoms: And how transcendent a Jubilee it would cause over all
the Roman World, That his Grandson should reunite his Subjects to the Roman
Catholic Church; which will be so irresistible a Charm, they say, that it
cannot be in his power to escape the Enchantment: Nor could he want the Charity
to wish it, or neglect the essaying all means to effect it, being prepossessed
with a firm Persuasion that the undertaking of it would be an acceptable
Service to God Almighty.

It is not my design to write any thing that may lessen the esteem and due
regard Men have for the Church of England, of which I own my self an unworty
Member. Neither shall I meddle with any Points in controversy, but only offer
my Reasons why I cannot conceive, by the Proceedings of the King hitherto, nor
the consequences flowing from those steps he makes, That the Protestant
Religion is either in danger, or designed to be rooted out, or so eclipsed, as
we are invited to believe.

SECT. VI. That the Church of England has been in a disturbed condition under
Protestant Princes.
BEfore I consider the present State of the Church of England, which I think,
in many respects, is as flourishing as it has been since the Reformation; I
must show its former condition.

During the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, and the three succeeding Kings, it has been
continually disquieted with Dissenters, Fanatics, and other Sects, who never
gave over their Clamours for a more refined Reformation from Rome: Every Year
almost producing some bitter Invective or other; grudging, murmuring, and
calumniating the English Hierarchy, to the great disquiet of the Secular
Government: Hence the necessity of severe Laws against Non-conformists, ever
and anon being made or reinforced.

Those that lived in the beginning of the late Wars cannot forget what Tumults
were in some places about placing the Communion Table Altar-wise. How many were
scandalized at the Bishop's, dignifyed Clergy, and Priests Habit; at the
kneeling at the Sacrament, at the use of the Cross in Baptism, about bowing to
the Altar, and the Name of Jesus: And though in Cathedrals a Solemn Order was
observed; yet it was much murmured at, and was branded (both in the manner of
the Celebration of Divine Offices, and the use of the Choristers and Organs)
with the name of downright Popery and Superstition.

Who has a mind to know the particulars of the disquieting of the Church of
England, by her Protestant Adversaries, may peruse Bishop Bancroft's Dangerous
Positions, and Dr. Heylin's History of Presbyterianism, Mr. Fowlis History of
the Plots, Conspiracies, etc. and such as relate the Church History of those
times; and they will find sufficient to convince them, what Jars, Conflicts,
Heartburnings, and Disquiets were amongst Protestants: How the Clergy and the
Liturgy were despised; which grew every Year worse and worse, till it was
judged requisite by a strict execution of the Laws to master the
Nonconformists, and bend, or break them to a compliance, or silence. But the
success answered not the design; for on the contrary, the peoples minds grew
strongly alienated from the Discipline of the Church, and as soon as they had
chosen a House of Commons to their mind, the use of the Common Prayer Book,
Surplices, and Habits of the Clergy, and all things in use formerly, and
established by Law, were voted down; and the Soldiery and Rabble were
encouraged to tear the Service Book and Surplices, to transplace the
Communion Table, level the Steps, pull up Fonts, break down all the painted
Glass-Windows, especially where any representation of our Savior, or any
Saints, or Bishops, or other in Religious Habits were: The Copes, Vestments,
and Chalices were all swept out of the Church by Order of Committies, or the
Rapine of Parishioners, or Soldiers; The Monuments and monumental Inscriptions,
were most of them defaced, especially where a Religious Habit was represented,
an Ora pro Anima annexed, or the worth of the Brass tempted the Sacrilege;
none of the zealous Observers of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church were
permitted to enjoy any Benefice, or teach a School; Bishops, and Deans, and
Chapters Lands were sold, and they were about resolving which of the Cathedrals
should be demolished. So that in conclusion there was no public appearance of
the Discipline of the Church of England, though all the Pulpits were supplied
with Preachers, who conformed to their new Directory, and new Ordination by
Presbyters. This might indeed be called a Protestant Church, but I am sure it
was very different from the Church of England as established by Law, which was
so far from then being a flourishing Church, that it had neither Vola nor
Vestigium of one, but such as was under as dismal a Persecution as a Church
well could be.

It is true, after the late King of immortal memory's Restoration; It was
restored again to a competency of Power, and Order. Yet the Dissenters
Meeting-places were as much frequented as the Churches. Everywhere
Non-conformable Ministers had their Conventicles, till a new Act of Uniformity
was made; yet the number of Dissenters then were so many, that the King (who
loved ease, and to have his Subjects minds composed, that he might more freely
have the Service of their Bodies and Purses) was willing to grant them
Indulgence, till that was disliked by the Parliament, and the Bishops, and
zealous Members of the Church of England, whereby the King was prevailed with
to revoke it. Thus was the Church of England harrassed under Protestant Princes.

SECT. VII. That it is in a more flourishing condition now.
LET us now take a view of its present State, and make a just parallel, and we
shall, I think, find it in no worse, but in a better state than before. Now our
Clergymen go publicly in their decent Habits, are reverenced and respected,
no affronts put upon them. All the Ceremonies appointed by the Canons, and
Rubricks are more exactly observed, and more universally confirmed too, than in
any Age before; we hear little of their Conventicles, the greater number of
former Dissenters flocking to our Churches, conforming in all things, answering
to the Responses, standing up at the Creed, bowing at the Name of Jesus,
kneeling at the Prayers, and with great attention and zeal, hearing the learned
Sermons delivered almost from every Pulpit, the Ministers redoubling their
pains in emulation to the Catholic Fathers, that they may retain their Flocks
firm to the Protestant Religion, and we may judge, by the crowding of the
Churches, That for one Dissenter that was won to the Church of England, in the
late Kings Reign, there are now ten, which is one of the Miracles the King has
done, to unite these at so great odds formerly: So that to me it is a plain
proof, that some people believe the Promise of protecting the Church of
England: Which makes them shelter themselves under it; but I suppose it will be
no longer than the Storm is impending. In fine (unless it be that we want his
Majesty's presence at the Royal Chapel) we find no alteration from what was in
King Charles the Second's time, and the generality of the people, finding the
Clergy so boldly to stand to the Protestant Religion, respect and reverence
them more than ever.

So that if the flourishing state of a Church be to be known by the number of
Communicants, by the populous Auditories, conformableness to the Ecclesiastical
Doctrine, and Discipline: If by the decency of the Churches, the full, free,
and solemn Exercise of the Rites of our Religion, by the eloquent, learned, and
painful preaching of the Ministers, by the full and free enjoyment of their
Revenues, the uninterrupted Exercise of the Ecclesiastical Laws and Discipline:
The present state of the Church of England is as flourishing as we can desire,
and may so continue, if we can be content to yield Roman Catholics a favor
next to a Tolleration.

SECT. VIII. The Self-denial of the King, in the Exercise of his own Religion.
SINCE I am discoursing of the parallel of the flourishing state of the Church
of England, formerly and now: I think we ought seriously to reflect how
gracious our King is to us, and how little a share of liberty to his Catholics,
he is content with.

None sure could have counted it injustice, if our Sovereign had chosen his own
Royal Chapel, in his own Palace, to have performed his Devotions in; whereas
he quits that to the Prince and Princess, to the Archbishops, great Ministers
of State, the Nobility, Bishops, and Protestants of all ranks; and contents
himself with the Queens Chapel at St. James's, has only one Bishop, his
Confessarius, and a small number of Chaplains, and circumscribes his
Processions within the Cloister of that small Convent: And at Windsor (his
SummerPalace) leaves the Collegiate Church to Protestants, and only keeps to
himself the small new Chapel adjoining to St. Georges Hall, which if he had
not taken (though some unquiet Spirits made such a noise at it) he must have
had no place there for his Devotion.

The King graciously allows us the Cathedrals, Parish-Churches and Chapels,
and the free and unrestrained exercise of our Religion; have we reason then to
grudge him two or three small Chapels, and the Subjects of his Faith, their
Private Oratories?

We have had a further Instance of his Majesty's tenderness in protecting the
Church of England, in the Letter sent to the two Archbishops, at such time
when it was generally bruited abroad (we may judge by whose Artifice and
Malice) that the King intended to prohibit preaching of Controversies, betwixt
the Church of Rome and us, and to take away Lectures, and Afternoon Preaching;
whereas we find by the Instructions annexed to the Letter, That it was no more
than had been done in King James's, and in King Charles the First's time, and
was verbatim what had been published by King Charles the Second: And in stead
of restraining our Ministers from preaching in defense of the Church of
England, it is allowed, yea appointed them, so it be done according to the
Instructions.

Let us therefore receive these largesses of Princely Favors, with dutiful and
thankful Hearts; and by no petulancy, or unnecessary eagerness for more,
endanger the loss of what we enjoy. And I doubt not but Roman Catholics will
allow something to a people devoted to their Religion, and distinguish betwixt
those that are, and ever will be, truly Loyal, even under Sufferings; and a
party that seek all opportunities to repine.

SECT. IX. The difficulty of effecting a Change of Religion. First, from the
Peoples general Prejudice against it.
TO proceed more particularly to the further Reasons, why I think the
Protestant Religion is in no such danger, as some labor with all their Arts to
make us believe. I shall desire it may be considered, How averse the body of
the People are to it. Protestantism here has taken deep Root, and the prejudice
against, and even abhorrence of Popery, has been instilled into us, with our
first Rudiments: So that the generality may as well be prevailed upon to
embrace Turcism or Heathenism, as the Religion which has been represented to
them as Idolatrous, and so contrary to Scripture. Education, and a long Series
of contrary Usage, are great Impediments in the minds of all Men, to admit of
any change in Customs, much more in Religion.

The great Obstacle, that hinder the common people from complying with the
Roman Catholic Religion, are, That the Public Service is celebrated in an
Unknown Tongue, in which they know not how to join, as they do in our
Liturgies, and the multitude of mysterious Ceremonies, do no less amaze them,
who will be rather contented, to be accounted thick-skulls, than they will be
at the pains to learn them.

The Clergy, and those who are able to consider the matters in dispute betwixt
the two Churches, cannot (after that vast number of Books that have been writ
on both sides) satisfy themselves in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
Invocation of Saints, worship of Images, Purgatory, Merit, and several other
matters, in which difference they unite with other Reformed Churches.

And there is something peculiar, which will be a constant Remora, (to the
Clergy especially) viz. That, First, the Reformation was here more regular than
in any other Country. Secondly, That Episcopal Government is maintained in good
order; and such a Liturgy and Ceremonies used, as come nearest to the Primitive
usage, as they think themselves very able to maintain. Thirdly, They are
unwilling to yield the Roman Catholic Church to be the Judge of Controversies
betwixt them. And as to the Supremacy of the Pope, The English Clergy will most
unwillingly yield it, after so long a renouncing it. Lastly, The Indispensible
Celebacy of the Catholic Clergy, is an insuparable hinderance of English
Ministers submission to that Religion; since the married here, will be
incapable of preferment, and on the contrary, must suffer degradation and
beggary.

Who seriously considers those things, will not only judge it an attempt
unseazable (especially when the prospect of a Protestant Successor, is an
Ensuring-Office to our Religion) but may satisfy any of the groundlesness of
those Fears, (some people are too prone to suggest, more, I think, out of
design, than that they believe it themselves) That the Protestant Religion is
designed to be overthrown.

There are but four ways, by which this can be effected. Either, First, by the
freedom of preaching of the Fathers, Secondly, Their Writings: Thirdly, Their
Conversation: Or, Fourthly, by Force; which I shall now consider.

As to their Preaching, That it will not be effected by the preaching of the
Fathers.
First, It is observeable, That it is a most rare thing, to hear any discourse
of Controversies, in the King's, or either Queen's Chapels, or I think in that
of the Popes Nuncio, or chapels of Ambassadors: Those Protestants which have
heard them, can universally testify, That the Text, mostly, is out of the
Epistle or Gospel of the day; and the scope of the Discourse is generally
incitements to the duty of Holy Living, disswasives from all kind of sin, and
true motives to penitence for them. When they commemorate any Saint, in
celebrating the Festival, the application is to imitate their Sanctity, and
praise God for the Grace conferred on them, and affording such Examples of
Devotion, and holy living: Which Heads, when they are most powerfully treated
upon, may be effectual to make a Man a good Christian, but avails not much to
make him a Roman Catholic.

It is well known to most that hear them, that if it were not for the habit,
the Ave Maria, the want of Notes, the devision of the Discourse, and some small
difference in the way of delivery, they could not distinguish their Sermons
from those in Protestant Churches: So that they gain only by that, a little
mitigation of peoples Censures, who have had them represented either as
ridiculous, or absurd. Since therefore the Preachers of both Churches agree in
the points of Moral Piety, and the Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity: It
may prevail with Lay Auditors, to judge those are the necessary things
knowable; and that the skill in nice and subtle Controversies, are nothing so
needful to salvation, as the decrying and shunning Vice, and Debauchery.

When therefore we consider the advantage the Ministers of the Church of
England have over the Fathers, we surely must yield, That they may much more
easily keep their own Flock from straying, than the other can win them over to
the Romish Faith. For, First, the Ministers are infinitely more numerous, and
settled in their several Parishes, as so many Shepherds to secure their charge
Secondly, They have willing, and unprejudiced Auditors to hear them; whereas
most Protestants that go to hear the Fathers, generally do it out of curiosity,
or to censure them. Thirdly, The Ministers of England have a good Art of
Address, to enforce their Doctrines; and having been longer used to preaching
than the Fathers, and using a different method from them (to which people have
been more accustomed:) I see no reason to fear that they can so prevail, as to
commit a rape upon their Auditors Affections and Judgments, whereby they should
be converted by thousands, as those were at S. Peter's Sermons; and without such
Miracles, I think, by preaching, the Protestants will not be changed.

As to their Writings; Nor by their Writings.
the scope of those seem to be primarily, to explain those Articles of Faith
(wherein Protestants most differ from them) in such a manner as may conciliate
a better understanding between the two Churches, and by a sweetening, and
favorable representation of the Catholic Doctrine, endeavor to remove the
Prejudices Protestants have entertained against it, as irroconcileable to
Scripture and the exposition of the Primitive Fathers.

This seems the most Christian and Charitable method they have, or possibly can
take, to render their Religion intelligible to us, or at least incline us to
less censoriousness of theirs: which province the Bishop of Meaux, has
undertaken with greatest applause, and it has been followed by some of our
Country.

Yet when we consider how little hither to has been gained by this expedient,
we need neithe be waspish and angry, or abandon our selves to such sinking
sears, as if the Church of England would be overset by so smooth a Sea.

The Church of England has in it many learned and dextrous men, who have good
Libraries, and are well skilled in History, and the Ancient Fathers, and are
well pleased, they have the opportunity of showing their Talents, and are
confident they can manage their cause more advantagiously than the Catholics,
and think this way of their Adversaries Writings, effects not what is aimed at,
but on the contrary, confirms the people, That they have been taught by their
Pastors, the more ancient and true Doctrine, as it was believed in the Ages
nearest the Apostles times: So when the Pope yielded to the Bohemians the use
of the Wine in the Sacrament: It being received by them, as a confirmation,
That the Eucharist ought to be administered in both species; and that it was as
reasonable that other Points in difference should be allowed them, the Pope
recalled the Tolleration.

When we further consider, That the dubious expressions of the Fathers, afford
subtle men on both sides sufficient matter for arguing, pro and con, and that
the Writers in both Churches, agree not upon a Judge betwixt them: It is not
easy to conceive, how by this way, a National Conversion can be effected. For
though the number of Writers were never so much multiplied: Yet since the
Arguments are the same, and neither part can put the principal differences to
Umpirage, or fix upon an Umpire, they may both write till Doomsday, Nor by
their freedom of conversation, and endeavors to proselite the people
ere they accord.

As to Conversation, It must be owned that in this, as well as the foregoing
particulars, the R. Catholic Churchmen, have that advantage now, that they
never had since the Reformation, both publicly to preach, and publish their
Books of Controversy, and be as industrious as they please, to prevail with
people in their conversation, which is like a single combat betwixt a Man
skilled at his Weapon, and a Novice. It must be granted also, That several
persons may be reconciled to the Church of Rome, especially such as are curious
after Novelties, and not well grounded in the Protestant Religion, or such as
fall into solicitous thoughts about the state of their Salvation, and come to
think the failures they have committed, have been occasioned by their want of
due Instruction: Or once conceive that Salvation is not to be had out of the
most Catholic Church, or that a perfect absolution upon Confession, and
Contrition is to be had no where, out of the Church of Rome, and some may be
won by an affectation of the modishness of being of the Religion of their
Prince, or in hopes of the more propitious royal Smiles: and such in my
judgment, as change their Religion for this sole end, neither deserve the
countenance of their Prince, nor of any worthy Man; for such will vary with the
next Wind, and neither God nor Man will find stability in them.

But we experimentally find that the progress of these kinds of conversion is
very slow, and it must be a work of many Ages, to effect any great matter this
way, where so thick-set prejudices, and prepossessions of a different
persuasion, are so firmly retained, that to change a Religion this way, is but
like the demolishing a Fabric of immense firmness and size, by picking out
here and there a single Stone, even while others are as diligent and
industrious to secure it.

If, lastly, any be won over to the Church of Rome, by any of these, or any
other method of more force, the act being personal, (seeing every Man's
Salvation touches himself most) why should any so much be concerned about it,
seeing it is their own voluntary act, and no injury is done to the willing
yielder, and it would be a strange obstinacy in any not to yield to conviction.

Having shown the groundlesness of those peoples fears that dread the overthrow
of the Church of England, by any of the three forementioned ways: I come now to
the last, that is, Force.

It was a Masterpiece in the Seclusionists, That it is morally impossible to
effect it by force.
to represent Popery and Slavery as Twin-Monsters, and inseparable Fiends;
which they described in the most terrible shape, with Jaws of Lions, Talons of
Vultures and Harpyes, Eyes of Basilisks, and fierceness of Tigers, surrounding
them with Fire and Brimstone, horrible Flame, and the equipage of Chains,
Racks, and Wheels, and all the Torments of the Ten Persecutions, or what ever
else, inventive Mischief has since found out: Yet we now live to see them all
but terrible Bugbears, and the Affrightments of Hypocondriac Dreams.

By a natural instinct, we English, of what persuasion soever, are very careful
to preserve our properties, which in all times have been dear to us; and those
most ancient Laws that secure them, were made before the name of Protestant was
known in the World. We must also consider, that with what ever daring courage,
religious zeal may inspire Men; yet common policy and interest, will certainly
discourage all Catholics from attempting any change of Religion by force and
enslaving; lest they or their posterity, in the next Age might undergo a
Retaliation as heavy upon them, when it would be more easy to extirpate the
whole Roman Religion here, than now it would be to change that of one City.
When therefore the founding of Religion will be the ruin of Estates, and the
Story of Perrillus's Bull, is not worn out of Men's Memories, or Men are like to
be the Sacrifices upon the Altars, they too precipitately raise; we are not to
expect such venterous Heroes, as will have the hardiness of Sampson, especially
since if they had, they would want the Power, and force to effect it.

SECT. X. Two Objections answered.
I Know it is urged, That we had a sad Experiment of the change made by a
standing Army here, which was able to overthrow the Monarchy: And the French
Kings late proceedings against the Hugonots prove, That by force great
alterations (otherwise looked upon, as next to impossible) may be effected.

But the Cases are very different from ours, That the case of the Usurpers,
over throwing the monarchy and episcopacy is very different from ours.
for in our late Civil Wars, the people were only wrought up to the height of
power, to dispose of the fate of Monarchy, by the belief the Designers
impressed upon them, That Popery and arbitrary Government were making great
approaches, and fully designed to be introduced by the King and Bishops: And a
Parliament was, by a fatal oversight, perpetuated, which was of the same
persuasion; and had the Hearts, Purses, and Heads of infinite multitudes to
assist them in the work of Reformation in the Church, and redressing of
Grievances (as they were called) in the State: Which being such specious
pretensions, and having a Parliament to patronize it; and the Scotch Nation to
abett them, it was the less to be wondered at, that such a Revolution was made,
especially when we consider the Churches alteration was nothing so great, as it
would be betwixt the exchange of Protestant Episcopacy, for R. Catholic
Hierarchy, and the Popes Supremacy, which is here so much antiquated.

Then the Doctrine of the Church was little altered, except in that they
rejected the Order of Bishops: for the Service being in the known Language,
without any Ceremonies, only consisting of Prayers, reading of Scriptures,
Preaching and Administering the Sacraments, according to the use of Scotland,
Geneva, Holland, and the Hugonots of France, the transition was more easy,
after the Army was victorious: Yet we have seen how short lived, even that
Usurpation was.

In our present case, a Religion is to be brought in, against the most earnest
endeavors, the firmest persuasions, and Resolutions, and the utmost
detestation and abhorrence of the people: So that while we see only a mixture
of Catholic Officers, with a far greater number of Protestants, and a Body
almost entire of Protestant Soldiers: We may as well have credited, That Oliver
Cromwell's Army could have pulled the Pope out of his Palace, and introduced
Protestantism in all Catholic Countries, (as I have heard some of the Officers
and Chaplains of that Army, confidently enough hope) as that we can expect an
extirpation of our Religion here, by so small a number of R. Catholics as are
in the Court, Camp, or Country.

As to the instance of the French Kings proceeding, That the proceedings of the
French King ought nor to affright us.
surely they that urge it, never give themselves liberty to reflect upon the
discrepancy of the case. In France, the King and the whole Body of his Kingdom
are R. Catholics, and the Religion is established by Law, and it is easy to
obtain further Laws for the support of it, and the destroying of all others, by
a King so victorious and reverenced; since how numerous soever Protestants were
there, yet comparatively to the Catholics, they were very inconsiderable. If
indeed the King of France were an Hugonot, and with the assistance of his
Protestant Subjects, had been able to have brought all Catholics to his
Religion, then there might have been some ground for such an instance.

If the advancers of this affrightment would have been so candid, as to have
subjoyned, how our gracious King has granted, not only the French Exiles a
safe retreat into his Kingdom, but has likewise promised them a Protection in
the exercise of Religion, conformable to the practice of the Church of England;
And to all such has granted his Gragracious Letters Patents for the collecting
the Charity of his Subjects for their Relief, (which is accordingly with a
superlative Liberality, afforded them) They would rather have made it as an
Argument of the Kings inviolable observing his Gracious promise in protecting
the Church of England, than have produced it as an incitement to our fears of
the contrary. But these kind of men know how to boil up Sugar to the bitterness
of Aloes, and extract Poison out of Cordials.

SECT. XI. That the King's dispensing with the Test is no Argument of his
Design to extirpate the Protestant Religion.
I Know it is urged, that if his Majesty did not design some alteration in
Religion, what need is there of his so great solicitude, and earnest endeavors
for the taking away of the Test; and how comes it to pass that the Law against
it is dispensed with, and so many Catholics are Commissioned in the Army, and
may be in other Offices? This being the continual Toll, by which some would
make us believe the Protestant Religion was about giving up the Ghost: I think
it most necessary to enlarge the more upon it, in showing how just it is in the
King to employ Catholics, and how much Reason he has to dispense with the
Test; and that the refusing the Abolishing of it, will be attended with much
greater Inconveniences than the continuance of it.

It is equitable that the King employ Catholics.
Before I enter upon this Subject more directly, I think it requisite, in the
first place, to show the Equitableness, and Reasonableness of the Kings
employing R. Catholics. In order to which,

First, we must consider with what steadiness and equanimity of Mind (peculiar
to himself) our Illustrious King stemmed the Torrent of Antimonarchical, and
Associating Insolence: and how undauntedly he weathered out the Storm raised
against him, upon the account of Religion, before his access to the Crown: So
that we cannot think that he withdrew himself from the Communion of the Church
of England for any Secular Interest; and being not only so peaceably at first
seated on his Throne, but by a Miraculous success against a Rebellion (that was
within a cast of Victory) so firmly established in his Right: It cannot be
thought but that he makes some reflections on the justness of his Cause, and
the favor of Heaven to his Religion; so that after we have seen him Triumph
over the spightful and impotent Confederaces against him, and know him to be a
Prince of those rigid Principles of Honor and Conscience, as in no time to
make use of the coverture of dissimulation; we must conclude, that the World
would judge him hypocritical in his Religion, if he should not publicly
practice it himself, and countenance the Profession of it in his Catholic
Subjects, and show as favorable a regard to them, Caeteris paribus, as to
Protestants.

Secondly, That the King has reason to favor his Catholic Subjects.
It is most natural for every person to cherish and confide in those most, who
are of the same Persuasion with themselves in point of Religion, who are to be
supposed, will most cordially and concernedly adhere to their Interest, as
knowing that their common Fortunes are interwoven. While therefore Protestants,
since the Reformation, have been the sole usu-fructuaries of all the places of
Honor and Profit in Church and State; and all, who have been bred Catholics,
have been, since the beginning almost of Queen Elizabeth's time, or at least
from the middle of it, under more or less continual pressure: And a great many
suffered most deeply for their Loyalty to King Charles the First: And during
the credence given to the late Plot, have been harrassed from Session to
Session, proceeded against as Traitors, Imprisoned, and forced into Exile, or
undergon the severe penalties of the Laws: It is but reasonable that they, or
their Posterities should, with some more than common emotion of Joy and
Contentment, entertain the liberty of the exercise of their Religion, they have
so long been restrained from. Nor is it to be wondered or repined at, that they
are very desirous to receive the Warmth and Sunshine of a Kings Favor, they
have so long been deprived of; and of discovering their Joy and Satisfaction,
that they may be capacitated to render him Service, and be united in that
dutiful Bond of Loyalty with Protestants, though they cannot accord with them
in Matters of Religion.

Thirdly, It is unreasonable the King should be abridged of it,
It is a very unreasonable Matter, that any Sovereign Prince should be abridged
of the liberty of placing his Favors at his pleasure, either in Compensation
of his Subjects Sufferings, or, as a reward for their serviceable Loyalty; or
for the support of some meritorious Person, or such as by their Pen do him
Joynt-service with his Arms; the one awing, and the other arguing the
Ill-dispos'd Subjects into their Duty: And it no ways becomes Subjects to
Murmur, much less to repine, upbraid, or offer at catechizing the Prince for it.

Fourthly, It is an usual practice among Princes.
It is a well known usage amongst all Princes to entertain, in their Service,
Great as well as Inferior Commanders that are useful to them, without having
respect to their Religion: For the Liberty that any Great Prince gives to a
brave Man, to Exercise his Devotions in the way he has chosen, makes him so
much the more at ease, to be solicitous about nothing worldly, but the true
serving his Prince; which made the late King not ill served by some of his
greatest Sea Commanders and Captains, who had learnt their Experience under the
Usurpers, and were Non-Conformists to the Church of England. It is well known
how long Marshal Turene served the French King before he returned to the Bosom
of the Church of Rome, and how Cardinal Richilieu, and he, though they offered
their Prayers at several Altars; yet petitioned jointly for success to their
Common Master: And how long after, the same King entertained Mounsieur
Schomberg, and other Protestants. Surely the German Emperor does not reject
the Service of the Lutheran Princes, and their Forces against the Otoman
Empire; and it is well known, that Foreigners are employed in the Councils or
Armies of most Princes.

Fifthly, It is but like employing Subjects of different Kingdom or Countries.
Neither can I see any greater difference in the Kings employing of some
Catholics together with Protestants, than there is in his making his Subjects
of both his Kingdoms, participants with us English, in Offices and Ministeries
of State: Which to repine at, were very great Injustice, seeing it is what has
been ever practiced.

Sixthly, I may add further, It would be an injustice not to do it.
that it were a great oversight in Politics, and an Injustice, if his Majesty
did not employ Catholics; for it is most fit, in all his great and small
Services, he should intermix those he might most entirely confide in by the
Unity of their Interest, by which a commendable emulation would be betwixt
them, who should serve him best, or at least his Wisdom or Umpirage would be
best known, by choosing what Council to follow, when they proposed different
Mediums; and it would keep either party in that Golden Mediocrity, which is
most useful to Princes.

As to Injustice (which Epithet, whoever would fasten upon a Prince, robs him
of one of the noblest Flowers of his Crown) can it be other in a Prince not to
bestow Rewards, Honors and Offices (that are solely dispensable by himself) to
his serviceable Subjects, or such as have suffered for their adherence to him,
or his Family, and persevere in it? and none can deny but some Catholics are
such: And all Catholic Princes would judge our King a very unequal Distributer
of his Favors, and to have no great Zeal for his Religion, if he should not
countenance and prefer some of his Catholic Subjects: Yet none of those Acts of
bounty or choice he can do, if he cannot dispense with penal Laws.

Yet for all this gracious and just Favor to Catholics, I do not see, that by
any the remotest consequences, either the King does design, or that it is his
Interest by them to extirpate the Protestant Religion, but rather to conciliate
a better Union betwixt them, by conversation and mutual Service; that, in as
much as in him lies, by the experience now, of that good Accord betwixt them,
in the Civil and Military management of Affairs, a better understanding may be
betwixt them, even under a Protestant Prince: Though it is to be doubted that,
however now we grudge, that a few Catholics are in Commission, and are peevish
because any are employed besides Protestants; yet who ever lives to see a
Protestant Successor, will not find the same reciprocal Favors to Catholics.

SECT. XII. That it is not the Kings Interest to extirpate the Protestant
Religion.
THe Reason that presses me much to believe, that the King neither Designs,
nor thinks it his Interest to introduce the Catholic Religion, so as to extrude
the Church of England, is the moral impossibility, that so wise and generous a
Prince, and so great a lover of his Country, (however his wishes may be, in his
Judgment, thinking it conducib^e to the Salvation of their Souls) will
undertake a Business that requires a long long Age to effect, and must render
those days he has to live (which I wish many and many) full of disquiet and
anxiety, if not of Blood and Carnage. For it is a Princes paramont Interest to
consult the safety of his Government; and where he governs Subjects (as his are
circumstantiated) so to manage Affairs, as he may not weaken his Kingdoms
defense against his watchful Neighbors, by giving the Power into a few hands,
against the hundred times more numerous, and consequently more able to serve
him in his Defense, or give opportunity to such (as we may be sure, are not
true to the Principles of the Church of England of non-resistance) to raise
some formidable disturbance, which the Catholics singly will not be able to
quell.

It is very evident, that the Doctrine professed by the Church of England, is
unconditioned Loyalty; and the Members of it, that understand best the
Doctrine, and their Duty, think in this particular they carry the Prize from
all other Church-Societies.

But they are not all to be reputed Members of the Church of England, who go by
that Name; there are some can be very loyal to a Protestant King, but can be
factious, seditious Malcontents, and sowers of jealousies and fears under a
Catholic; and think it no sin to be regardless of his Honor or Success. And if
any Rebellion should happen (which God avert) they would think it their Duty to
sit still; and others who fight for pay only (of which it may be presumed there
are many of the Common Sort) if upon any Revolt they had a prospect of Money,
and the better securing of the Religion they value, would swiftly run over to
that side, where they might hope for both. Besides which, the indefatigable
Commonwealths-men, Malcontents, Non-conformists, and several of the Zealous
true Protestants Associaters, and Exclusionists, would combine in opposition to
barefaced Popery; for they are all threaded on one String, the same Iron Sinue
running through them all; so that if by any Wars abroad, or Intestine
Discontents at home, any Calamity should happen, (which may fall out under the
prudentest and wisest Prince) It is to be suspected by the mere terrible Engine
(the fear of losing their Religion) the Body of the People would consider their
strength only, and make their Loyalty give place to their great Concernment;
and neither regard the Kings Sovereignty, or the Loyal Principles of the Church
of England, but forget all Duty, and Reverence, to secure that which (they
would make us believe) is dearer to them than their Lives and Fortunes; and
then the Catholics, and true Sons of the Church of England, would be only left
to abide the shock of all the rest.

And though such a Prince as ours, is not to be affrighted out of his Methods:
yet we may rationally Judge that he considers all this, and must compute what
Hearts and Hands he is sure of; and will not embarras and imbroil himself in
Matters so difficult to accomplish, and make his Reign uneasy to himself, by
imposing a Religion upon his Subjects, they are so much Strangers unto, and
have such an aversion from, and to no other end, but to force his people at the
best to become Hypocrites.

Having thus, I hope, cleared that Point, that the Protestant Religion is in no
such danger as timorous, or designing Persons would have us believe: I come now
to speak more particularly to the Test, which is looked upon as the very
Barrier, Rampire and Citadel, that is only left to defend us against the
overpowering Attacks of Popery; which some Men would make us believe, if it
once be yielded up to the Kings demolishing, no visible hold is left to prevent
the whole Nation's being subdued to the Catholic Religion.

SECT. XIII. Concerning the Test.
I Shall first therefore endeavor to show the Nature of the Test, and the
occasion of the making of it; and the several Reasons why it may be prudence to
revoke it, and other penal Laws. And lastly, the inconveniences of denying to
repeal it, and so draw to a Conclusion.

The Motives that occasioned the making of the Test.
It must be owned, that it has been the Care of most Protestant Parliaments,
especially since the late Kings Restoration, to secure the Militia, and the
Kings Guards, and standing Forces in the hands of Protestants only: Therefore
in the Act for Settling the Militia, Anno 1661, the taking of the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy were enjoined; and when it was known, that our King
had left the Communion of the Church of England, the Houses began to be more
intent upon finding out ways to secure the Protestant Religion; and then those,
who afterward, pushed forward with such violence the Bill of Seclusion, having
gained so specious opportunity, to lay all the stress of their Contrivances,
upon the necessary endeavors to secure the Protestant Religion, under the
notion of protecting the Person and Government of our late King, and preventing
a Popish Successor, from Arming Catholics to the hazard of the Protestant
Religion; They prevailed upon the King to give his Assent to the Bills.

I shall now give you a Breviate of it, in the words of the Act, and give some
short Notes upon them, and then proceed.

The First Act.
Stat. 2^. Car. 2. c. 2.
The Title of the Act is, For preventing dangers which may happen from popish
Recusants. And the preamble adds, For quieting the minds of his Majesty's good
Subjects; It is enacted, That all and every person or persons, as well Peers,
as Commoners, that shall bear any Office or Offices, Civil, or Military, or
shall receive any Sallary, Fee, or Wages, by reason of any Patent, or Grant
from his Majesty, or shall have command, or place of Trust, from and under his
Majesty, or from any of his Majesty's Predecessors, or by His or Their
Authority, or by Authority derived from Him or them, within the Realm. etc. or
in his Majesty's Navy; I slands, etc, or shall be of the Household, or in the
Service, or Employment of his Majesty, or of his Royal Highness, the Duke of
York, etc. shall personally in the Court of Chancery, or King's Bench, take the
several Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and receive the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, according to the usage of the Church of England; and the like for
all Officers to be admitted to any Office for the future, within a time
limited. The Neglecters, or Refusers to be adjudged incapable of any other
Office, or to Sue, use any Action, Bill, Plaint, or Information in Courts of
Law, or prosecute any Suit in any Court of Equity, or to be a Guardian to any
Child, or Executor, or Administrator of any Person, or be capable of any
Legacy, or Deed of Gist, or to have any Office, and shall forfeit 500 l.

The persons obliged to take the Oaths, shall at the same time make and
subscribe the Declaration following, under the same penalties, and forfeitures,
as by the Act appointed.

The Declaration is in these words, I A. B. do declare that I do believe, that
there is not any Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or in
the Elements of Bread and Wine, at, or after the Consecration thereof, by any
person whatsoever.

There is a Provision that this Act shall not hurt or prejudice the Peerage of
any Peer of this Realm, either in time of Parliament or otherwise: But this was
in the next Act fully vacated.

The Second Act.
30. Car. 2.
The second Act is Intiuled, An Act for the more effectual preserving the Kings
Person and Government, by disabling Papists from sitting in either House, and
the Preamble adds, That for as much as diverse good Laws have been made, for
preventing the increase and danger of Popery in this Kingdom, which have not
had the desired effect, by reason of the Liberty which of late some of the
Recusants have had and taken, to sit and vote in Parliament: Therefore, it was
Enacted, That no Peers of the Realm, and Members of the House of Peers, should
Vote or make their Proxy in the House of Peers, nor any sit there, during any
debate in the said House; Nor should any Members of the House of Commons Vote,
or sit there during any debate, after the Speaker was chosen; until they
respectively take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and make, and
subscribe, and audibly repeat the Declaration following.

I A. B. Do solemnly and sincerely in the presence of God, Profess, Testify,
and Declare, That I do believe that in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, there
is not any Transubstantiation of the Body and Blood of Christ, at or after the
Consecration thereof by any person whatsoever; and that the Invocation or
Adoration of the Virgin Mary, or any other Saint, and the Sacrifice of the
Mass, as they are now used in the Church of Rome, are Superstitious and
Idolatrous.

Likewise no Peer of England, Scotland or Ireland -- being twenty years old,
nor any Convict Recusant, that takes not the same Oaths, and make and
subscribes the Declaration, may advisedly come into, or remain in the presence
of the King or Queens Majesty, or come into the Court or House, where They or
any of Them reside.

Every Peer, or Member thus offending, shall be deemed and judged a Popish
Recusant, and suffer as such, and be disabled to hold or execute any Office or
place of Profit or Trust, Civil or Military, in any of His Majesty's Dominions,
etc and shall not Sit or Vote in either House, or make a proxy in the house of
Peers, or have any benefit of the Law, as in the foregoing Act, and shall
forfeit 500 l.

Also every sworn Servant of the King, not having performed all things in the
former Act required, shall do what this Act enjoins, or shall be disabled to
hold any place as sworn Servant to the King, and suffer all the Pains, and
Penalties aforesaid.

The Proviso's are, That Nine of the Queens Menservants, natural born-subjects
of Portugal, and as many Women-servants, such as shall be nominated by the
Queen, under her Hand and Seal, are exempt from the taking these Oaths, etc.

Secondly, That none be restrained from coming or residing in the King or
Queens presence, etc. that shall first obtain warrant so to do, under the Hands
and Seals of six, or more Privy Councillors, by order from his Majesty's Privy
Council, upon some urgent occasion, therein to be expressed; so that such
License exceed not the space of ten days at one time, nor thirty days in one
year, and such License to be recorded in the Petty-bag-Office. Lastly, That
nothing in this Act shall extend to his Royal Highness the Duke of YORK.

Some Reflectione upon these Acts.
Whoever peruseth these Acts (in the circumstance we now are in) will easily, I
think, yield, that whatever temporary uses there could be formerly of them, yet
they could never be put in practice by a Roman Catholic King, or that he could
suffer the execution of them, as I shall more at large show in the following
Discourse.

In this place I shall only touch upon some few Heads. As,

The Sererity.
First, Concerning the severity in General, upon those who could not renounce
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Invocation or Adoration of Saints; these
being purely Metaphysical Points of Religion, settled by Pecrees of Councils in
the Roman Catholic Church; oblige those of that Communion to believe them,
under the penalty of an Anathema; yet I think it is not easy to prove, that
these Doctrines have any Natural Tendency to induce the Believers and
Practisers of them, either to endanger the Person of the King, or the
Government, which is declared to be the principal end why the Acts were made:
and as to the increase of Popery, these very Doctrines are so far from working
upon Protestants, that they are the very chief impediments, which hinder the
people in General from embracing that Religion.

Therefore it must appear very severe, that all persons, who by a spiritual
obligation cannot renounce these Doctrines and Practices, should be obnoxious
to those penalties, which, as convict Papists, they are liable to; and which,
however vexatious and chargeable to them, redound mostly to the profit of
Informers, Bailiffs, Clerks, and such persons as bear no proportion of Merit or
Interest in the Government, to those suffering Roman Catholic Lords and
Gentlemen; and by such Payments, Fines, etc. the Kings Revenue is very little
increased.

The Reasons why made.
Although some may think, some of the branches were then necessary, to prevent
all Roman Catholics from enjoying public employments, whereby the Managery of
the Government might solely be in the hands of Protestants; yet what necessity
was there for the outlawing of them, in putting them out of the protection of
the King, and his Laws, or of receiving any benefit by them, so that they could
not recover their just debts, defend themselves from any injury done to their
Persons or Estates, nor have equity done them, which is the privilege all
Subjects claim from their Sovereigns Justice.

As they must suffer all hardships: so the Acts provide that no Protestant, or
other, should be beneficial to them, being deprived of all the usual ways,
whereby advantages accrue to any, either by the Living or the Dead, in that
they might not be Guardians, Executors, Administrators, or receive any Legacy,
or Deed of Gift.

Whoever considers these things with a sedate and composed mind, undisturbed
with Bigotry, Suspicion, or Envy, must think this punishment intended to keep
the Roman Catholics in perpetual poverty and vassallage: which no Roman
Catholic Prince can take pleasure to see, or endure.

Of the prohibiting Romans Cathol. to be in the Kings Court or Presence.
As to the prohibiting all Roman Catholics, or any other resusers of the Oaths
and Declarations, advisedly to come into the Kings Presence or Courts; there
might be some color for such a prohibition, during the time that a Protestant
Prince was thought to be in personal danger from Roman Catholics; but surely at
any other time it appears a strange ungentileness to retrench a Sovereigns
attendance, and shows a very unbecoming diffidence in the Wisdom of a Prince,
and his Privy Council, as if they knew not whom, and when to prohibit Access to
their Royal Persons and Court; which by direction to the Lord Chamberlain, or
by Proclamation might be done upon Emergencies. It looks like a suspicion, that
the hinderance of the Access of Roman Catholics was rather that they might not
represent their sufferings, explain their Religion more favorably, make
Proselytes, or interceed for some accused; which though not expressed in the
Act fully, yet may well enough be interpreted from the words, preventing the
increase of Popery.

I know there is a provision upon obtaining of license; but that could extend
to very few, who either could be at the expense, or obtain the favor of an
Order of Council for that purpose, and so all indigent Catholics, who for their
sufferings for Kings Charles the Martyr might merit the late merciful Kings
regard and benignity were utterly, excluded.

Not fit now to continue.
But if we suppose these Acts as necessary and equitable, as the greatest
Sticklers for them could evince, while the Plot was believed; I think no person
endowed with common civility, will think it fit they should be imposed upon our
present Sovereign; nor will they think it equitable and just, that any Roman
Catholic King should deal in the same manner with his Protestant Subjects. And
I presume the Golden Rule to do to others as we would be done by our selves,
should influence public as well as private affairs.

Concerning the King and Queens sworn Servants.
As to the Kings sworn Servants, It must be very severe upon several of them,
whose fortunes were bottomed upon it; and it was a very unbecoming restraint,
that a Sovereign should dismiss his Domestics, though never so experienced and
faithful, for that, which, it may be few Members of the Houses would discard a
Trusty Menial Servant for.

As to the Queens Servants, it had been contrary to the Law of Nations, to have
imposed such Oaths and Declarations upon such as were naturaly born Subjects of
Portugal; yet in that they were limited to so small a number as nine (whereas
her Majesty entertains near thrice the number of Religious) it showed but
little consideration of the number of Servants in the Family of so great a
Princess.

But I need not trouble you with the consideration of these, as moving in a
lower Sphere; for what ever will induce the two Houses, to reinstate the great
Orbs in their places, and capacitate them to exert their due Powers, will
prevail to restore the Satellites of the great Luminaries.

Therefore I shall now pass to the ejecting the Roman Catholic Lords out of
their House, and depriving them of their Birthrights.

Concerning the Catholic Lords, being excluded the House.
By the Kings Royal Prerogative, the Power of Creating a Baron and Peer of the
Realm, is only in the King, as the Original Donor of all Honors, from whom all
Dignities flow, as from a Fountain, to all his Subjects.

Conciliarii nati.
This Honor consists not only in obtaining a swelling Title and Degree of
precedencie, as special Marks to them and their Families of Princely Favors:
but likewise has, for many hundreds of years, had annexed to it a right of
being a Member of the House of Peers, sitting and voting there; and thence they
are styled frequently Hereditary Counselors, who constitute the Kings Supreme
Court of Judicature.

In the Saxon times, and long after the Conquest, we find none but Bishops,
Abbots, Priors, and these (styled Magnates or Proceres) to constitute the
General Councils, which we now call Parliaments; tho it seems, by what we can
collect from the Ancientest Authors, the King summoned which of these he
pleased, and did not tie himself to continue it to their Posterities.

Mat. Paris 227.
But in the Great Charter of King John, we find he granted, that he would, by
special Letters, summon to these Great Councils, in Assessing all Aids and
Scutage, the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and great Barons of the
Realm. Cap. 2.12.19.37.38.
So in the Great Charter of Henry the Third, those are first provided for; and
a severe Excommunication was wont to be pronounced, by all the Bishops, in
presence of all the Lords and Commons, against the Infringers thereof: And it
is obvious to all, who know any thing of our Laws, how Sacred an Esteem the
Great Charter has had, being styled, The Charter of the Subjects Liberties,
and looked upon as the Standard of the Subjects Privileges; so that some are
of opinion, that even Acts of Parliament, contrary to Magna Charta, are void.

Et ut Barons tractentur, teneantur, and. reputentur, etc. and eorum quilibet
habeat, teneat, and possideat sedem, locuus and vocem in Parliamentis, publicis
Comitiis et consillis nostris, haeredum and successorum nostrorum infra Regnum
nostrum Angliae inter alios Barons, and Barons, Parliamentorum publicorum
Comitiorum and Conciliorum, Tit (...). Part. 2. cap. 5.
This Right of Barons sitting and voting in Parliament, is specially provided
for in their Patents of Creation, which may be seen at large in Mr. Seldom:
And, as to what relates to our purpose, is contained in these Words, after the
Recital of the Words of Erecting and Creating them and their Heirs-males to the
Name, State, Degree, Style, Dignity, Title and Honor of a Baron, etc. That
they shall be treated, held, and reputed such, etc. and every one of them to
have, hold, and possess, seat, place, and voice in our Parliaments, Public
Conventions and Councils, and of those of our Heirs and Successors, within our
Kingdom of England, amongst other Barons and Barons of our Parliaments, public
Conventions and Councils.

This having been the long used form of the Patents granted by our Protestant
Princes, it is not only an abatement of what the Sovereign intended for their
well-deserving Subjects, and a violating of that peculiar Right, which was
designed to be transmitted to their Posterities, and thereby a degrading of
Roman Catholic Peers of so importent a privilege; but it wrests out of the
Kings hands a Royal Prerogative he has Jure Coronae, to make and create the
Members of that most Honorable House, which is his Supreme Court of
Judicature. The ill Consequences that may follow such Retrenchment, being well
worth serious Reflections; and of the Kings Prerogative, I having occasion
hereafter to treat more largely, shall add no more here, but only hint to you
the Resentments of some Parliaments, when they have wanted their Members, and
close this Head with some short Reflections (which with all due deference to
better Judgments, and those whom it may most immediately concern) I shall only
offer to be considered.

Mat. Paris, p. 885.
Anno 1255. The Earls and Barons absolutely refused the King any assistance, or
answer at all to what he demanded, because all the Barons were not at that time
called according to the Tenure of Magna Charta.

Stat. 1^.114.
So the Acts of the Parliament of the 21th of Rich. 2. and all the proceedings
therein were totally repealed and nulled by the first Parliament of King Henry
the Fourth, because the Lords, who adhered to the King, were summoned by him to
the Parliament, and some of the opposite party imprisoned, impeached, and
unsummoned.

Pryns plea for Lords Stat. 24.
When King Charles the First, sitting the Parliament, confined but one Member,
the Earl of Arundel, the whole House of Lords Remonstrated and petitioned the
King to take off the restraint, and to admit him to sit, and serve the King and
Commonwealth in the great Affairs of that Parliament.

So the Lord Digby, Earl of Bristol being not summoned, the Lords ordered his
Admission to Sit, as his Birthright; 4 Justit. p. 2.
from which he might not be debarred, for want of summons, which ought to have
been sent him ex debito Justitiae, as Sir Edward Coke affirms.

Pryn ut supra, p. 145, 146.
When the same King Charles demanded the Five Members, the Two Houses grew
exceedingly disquieted at it, and would meddle in no other Business, but
adjourned themselves to Guild Hall, London, till the King should give them
satisfaction in discovering the Authors of that Counsel. The stress of whose
Argument in their Messages to the King, Nov. 2. 1642 was, That by that means,
under false pretenses of Crimes, and Accusations, such and so many Members of
both, or either House of Parliament, may be taken at any time, by any person to
serve a turn, and to make a Major part of, whereby the freedom of Parliament
would be destroyed, which, they say, depends in a great part on this
privilege, because without it, the whole Body of Parliaments may be dissolved,
by depriving them of their Members by degrees, some at one time, and others at
another.

Plea for Lords, p. 414.
The same mischiefs which they urged might happen to the Being and Constitution
of Parliaments, by the Kings depriving the House of five Members; may happen
upon the Houses excluding their Members by Vote: against which Mr. Prynn makes
so great an Outcry, and from this unparalleled president (except in the long
Parliament) of expelling Members for their opinion in Religion: Some
Reflections upon the whole.
All Lovers of the so excellently composed Constitution of the Two Houses, may
do well to consider, what an Inlet it will make to the Imitation of the likely
designing Men, when they shall have any Intrigue in hand to expel Members of
other Qualifications.

Qualifications and Recognitions during the Usurpation.
Surely we ought not to forget, how much it prolonged our miserable slavery,
under the Usurpers, when no Members (how duly soever chosen by the Freeholders)
were admitted to sit, unless they were so and so qualified, and made a
Recognition to own the Usurped Government, and to Act nothing contrary to the
Model of it.

I think it no great Commendation in us to be in Love with such a Copy of the
same, tho drawn in Oyl-Colours, and made more lasting and obliging by the
Legality of it.

When Queen Elizabeth was in greatest danger, from Roman Catholics (even while
her Rival lived) she could not be induced to deprive the Roman Catholic Lords
of their places in Parliament.

The ill consequences of Secluding the Bishops.
I think we ought to remember what dismal effects followed the Seclusion of the
Bishops out of the House of Lords; and that upon the Kings Restoration, none
appeared more forward and zealous to have them brought into the House of Lords
again, than the Roman Catholic Peers did, which Action none, I think, will
interpret to have proceeded from their Love to their Religion, but solely to
the tender regard they had to Justice, and the true Constitution of
Parliaments; and if the Bishops and Protestant Lords, had thought fit to have
been as careful of the Birthrights of those few Catholic Lords, that were
Members of their House, in all probability our Religion had been in as little
danger by their stay, as it has been bettered by their expulsion; for they
neither were then, or are like to be so numerous in that House, as to carry any
Vote to overthrow or weaken the Exercise of the Protestant Religion.

What sort of Acts of Parliament least dureable.
It must be owned that Acts of Parliament are to be looked upon as Laws the
Subjects ought to yield all Obedience to: But it is likewise to be considered,
that such Temporary Acts, which upon Emergencies, and to serve a juncture, have
altered any Ancient or Fundamental Constitution of the Government, robbed the
King of any useful Prerogative, or the Subjects of their Birthrights; as
likewise all such as by Revolution of Time have the Causes, for which they were
made, ceasing: have been rarely found conducible to Public Good, or of any
long continuance.

It is true, our present Sovereign was personally excepted from the severity of
these Acts; but it is well known that some great Members of the Houses,
designed to have him presented by the Grand Jury as a Recusant, in order to his
Conviction as a Roman Catholic; and the Judges, for discharging the Jury too
soon (as the designers alleged) whereby an Indictment could not be brought in,
were severely censured by the House of Commons.

This was not all; for the hottest Zealots were for proceeding upon the Statute
against being Converted or Reconciled to the Church of Rome; upon which they
would have grounded an Indictment of Treason. And whoever considers all the
Arguments of the Exclusionists; will find they were bottomed upon the severe
Laws against Papists.

So that if his Royal Brother had been wrought upon to have consented, it had
been easy, by the force of the penal Laws against Roman Catholics, not only to
have deprived our Sovereign of his Right of Succession, but of his life also.

Since therefore it is so evident, that the penal Laws against Roman Catholics
(as they now stand in force) are not only destructive to the Subjects property,
but endanger as much the Rights of Hereditary Princes: In my Judgment the King
has sufficient reason to require their repeal, and all Lovers of our Monarchy
(reflecting upon the hazard his Majesty was in, from them) have reason to use
their utmost endeavors to have such abrogated.

Surely we cannot but reflect how things were pushed on after the credit given
to that perjured Man's Plot. How a traitorous party designed the late Kings
Murder, the overthrow of the Monarchy, or at least the utter secluding of our
Gracious Sovereign, and never rested, till they had formed the Rebellion in
England and Scotland.

So that when we consider how these Laws were obtained, in a time when the
Affrights, Heats and Ferments of the Nation were so great, and the drift of the
Enemies to Monarchy, and the Kings person, were not sufficiently discovered;
and when we consider that those so fair-blown Blossoms, so delicately striped,
with the beautiful Colors of Religion, and Property, and Privileges, were
succeeded by the most poisonous Fruits:

And that those men who pretended so much care of the Protestant Religion,
manifestly designed the Eclipsing at least, if not the overthrow of the Church
of England, by their Bill of Comprehension; whoever, I say, considers these
things deliberately, cannot think the King has any reason to be in Love with
these Acts, which were made so Diametrically opposite to his Regality, and
which would so manacle his hands, that he might have no power to bestow Places
or Offices upon his Catholic Subjects.

Having premised these things in Gross, I shall now proceed to give you some of
the many reasons, why I think the King has just cause to insist upon the
Repeal of these Acts, and all other Sanguinary Laws.

Reasons why the Test ought to be repealed. 1. That it charge the King and
all Catholics with the detestable sin of Idolatry.
First, If there were no other reason why he should earnestly endeavor the
abolishing of them, This one thing seems to me sufficient, in that all his
Subjects, who are capacitated to serve Him, must solemnly declare the King (or
the Church he is in Communion with) Idolaters, than which sin I think no
Christian can be guilty of a greater, except that of the so inexplicable sin
against the Holy Ghost. If I were a Military man, I should be very diffident of
success, or that God would prosper my Arms, while I fought a Princes quarrel
whom I judged an Idolater. And if I did not believe it (as their whole Church
so solemnly denying any properly Divine Worship to be given by them to any but
God, methinks should hinder me) and yet were obliged so solemnly to declare it,
I should think I scandalized my Prince in the highest degree, mocked God, and
gave a lie to my Conscience: So that however useful it might be to deter
persons of the Roman Faith from taking it, and so to incapacitate them; yet I
cannot see how a Catholic Prince can countenance or need it: And how either the
King himself, or his Catholic Subjects can digest such public avowing them
Idolaters, I leave to any rational man to judge: And especially the King,
being, I doubt not, thoroughly convinced in his own Conscience, that he is no
Idolater (for I think gestures only, without some kind of intention of paying
Divine Honor to something that is not God, will not make a person guilty of
that damnable sin) It cannot but concern him in Conscience to prevent, as much
as in him lies, his Subjects averring so scandalous an untruth (in his
Majesty's own belief at least) and which assertion carries with it another ill
consequence, that every one is not aware of: For the Ordination of our Bishops
coming from the Church of Rome, if that be Idolatrous, it is no more a Church
of Christ, but a Synagogue of Satan: And if it be no Damage, I am sure it is no
Credit to derive a succession from it.

Secondly, That one great end of the Test now cease.
Another reason against the Test may be, that now there is no use of the direct
intendment of the Act; because the end for which in great part it was made, is
now obsolete, and totally cease: which I hope will be clear to them that
consider, that the power of the Militia, and the disposing either directly or
indirectly of all the places of Service and Trust, are in the King: So that
though it was but rational, that those persons, to whom Protestant Kings
committed Arms and Offices, should be assured of them in fidelity, (which the
being of the same Religion induces a Prince to confide more in) lest their
Persons or Government might be in danger from any armed with power, that were
Catholics: So that it was but consentaneous to the Sovereign Power, in disposal
of the Militia and Offices, that a Protestant Prince might refuse to be served
by Catholics: and lest any such might get into Employments, he might be willing
to consent to the most effectual discriminating Test that could be invented to
debar them.

But now the King is secure from any apprehensions of the least danger to his
Person and Government from Catholics, and can have no more doubt of the
Allegiance of Catholics (without such Oaths or Declarations) than a Protestant
Prince could have of his Protestant Subjects under the engagement of those
Oaths.

Here we may en passant observe a considerable difference betwixt the method of
our King, and those of former times. Now we repine, and are greatly alarmed,
as if all were lost, because here and there a Catholic Officer is
Commissionated: whereas the King imploys treble the number (yea some say, Ten
Officers that are Protestants, for one Catholic) and the Soldiers are generally
Protestants; whereas before, not one Known Catholic was capable of any
Employment: We might have indeed some reason to murmur and repine, if the King
should commissionate none but Catholics, yet that would be but Lex Talionis,
turning the Tables.

Therefore since he has the power of dispencing with that Law, as appears by
the Sentence in the King's Bench, we have reason to be thankful to the King,
for the distribution of his favors so liberally to Protestants, which has
been so long denied to Unfortunate Catholics; who, if their Religion did not
incapacitate them, as Englishmen, Fellow Subjects, and Gentlemen, are as fit
for all sorts of Employment as Protestants: And I doubt not but now that they
are employed, will as Bravely, Honorably, and Circumspectly discover their
abilities, and, I hope, will keep so good a correspondence with Loyal
Protestants, that are their Fellow Servants to so great a Master, that the King
may at least have that satisfaction, that he can unite them in a Camp, which he
cannot do in a Church; and show his great wisdom in Government, that he can be
faithfully and effectually served by all his Subjects of different Religious
Interests: And though the endeavors of several to explicate the Roman Catholic
Religion more approachingly to the sentiments of Protestants, have not as yet
had that effect they wished, yet it may be useful to let us see, that in
affairs of State and Government, such an intercourse and mixture may be, as
former Ages have not known; and by the Conduct of our Gracious and Wise King,
may be laid a foundation for better accord in future times, that we may not be
at such feuds among our selves.

It is true, that under a Protestant King, there might be some reason to
maintain the Protestant Church, so as it might neither be endangered by the
Roman Catholics, or Protestant Dissenters, and by Sanguinary Laws (tho rarely
put in use) people might be deterred from being of any other Communion; yet we
cannot think that the same measures can be taken now, such circumstances
varying the methods of proceeding; and in Government and Politics new
Emergencies may, yea must, render old Axioms obsolete.

Hence we take notice how imprudent these Informers are, who in our King's
Reign, (more out of pretense and impotent zeal, than for any good concern to
the Church of England) tempt the Justices, and instigate them to prosecute
Catholics, by binding them to Sessions and Assizes; for what can be expected
from this, but it will exasperate the King, and discover how desirous these are
to persecute them, tho they know he will pardon the Transgression, in as much
as it relates to himself.

Thirdly, It is against the Kings Prerogative.
Having thus far treated of the Natural and Religious Grounds the King has to
demand to have the Act repealed; I come now to the politic and more necessary
part, as it relates to the legal constitution of the Government, which, by this
Act of the Test, suffers a great alteration in the abridging the King of an
undoubted Prerogative of the Crown.

For the illustrating of which, I shall first give you the opinion of the most
Celebrated Writers of the English Laws, of what nature the Kings Prerogative in
general is. Secondly, That the Leigance of the Subject to his Sovereign, is
judged among the principal Prerogatives of the King. Thirdly, How tender our
English Ancestors have been of the Royal Prerogative. Fourthly, That the Test
deprives the King of the Leigance, and of that Fundamental Prerogative of
having the service of his Subjects. And, Lastly, Conclude with some Inferences
from these Considerations.

The nature of the Kings Prerogative.
As to the first, L. 1. Instit. 90.
Sr. Edward Coke says the Prerogative extends to all Power, Pre-eminence and
Privilege which the Law gives to the Crown. Lib. 1.
Bracton calls it in one place the Liberty, in another the Privilege of the
King. Fol. 47.
Bretton (following the Weston 1. c. 50.
Statute) calls it Droyt le Roy, and the 61.
Register styles it the Kings Right, and the Royal Right of the Crown.

My Lord 2 Instit. 84.
Coke says, the Prerogative of the King is given him by the Common Law, and is
part of the Law of the Realm. Prerog. c. 1.
Stanford says the Prerogative has its Being from the Common Law, and the
Statutes are but declarative. Properly speaking, the Prerogatives of the Crown
are such powers as the Kings of England have reserved to themselves, as most
necessary for the support of their Dignity, and the Government.

Therefore Rus^w. Collect. 555.
Sr. John Banks in his argument about Ship-mony, affirms that the Jura Summae
Majestatis, which are the Prerogatives, are given to the person of the King by
the Common Law, and the Supreme Dominion is inherent in his Person.

Another judicious Mr. White Majestas Intemerata. p. 30.
Lawyer, out of the Authorities he there cites, says, The Prerogative is
inseparable from his Person, not grantable over, it is always stuck upon the
King or Crown, and being inherent to the Majesty of a King, and part of the
matter of that Majesty, is no more grantable, than the Majesty it self, or a
Royal member of the Imperial Style. These are the Characters given to the Kings
Prerogative in general.

^. The Subjects (...) the Crown.
Let us now in the second place consider, that among the Prerogatives of the
Crown, It has been always accounted one of the eminentest, principal, and
fundamental ones, that the King, and none but he, may at his own pleasure
command the service of all, and every his Subjects in his Wars, and other
Ministerial Offices, which they are bound to, by their Natural Allegiance.

Hence 2 Instit. 128.
Sr. Edward Coke styles Leigeance the highest and greatest obligation of Duty
and Obedience that can be, and defines it The true and faithful obedience of a
Liege man to his Liege Lord or Sovereign, and so calls it Vinculum Fidei, and
Leges essentia.
The Ligement or bond of Faith, and the essence of the Law, and in 7 Rep. p. 9.
amittit Regnum sed non Regem, amittit Patriam sed non Patrem Patrie.
another place he affirms, That it is not in the power of any Subject to
dissolve this Obligation, saying, That he that abjures the Realm, may loose the
Kingdom, but not the King, may loose his Country, but not the Father of his
Country; agreeable to what another eminent Dyer. fol. 300.
Lawyer asserts, That none can divest himself of his Country, in which he is
born, nor abjure his due Allegiance, nemo patriam qua natus est exuere, nec
ligeanciam debitam ejurare potest.

In Calvin's Case the famous 7 Rep. p. 4.
Chief Justice says, That Liegeance and Obedience is an Incident inseparable
to every Subject: For as soon as he is born, he owes by Birthright, Liegiance
and Obedience to his Sovereign, therefore in several Acts of 14 H. 8.61. 43 H.
8. c. 3.
Parliament, the King is called The liege and natural liege Lord of his
Subjects, and his people, natural liege Subjects. So that the liegiance is due
to the natural person of the King, by the Law of Nature, which is immutable; is
part of the Law of England; and was before judicial and municipal Laws, as the
same great Author affirms.

Long before him Lib. 1. Stanford Plea 54.
Bracton says, That things which are annexed to justice and peace, belong to
none but the Crown, and dignity Royal, nor can they be separated from the
Crown, for they make the Crown.

It is a known maxim in Law, says the learned Coke Report 7, p. 7. ex Stat.
11. H. 7. c. 1. 2 Eliz c. 2
Judge, that every Subject is bound to defend the King, and to go with the
King, and to serve in his Wars, as well without, as within the Realm.

The Liegeance to the Prince, says a singularly well read Majestas Intemerata.
Lawyer, is immutable, and absolute, in all places: It obliges in all ubi's,
and the liege man ought in duty of this faith, to perform to his Lord the
Offices of a Subject, when ever he shall need his assistance, against all who
mori possunt aut vivere, can die or live.

This is clear by Law and Reason. In the 48 Claus 48. H. 3. M. 3. Tam militi^e
quam liberi homines and omnes alii ad defensionem Regis tenentur.
H. 3. the words of the Law are, That the Knights and Free-tenants, and all
others were obliged to the defense of the King: And so 12 E. 3. All and every
single person are bound to defend the King.

Thence it was, that a 4 Instit. 7. In ^^ri^^lo Hestium suorum.
Parliament judged it High Treason in Nicholas Segrave, that he withdrew
himself from the Kings Host, leaving the King in danger of his Enemies.

The ground of all which is what Lib. 2. c. 1.
Bracton so long since has noted, that to receive Justice and Protection, are
the greatest benefits of this Life, and there can be no use of Com. 3.5.
Rulers without these Attributes; for if the Sovereign be abridged Roll. Eritt.
234.
of the Prerogative to exact Obedience and Liegiance from his Subjects, he has
but a small portion of the Sovereignty; indeed his Kingship must be precarious,
as depending only on the good Nature of his Subjects.

Thence the Attorney Pusw. Col cer. (...). 552,
General in the Argument of Ship Money says, The King (as Head of the Politic
Body) is furnished with entire Power and Jurisdiction, not only to minister
Justice in Causes Ecclesiastical and Temporal unto his People, but likewise for
defense both of the one and of the other: Whence the Clause inserted in the
Register, Ad providendam Salvationem Regis.

Bracton 2 Lib. 1. fol. 6.
says, The Life and Members of every Subject are in the Power of the King: And
a Pasch. 19 E. 1. Roll. 36. North.
Record says, Vita and membra sunt in manu Regis; both which are understood,
that the King has sole Power to command their Service in his Wars, or
otherwise as he has occasion.

The Lord Chief Instit. 149. West. 2.39. 1 R. 3. p. 2. c. 15. Roll. Brit. 85.
Justice says, That if any Privy Councellor, or other, cause one to enter into
an obligation to serve the King, it is void; every man being bound to serve him
without it, and such Writings are declared dishonorable; being every man is
bound to defend the King and his Realm, and to do the service that appertains
to him as his Liege Lord.

The King Com. pl. 316.
is styled the Sovereign and Chief Captain of Arms, all Power is his, no man
may use Arms, so much as in Turnament, Tilt, etc. without the Kings License:
The Roll. Parl. 5 H. 4. No 24.
Statute of Array is full in this, though not printed.

This is further illustrated in that, if a Sheriff return that he is resisted
in serving the Kings Writ; it is declared not to be good, because it redounds
to the Kings dishonor, being presumed the King can command every one to obey:
and the Sheriff has Authority from him to raise the Posse Commitatus.

In former Ages, the Kings absolute Power in disposing the Militia, was never
disputed. It was the black or bloody Parliament only, that assumed to
themselves coordinate Power, and challenged the Power of ordering the Militia,
for preserving the Kingdom, without and against the Kings consent; which
occasioned the first Parliament of King Charles the Second to declare in the
preamble of the Act 13 Car. 2. c. 6. 14 Car. 2. c. 3.
That it is, and ever was the Kings Prerogative alone to dispose of the Militia
of the Nation, to make War and Peace, League and Truce, to grant safe Conduct
without the Parliament; and that he may Issue out Commissions of Lieutenancy,
impowering them to form into Regiments, and employ them as well within their
own, as other Countries, as the King shall direct.

Since the taking away Tenures, it is true, the Method of raising Men has been
something altered; but before the imposing of the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, and now this Test, we find no qualifications of the persons
required, but that they should be habiles Corporis, of able Bodies, sit to
serve the King and Country: And tho this Test does not totally deprive the King
of the service of his Subjects; yet it diminishes his Authority, and takes
away the corporal Service of a considerable number of his Liege people.

Thirdly. Hew careful our Ancestors have been to preserve the Prerogatives.
I now pass to the third particular, in which I shall in some few instances show
how careful the Houses of Parliament have been in preserving inviolable the
Prerogative of the Crown; or when by any pressing emergency they have been
invaded, that the Judges have determined that the Kings of England might by a
special non obstante dispense with the penalty of them.

This Question about the Test being wholly new, and such a weakening of the
Prerogative as has not been known in our Ancestors days, you cannot expect any
clear discission of it in the Books of the Law. All one can do in such a case,
is only to produce some Maxims, Presidents, or parallel Cases that may affect
it most, which without the help of any ones Collections, as having never
perused any of the Arguments in Sir Edward Hales Case, I shall out of my own
small reading offer these following to your consideration.

The Attorney Rushworth's Collect, 578.
General affirms, That an Act of Parliament does not extend to take away the
Common Right of the Crown, and says, That has been the exposition of the
Judges, of Acts of Parliament that have done so. He instanceth in the Magna
Charta, of King John's 17o Regni, where it is said, That no Scutage or Aid
should be without assent of Parliament: So that in this there was no exception
of an Aid to Knight the Kings Eldest Son, or marry his Eldest Daughter; yet it
was resolved in this case, that by that Charter those Aids were not abolished,
they being due by the Law of the Land, and so it was declared, 25 E. 1. cap. 1.

We find an Ancient Statute in King Westons. c. 50. 2 Instit. 263.
Edward the First's time, wherein the King speaks thus, That he bad done this
for the Honor of God, the Honor of the Church, for the Commonweal, and for
the remedy, disburthening and ease of them that be grieved; yet this should not
be prejudicial to him, or to his Crown, but that the Right, which to him
appertains, should be saved: Which Sir Edward Coke calls the Kings Right of
his Crown and Prerogative.

It is declared by the Lords and Commons in full Re^l. Parliament. 43 Ed. 3.
No. 7.
Parliament, upon demand by the King, That they would not assent to any thing
in Parliament that tended to the disinhereson of the King and the Crown,
whereto they were sworn.

This makes the Chief 4 Iucti^. 51.
Justice censure as a great fault the omission in the printed Statute of 2 R.
2. in confirmation of Liberties these Words, Saving to the King his Regality,
which are found in the Parliament Roll. Parlam. 2 R. 2. Stat. 2. cap. 4.
Roll.

A Lawyer Davis Reports 86.
of no small esteem says, The Commons of England have ever been exemplary for
the tenderness of the Kings Honor, and the maintenance of the Sovereignty: But
this was before they meddled so much with Articles of Religion.

So in latter times 3o Car. 1. both Houses declared, upon passing the Petition
of Right, that they have neither intention nor power to hurt the Kings
Prerogatives.

Thus far as to the regard our Ancestors have had to the Royal Prerogative. Now
I shall in a few particulars show the resolutions of the Judges, in such Cases,
when Acts of Parliament have entrenched upon them.

In the 13th of 4 Institu. 42. How the Judges have resolved upon Acts of
Parliament that Insringe the Preregative.
Richard the Second. Stat. 2. cap. 1. it was enacted, That no Charter of
Pardon, unless so and so qualified, should be from thenceforth allowed by the
Justices for Murder, Treason or Rape, and if it were otherwise, the Charter to
be disallowed: Yet my Lord Coke says, This did not bind the King, the granting
of Pardon being the Kings Prerogative, incident solely and inseperably to the
Person of the King.

The same Richard the Second bequeathed Ibid.
certain Treasuries to his Successor, on condition to observe the Acts made the
21 Reg. This was held unjust and unlawful, for that it restrained the Sovereign
Liberty of the King his Successor. And the same Reason, says a judicious
Majestas Intemorata.
Lawyer, may serve to overthrow a Statute, which shall unjustly and unlawfully
restrain the same Sovereign: Nor had, says he, this bequest been of more
strength, had it been enacted by Parliament; Injustice being Injustice, and
Unlawfulness Unlawfulness every where.

It was Cokes Report. 12. p. 14.
enacted 23 H. 6. That no man should serve the King as Sheriff in any County
above one year, but the Grant should be void, the person accepting it, pay two
hundred pound; and it was expressly provided, that the King by a non obstante
should not dispense with it. Yet it was agreed 2 H. 7. against the express
provision of that Act, That the King may, by a special non obstante, dispense
with the Act, because no Act could debar the King from the service of his
Subjects, which the Law of Nature did give unto him.

In the 37 H. 6. it was Ibid. p. 18.
enacted, That none should be Justice of Assize, etc. in the County where he
was born, or did inhabit: Yet, says the same judicious Lawyer, the King with a
special non obstante may dispense with it, and gives the reason; for that it
belongs to the inseparable Prerogative of the King, viz. his power to command
to serve.

The same Ibid. p. 18.
Lord Chief Justice, in the same report, is more express, and as full as if he
had foreseen this present Case of ours, where he affirms, That no Act can bind
the King from any Prerogative, which is sole and inseparable to his person; but
that he may dispense with it by a non obstante, and instanceth in the Sovereign
Power to command any of his Subjects to serve him for the Public Weal. For
this, says he, is solely and inseperably annexed to his Person, and this Royal
Power cannot be restrained, continues he, neither in Thesi nor Hypothesi, but
that the King by his Royal Prerogative may dispense with it: For all which he
gives this most unanswerable reason, because upon the Commandment of the King,
and Obedience of the Subject, does the Government subsist.

I might add very many more Authorities, as Edw. the Thirds repealing an Act of
Parliament by Proclamation, as consented to upon necessity: But I shall leave
that to those whose Province it is, and close this Head with one Observation.

We are all commendably and justly tender of the preserving the Liberties and
Enfranchisments we enjoy, by the gracious Condescentions of our Princes, and
are vigorous maintainers of our Properties; and ought we not to own, that there
is as good reason, that the Kings of England should be as solicitous to
preserve their Prerogatives which are their right? For as a most judicious
Quicquid in Regalibus est Ita est Principibus privatum ut Subditis quod suum
est. Seldom prefat. Mare Clausum.
Antiquary and Lawyer expresses, Whatsoever belongs to the Kings Royalty, he
has as much Propriety in it, as the Subject has in any thing that is his.

We must likewise consider, that the King is as much sworn to preserve the
Right of his Crown, as the Liberties of the People: Therefore we find that
branch in Majestatis Intemerata.
some Coronation Oaths, that the King swears he shall keep all the Lands,
Honors, and Dignities of the Crown, righteous and free, in all manner whole,
without any manner of minishment: And the rights of the Crown, hurt, decay or
lost, to his power shall call again into the Ancient Estate. Therefore my Lord
12 Rep. 18
Coke praises King Henry the Second, in that he was a great Defender and
Maintainer of the Rights of the Crown.

Inferences from the premises.
Having dispatched these Heads, I now come to the application of them, to the
Test, which, as the Case now is, and ever will be so long as it stands
unrepealed, deprives the King of the Allegiance of such of his Subjects, as
either Conscientiously or Designedly refuse the taking of the Oaths, and
affirming the Declaration enjoined. The Inconveniency of which is double:
First, In robbing the King of so necessary and fundamental a Right over his
Subjects, in commanding them to serve him in Offices Military and Civil,
without which he is but a very Impotent Sovereign, and cannot exert that
necessary Justice of Protecting, Rewarding and Employing his Subjects, which
surely is not only much to the dishonor of the Sovereign, but an unsufferable
restraint, And if 31 Eliz. c. 4.
Imbezelling Purloyning, and Conveying away the Arms, Ordnance, Munition, Shot,
Powder, Habiliments of War, etc. is declared Felony; what sort of Crime shall
it be in any to withdraw himself from the Allegiance and Duty to his Sovereign,
to serve him personally when he commands it?

This leads me to the Second, viz. the Subjects part, for this puts the Subject
in a state and condition either of disability, or denying to serve his
Sovereign at his pleasure: for those who are Roman Catholics cannot, while
such, take the Oaths and make the Declaration, they being so penned, that none
of that Faith can own them without renouncing their Church; the Act containing
nothing in its own Nature essential to Obedience, but only controverted points
of Faith.

So, many others who are not willing to serve the King in Military and Civil
Employments, by pretext, that they cannot with a safe Conscience take the
Oaths, etc. Instantly obtain a Dispensation from their Allegiance, which ought
to be absolute and unconditionate, and whatever may be the case of some few,
may be of many; and consequently a Prince may be deprived of the necessary Aid
of his Subjects, even when any Rebellion or Invasion should happen; for tho the
King be willing to dispense with their not taking those Oaths; etc. Yet they
may insist upon the penalty which they may pretend they cannot be secured from.

Contra Hostem publicum quilibet homo est miles, against a public Enemy every
man ought to be a Soldier, and so it cannot be the intent of the Law, that the
King should be deprived of his Right to arm whom he pleases and can confide
in, in such a Conjuncture; but only it was designed to hinder Catholics from
being Commissionated and Employed in times of Peace.



I remember my Lord Coke, speaking of the statute 11 H. 7. says, It has a
flattering preamble, pretending to avoid many mischiefs, yet it was found that
by color of it, Empson and Dudley, did many enormous things; therefore he
observes that, When any Maxim, or Fundamental Law of the Realm is altered, it
is incredible to foresee what dangerous mischiefs follow.

It becomes therefore all Lovers of the Monarchy of England, to be very careful
to consider the dangerous consequences of taking out, or undermining any Corner
Stone of that Royal Fabric, and in this particular case to deliberate well of
the dangerous sequels of such Laws as limit the Sovereign to use only persons
so and so qualified.

For by the same president, we cannot tell, if a Prince should succeed that
shall be a Calvinist, or of any other persuasion opposite to the Church of
England, and obtain a Parliament to his purpose, but that he may make
renouncing of the Episcopal Government, or the Church of England, a condition
absolutely necessary to capacitate any to serve in any public Employment, and
then we should find too late how cautious our Ancestors ought to have been to
consider consequences of things.

We have a fresh instance of this in the Kings Supremacy: which Act being
purposely designed to abridge the Popes power here in matters Ecclesiastical,
has heightened so much the Kings Power above what the Pope, or any other
Ecclesiastical Court ever had; that now the Church of England finds how much
they are at the Kings pleasure, and must necessarily rely more upon the Kings
clemency, than upon any security they are in, by that Act: So that if some men
had considered the extent of this, it is probable they would have acted with
more caution and observance.

SECT. XIV. Concerning the Sanguinary and Penal Laws against Roman Catholics.
BEfore I proceed further, I think it necessary to speak something to the
Sanguinary and Penal Laws against Roman Catholics; made upon the rejecting the
Pope's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters, and for securing the Sovereigns
that were Protestants, and the Religion established since the Reformation.

For the clear illustrating of which, I shall, 1st. Show what the Principal of
those Laws were. 2ly. The grounds and reasons why they were made. And, 3ly.
Show that as to the security of the Civil Government, the ends for which they
were made, now cease; and then proceed to lay down the Inconveniences that will
attend the not repealing of them.

An Abridgement of the Penal Laws.
As to the first, In the 35 H. 8. c. 1. A Statute was made, wherein it is
declared Treason in any who refuse to take the Oath (commonly called of the
Supremacy of H. 8. to distinguish it from that of Queen Elizabeth.) The persons
there appointed to take it, are to swear, that, Neither the Sea nor the Bishop
of Rome, nor any foreign Potestate, has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction,
Power, or Authority within the Realm, etc.

1 Eliz.
That of Queen Elizabeth appoints all to swear, that, No foreign Prince, Person,
Prelate, State, or Potentate, has, or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Prehemenency, or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within
the Realm: And in the 5th. of the Queen, the refusers to take it, are guilty of
a Praemunire. And in the former Statute, No man shall by Writing, Printing,
Teaching, Preaching, etc. maintain, or defend the Authority, Preheminency,
Power, or Jurisdiction, Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, of any foreign Prince,
Prelate, Person, State, or Potentate, which was heretofore claimed, etc. within
this Realm, for the third offense shall suffer as a Traitor.

Anno 13 Eliz. cap. 2. It was Enacted, That if any person use or put in use,
any Bull, Writing, or Instrument Written, or Printed, of Absolution or
Reconciliation; or if any shall take upon them by color of any such Bull,
Writing, etc. to Absolve or Reconcile, any Person or Persons, or promise such
Absolution, or Reconciliation, it shall be judged High Treason.

So, bringing of Agnus Dei's, Crosses, Pictures, Beads, or such like vain and
superstitious things from the Bishop or See of Rome, or any authorized, or
claiming Authority from the Bishop or See of Rome, to Consecrate or Hallow the
same, shall be guilty of a Praemunire.

27 Eliz. c. 2. All Jesuits, Seminary Priests, or other such Priests, Deacons
or Religious, or Ecclesiastical Persons whatsoever, born within the Queens
Dominions made, ordained, or professed, by any Authority, or Jurisdicton,
derived, challenged or pretended from the Sea of Rome ( unless upon some
occasions allowed by the Act) that shall be known to come into, or remain in
the Realm or Dominions, shall suffer, lose, and forfeit as in case of Treason:
Also all such as shall willingly, and wilfully receive, relieve, comfort, aid,
or maintain any such (being at liberty and out of Prison) shall be adjudged
Fellons.

Likewise to give or contribute any money, or other relief, to such out of the
Dominion, or for maintenance of any College of Jesuits or Seminary Priests,
shall incur the penalty of Praemunire.

I need not mention the severe Laws of that Queen against convict Lay
Recusants: As confining them within five miles of their Habitation, and the
poorer sort that had none, to Prisons, or other Restraints; and to the end that
the Realm be not pestred and overcharged with the multitude of such seditious
and dangerous people, they must abjure the Realm.

King James the 1st 1o Reg. c. 4. Confirms all the Laws of Queen Elizabeth
against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, etc. and enjoins the taking of the Oath of
Obedience, commonly called Allegiance, which was more directly to oblige to
Fidelity, than in point of Faith, and only enjoined to repair to Church, and
continue there during the time of Divine Service, and not to send any to
Seminaries beyond Seas.

Cap. 4.
But in the third of his Reign, when the Gunpowder Treason was discovered, the
Laws were made more severe, that If any shall put in practice to absolve,
persuade, or withdraw any of the subjects of the King, or of his Heirs from
their Natural Obedience to his Majesty, his Heirs, or Successors, or to
reconcile them to the Pope or See of Rome, it shall be High Treason, and those
that are willingly absolved or withdrawn, as aforesaid, or willingly
reconciled, shall be adjudged Traitors.

^. 5.
At the same Parliament it was enacted, that Recusants should not come to the
Court, that they should depart from London, be confined within five miles of
their Habitations: Convict Recusants should be as Excommunicate Persons, made
incapable of most Offices Civil, or Military, of practicing Law, Physic, etc.
Which no doubt gave rise to the Test, and which in its full extent was never
put in use, and has been connived at, or dispensed with, under Protestant
Princes ever since. Likewise under several penalties they were to Marry,
Baptize, and Bury according to the Laws of the Realm.

The grounds of these Laws.
Now if we enquire into the grounds of all these Laws, we shall find them
expressed in the several Acts, as in that of the 35o of H. 8. it is said to be
made in Corroboration of that made in the 28th of the same King, To exclude the
long usurped Power, Authority, and Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome.

That of the first of Queen Elizabeth, is to the intent, That all usurped and
foreign Power, and Authority, Spiritual and Temporal, may for ever be clearly
extinguished, and never to be used or obeyed within this Realm, etc.

In the 5th of the same Queens Reign the grounds are expressed, For the
avoiding both of such hurts, perils, dishonours, and inconveniences, as have
before time befallen, as well to the Queens Majesty's Noble Progenitors, Kings
of this Realm, as for the whole estate thereof, by means of the Jurisdiction
and Power of the Sea of Rome, unjustly claimed and usurped within this Realm,
as also of the dangers by the fautors of the said usurped Power at this time
grown to marvelous outrage, and licentious boldness, and now requiring more
sharp restraint and correction of Laws, etc.

(...)
The Reasons for the passing the Act of the 13th of the same Queen, is more
full, viz. That diverse seditious and very evil disposed people, minding not
only to bring the Realm and the Imperial Crown thereof (being indeed of it self
most free) into the Thraldom and Subjection, of that Foreign, Usurped, and
Unlawful Jurisdiction, Preheminency and Authority claimed by the Sea of Rome,
but also to estrange, and alienate the minds and hearts of sundry her Majesty's
Subjects from their dutiful Obedience, and to raise and stir Sedition, and
Rebellion, within this Realm, and so mentions the Pope's Bull to absolve and
reconcile all those that will be contented to forsake their due obedience,
whereby has grown great disobedience and boldness in many, not only to
withdraw, and absent themselves from all Divine Service, now most Godly set
forth and used in this Realm, but also have thought themselves discharged of,
and from all obedience, duty and allegiance to her Majesty, whereby most wicked
and unnatural Rebellion has insued, and to the further danger of this Realm
for hereafter very like to be renewed, if the ungodly and wicked attempts in
that behalf be not by severity of Laws restrained and bridled.

Cap. 2.
The 27th of the same Queen lays no stress upon Religion, but only on the
security of the State, although it was the first Act that prohibited Jesuits and
Priests to come over and stay here, under penalty of Treason, without whose
Offices, the Roman Catholics could no ways exercise their Religion: The grounds
in that Act are expressed, That of late Jesuits, Priests, etc. have come and
been sent into the Realm, etc. of purpose, not only to withdraw her Highness
Subjects from their due obedience to her Majesty; but also to stir up and move
Sedition, Rebellion, and open Hostility within the same, etc.

Cap. 2.
The Act of the 35o of that Queen expresses, that For the better discovery, and
avoiding of such traitorous and most dangerous conspiracies and attempts, as
are daily devised and practiced against the Queen by sundry wicked and
seditious persons, who terming themselves Catholics, and being indeed Spies and
Intelligencers, etc. hiding their Detestable and Devilish Purposes, under a
false pretext of Religion and Conscience, etc.

Cap. 4.
In the Act of the first of King James the first, the grounds are, For the
better and more due execution of the Statutes heretofore made against Jesuits,
Seminary Priests, and other such like Priests, as also against all manner of
Recusants, be it ordained, etc.

The third of the same King expresses the Reasons thus; For as much as it is
found by daily experience, that many his Majesty's Subjects that adhere in
their hearts to the Popish Religion, by the Infection drawn from thence, by the
wicked and devilish counsels of Jesuits, Seminaries, and other like Persons
dangerous to the Church and State; are so^ far perverted in their Loyalties and
due Allegiance unto the Kings Majesty, and the Crown of England, as they are
ready to entertain and execute any treasonable conspiracies and practices, as
evidently appears by that more than barbarous and horrible attempt to have
blown up with Gunpowder the King, etc.

Having thus given a short draught of the severe Laws against Roman Catholics,
and the Reasons and Grounds of them: It is obvious, that those for the
Supremacy were enacted principally to exclude the Popes Authority in Matters
Ecclesiastical, which opposed King Henry the Eighth's Divorce, and the
Reformation of the Religion begun: So that a Subject in point of Conscience,
and mere Matter of Faith, that could not be induced to believe a King and
Prince capable of being Head of the Church; but shall be invincibly persuaded
(how erroneous soever) that the Pope is St. Peter's Successor, and Christ's
unquestioned Vicar upon Earth, and cannot, without hazard of his Soul, consent
to acknowledge otherwise; yet not withstanding (by those Laws) this invincible
persuasion, without any other Crime, is interpreted High Treason, and punished
as such; and Sir Thomas More Lord Chancellor, the Bishop of Rochester, and
others, suffered death upon that account.

In others of them, not only Priests, for receiving Orders according to the
Rites of the Church of Rome, and coming over to Exercise the Office of their
Function, but such as were converted to the Romish Faith, or Reconciled, were
involved in the Crime of Felony or Treason, without lifting an hand, uttering a
Word, or imagining the least disloyal thought against the peace of the Nation,
where they were Subjects.

First consideration how the grounds of those severities now cease.
Therefore first it must be considered, that since some of these Laws were made
in the tender Age of the Reformation, when our Princes were very careful, that
it might not be overlaid in its Swathing Clothes: but now it is at a manly and
masterly growth and back-set with so numerous a Progeny and powerful Abettors,
that it can plead a prescription and possession sufficient to maintain it self
by Argument and Vote. Therefore we cannot now judge such severe Laws so
necessary: there being no such danger of the Popes exercising any other
Supremacy here, than what is purely spiritual, over those of that Communion, in
the Divine Offices of their Religion, without having any power to dispose of
any Benefices, endow Religious Houses, or establish any Religious Polity over
the Protestant Subjects: And as to any Temporal Jurisdiction, it is impossible
he should receive any thing of that, which has been so strenuously opposed,
even while the whole Nation, in Spirituals, submitted to the Doctrine and
Discipline of that Church: and I think all may be well satisfied, that our King
is no ways disposed to quit any of his Royal Prerogatives, or subject his Crown
to any other Potentate upon Earth.

The second Reason.
Secondly, It ought to be remembered, that in Queen Elizabeth's time, there grew
a strong Faction in the State, by reason of the doubtful legitimacy of that
Queen, as being by the Pope, and all Roman Catholics looked upon as born out of
lawful Wedlock, (her Fathers Wife Queen Catherine being then alive, and her
Mother married to the King, before a legal Divorce, according to the
Ecclesiastical Laws then in force) which occasioned the Roman Catholics here,
to be great Favorers and Abetters of Mary Queen of Scots; so that there was a
political necessity in Queen Elizabeth, and those that adhered to her, (and
upon that account were desirous to preserve the Protestant Religion she
embraced) with all the Art and Industry they could, by the severest Laws, to
secure the one and the other; and by reason of several Attempts, Insurrections,
and Foreign oppositions, the unfortunate Queen of Scots was put to death, for
the safety of that Queen, which the Politicians of that Age thought could never
be, as long as her Ryval lived.

Therefore we must look upon those Laws as made mostly for the security of the
Sovereignty against Roman Catholics, who, as such, were adjudged the greatest
Enemies to it: So that if we consider the times when, and the persons upon whom
the bloodiest Laws were executed; we shall find that they were principally, (if
not only) when the State was either in real or imaginary danger from such:
Whence it was, that the great Statesman, the Lord Burleigh, published that
Discourse, That Papists were not put to death here for their Religion, but for
their Treasons: Tho whoever considers how the security of the State and of the
Religion was interwoven; will find it requires a subtle head to separate them.

The grounds of them now cease.
However the Case is now wholly altered, the Succession of our King is not in
the least disputable by Roman Catholics or Protestants; so that there can be no
ground to keep up those in force, for any other end, than the securing the
Protestant Religion only: So that we must invalidate all my Lord Burleighs
Arguments, and bottom all our reasoning upon Religion, if we plead for those
Laws, which cannot fully be justified, but by avowing of that position, so much
exploded by the Church of England, that Dominion is founded in Grace: which
dangerous Doctrine, if it were once yielded, no Prince could be safe from those
that would allege (and were powerful enough to prove it) that a Prince was not
as holy as they, or of their Society; and where punishments, of the severer
kinds, are inflicted for different modes of Worship (where neither Immorality,
Sedition, or Treason deserve it, or it is not done with due reference to the
peace and tranquillity of the State) we must ground them on the same Principle,
that because such, and such, are not Believers of the true Faith (which the
present Rulers would infer they only had) must be cut off, or punished, as
Malefactors: Whereas it seems much more agreeable to Christian Moderation, and
the Rules of true Policy, that where any Church is legally settled, the care of
preventing mischiefs should be left to the Government, which no doubt would
provide redress by suppressing Sedition, whereby none but such as were
Factious, Turbulent, and endanger the peace of the Government, might be under
any pressure, or forced to withdraw their effects, and forsake their Country,
or to live in obscurity and reservedness, as people under the hatches: all
which do manifestly impoverish a Country. However in our case it seems an
unbecoming distrust of the intrinsic goodness of our Religion, or the strength
of our Arguments for it, when it must be defended by Club-law: And since we are
out of all danger of Roman Priests Trafficking for Foreign Invasions (as when
the severe Laws were made, the State was apprehensive of) or of plotting and
contriving against the King and Government; It is too great an Argument, that
the refusing to take off the penal Laws, and that we do not acquiesce and yield
to the moderate desire of so gracious a King, is more out of an inclination to
gratify Humor, and Contention, than for any other Cause. It being sufficient
that if ever such a time should occurr, wherein the State should be endangered
by Roman Catholics, the severities might be reinforced.

When therefore we consider, that the sanguinary and penal Laws now in being,
are severe to the utmost extremity: When a Turk or a Jew (not to mention other
professions more turbulent in a State) are not under any such impending Lash:
And consider what an after reckoning they may undergo, so that (the Laws
standing) not only Priests, and new Converts, but most of the old hereditary
Roman Catholics must be forced to flee, or abscond themselves. And as to the
Test, however the King may, for his time, dispense with the taking of it, and
grant Pardons to, and Indempnifie the not-takers of it, toties quoties; yet who
ever shall act after the very last Pardon, may be informed against under the
next Protestant Successor; and then it may be doubtful, whether the Kings
dispensing Power will be allowed or not.

I say, if there were no other Reasons; the King has from hence sufficient
cause to insist earnestly upon the repealing these Laws and the Test; and it is
probable, almost to a demonstration, that if this had been frankly granted, it
would have satisfied the King, and have composed the minds of Roman Catholics,
who, being placed in a condition of safety, would have continued that esteem
they had for the Church of England, ever since the late Civil Wars, when they
were the only fellow sufferers.

SECT. XV. The Inconveniences that will attend the not repealing of Penal
Laws, and particularly the Test.
HAving premised this, I come to treat of the Inconveniences, the denial of
the repeal of these Laws brings with it: ( viz.) First, That it raises in his
Majesty's Royal Breast a prejudice against our Church and Religion; and the
effects of the unkindness it may beget, appears to me of a much more dangerous
consequence, than the taking off the sanguinary and penal Laws can produce: so
that in stead of acting for the preservation of our Religion, we expose it, to
more imminent and apparent danger, and inconsiderately run upon the Rock we
would avoid; since such unaccountable obstinacy has not only, in all
probability, occasioned the enquiry into the Kings Power in dispensing with the
penal Laws, the displacing of Ministers of State, and Officers in the Army, and
Commissionating a greater number of Catholics than otherwise would have been
admitted, the taking Catholic Lords into the Council, and granting the
Commission for Ecclesiastical Affairs; but may oblige the King to make still
greater Changes amongst his Officers, Ministers and Judges, than otherwise he
intends: All those holding their places only during his Royal Pleasure, so that
without violating any Law, he may at one stroke remove most Protestant Officers
from the Administration of Affairs of State under him: And we know not what
Changes and Alterations this wayward and unseasonable stiffness, may induce his
Majesty to make in the external Government and Polity of the Church, by the
Power of his Supremacy and Prerogatives: And surely the extruding of
Protestants from Power and Authority, either in Church or State, under the
King, is likely to be a vaster prejudice to our Religion, than the repealing
the Test can be.

Let us therefore think how much we are bound, even in Christian prudence, for
the sake of our Religion, not to provoke the King to withdraw his Indulgence to
us, in the Exercise of that Religion, which he graciously offers to protect,
and which Grace we ought not to requite by urging the keeping up those
severities against those of his Religion, which most Protestants would decline
to execute, if they could, and which we cannot, if we would, until we first
renounce obedience to Gods Command, and Submission to our Sovereign, by
refusing, if not overthrowing his Sacred Authority and Power: Whereas we are
tied by our Principles and Religion not to resist, it being a chief and
Essential Position and Doctrine of the Church of England, to render Active, and
when we cannot do that, Passive Obedience to our Sovereign; and what ever we
suffer, it will not excuse us from the Guilt and Crime of indamaging and
indangering our Religion, by this unnecessary giving occasion to it: when we
might have saved, not only our Reputations of being most dutiful Subjects, but
won so far upon the heart of our Royal Master, that it would have been in the
power of none to have estranged his Affections from us.

The Spirit of moderation becomes Christians, and Calmness, and Discretion
becomes Subjects in all dealing with their Sovereign; and we may be assured,
that the greater invitation we give our King by these Virtues, the greater
assurances we have of his Protection of our Religion, and the preservation of
the present Peace, and Tranquillity which we enjoy.

Let us not therefore, by denying what we cannot hinder, lose the greatest
Blessings, and Happinesses we may retain, that King and People may live in that
happy and good understanding, which may continue, and Crown the sweetness and
easiness of his Royal Government over us, and of our Tranquillity, Prosperity
and Happiness under his Shadow.

The second Inconvenience.
Secondly, Till these Laws be taken off, it will continue those most dangerous
of Evils, that can befall the King and People, when there is no good
correspondence betwixt the King, and the two Houses of Parliament.

On the Kings part, first, we may call to mind the miserable times of King
John, and King Henry the third, and those more fresh and never to be forgot
under King Charles the First. Secondly, However prudent and wise a Prince may
be, yet the watchful envy or designs of some Neighbor Potent Prince or State,
may necessitate our King to defend his Merchants, or Plantations, to succor
his Allies, or to secure his People from Damage or Hostilities, whereby he may
be forced to have recourse to his Parliament for Aid, which, while a good
correspondence is wanting, may render them slow to grant, or upon unequal
Conditions. Thirdly, This will give an opportunity to all sorts of
Malcontents, and Enemies to the Monarchy to bestir themselves, to embroil,
and ferment the People into some dangerous Defection, Sedition or Rebellion.

On the Peoples side, the mischiefs that will befall us by this want of a good
understanding betwixt the King and his two Houses, will be, first, that since
our King by a mature Age, and a great Experience of all affairs relating to
Arms and Government, is fitted and enabled more than most of his Royal
Predecessors to aggrandize himself, and give renown to his Subjects, by buoying
up whatever has been sunk in the reputation of the World: And is able to
increase the Traffic of his people, and enlarge their Commerce, and his
Empire, and make as great a Figure in the World as any Crowned Head. All the
Blessing, we and our Neighbors might expect from so qualified a Prince, will
be utterly lost; so that in stead of transporting his Cares, Counsels and Arms
into foreign parts, he shall be necessitated to confine them within the Circle
of his own Dominions, only to keep them from Sedition or any worse mischief: So
that the hopeful opportunities, which the World knows our King might have to
hold again the Balance of Europe, and make us as flourishing a people as ever,
will be totally lost: To the great satisfaction, no doubt, of some of his
Neighbors, and the general and irreparable loss to us and our Posterity, who
with sad reflections may lament the occasion of this dispute.

Secondly, Such a want of good Correspondence betwixt the King and his two
Houses, will hinder us from obtaining such advantageous Laws, for the benefit
of the Subjects, as, this Remora being removed, might rationally be expected;
among which, most probably, one or more; might be a Corroboration of the Kings
Gracious Promise of protecting the Church of England, and whatever else the two
Houses might find useful for the public good.

Lastly, This Non-correspondence must gratify and encourage all the Enemies to
Monarchy, and all those who were for the Bill of Seclusion; this Discord being
the only pleasing Harmony to them, who never hug themselves with so full an
Ohe! of content and satisfaction, as when they find the Crown in any straits;
or can foment (if not conjure up) a Spirit of Jealousy betwixt the King and
his Parliament, and when they have stolen the Peoples Hearts from the King,
they are upon the Tiptoes of hope, that they may strike in for the prize.

If we have not a feeling sense of the miserable state, that Sedition and
Rebellion (It Is most savage Elder Brother) will bring us all to, let us consult
our bloody Annals, and our Ancestors deplorable experience, and then ponder
well whether it be Tanti, to move Heaven and Earth, harras our Country, and
embrue it with the blood of so many of our Countrymen and nearest Relations,
and at last fight our selves into a much worse condition, than we are ever like
to be in by granting this Repeal; which in this juncture is most reasonable, if
not for our Kings sake, and the Roman Catholics; yet at least for our own peace
and tranquillity, and the establishing our hopes of his Majesty's kindness to
our Church.

The last Inconvenience.
The last Reason I shall urge, is, that the refusing to Vacate these Acts may
necessitate the King to grant a Toleration, which, of all things, the Church of
England has hitherto most dreadded, and to which we may believe the King is
well enough inclined out of a principle of clemency to his people in general,
as well as Indulgence to his Catholic Subjects; which although his Royal Brother
(after an essay) at the earnest solicitation of his Parliament, was Graciously
pleased to recall, to gratify the Church of England, yet we cannot expect that
our King (not having those motives, and being courted by so many to grant it,
and finding the extension of his Supremacy) will think it his Interest to
revoke it if he once establish it.

The difference betwixt Roman Catholics, and other Dissenters from the Church
of England.
Here it will not be a miss to consider, the great difference there is betwixt
Roman Catholics and other Dissenters, while the Laws are in force: The
Non-conformists may meet to the number of Five, besides the Family, and have
their Pastor, or Teacher with them, and the disagreeableness betwixt them and
the Church of England is not so great, but that those who have Estates, or
desire to obtain Offices of honor or profit (even to do the Crown a
disservice, as we found in those that were to capacitate themselves to be
Sheriffs in the late times) could readily Conform. Whereas Roman Catholics are
in extreme peril from the very harboring their Priests: so that in this the
Roman Catholics are in a sadder state than any Christians are: For to exercise
their Religion without Priests, for performing the Office of Baptizing,
Administering the Blessed Sacrament, burying the Dead, etc. Is in that Church
(and ought to be in all others) impossible, and to have them for celebrating
these and other Divine Offices (as the Laws now are) renders them obnoxious to
the punishments inflicted on Felons and Traitors; and there is no possibility
of the Roman Catholics, as such, conforming even so much as in going once a
month to Church, without putting themselves out of the Communion of their
Church, which, with them, is to be avoided more than the utmost sufferings.

When therefore we consider the Unchristianness of such severe Laws under our
circumstances, and reflect that tho the greatest part of the disquiets, from
the Tenth Year at least of Queen Elizabeth, have arisen from the pretenses of
keeping out Popery, and the Advantages the Long Parliament had against King
Charles the First, was from that source, and the troubles of our late merciful
King, were bottomed on the same apprehensions; and yet now that we see it is
actually practiced, we find no such dreadful events; but that the Vizard was
portraied much more terrible than now when it appears with open face; and now,
when we see the public exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion, we only find
it gazed at as a Novelty, but no affrightments attending it; and we find, what
we understand in Sermons and Catechizing is Christian and profitable, and what
we understand not in Ceremonies, we see full of Pomp and Magnificence, and
further we see not.

I say, when we consider all this, and that it is in our choice, whether we
will allow the sanguinary and penal Laws to be abolished with a security in the
exercising the Protestant Religion; or on the contrary, the Inconveniences
before recited, and a Tolleration to boot; methinks it should be no difficult
matter to determine which were more advantageous.

Having thus shown some of the disadvantages to Us and our Religion, by the
refusal of a Repeal: I might propose the advantages which will accrue by
yielding up those Laws the King has such an obligation in Honor and Justice
(at least in his own Royal Apprehension) to insist upon, but that the removal
of the one, puts the other in their place.

SECT. XVI. The practicableness of Roman Catholics and Protestants living under
one Secular Government.
THerefore I shall choose rather to show the practicableness of Roman Catholics
and Protestants living in the full enjoyment of their respective Religions,
under Princes of either Religion: And first shall observe, that the Church of
Rome, and the Church of England are the two Churches (in Europe at least) that
are the most conspicuous and of most renown: Both plead for the Antiquity of
their Doctrine: The Roman Catholics are of one Communion, and so is the Church
of England; but Protestantism at large takes in a greater variety of
subdivisions, and those separate from the Church of England, as much as that
does from the Roman.

Secondly, It has been the endeavor of many learned and pious men, to
accommodate the points in difference betwixt Roman Catholics and Protestants.
But by reason of secular interests, no expedient could be found to adjust them,
till at last in Germany (from whence our Saxon Ancestors came) after about
twenty years war, wherein the Country was the very Theater on which the most
Tragical Effusion of Blood, and the most depopulating waste, by Fire and
Rapine, were acted to the highest degree of humane cruelty and revenge; and all
this principally upon the account of the difference between Roman Catholies and
Protestants, upon account of their Religion, and being at last thoroughly
wearied with the unsuccessful attempts upon one another, in the year 1624. they
came to the following settlements, which, I believe, they hitherto reap the
fruit of, being confirmed Anno 1648. at the Treaty of Munster, whereby it was
made an Imperial Law.

The Duke of Newburgh is a strict Roman Catholic, yet in his Country of
Juliers, even at Deuseldorp, the principal place of his residence (not to name
other Towns) Lutherans and Calvinists have their Churches as well as Roman
Catholics, and I suppose he allows the like liberty in the Palatinate, as the
Count Palatine did, to whom he lately succeeded as his heir male.

The Duke of Brandenburg is himself a Calvinist, yet his Subjects are for the
most part Lutherans, and in some parts of his Dominions Roman Catholics freely
enjoy their Religion.

The Bishop of Mentz (tho a Roman Catholic) admits the Lutherans in his City of
Erford to exercise their way of worship.

So the Duke of Saxony, a Lutheran, has established such an accord in his City
of Budifin, that the Roman Catholics, and Lutherans celebrate their Divine
Offices, in the very same Church, separated only by a Grate.

The Bishop of Osnaburgh (of the House of Zell) is himself a Lutheran; yet in
his Town, from whence he has his Title, both Roman Catholics and Lutherans
have their Churches: and the next Bishop must be a Catholic, and so
Alternately. And the Lutheran Canons say their Offices, with the Catholics in
the Cathedral.

In the City of Ausburgh they have two chief Magistrates, whereof one must
always be a Roman Catholic, and the other a Lutheran.

The Prince of Sulzback is a Roman Catholic, by profession; yet in some parts
of his Territories, not only Roman Catholics and Lutherans enjoy their
different worship, but interchangeably the same day, in the same place: The
Roman Catholics using a portable Altar, which they place upon the Lutheran
Altar, when they officiate.

The Abbot of Curvey is a Prince of the Empire, and a Roman Catholic, and has
seventeen Villages in his Jurisdiction, whereof sixteen are Roman Catholics,
only Ansted has Lutheran Inhabitants, who enjoy their Religion, and in their
Annual Procession, not only those Lutherans, but the Envoys from the Lutheran
Princes of Brunswick, Lunenburgh, and Hannover attend it, some carrying the
Abbot's Mitre, others the Crosier (etc.)

At Lambspring, under the Rule of the Bishop of Hildershem, the Abbot and
Convent are principal Lords, yet they permit the Lutherans to have a Church.

Thus the Germans live in neighbourly Love and Amity, and busy not themselves
in conspiring one another ruin.

There is one great instance in this part of Germany, that comes home to our
Case. The late Duke of Hannover, being converted to the Roman Faith, during his
Father, the Duke of Zell's Life, lived out of his Country, and was a Canon at
Paris; and tho he lived in a low Station with few Servants; yet he kept such a
correspondence with persons of Quality, in his Fathers Jurisdiction, that tho
his Father designed to disinherit him; yet upon the news of his last Sickness
he posted into the Confines, and upon notice of his Death at Hannover (where
his Elder Brother was) he posted to Zell, and was so well received there, that
he was soon in the Head of a considerable Army, and by mediation betwixt the
two Brothers, he made an exchange of Zell, the nobler Dukedom, for that of
Hannover, the richer; where being settled, he governed his Country very
peaceably for fourteen years, and contented himself with a Chapel for his own
Devotion, and a Convent of Capuchins near it; and promiscuously employed Roman
Catholics and Lutherans in his Military and Civil Employments, giving to his
Roman Catholic Subjects free liberty of the Exercise of their Religion, and
wrought so good an accord among his Subjects, of both Persuasions, that there
were no animosities among them, none repining at another preferment, but in
point of Duty and Allegiance, they all respected, honored and served him, and
lived happily under his Government; and he was in as good esteem among his
Lutheran Subjects, as any Prince had been long before.

He dying without Issue, Hannover fell to his younger Brother the Bishop of
Osnabourgh, who is a Temporal Prince, not in holy Orders, but married; and has
several Princes and Princesses his Children, and is himself a Lutheran. Upon
his entrance to his Principality he did not prosecute the Roman Catholics; only
the Capuchins, who lived upon Alms, could not stay as in a Convent, tho he
proffered them protection for their persons, and Roman Catholics enjoy the
liberty, I have before mentioned, as others do in several Principalities in
Germany: Whether this Harmony happen by reason the people are not such Zealots
in Religion, as in other places, to be cutting of Throats for it, I cannot
tell; but I am sure it is a great ease to Prince and People.

By this Example, I hope it will appear, how practicable it is, that Roman
Catholics and Protestants may live under the protection of Magistrates of
either Belief, without swallowing up one another; and if it were not for the
violent prejudices which some have, there is no need of endeavors to extirpate
Roman Catholics, who being few in number, yet are considerable in quality and
interest: Nor of oversetting the Church of England, whose true Members ever
have been Loyal, and in the worst of times have joined with Roman Catholics for
the support of the Crown, and have been fellow sufferers.

Surely we cannot forget the time when so great a Credit was given to a Plot,
which (even as it was published in Narratives) was as dark and confused, as the
Chaos; as monstrous as any Figment of the Poets, or in the Alcharon; full of
impossibilities, and contradictions; So that it is now our wonder and
astonishment, how greedily it was swallowed: Yet this served the turn to
exasperate the people, yea the Parliament it self, to that degree, that not
only the Catholics were branded as the most traiterous, barbarous, cruel,
bloody-minded Men in the World; but they suffered the severities of the Laws:
And much innocent blood was shed upon the Testimony of a few perjured Villans,
who got the Character of the Kings Evidence; yet we cannot but remember who
They were, that while they were fixing our Eyes so intently, upon the defense
of the Kings Person, and the Church of England, against the Plots of Papists,
were in the mean time providing their Blunderbusses, and designing a most
horrid Regicide.

I recall this to mind only to evince, that we are not to look upon Papists,
through the perspectives have been hitherto afforded us; but to believe our own
Eyes, and other Organs of Sense, and consider whether a Popish Successor be
such a Creature, yea, a Fiend, as he was represented.

SECT. XVII. The Character of his Majesty.
IF I were able to furnish my self with as much Celestial Illumination and
Spirit from above, as the Author of that Character fetched from the Mines of
Fire and Brimstone below; I should not be able to describe, as I ought, any
tolerable similitude of our great Sovereign, whose Portraicture the pannick
fears, luxurious spite, and hellish designs of some then exposed.

Yet with humble Submission and Reverence due to the Majesty of so great a
King, I think it necessary to give some faint touches of those out-lines, which
ought to strike us all with Admiration and Joy.

It will, I doubt not, be readily owned, that his Majesty is endowed with as
large a portion of those Royal and Princely Virtues (which signalize great
Monarchs, and render them conspicuous) as any Prince that has governed these
Realms for many years: And, without flattery, we cannot but admire his Courage,
Resolution, and Promptness of Mind, Activeness, delight in Business, thorough
inspection into his Affairs, with such a peculiar sweetness and benignity of
temper, as, singly are of great value in Crowned Heads; much more, when, to
such a degree and luster, they are mingled with Justice, Honor, Fortitude,
Temperance, and other Heroic Virtues in a Constellation: so that even those,
who most passionately wish him the Delight and Darling, as well as Glory of his
People; can superadd nothing to their wishes, but that he were of their
Religion. But in the Judgment of Roman Catholics, he finds, not only an esteem
due to the accumulation of his illustrious Virtues, but is enriched with a Ray
more, by the profession of his Religion.

Those, who are blessed Auditors of his familiar Discourses, admire the
serenity of his Humor: few Mortals being less clouded, or shaken with any storm
of passion. Those are witnesses how he imploys his dressing time, in enquiries
after what is remarkable in remotest Countries, whether they relate to
Government, Peace or War, Situation, and Fortifications of places,
correspondencies one with another, Customs and Usages, Disposition of the
people and their Commodities, and of Traffic, or the personal Virtues and
Accomplishments of great Men: The Inventers of useful Arts, especially such as
respect Military Discipline, Navigation and Traffic; mingling his own choice
Observations, which render all his Discourses pleasing, yea, sometimes
surprising, and always profitable and instructive.

Never was any Princes Court freer from debauchery, and more orderly in the
^^^posal of all Officers in it, from whence the Sovereign Master's solid Rules
and exemplariness are notably discovered. The Diligent, Virtuous, Sober,
Ingenious and Loyal, are received without censure of their Religion: The
Sloathful, Turbulent, Factious, Debauched and Irreligious are as much
discouraged, as is most manifest by bis severe charges against Swearing and
Drunkenness ( etc.)

Pass we thence to his Chapel, we cannot but observe, with some astonishment,
how his public Devotions are performed with a serious Attention, and a Fervor
and Zeal equal to those that officiate at the Altar.

When we consider the management of his Revenues, by his own peculiar Wisdom
and Direction, we cannot but be amazed at that vast Capacity; which those, bred
to the Employment, cannot equal no more than they can, that inspection into all
the Officies of his great Empire, the Uses and Abuses of which are as well
known to him, as any Nobleman knows his Surveys, Rentals and Offices; what a
Fatigue would this give to the ablest of his Subjects, to order some few
particulars of these Matters, much more to superintend the whole as he does.

Did we survey the wonderful increase of stores he has made, for all sorts of
Munitions, both for Land and Sea, we should think he employed his Care, and a
great part of his Revenues in nothing else: But when we attend him to his Camp
and Navies, we find a new Charge, a new Care.

His Majesty's extraordinary Diligence and Skill in disciplining his Army, and
the perfection he has brought it to in one year, will be as incredible to
after Ages, as it is the wonder of this. It is the observation of some, that
have seen other Princes Troops, that (considering their number) they exceed all
others, not only in the richness of the Clothes of the Officers and the Guards;
the neatness of the Common Soldiers, the goodness of their Arms, the
sightliness of the Men and Horses, the order of the Camp; but in the Skill in
all their Exercises, their readiness to observe Orders, and the Civility and
Morals of them; being free from those Debaucheries, which effeminate and unfit
Soldiers for Valor and Vigilance: And no Prince can take more effectual ways,
by due and constant pay, and provision of all things necessary, to oblige his
Troops to Fidelity and Courage, Skill and Resolution, than his Majesty does; so
that his Camp is not only accomplished in Military Matters, but is a nursery of
good Education: It being his Majesty's special Command, that the Soldiers so
behave themselves in the Country, that they may not only be regarded as his
Servants, wearing his Livery, but as their Guard, and the security of their
peace and quiet. So that none can justly repine at their numbers, but such as
would be glad to see him destitute of any force that might hinder their
Contrivances against his Government.

We have already seen his Majesty's Troops, and we now find, with how great
ear and diligence he is equipping his Fleet, which we may be sure will be
answerable to the service he intends them for, and proportionable to that
Method and Order of his Land Forces: and then, no doubt, it will exceed what
former Ages have known, when they are fitted by so great and magnanimous a
Prince, that has so long been Lord High Admiral himself.

These things have millions of Witnesses: But who can divine the Royal
Solicitude and Care, and those wise Contrivances, for the good of his people,
which are the effects of his retired hours in his Closet: There, where he
revolves in his Great Mind, how to order all the Instruments of his Power, to
set all the Wheels of this great Machin on work, to consider who are fitted for
every distinct undertaking; how to allott the thinking, grave and wise, the
contriving part: And the bold, and obedient, the executive part of his Affairs.
There he ruminates of his Counselors Wisdom and Address, and what is fit to be
communicated to them. Here he consults the safety, preservation, and wealth of
his Subjects; how to make all of Loyal Principles (tho of different persuasions
in Religion) live at ease and freedom. Here he studies to obviate the designs
of the Factious and Seditious, which give greatest disquiet to the otherwise
flourishing Reigns of Princes: To reward, advance and honor those who do him
the acceptablest Services. Here he bears the Burden of his Kingdoms alone,
revolves the fate of other Empires, and resoves the Model of his own.

May the Divine Wisdom inspire his Royal Breast here, and in all places, to
follow such Methods, as may make his People truly Reverence, Love, and
dutifully Obey him, whereby not only his Reign may be prosperous and peaceable,
but our Posterity may find the good effects of his Government.

Were his Majesty's Character as well known, through all his Dominions, as it
is to those nearest to him, (however imperfectly I have described it) I should
not think it possible that any could entertain such Umbrages of fear of his
Conduct, since we may be assured so wise, and extraordinarily qualified a
Prince, will attentively consider how his own ease and felicity is involved in
that of his Subjects.

Were he a Prince less Vigorous, and Active in his person, (which his Princely
exercises and temperance contribute so much to) were he less experienced in a
long Tract of Obervations, less knowing of men, and of their bypast, and
present, innate and forced dispositions; and of a less piercing Judgment, and
vivacity of Spirit: Had he not so many times adventured his Life for the Honor
and Safety of these Kingdoms; were he a Prince that did not so seriously
discountenance profaneness and vice, or gave not such signal tokens of his
piety; were he a Prince that devolved his Cares on others, whereby he might
enjoy a pompous and easy life; were he not constant to his purposes, or were
less exemplary in all provident managery, or sparing in the expense of
Provisions for the Honor and Safety of his Dominions; Were he subject to any
transport of Passion, or easily imposed upon by sly and cunning Achitophels;
we might suspect his concern for his people, and think him negligent or not
understanding of his Interest. But a Prince endowed with so extraordinary
qualifications can never be wanting in the great concern of his Royal Office,
both in conserving his Dominions in peace, and being indulgent to all, that
unworthily distrust not his Gracious Intentions, and make not false
constructions, comments, and glosses upon them, and by an unworthy waywardness
court cloudy weather or storms, when they might enjoy sunshine and a clear sky.

SECT. XVIII. The Conclusion.
TO draw now toward a Conclusion, I shall only offer you some considerations,
which I desire you will seriously think upon.

First, you cannot but have observed, that there are a set of men, who although
they be at as great a distance from knowing his Majesty's Resolves, as they are
from the Moon; yet will pretend to have Telescopes in Politics, whereby they
can discover all the Hills and Valleys, Seas and Rolling Sands, the Precipices
and Plains, the Deserts and Fertile Champaigns of our little world, and by
engraffing Microscopes upon them, can magnify to what prodigious bulk they
please, Molehills and the minutest Insects: Yea they pretend to discover the
secret Springs and Movements of all Counsels, and that, (which is their
greatest dexterity) by a Charm they have, they can make every one they get to
use these, to believe the reality of what they represent.

These men considering the Kings Personal Resolution, Courage and Conduct, and
the Noble Designs he declared at his first entrance on his Government, that, by
the blessing of God he would adventure his person as far as any man in his
Dominions for the good of his people, and endeavor to raise the renown and
repute of his people, as high as any of his Predecessors: and withal
considering the success that had attended all his undertakings, knew that they
could no ways foreslow the progress of his affairs, but by depriving him of the
Cordial Affections of his Protestant Subjects.

Therefore finding that his Majesty would be bound in Honor and Justice to
show favor to Catholics in employing them and endeavoring a repeal of penal
Laws, and knowing how much it would stand them in hand to lay hold of this
opportunity; fell presently to sigh out their extreme fears, that the Church of
England was to be trod under foot, if not totally extirpated.

They knew full well, that as a Nipping Frost suddenly dispoyleth fresh Flowers
of their richest paint and beauty, and makes their erectest leaves soften and
flag, and singes the tallest Oaks, as well as the lower Thickets and Copices;
even so from this chilling apprehension, the briskest and most active Loyalty
of some would be palsied, benumbed, or cramped; a Cloudy Jealousy would seize
others, and it would slacken the sails, and becalm, and make those Vessels Hull
and float in a dead Sea, that had formerly made so fair a progress toward the
Port of Loyalty.

They knew likewise, that if they could get the Kings desires opposed in
Parliament, it would effectually hinder the former good Correspondence had been
betwixt the King and them, and so it was their Interests, like cunning
Ambo-dexters, to animate, and encourage the Kings Zeal for it, and at the same
time to set all other tools at work to get it opposed.

This was the masterpiece of some peoples policy, which possibly was not all
homebred, and it has most powerfully effected the business: and no doubt but
it was easy to have been prognosticated.

However the matter has been managed, it is too late to call back yesterday:
The King has the same motives to insist upon the taking off the penal Laws;
and since I have laid down so fully the reasons and inconveniences of denying
his desire: It will be very becoming the wisdom of the Parliament (as Loyal as
a Prince can wish) and of all the true members of the Church of England, and of
all that desire, we and our posterity may be happy, to study such expedients,
as there may not be eternal heart-burning, persecutions, jars, and feuds,
betwixt the Members of the two so Famous Churches, and that they will not only
impartially consider what I write to you, but that they will call in the aids
of their Christianity, reason and duty to govern their Actions, that we may not
endanger our Religion, or be misled by false fires, and trained into those
denns, where destruction and slavery keep their residence, and where the
pretended qualm at the apprehension of their dying Religion, is but to get a
dose of that Volatile Salt of Vipers, that they hope would raise to life again
their good Old Cause.

I know it is one of the difficultest cures to bring Hypocondriac people to
abandon, or forget their complaints: If they get a notion by the fore-top, they
swing it about, as boys do fire-sticks, till it appears a whole Circle of Fire,
whereas six drops of water will quench it. Sometimes such are cured with
Hellibore, but oftener by calm reasoning, diverting their thoughts, by
representing the ill consequences of such groundless phancies, and then cordial
refreshings of their spirits bring them to composure.

I have made choice only of the last, and desire all Lovers of their Country,
yea, and of their Religion also, to consider what the designs of some men are,
by their Libels, wherein they endeavor to possess the Soldiery with strange
apprehensions, and would poison them in their principles of Allegiance. Surely
it can be to no other end, but that they hope thereby to disarm them of their
Loyalty, and so to find from them little resistance, when they could be able
(by setting up the Standard of Protestantism) to assemble their power against
the Government.

Have you not seen other Libels for setting up Stipulatory, Conditional
Monarchy? There was never an Insurrection, or any Intestine Trouble, but it was
occasioned by a prepossession of the people, with an ill opinion of the Princes
Conduct, and by debauching of the people in their duty; and when there was
either a faction in the State, or diversity in Religion, these readily divided
their adherence, either to the Crown, or to the Seditious, or Rebels. But
whoever got by such commotions, I am sure the generality of the Subjects were
sufferers; and whenever God Almighty punished them in this kind, yet we find,
in the upshot, the Government was again settled more firm, as we may learn even
by our latest examples at the Restoration of King Charles the second; And
whoever consider the benefits that accrue to a people that live quietly under
Government, and the sad mischiefs that Faction and Sedition cause, will choose
the one rather than the other, and will find that all the stricter impositions
on the Subject, have been occasioned by the peoples disobedience, and the
displacing of Officers have been for the security of the Government: Hence the
Act of purgeing Corporations, and the late Quowarranto's, and some Acts of
State of later date.

Distrust of a Princes good Intentions for his People, and diffidence in his
gracious promises, above all things are to be avoided in Subjects. It is that
hinders them from yiedling to his reasonable desires. Our gracious King has
multiplied his Assurances of his protection of our Religion, and it is our Duty
and Interest to be confident in, and truly thankful for them, and neither by
insolency, mistrust, or peevishness to forfeit his Royal Favor.

Those who are well acquainted with the gracious and generous temper of his
Majesty, know, that a diffidence in his Sacred Promises, is so much the more
disobliging, as it is the questioning his veracity, which is one of the chief
and most valuable of his Royal Virtues. This distrust touching so vital a part,
as the Justice and Reputation of any private person, raises a deep resentment:
how much more must it be ill endured in so great a Person, who has that
peculiar temper of Spirit (suitable to his Birth and Dignity) not to suffer his
Methods to be thwarted, or disputed; especially where the constructions put
upon them, tend to the diminution of the Love and Honor his Subjects owe him,
and will occasion seditious withdrawing of the Subjects from their Duty and
Allegiance? which as they are most important mischiefs, and hazard the Peace of
the Government, so they have, in all humane probability, been the rrue, and
only Motives, that have induced his Majesty to withdraw his wonted kindness
from some persons, that I am confident out of mere inadvertency of these
consequences, and out of desire to serve him in other Methods, have fallen
under his displeasure.

Upon this consideration it is, that our Loyal Divines should have a special
regard, that neither openly, or covertly, they increase their Auditories
suspicion, or distrust of his Majesty's kindness to our Church, but rather
enforce a free passage of the contrary to our very heart and souls; so as first
to be truly thankful for his grace, and then to be confident of it: They have
liberty from the King to confirm their Auditors with the best Reasons they can
(without misrepresentations) in their Religion. But withal, I think it likewise
necessary, they be taught not to harbor those doubts, and apprehensions of any
Intendment of the King by any power to enforce us to abandon it, but rather
encourage them in a firm and thankful belief, that the King will make good his
gracious Promise. Some such Cordials would preserve our Religion, better than
all the bewailings of the afflicted State of the Church, which will not secure
us one Article of our Religion.

I can foresee no danger to the Church of England by this way of proceeding,
but am most assured it would incline his Majesty more cheerfully to continue
his protection of it, in finding such grateful returns of his Favors.

Only it might produce one effect, that some probably are not desireous to
experience, that it would again bring us to that Criterion, and perfect
distinction of those who are true Members of the Church of England, from others
that now wear the Badge and Livery only, which they can as soon undress
themselves of, when they should judge it for their Interest. We should then
find them at their old Calumnies, that the Clergy were going over to, or
meeting halfway the Church of Rome; and even those who are so much applauded
and followed, would in a little time be accused of selling the Reversion of our
Religion, as in the late times they were scandalized with the Incumbering and
Mortgaging of it.

Upon the whole let us seriously consider, that where Loyalty obtains, no
people can be miserable, let us trust God and the King. And tho there are
differences in point of Doctrine, betwixt the Roman Catholics and us: Yet as we
agree in Morals, and in several indisputable Points of Christanity, in the
Creeds, and several Articles of Faith, as well as in some external Ceremonies
(rejected by other Protestants) there is no reason we should keep up such
inveterate Animosities, be at perpetual strife, not de finibus regundis; but of
exterminating one another. But rather study how by an amicable accord in our
common Duty of Christianity and Allegiance we may mutually and Cordially
endeavor the defense and preservation of the King and his Government, which
ought to be every Loyal man's design, and is the sole intendment of this my
present writing to you.

FINIS.

