A SERMON PREACHED ON THE LATE DAY OF Thanksgiving. December. 2. 1697. By JOHN
HOW, Minister of the GOSPEL. To which is Prefixed, Dr. BATES's Congratulatory
Speech to the KING, November. 22. 1697. In the Name of the Dissenting Ministers
in and about London.

LONDON: Printed by S. Bridge, in Austin-Fryers, for Tho. Parkhurst at the
Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside* near Mercers Chapel. MDCXCVIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Haversham.
I Offer this Discourse, My Honored Lord, to Your Perusal, in Confidence that
the Subject and Design of it will be so far Grateful to Your Lordship, as in
some Degree to Atone for the Imperfections of the Management.

I Believe it will not Offend against Your Lordships very Accurate Judgment of
Things, that I have not been so swayed by an Authority, which has signified
much in our Age; as to represent the Natural State of Man, as a State of War,
which either must signify Man in his Original Constitution, to have been a
very ill-natured Creature, or must signify his Nature to be less Ancient than
Himself.

FOR I cannot Doubt, but the Author of that Maxim, would have Disdained their
Way of Speaking, who by Nature Mean Vice. Or to have been Guilty of so Pious a
Thought, that God at first made Man any better Thing than we find Him.

I Shall the less passionately Lament my Infelicity in losing the good Opinion
of Men of that Sentiment, if I stand Right in Your Lordships. Not knowing any
of your Rank and Figure, in the World, with whom I Count it a greater Honor to
Agree in Judgment, or do less Fear to Disagree.

IN Matters of Secular Concernment, it becomes Me not to Profess any Judgment
at all, besides the Public, unto which in Things of that Nature, every Private
Man's ought to be, and is professedly Resigned.

YET within that Compass, notwithstanding the Just Esteem Your Lordship has of
the Noble Endowments, which do then Illustriously Shine in the Military
Profession, when there is a Necessity of their being red^c'd to Practice: I
Apprehend that otherwise Your Lordship has no more gratful Thoughts of War,
than I, nor more ungrateful of the Necessary Means of Preserving Peace. That
which is the Reproach of Humane Nature could never Originally belong to it. Nor
can any thing more expose its Ignominious Depravation, than it should ever be
Necessary the Sword should Dispute Right, and the Longest, Decide it.

IN the Matters of Religion which is every Man's Business, and whose Sphere as
it is Higher, must be proportionably Wider and more Comprehensive; I Hope it is
Your Lordships constant Care to add unto Clearness and Rectitude of Thought,
the Pleasantness of Taste; and that you apprehend it to consist not more in a
Scheme of Notions, than of Vital Principles; and that your Love to it proceeds
from hence, that you Relish it and Feel you Live by it; You are hereby
Fortified against the Reproach that attends it, from their Contempt of it who
are every Day assaulting Heaven, and would have the War not ended, but only
transferred thither-ward.

THAT which though some Vent, and others admire as Wit, even Paganism it self
has Condemned as Foolishness. Your Lordship is in no more Danger to be altered
hereby from your chosen Course, than a Man in his Health and Senses, by Satyrs
against Eating and Drinking.

I Reckon Your Lordship is so much taken up with the great Things of Religion,
as to be less taken with the Adventitious Things Men have Thought fit to affix
to it. I do not more Emulate Your Lordship in any Thing, than a Disdain of
Bigotry; nor more Honor any thing I Discern in You than True Catholicism.

AND Recounting what Things and Persons do truly belong to a Church, I Believe
Your Lordship is not professedly of a Larger Church, as Counting it too Large
for You but too narrow, and that You affect not to be of a Self-distinguisht
Party. Nor, besides the Opportunity of avowing the Just Honor, and Obligations
I have to Your Lordship, and Your Noble Consort, with my Sincere Concern for
Your Hopeful and Numerous Offspring, did any Thing more Invite this Address to
Your Lordship, than the agreeableness of such Your Sentiments to the Mind and
Spirit of

My most Honored Lord, Your Lordships Most Justly Devoted, and Most Faithful,
Humble Servant, John How.

Dr. BATES's Congratulatory Speech to the KING, November. 22. 1697. In the Name
of the Dissenting Ministers in and about London.
May it Please Your MAJESTY!
YOUR Happy Return with PEACE in your Retinue, has raised a Springtide of Joy,
that overflows the Nation. This great Blessing, We Primarily owe with our most
Solemn and Dutiful Thankfulness to the GOD of PEACE, who has Calmed the
Tempestuous World, and Changed the black Scene of Horror, and Misery; wherein
the most Tragical Cruelties were Acted, Cities were Fired, and the Fires
quenched in the Blood of the Citizens, wherein Death and Despair appeared in
their Terrible Shapes: And has introduced a Bright Scene of Prosperity, wherein
Innocence and Liberty, Commerce and Abundance are secured. This we Owe, as to
the Secondary Cause, with our most Humble Gratitude to Your MAJESTY; Your open
and generous Opposition in the Field of Battle, has Tamed our Potent Enemies;
who presumed to Level all Obstacles to their Lofty Designs, as if their Power
had been Equal to their Pleasure. They had broke through the Circles of Justice
and Honor, but Your MAJESTY has fixed such Bounds, as may prevent their
Swelling Exorbitancies for the Future.

EVROPE, has seen with Admiration Your Courage and Heroic Heat guided by an
Equal Light, and Superior to all Dangers in War: There is a Just Expectation
that an Equal Honor will attend Your MAJESTY, for Your Ruling Wisdom, Your
Justice Tempered with Equity and Goodness in the Counsels and Arts of PEACE:
You are the Glory of Your Subjects Abroad, and their Delight at Home. Your
Influxive Presence is the Vital Breath the Kingdom Draws, the Vital Band that
Unites its Parts, and prevents their Breaking into Confusion.

YOUR MAJESTY is Ordained for Victories. Thereare more Noble Conquests to be
obtained over worse than Foreign Enemies: Profaneness in Manners, and
Pernicious Doctrines in Religion that Fight against the Soul, and
notwithstanding our PEACE on Earth, Expose us to a Fearful War with Heaven. WE
Live in an Age of Degenerate Wickedness: Wherein are Numberless Numbers of
resolved Looseness, who by their bold Impieties, defy the Supreme MAJESTY of
Heaven: These WE Hope by Your Authority and Influence, may be Restrained, if
not truly Reformed; for whereas other Princes assume an Infamous Prerogative to
Live as they List, to satisfy their Vicious Appetites without Control; Your
MAJESTY Exhibites such Excellent Virtues in Your Practice, as may be a
Persuasive Pattern, and Commandingly Exemplary to Your Subjects.

AND whereas, there are such Doctrines frequently Published, as are Infinitely
Injurious to the Person and Office of our Blessed Savior; WE Hope Your Pious
Zeal for his Divine Honor, will put a stop to the Licentiousness of the Press,
that the Contagion of the Dead, may not Corrupt the Living. This will be a most
pleasing Sacrifice of Praise to the Blessed GOD, who has Preserved Your most
Precious Life in Raging War, and from more Imminent Dangers, by the Dark and
Cruel Conspiracy of Wicked Enemies.

WE Humbly Renew the Assurances of our inviolable Loyalty, and our Continual
Prayers, That GOD would Preserve Your Sacred Person, and make Your MAJESTY
always Happy in Your Government, and Your Subjects Happy in their Obedience.

PSALM XXIX. the latter part of the Last Verse. The Lord will Bless his People
with Peace.

The Whole Verse is, The Lord will give Strength to his People.

The Lord will Bless his People with Peace.


YOU so generally know the Occasion of this our Solemn Assembly, at this Time;
that none can be in Doubt concerning the suitableness of this Portion of
Scripture for our Present Consideration.

OUR Business is to celebrate the Divine Goodness, in Preserving our King
Abroad, and Restoring him Home in Safety, after he had been the Happy
Instrument of bringing about that Peace, which puts a Period to a long
Continued, Wasting, and Dubious War, under which We, and all Europe have
groaned these Diverse Years. And if we find the favorable Workings of
Providence to concur and fall in with a Divine Word, pointing them to GODS own
People; as this for Instance, The Lord will Bless his People with Peace: i e.
He will vouchsafe this Blessing to his own People in the fittest Season, as it
must be understood; this adds so much the more grateful and pleasant Relish, to
the Mercy we are this Day to acknowledge. It cannot but do so with Right Minds,
unto which nothing is more agreeable, than to desire and covet such Favor as
GOD shows to his own People, and to be made glad with his Inheritance, Psalm
105. 4, 5. from an Apprehension, that there must be somewhat very peculiar in
such Mercy as GOD vouchsafes to his own, to a People Peculiar and Select,
severed and set apart for himself, from the rest of Men.

IT IS true indeed, that Peace, abstractly considered, is neither the
appropriate, nor the constant Privilege of such a People; they neither alone
enjoy it, nor at (...) Times; when it is brought about, even for them, they
have other ^arta^ers: But yet, such Favors of Providence as are of larger
extent, and re^ch to many besides GODS own People, have a more peculiar benign
Aspect upon them, and are attended, with reference to them, with such
Consequences, as wherein others, without being made of this People of his, are
not Sharers with them. Some Intimation there is of this in this Psalm, which
the Title speaks, a Psalm of David, and which some think to refer unto the Wars
managed by him in his Time with the Moabites, signified by the Wilderness of
Cadesh, and the Syrians, signified by the Cedars of Lebanon, of whom he speaks
in the Prophetic Style, as if, by the terrible and amazing appearances of
GOD's Power against them, they were Thunderstruck, like the Trees of a
Forest, or as the Hinds that are wont to inhabit amongst them. And so it is
concluded, and shut up with this Epiphonema in the End of the Psalm. The Lord
will give Strength to his People, the Lord will Bless his People with Peace: i.
e. He is in War their Strength, and their Felicity in Peace; in War, He is the
Author of all that Power, wherewith they are enabled to oppose and overcome
Potent Enemies; And in Peace, he is their truly felicitating Good, and makes
them, by his own vouchsafed Presence, a truly blessed People.

IT is the latter of these, Peace, unto which the Present Occasion confines us.
And concerning that, we might, in the

1. PLACE, Note, from the Text, That wheresoever it is brought about, GOD is
the Author of it, GOD will Bless his People with Peace. That Title which the
Scripture gives him, The GOD of Peace, with the many Expressions of like
Import, wherewith it abounds, can leave them in no Doubt, concerning the Divine
Influence and Agency in bringing about the grateful Intervals of Peace, after
desolating Bloody Wars, who have any Reverence for the Sacred Oracles. And
indeed, to insist upon such a Subject as this, in a Case so plain, so
acknowledged amongst Men that believe the Bible, were to Reproach the Auditory,
as if it were made up of Scepticks and Atheists, or of them that did not
believe this World was made by GOD; or that it was made by him only by some
casual Stroke, and without Design, that he cared not for his reasonable
intelligent Creatures when he had made them, what became of them, nor did at
all concern himself, in their most considerable Concernments. I shall not
therefore insist upon this, which seems rather slid in, and supposed in the
Text, or taken for granted: For among a People in visible Relation and
Subjection to GOD, it had been as great an incongruity industriously to assert
and prove such a thing, as it would be, by an Elaborate Discourse, to prove
that there is a Sun in the Firmament, unto Men that continually partake and
enjoy its Light and Influences, and to whose Sense, the Vicissitudes and
Distinctions of Day and Night, by its Presence and Absence, are brought under
constant Notice every Four and Twenty Hours.

I shall therefore, I say, pass on to what appears more directly to be the
Design of the Text. And that seems to be twofold, First, To represent to us in
general, the great Blessing of Peace; wherein, when GOD sees it sit, he is
pleased to make his own People Partakers with others. Secondly, Because it is
not without Design, that it is said, He will Bless his People with Peace; unto
whom it is plain, this alone is not an appropriate Privilege, it seems further
designed to intimate, and couch in, the Concurrence and Concomitancy of such
things, as, superadded to Peace, will make it a complete Blessing. The Lord
will Bless his People with Peace. He will give them Peace, so, and upon such
Terms, and with such Concomitants and Consequences, that to them it shall prove
a real and a full Blessing. These two things, therefore, I intend to insist
upon,

1. TO show you how valuable a Good, and (in the Large and Common Sense) a
Blessing, Peace is, as it stands in Opposition to Bloody and Desolating Wars.
And then

2. I shall show you, what Additions and Concomitants are necessary to make it
a complete Blessing, such as may be appropriate and peculiar to GODS own
People, and so make use of the whole.

1. I shall show you Briefly, how valuable a good Peace is in it self, as it
stands opposed unto Bloody and Destructive Wars. And this will best be seen, by
stating and viewing it in that Opposition, and by representing to you somewhat
of the Horror of War; which we may do, by viewing it in its Causes, in it self,
and in its dismal Consequences, wherewith it is wont to be attended.

CONSIDER it in its Causes, and they are principally these two, the Wickedness
of Men, and the just Vengeance of GOD thereupon. These two concurring, and
falsing in together, must be understood to be the Causes of so great a Calamity
among Men in this World. And I shall only consider these two in their
Complication, and not speak to them distinctly and separately.

VERY Plain it is, That War is a Mark of the Apostasy, and Stigmatizes Man as
Fallen from GOD, in a (...) ^evolted State. It is the Horrid Issue of Men's
having fo^saken GOD, and of their being Abandoned by Him to the (...) of their
own Furious Lusts and Passions. The Natural, and the (...) Effect of their
having severed themselves, and broke loose from the Divine Government. From
whence are Wars? Are they not from your Lusts? Jam. 4. 1. GOD most Justly
Punishes Men's Injustice, not by Infusing Malignity, which he needs not, into
their minds and Natures, and which it is impossible He can be the Author of,
whose very Nature it self is Goodness, and Purity, and Love; but having
Forsaken Him, Rebelled against Him, Disclaimed Him as their Ruler, Refused any
longer to be Subject to Him; they are Forsaken of Him, and left to take
Vengeance for it on one another; of which there cannot be a greater Instance,
than that, when Controversies do arise between Men and Men, between Nation and
Nation, Kingdom and Kingdom, one People and another, it is presently to be
Decided by a Bloody Sword. This speaks a Monstrous Degeneracy in the
Intellectual World, and from the Original Rectitude that belongs to the Nature
of Men, which in his Primitive State did stand in a Temperament of Reason and
Love. That there should be Differences about Meum and Tuum in a Creature of
that Constitution, is it self an Horrid Thing; but then that such Differences
are to be Determined only by Violence, that presently they must hereupon Run
into War! Good GOD! What an Indication is this, That Reason, Wisdom, Justice,
and Love are fled from this Earth! And it speaks Rebellion against GOD in the
Highest Kind, it is a Subversion of the most Fundamental Law of his Kingdom over
the Intelligent World, Thou shall Love the LORD thy GOD with all thy heart,
with all they soul, with all thy mind, with all thy might, and thy Neigbour as
thy self.

IT IS impossible there should be any such Thing as War in the World, but by the
Violation of this most Fundamental Divine Law, the Principal and most Important
Thing that this Government does as it were Consist in over reasonable
Creatures, their Loving Him above all, and one another as themselves. This Law,
observed, must make this Earth another Heaven: This Law, Violated, and Broken,
makes it another Hell. Man being Fallen from GOD, and having lost their
Acquaintance with Him, and all Relish of Divine Things, think to Repair their
Loss out of this Sensible World; whereof no Man thinks he has enough. Desire
of more, blinds their Eyes that they cannot Judge of Right and Wrong. Hence
every Man's Cause is Right in his own Eyes. Appetite is the only Measure they
Judge by. And Power (whatsoever of it any one can grasp) the Instrument by
which they Execute their perverse Judgment. A Dismal Spectacle, and Subject of
Contemplation to the Inhabitants of the Purer and more Peaceful Regions! To
behold a Divine Offspring, the Sons of GOD, now Transformed into Sons of the
Earth, and Tearing in pieces one another, for what some Posses, and others
Covet!

YEA, and to a Calm, Uninteressed Spectator on our own Globe, this can be no
grateful prospect to View the History of all Times, and Nations, and take
Notice how full it is of such Tragedy! Countries from Age to Age made
Akeldama's, Fields of Blood, on this Account, of extending or Confining Empire
and Dominion, of Invading another, or Defending ones own!

BUT hereupon it is not strange, when a World of Intelligent Reasonable
Creatures are thus gone off from GOD, and in Rebellion against him, in the most
Fundamental part of his Government, that He suffers them to be the Executioners
of His Just Wrath upon one another.

AND if we thus look upon War, First, in this its Complicated Causes, it is the
Opprobrium, the Reproach of Humane Nature, of Intelligent Reasonable Creatures.

BUT Next look upon it In it self, and what is it, but the Destruction of
Humane Lives, of Creatures made after the Image of GOD? Of whom He has so High
a Value, and whose Lives, even for that very Reason, He is pleased to Fence and
Secure by a Severe Law, Whoever sheds Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be
shed, for in the Image of GOD made He Man. But here is a Formed Design of
Destroying Humane Lives by multitudes; Lives of Creatures bearing the Image of
GOD.

AND by how much the more Necessary this is in many Cases, so much the more
Grievous and Calamitous a Thing it is, that when to Cut Off and Destroy by
multitudes so Precious Things as Humane Lives, is Tragical and Horrid, not to
do it is so much Worse! Yea, That War it self is become an Art, and that the
Valor and Skill which belong to it are Laudable Excellencies, is all
Aggravation of the Sadness of this Case.

AND if we do consider the Consequences and Effects which do ensue upon such
War, How full of Horror and Frightfulness are they! And those most of all, that
are least of all thought on, and that lie most out of view: For, besides that
Property is gone, and no Man knows what to call his own, Laws lose their Force,
Magistrates their Authority, and Reverence, Civil Government is Disobeyed and
Despised, Common Order is Violated and Turned into Confusion; Families torn in
pieces, Countries laid Waste and Desolate, Towns and Cities Sacked, Ravaged,
and made Ruinous Heaps. Besides all this, (I say) the Sacred Rites and
Mysteries of Religion are Neglected and Profaned, its Holy Solemnities
interrupted, Worshipping Assemblies are broken up. Men have little Opportunity
left them to mind their great Concerns with GOD, and for another World; Care
for Immortal Souls, when it is most Necessary, is thrown out of doors, and
Reasonal Creatures, that should be employed in Adoring and Worshipping their
Great Creator, the GOD of their Lives, are Employed in Designing the Mutual
Destruction of one another Lives: And it may be, that is least considered,
which carries the most of Horror in it, that multitudes are hurried down to
Perdition, neither Dread^d by themselves, nor Apprehended by the Destroyer;
Souls are passing in shoals into Eternity, they not considering it who are
sent, nor they that send them! And what sport does this make for Devils, those
Envious Apostate Spirits, that first drew Men into a like Apostasy, that when
GOD had given this Earth to the Children of Men, Assigning to themselves a
worse abode amidst Infernal Darkness and Flames, they should be Tearing one
another in pieces about this their Portion, under the Sun, making GOD's Bounty
to them the Occasion of their doing all manner of Violence to one another! That
the Prince of the Apostasy, the Vsuping God of this World, should have the
Opportunity of Peholding Man sometime, by Divine Grant the Lord of it, now its
slave, and his Captive by it! Led by him at his will, into whatsoever is most
Repugnant to the Will, and the very Nature of his Maker. That whereas he was at
first made after GOD's own Image, a God-like Creature resembling his Maker,
especially in Spirituality, and Love, he now more resembles in Sensuality
Beasts, and in malignity Devils, and both, by an Inordinate Love of this World;
the Friendship whereof, and a mind Cornalized by it, is Enmity against GOD.
(Jam. 4. 4. Romans 8 7.) And whereof also, because every Man thinks his own share
too little, he becomes any ones Enemy, that has more of it than himself.

AND thus have Devils the pleasure of Beholding Men by this very Gift and
Expression of GOD's Love and Kindness to them, Transformed into Emnity, and
Hatred of himself and one another, Forsaken of Him, and Destroying each other,
and hastening once more into their Horrid Society; that as they were
Accomplices with them in their first Rebellion, they may be Partakers and
Associates with them in W^e and Torment. The most dismal part of the Story, is
that which lies most out of sight.

NOW let all this be considered and put together, and surely Peace is a
Valuable Thing, It speaks Man in some degree returned to himself, and in a
right mind, when he can Agree and be Content to let another live Quiet and
Unmolested by him; one Man another Man, and one Nation another Nation.

THUS far does Peace appear a Blessing, apart and by it self, a Valuable Good,
and, according to the Common Notion and Estimate, it may be called a Blessing,
wherewith GOD Blesses His People, in common with others. But we are further to
consider.

2. WHAT Things are requisite to make this a Real, and a Complete Blessing,
Capable of being Appropriated unto GOD's own peculiar People. Which seems also
to be Intended here, The LORD will Bless His People with Peace. In Speaking to
this, I shall do these Two Things:

1. MENTION the Requisites themselves.

2. SHOW their Requisiteness: Or, Show what is Requisite to make External
Peace, a Real and Peculiar Blessing. And then show you upon what Account the
Addition and Concomittancy of such Things is Requisite,

1. I shall show you the Things that are requisite.

1. SUCH Peace as we have been hitherto speaking of, is then truly a Blessing,
when there is in Conjunction with it, a very Copious Effusion of the Spirit of
GOD. In such a Concomitancy, Peace will make a People, a Blessed People. When,
after such a Calamitous Dispensation was over, and at an End, as we read of,
Ezck. 39. wherein ver. 23. GOD is said to hide his Face; and many of his People
were carried into Captivity, and many fell by the Sword, it comes at length to
this, He will no more hide his Face, or cover it with so ireful and gloomy
Aspects, and Appearances that it cannot be comfortably beheld. It Is for this
very Reason, Because he pours forth his Spirit upon the whole House of Israel,
as it is in verse 29. of that Chapter, Pouring forth, signifies a Copious
Communication; and if the Spirit of GOD be copiously communicated, the best of
Blessings are in great abundance contained in it, which will infer, or
countervail whatsoever is valuable or needful besides, to make the State of
such a People a Blessed State.

2. IT will be so, when the Gospel of Peace has its free course, and a large
spread in the World. When, in Conjunction with beating of Swords into
Plow-shears, and Spears into Pruning Hooks, the Law goes forth of Sion, and the
Word of the Lord from Jerusalem; and Nations shall say, Come, let us go up to
the House of the Lord, and he will teach us his Ways, and we will walk in his
Statutes; as in that of Micah 4. 2, 3. And

3. WHEN, according to the Dictate of Divine Wisdom, Kings do Reign (as Prove.
8. 15.) and Princes decree Justice; when GODS People have Judges, as at the
first, Counselors as at the beginning, Isa. 1, 26. able Men, Men of Truth,
fearing GOD, and hating Covetousuess, Exodus 18. 21. When he is pleased to set
Kings on the Throne, that scatter the Wicked with their Fyes, and so to
establish the Throne in Righteousness; when there is a Design driven, by those
that bear the Civil Sword, the Sword of Justice, to be a Terror to Evildoers,
but a Praise to them that do well; so as it may be said upon this account, they
are the Ministers of GOD for good, whom he has been pleased to set in such
Stations.

4. WHEN GOD gives Pastors after his own Heart, that are able, and do make it
their business, to feed his People with Knowledge, and Understanding. When he
inspirits such to cry mightily, to warn Men off from Sin, When Watchmen, set
over his People, are faithful in the business of their Station, at once both to
save their People and Themselves, from having their Blood required at the Hands
of either. This will make a peaceful State, an happy State; it will contribute
a great deal toward it. And again, when hereupon, in the

5. PLACE, Wickedness languishes, the Lusts of Men droop and wither. There is
some visible restraint, if there be not an universal Mortification, of such
Fruits of the Flesh as those that are spoken of Gal. 5. 19. Adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulation, wrath, strife, sedition, heresies, envyings, murders,
drunkenness, revilings, and such like, that are inconsistent with a share in
the Inheritance of the Kingdom of GOD, as it after follows. This does much to
the making a peaceful State of Things, a Blessed State; it takss away much of
the Occasion of further Controversy between GOD and such a People. But

6. WHEN there is a very great Diffusion of an Holy new Nature, which carries
the Matter higher, and is a great Addition, though in certain Conjunction with
the former; as it is when the Lusts, and Works of the Flesh do cease to be
Reigning and Rampant among them, who Live under the Gospel, through the
victorious and more powerful Operation of the Spirit of Grace breathing in it.
For then by the Influence of the same Spirit, not only such vicious
Inclinations are plucked up by the Roots, as certainly withstand a Peoples
Felicity; but such positive Principles are implanted, as tend to promote it.
Yet since this Conjunction is not constant, but such insolences of wickedness,
as more directly tend to make a People miserable, may be represt by Inferior
Causes: I therefore more expressly add, that then Peace may be reckoned a
certain, and a full Blessing, when with it we behold a Divine Offspring
continually rising up, of Men appearing to be Born of GOD, and to have received
a GOD like Nature; apt to do Good, and become Blessings to the World. When
there is a Rising Generation of such! Not proselyted to this or that Party, but
to real substantial Godliness and Christianity. When Multitudes are thus turned
unto the Lord, When there are numerous Conversions, a new Creation is springing
up in visible and multiplied instances, so as that Holiness comes to be both an
extensive and illustrious thing; when Multitude comes to give Reputation to
serious Religion; when it is no longer a Reproach to be a visible Fearer of
GOD, because generally Men are so. When it is looked upon as no fashionable
Thing, to be a despifer of God, and Heaven, and to breath out Contempt, of the
Divine Power that gave us Breath. And

7. WHEN hereupon, the Divine Government obtains and takes place in the Minds
and Consciences of Men. When his Authority is owned with Reverential
Submission. Then GOD does Bless a People, when his Fear spreads far and near;
GOD shall bless us, and all the Ends of the Earth shall fear Him; as in that
Psalm 67, the latter end. And again,

8. WHEN there is a manifest Power and prevalency of Divine Love amongst Men,
that bear the same Name of Christians; when that Peace of GOD Rules in their
Hearts, unto which they are all called in one Body. When they observably keep
the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. When they have Peace one toward
another, so as that it may be seen that they are all the Sons of Peace, the
Children of the same Father, who has conveyed it into them, as part of that
Divine Nature, which he communicates to the Regenerate Seed, when there is a
natural Propensity to one another, that they can no more Violate and Tear that
vital Bond of Love and Peace that is among them, than they can endure to Tear
their own Flesh, or pluck out their own Eyes. When Peace among Christians,
appears to be a connatural Thing, not the product of Convenience and prudential
Considerations only; but a Nature, which none can more endure to Counter-Act,
than to offer Violence to themselves; a Thing which Nature admits not, whose
Laws never allow it to Act against it self. And

Lastly, WHEN, upon all this, GOD appears to be Reconciled unto such a People,
For in His Favor is Life. When all these Things do concur, as so many
Indications of His being at Peace with them, i. e. That He has entirely
Forgiven them All Former Offenses, That their Sins and Iniquities He remembers
no more; And these concur with such Things as partly Make, and partly Argue
them, the Objects of His Delight, That He has Written His Law in their Hearts,
He has Put His Spirit into them, He has made them a Company of God-like
Creatures like Himself, whose very Nature is Love; they are his Living
Resemblances in that very Respect, expressing herein His Virtues, who has
Called them out of Darkness, into His own Glorious and Marvelious Light.
Hereupon, such a People may reckon themselves secure of GOD's own Prefence, He
is in the midst of them, and His Glory ceases to hover, becomes with them a
Fixed Thing, settles its Station, as not about to discontinue or remove; their
Land may now be called, The Land of Immanuel, and bears the Inscription GOD
with us. The Tabernacle of GOD is with them, and He is resolved to Dwell with
them, and be their GOD, and a-vow them before all the World for His Peculiar
People. After the many things that do concur together, in an Inferior kind, as
the concomitants of a merely External Peace as, That their Sons grow up as
Plants, their Daughters as so many Polished corner Stones, that join together
the Walls of a Palace, that their Garners be full, their Sheep numerous, their
Oxen strong, and that there be no complaining in their Streets; after all these
things, it is subjoned, Yea, Happy is the People whose GOD is the LORD. All the
forementioned things, alone, will never make a Blessing worthy of a People
peculiar to GOD. But when it can be said, That the LORD is their GOD, they are
an Happy People indeed, Psalm 144. 12. 15. Such as these are the Things
Requisite to make Peace a Complete Blessing. But now we are

2. TO show you the Requisiteness of the Concurrence and Concomitancy of such
Things to the mentioned Purpose; or how it may appear, that such Things as
these are necessary to complete this Blessing, or to make it a truly valuable,
or a special Blessing. In Order hereto Note,

1. THAT there is such a Thing, as a special Blessing, very distinguishable
from such Blessings as are merely Common. We read of one Jabez, 1 Chronicles, 4. 9,
10. said to be more honorable than his Brethren. And somewhat very remarkable
(as we are to reckon, when to the Divine Wisdom it was thought fit to be
inserted amidst a Genealogical Discourse) is further said of him; viz. That he
called to the GOD of Israel, saying, O! that thou would Bless me indeed, etc.
And it is added, GOD granted what he Requested. It seems, besides what goes
under the Common Notion of Blessing, he reckoned there was somewhat more
Peculiar, which he calls Blessing indeed. There is a known Hebraism in that
Expression. What we read Bless me indeed, is, Bless me in Blessing me; q. d.
Let me have a Bleessing, within a Blessing; Let me have that Blessing, whereof
the other is but a Cortex, the outside. Let me have that Blessing, that is
wrapped up and enclosed in the external Blessing. And because it is said, And GOD
granted his Request, we have Reason to understand, it was som^what very
peculiar that GOD vouchsafed unto him: And that account which some give us, has
a look that way; that GOD vouchsafed him somewhat more extraordinary in the
kind of Mental and Intellectual Endowments: For we are otherwise informed, that
this Jabez became a noted Doctor among the Jews, and that the City, called
after his Name, was thereupon afterward the Residence of such as were most
Learned in their Laws, Vatabl. apud Critic. That is to be Blessed indeed, to
have these Things conferred, that do reach the Mind, and affect the inner Man;
to be blessed with Spiritual Blessings from the Heavenly Places, as in that
Ephesians. 1. 3. There is a Spiritual sort of Blessing, that may be enclosed in the
External Blessing: And particularly in this of Peace, which while it is common
to the People of GOD, with other Men is it self not common.

2. I further Note, That the things I have mentioned to you, they are of that
special kind, they are either immediate Spiritual Blessings or Subservient to
such. Whereupon now we may, from several considerations, evince to you, that,
without them, such an External Good as this of Peace, is not a complete
Blessing:

1. IT is no Argument of GOD's Special Favor. The Best and most Valuable
Blessings are from the (...), the good pleasure of His Will, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5.
Other Men may enjoy External Benefits, may both Prosper in War, and Flourish in
Peace, as well, and often more than GOD's own People. You Read of a Time,
wherein the whole Earth is said to be at Rest and Quiet, Is. 14. 7. Therefore
mere Peace is no mark of Special Divine Favor, and so is not Abstractly
considered, a Complete Blessing; not a Self-desirable Thing.

2. MEN are not made by it the better Men; they may enjoy Peace, and being
Carnal-minded Men before, may still continue so, as great Strangers to GOD as
they were, as Vain and Sensual, as Profligate and Licentious, as Useless in the
World, as Mischievous; every way as Ill Men as ever. And

3. THEY may, by mere External Peace, become so much the worse Men. That may be
an Occasion to them of their growing worse and worse. The Prosperity of Fools
(i. e. of Wicked Men) slays and destroys them, Prove. 1. 32. It Is an
Observation, that runs through the Course of Time, that as Wars at length beget
an enforced Peace; so Peace, infers free Trade and Comerce, and that Plenty,
and that, Pride and Wantonness; so these run us back in an ^esie, but unhappy
Circle to be as we were, in War again. And if tha^ prove not the present or the
speedy Consequent, that ensues which is worse than War, unless GOD vouchsafe
that other sort of Blessing, which will Influence, and Better Men's minds. Vice
springs up in the more fattened Soil. Men's Lusts will soon prove more
Oppressive Tyrants than they can have freed themselves from, by the justest and
most prosperous War, and will subdue them to a far Viler and more Ignoble
Servitude. An ingenious Writer of those Affairs, Vell: Patercul.
observes, that the former Scipio opened the way to the Roman Power; the
Latter, to their Luxury. Their Virtue languisht, and they were conquered by
their own Vices, who before could Conquer the World. Sen.
That Noted Moralist says, Infirmi est animi, non posse pati divitias. It Is a
weak mind that cannot bear a prosperous condition: But where are there minds
strong enough to bear it, if they be not Blessed from Above with somewhat better
than that Prosperity it self.

4. Men may, notwithstanding mere External Peace, he as miserable in this, and
in the other World, as if they had never known it; and much more, if by it they
have been the more wicked. I beseech you consider, Are they a Blessed People?
Or, Is that a Blessed Man, between whom and Eternal Misery there is but a
breath? He may but breathe another breath, and be in the midst of Flames; Is he
Happy this moment, that may be as Miserable as any Devil the next? Those things
can only be complete Blessings to any, that are inseparable ones, and that will
make them for ever Blessed. For me to have but such a Blessing, as does not
make me Blessed! What an unblest Blessing is this! A Philosopher can tell you,
Blessedness cannot be a thing separable from my self; not a (...), Arist. It
can much less be such a thing as may leave me miserable to all Eternity, least
of all, what may make me so, by degenerating into a Curse, as Mal. 2. 2.

THEREFORE these are demonstrations that mere External Peace, without such
Additions as you have heard of, can never be a Complete Blessing, nor such as
can be understood vouchsafed to the People of GOD, as their Ultimate and
Consummative Felicity.

IT must in the mean time be acknowledged, that as a People may belong to GOD,
Externally more than another People; and may some time be Externally more
reformed than at other times; so Peace, with other External Good Things, may
thereupon be afforded them, as Less-expressive Marks of GOD's Favor, and
approbation of their more Regular Course. And by the Tenor of GOD's particular
Covenant with the people of Israel, might more certainly be expected so to be.
Yet this is a State wherein it is not reasonable or safe for any finally to
acquiess.

I therefore now come to the promised Use, which will correspond to the two
General Heads I have been discoursing of First, To let you s^e what cause of
Thanksgiving we have in reference to the former, the Blessing of Peace
abstractly considered. And, Secondly, What Cause of Supplication we have, in
reference to the latter, the Additions that are requisite to make it a Complete
Blessing.

1. As to the former, Since Peace is so Valuable a Thing, consisidered apart,
as you have heard it is. This points out to us The matter of Than^sgiving, for
which this day is appointed, That GOD has preserved our KING, amidst so
innumerable Dangers abroad; That He has brought him home to us in Safety; That
He has made him the Instrument of That Peace, that we find is at length brought
about, wherein he is returned to us a Greater Conqueror, than if he had Routed
and Destroyed never so Potent Armies of our Enemies in the Field, we have
Reason to understand the matter so. By prevailing in War, he had only Conquered
by Force; by prevailing for Peace, he has Conquered by Wisdom and Goodness. By
prevailing in War, he had only Conquered the Bodily Power of our Enemies, or
their baser part; by prevailing for Peace, he has Conquered their minds. By
prevailing in War, he had brought about the Good only of one side; by
prevailing for Peace, he has brought about the Real Benefit of both sides, a
far more diffusive Blessing. By prevailing in War, he had Conquered Enemies; by
prevailing for Peace, he has Conquered Enmity it self. By prevailing in War, he
had overcome other Men; but in prevailing for Peace, considering his Martial
Spirit, and his high Provocations, he has done a far Greater Thing, he has
Conquered himself, whom none ever Conquered before.

BESIDES what this Great Blessing of Peace, generally considered, contains in
it self, we ought to Amplify it to our selves, being brought about by such
means, wherein we have so particular a Concern. This ought to add with us a
very Grateful Relish to it, for it is a Glory to our Nation, that GOD has set a
Prince on the English Throne, that could signify so much to the World; the
Beams of that Glory, GOD has cast on him, reflect, and shine upon His People;
to be made the Head among other Nations, and not the Tail; GOD has in His Word
Taught us, Not to count it an inconsiderable thing. And it is our more peculiar
Glory, that our KING is Renowned, not by throwing Death and Destruction every
where round about him; but by spreading the Benefits included in Peace through
the Neighbour-Nations. And is Returned to us, leaving the rest of Europe only
to Lament that they all live not under his Government; I pray GOD he may meet
with no Ungrateful Returns; and that none may be so ill-minded as to grudge at
Power so lodged as to save us, who were less concerned at its being lodged,
where it could only be designed to destroy us. In the mean time, it might
Excite us to the higher pitches of Thankfulness to Almighty GOD, for this
Blessing of the Present Peace, if we did consider,

BOTH, what it has Cost.

AND whereto it is Improvable.

BUT the Former Consideration I shall not insist upon, lest any should make an
undue use of it.

AND the Latter, I leave to the following Head, which we are next to proceed
to, Viz.

Secondly. TO show what matter of Supplication remains to us upon the latter
Account, that is, with Reference to such things as are yet wanting to make this
Blessing of Peace a Complete Blessing, and without which it cannot be
understood to be such; but we may be left, at last, a most miserable People;
and so much the more miserable, by how much the higher Favors we have to
account for, that not being Improved, must have been thrown away upon us. The
Mercies included in the Peace, will be unimproved and lost, without the
mentioned Additions. Whereof all the several Heads that were Recited belong to
one, Viz, That of Spiritual Blessing; That therefore in the General, we have to
pray for, that GOD may be said to Bless us indeed, to Bless us in Blessing us,
viz. That He would Bless us with Spiritual Blessings in the Heavenlies, (i. e.
in Heavenly Things, or from the Heavenly Places) in Christ Jesus, as Ephesians. 1. 3.

LET us I Pray you Learn to distinguish between a Self-desirable Good, that in
its own Nature, is such, so immutably, and invariably that it can never
degenerate, or cease to be such; And what is only such by Accident, and in some
Circumstances may be much otherwise.

SPIRITVAL Good, that of the Mind and Spirit, and which makes that better,
especially that which accompanies Salvation, Heb. 6. 9. That runs into
Eternity, and goes with us into the other World, is of the former Sort.

EXTERNAL Good, is but Res Media, capable of being to us, sometimes Good, and
sometimes Evil, as the Case may alter. Blessings of this kind may become
Curses. Mal. 2. 2. I will Curse your Blessings -- yea I have cursed them
already --. A Man's Table may become his Snare, and that which was for his
welfare a Trap, Psalm 69. 22.

MERELY External Blessings, are Curses, when they become the fuel of Lusts,
when they animate Men unto Contests against Heaven, rebellions against the
Divine Government; when, like Jesurun, Men wax Fat by them, and Kick against
Heaven, Deuteronomy, 32. This we are always liable to, till Spiritual Blessings,
intermingle with our other Blessings. And nothing should more convince the
World, that the kindest and most benign Part of the Divine Government lies in
immediate Influences on the Minds of Men, and that consequently their own
Felicity depends thereon. Let all things that can be imagined, concur in the
kind of External Good; and they can never make him an Happy Man, that has an
ill Mind: He will always be his own Hell, and carry that about with him
wheresoever he goes; He will be a constant Spring and Fountain of Misery to
Himself; Misery, and he cannot be separated from one another. There is no Peace
to the Wicked, says my GOD; but he will be always a troubled Sea, whose Waters
cast forth Mire and Dirt, Isa. 57. 20, 21. The Philosophy of Pagans would have
made them ashamed to Place their Felicity in any Thing without, or Foreign to
themselves.

BUT we are Christians, and shall we not much more be ashamed, to take other,
or even opposite Measures of Blessedness, to those which are given us by our
Divine Master.

TO be Toor in Spirit; upon just accounts Mourners, Meek, Hungry and Thirsty
after Righteousness, Merciful, Pure in Heart. Peacemakers. To submit to be
persecuted for Righteousness-sake. These are his Characters of a Blessed Man.
And He places that Blessedness it self in Congenerous Things, Mat. 5. 3, 4, 5,
etc.

LET us Learn from him; and Collect that nothing but Wickedness can make us
miserable. What an overflowing Deluge have we in View? Tending to subvert our
Religion, and Our Civil State together! Nor have we another Effectual Remedy in
view, but the Spirit of GOD, if He will vouchsafe to pour it forth. The great
Enemy of Mankind is come in upon us like a Flood; and only the Spirit of the
Lord can lift up a Standard against him, Isa. 59. 19. The Spirit of the Lord
would be to us as a purifying Flame, to burn up our Filthiness, and enkindle in
us that Divine Love, that would make us Zealous of good Works. And this should
be with us the Matter of earnest and incessant Supplication, not with
Diffidence, for He will give his Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11. 13. Nor
with diminishing Thoughts of the Necessity and Value of the Gift. Take heed of
that, for that were to be miserable and undone by a Principle; To be misled by
a profane false Judgment, into the Contempt of the most highly valuable
Things, that are most necessary to our true Welfare. And which are all
contained in the Gift of the Spirit, as you may see by comparing Mat. 7. and
Luke 11. with one another. In the one Place it is said. He will give good
Things to them that ask him; in the other Place it is said, his Spirit;
implying, that the Gift of the Spirit Involves in it all good Things. And
certainly nothing can be good to any Man, till he has that Spirit that makes
him Good: And we are greatly concerned, to Supplicate mightily for the Effusion
of that Blessed Spirit, for these two Purposes especially. First, That there
may be a larger Diffusion amongst us of Vital Religion, whereby we shall be at
Peace with GOD. Secondly, That Christian Love may more abound, whereby
Christians may be composed to mutual Peace, and more disposed to mutual
Communion with one another.

1. THAT there may be a larger Diffusion of Vital Religion. Wherein stands
indeed their being at Peace with GOD, when there is a mutual amplexus between
him and them, Mind touching Mind, and Spirit Spirit; when He does, by His
Spirit, embrace the Spirits of Men, and infuse Light and Life into them, and
adapt and suit them for his Communion. To this Purpose, we have great Cause to
beg and supplicate earnestly, for a greater pouring forth of his Spirit that
this living Religion may spread amongst us: For we appear to be under a Doom,
while it does not so, that seeing we should see, and not perceive, etc. Isa. 6.
O the fearful guilt incurred one Lords Day after another! When great Assemblies
meet together, Multitudes are besought and supplicated, that they would be
Reconciled to GOD, but too few Listen. Peace with GOD, seems not a valuable
Thing with us, His Favor in which is Life, is little set by. When, with many a
one, a Treaty is continued, in Order to Peace, through many Years, Seven, Ten,
Twenty, Thirty, nay Forty Years; and yet this Treaty brings not about a Peace
at last; but they stand out still, hardened in their Impenitency, Infidelity,
Obstinacy, Enmity, against GOD and his Christ, through the Power and Dominion
that an Earthly, Vain, Carnal Mind has in them, and over them. What can our
Peace with Men signify in this Case? What do we not know, that the Friendship
of this World is Enmity against God? James 4. 4. 1 John 2. 15. And that it is
as impossible, for a Man to be a sincere Lover of GOD, and an over-intense
Lover of this World, as to have two GODS, i. e. two Supreme Powers to govern
him, two Supreme Goods to satisfy him. This must breed a perpetual War, till
the Case alters between Thee, and Him that made Thee; and Woe to him that
strives with His Maker! To have the Wrath of GOD, Armed with Omnipotency,
engaged against Thee; and yet that thou should not covet Peace, that yet
thou should not cry for Peace! To have the Peacemaking Blood of thy
Redeemer, crying to Thee, O he at Peace with GOD! To have Him that shed it thus
bespeaking Thee, I am ready to do the Part of a Days-man; I have dyed upon the
Cross, that I might do so, that I might effect and bring about a Peace between
GOD and Thee. I am ready to Mediate, make Use of Me. I will undertake on GODS
Part, that He shall Pardon Thee, that He shall Forgive Thee, and let the
Controversy fall, if yet thy Heart, on thy Part, will yield, melt, and relent,
and thou cry for Mercy. He came with this Design into this World, the
Proclamation of Angels at His coming spoke his Design, Glory to GOD in the
Highest, and Peace on Earth, and Good Will toward Men. Shall not all this be
believed? Or shall Men pretend to believe it, and not Consider it, or not Look
upon it, as a considerable Thing?

2. AND there is as much need too, that we supplicate for this Spirit, as a
Spirit of mutual Love among Christians, to reconcile them to one another. Which
indeed is also but to Christianize them, to make Vital Religion take Place with
them. For that same Spirit of Christ, which animates his Body, and makes them
his Living Members, makes them such to one another. And the Matter speaks it
self, That opposite Spirit unto truly Christian Peace and Love which appears
amongst us, nothing but the Spirit of Christ can overcome; we are not to expect
a Cure of our Distempers in this Kind, but by the pouring forth of this Blessed
Spirit: And if there be not a Cure, we are certainly to expect the pouring
forth of his Wrath. And Things look with a Threatening Aspect upon us to this
Purpose. Now that Opportunity is so Inviting, GODS Call so Loud, and the Way so
Plain. That yet an Indisposition to Peace should be so obstinate, that Breaches
should be kept open by Trifles, and unaccountable Things, of which no Man of
Sense can pretend to give an Account. That there is Strife, too manifestly not
from the Love of Truth whereof not one Hair needs be Lost (nor of any other
valuable Thing) but merely from the Love of Strife; when as to the most
Material and Important Truths, Men are agreed, but would seem to disagree; they
Mean the same Things, but impute to one another a different Meaning; and
pretend to know the others Mind better than themselves, that on that pretense
they may Quarrel with them! All this looks Fatally. And our unjust Angers at
one another, are too expressive of GODS just Anger with us all; that his Good
Spirit, that Spirit of Love, Peace, Kindness, Benignity is so notoriously
Resisted, Vexed, Grieved, and Despited by us. And the Consequences are likely,
for some Time, to be very Dismal. Though when GOD has proceeded in a Way of
Punitive Animadversion, so far as he shall Judge necessary for the Vindication
of his own Name, and the Honor of our Religion so scandalously misrepresented
to the World, it will be easy to Him, by one Victorious Effort of that Spirit
to reduce the Christian Church to its Original, genuine Temper; and make it
shine again, in its own Native Light, and Luster. But in the Mean Time, I
cannot see, that there is greater need of an over-pouring Influence of the Holy
Ghost, to draw Men into Union with Christ, and thereby to bring back Apostate
Souls to GOD, or to work in them Faith and Repentance, than to bring them into
Union upon Christian Terms, with one another. Or that the Love of this World,
or any the most ignominious sensual Lust, or Vice (Drunkenness, Gluttony, or
any other) are more hardly, or more rarely overcome, than the Envy, Wrath,
Malice, which Christians ordinarily, are not at all shy of expressing toward
one another.

I speak upon some Experience, lamenting that having this occasion (which Sense
of Duty will not let me balk) I have also so much Cause, to mention that
foregoing Observation. For I cannot forget, that sometime Discoursing with some
very Noted Persons about the business of Union among Christians, it has been
freely granted me, that there was not so much as a Principle left (among those
the Discourse had Reference to) upon which to Disagree. And yet the same fixed
Aversion to Union, continued as before; as a plain Proof, they were not
Principles, but Ends, we were still to differ for. In this Case, what but the
Power of an Almighty Spirit can overcome? To quote Texts of Scripture upon such
Occasions, signifies nothing, even to those who profess a Veneration for those
Holy Oracles of GOD. Let such Places be mentioned, as are expressly directed
against Division, Wrath, Strife, Slandering or Backbiting one another, and they
avail no more, than if the Vice, were the Virtue, or the Virtue the Vice; no
more than if it were a Command to Christians, to Malign, to Traduce, to
Backbite one another. To urge so plain and numerous Scriptures in these Cases,
it is to as little Purpose, as to oppose ones Breath to a Storm; It is the same
Thing, as if all Scriptures, that had any Aspect or Look this Way, were quite
put out of the Canon, and all this, with Men zealous for the Divine Authority
of the Scripture. And indeed it is come to that pass as to look like a Jest, to
expect that any Man should be swayed by Scripture, or the most convincing
Reason agreeable thereto, against his own Passion or Humor, or against the
(supposed though never so grossly mistaken) Interest of his Party.

NOR is it mere Peace, that is to be aimed at, but free, mutual Christian
Communion with such, as do all hold the Head, Christ. As Peace between Nations
infers Commerce, so among Christian Churches, it ought to infer a Fellowship in
Acts of Worship. I wish there were no Cause to say this is declined, when no
Pretense is left against it but false Accusation; none but what must be
supported by Lying and Calumny: Too many are busy at inventing of that which
is no where to be found, that Exists not in the Nature of Things, that they may
have a Color for continued Distance. And is not this, to fly in the Face of
the Authority under which we Live? i. e. The Ruling Power of the Kingdom of
Christ, the Prince of Peace? It Is strange they are not ashamed to be called
Christians; that they do not Discard and Abandon the Name, that can allow
themselves in such Things! And it is here to be Noted, that it is quite another
Thing, what is in it self True or False, Right or Wrong, and what is to be a
Measure or Boundary of Christian Communion. Are we yet to Learn, that Christian
Communion is not amongst Men that are perfect, but that are Laboring under
manifold Imperfections, both in Knowledge and Holiness! And whatsoever Mistake
in Judgment, or Obliquity in Practice, can consist with holding the Head, ought
to consist also with being of the same Christian Communion; not the same
Locally which is impossible; but the same occasionally, as any Providence
invites at this or that Time; and Mentally, in Heart and Spirit, at all Times.
And to such Peace (and consequently Communion) we are all called in one ^ody,
Col. 3. 15. We are expressly required to receive one another (which cannot but
Mean into each others Communion) and not to doubtful Disputations, Romans 14. 1.
If any be Thought to be Weak, and thereupon to Differ from us in some or other
Sentiments, if the Difference consists with holding the Head, they are not,
because they are Weak, to be Refused Communion, but Received; and Received,
because tbe Lord has Received them, Ver. 3. All that we should think Christ has
Received into his Communion, we ought to Receive into ours, Romans 15. 7.
Scriptures are so express to this Purpose, that nothing can be more.

AND, indeed, to make New Boundaries of Christian Communion, is to make a New
Christianity, and a New Gospel, and New Rules of Christ's Kingdom; and, by
which to distinguish Subjects and Rebels, and in Effect to Dethrone Him, to
Rival Him in His highest Prerogative, viz. The Establishing the Terms of Life
and Death, for Men Living under his Gospel. It is to Confine Salvation, in the
Means of it, to such or such a Party, such a Church; arbitrarily Distinguished
from the rest of Christians. As if the Privileges of his Kingdom belonged to a
Party only; and that, for instance the Lords Table were to lose its Name, and
be no longer so called, but the Table of this or that Church, constituted by
Rules of their own Devising. For if it be the Lords Table, they are to keep it
Free, to be approach't upon the Lords Terms, and not their own. In the mean
time, what higher Invasion can there be of Christ's Rights? And since the
Christian Church became so overwise, above what is Written in framing New
Doctrines, and Rules of Worship, How miserably it has Languish't, and been
Torn in Pieces, they cannot be ignorant who have read any Thing of the History
of it.

AND indeed there is not a Difference to be found, amongst them that hold the
Head, but must be so Minute, that it cannot be a Pretense for Refusing
Communion. For true Christian Charity will at least Resolve it into Weakness.
And Men are generally so kind to themselves, that he from whom another differs,
will be very apt to think himself the stronger; then does the Rule conclude
him, You that a^e Strong, bear the Infirmities of the Weak, and do not Dispute
with them, but Receive them. This Obligation immediately lies on the Strong,
and therefore must take hold of them that think themselves so, not to Dispute
with the others but receive them, and because the Lord has Received them. Does
He take them into his Communion, and will not You take them into Yours? To
profess want of Charity in Excuse, is to Excuse a Fault by a Wickedness. It is
to Usurp Christ's Judgment Seat, and Invade His Office, Romans 14. 4, 10.
Therefore wheresoever there is any such Case to be found, that let a Man be
never so sound in the Faith, never so Orthodox, let him be in all Things else
never so Regular through his whole Conversation, if he do not submit to some
doubtful Thing, Thought perhaps a Matter of indifferency on the one side, and
unlawful on the other; this Person must be excluded Christian Communion, for no
other known Pretense, but only that he presumed to Doubt somewhat in the
imposed Terms; for this very Doubt he is to be Treated as an Heathen or
Publican, or indeed no more to be Received into our Communion, than a Dog or a
Swine. How will this be Justified at Christ's Tribunal!

BUT how much less justisiable is it, if not only Communion be Pefused, but
Ruin Designed, to such as Differ from us about those our Arbitrary Additions
to Christ's Rules, and Boundaries of Christian Communion.

AND scarce can a very serious Person (even in so serious a Matter) forbear to
Smile, when they see them that have done so much harm to their
Felion-Christians, attempt to justify it, only in Effect from their having
Power to do it; which would as well justify any Thing, since no Man does what
he could not do.

NOR yet do I look upon this Proneness, to innovate and devise other Terms of
Christian Communion than Christ has Himself appointed, as the Peculiar
Character of a Party: But as ^ Symptom of the diseased State of the Christian
Church, too plainly appearing in all Parties. As I also reckon it too low and
narrow a Design, to aim at a Oneness of Communion among Christians of this and
that single Party and Persuasion; which would but make so much the Larger
Vleus, and Tumor a greater unnatural Apostem or Secession, in the Sacred Body
of our Blessed Lord. Nothing in this Kind, can be a Design worthy of a
Christian, or suitable to the Spirit of Christ, b^t to have Christian Communion
Extended and Limited, according to the extent, and Limits of visibly Serious
and vital Christianity. And hereof, that distinguishing Judgment, which is
necessary, is as little difficult as in Private Conversation between a Visible
Friend, and a Visible Enemy, or in Public and Political, between a Visible
Subject, and a Visible Rebel. So far as a Discrimination can and according to
Christ's Rules (not our own unbounded Fancies) ought to be made, any serious
Living Christian, of whatsoever Party or Denomination; I ought to communicate
with as such, and with only such. For Living Christians to sever from one
another, or to mingle with the Dead, is an equal Transgression. Nor must our
Judgment of any such Case, be guided by mere Charity, but must guide it, being
it self guided by the known Laws of Christ.

TO Sum up all, when once we shall have Learned to distinguish between the
Essentials of Christianity, and accidental Appendages, And between Accidents of
Christ's appointing, and of our Devising, and to dread affixing of our own
Devices to so Sacred an Institution. Much more when every Truth or Duty
contained in the Bible, cannot be counted Essential or Necessary, when we shall
have learnt not only not to add Inventions of our own to that Sacred Frame, but
much more not to presume to insert them into the Order of Essentials or
Necessaries, and Treat Men as no Christians, for wanting them. When the Gospel
shall have its Liberty to the utmost Ends of the Earth. When the Regenerating
Spirit shall go forth with it, and propagate a Divine and GOD like Nature every
where among Men. When Regeneration shall be understood to signify the
communicating of such a Nature, and such Dispositions to Men. When the weight
of such Words comes to be apprehended [ He that hates his Brother, abides in
Death, 1 John 2.] When to be Born of GOD ceases to signify with us, being
Proselyted to this or that Church formed and distinguished by Humane Device.
When Religious Pretenses Cease to serve Political Purposes, when the Interest
of a Party ceases to weigh more with us than the whole Christian Interest. When
Sincerity shall be Thought the noblest Embellishment of a Christian, When the
Wolf also shall direll with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall Lie down with the
Kid: And the Calf, and the Young Lion and the Fatling together, and a little
Child shall lead them. And the Cow and the Bear shall feed, their Young Ones
shall lie down together: And the Lion shall Eat straw like the Ox. And the
Sucking Child shall Play on the hole of the Asp, and the Weaned Child shall put
his Hand on the Cockatrice-Desn. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my Holy
Mountain: For the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the
Waters cover the Sea, Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. Then will our Peace be as a River,
and our Righteousness as the Waves of the Sea. Isa. 48. 18. And the Glorious
Lord will Himself be to us a Place of broad Waters, Chapter 33. 21. Where Straits,
and Rocks, and Shelves, shall no more Affright or Endanger us. But if these
Things take no Place with us, then have we Cause to apprehend that the Things
of our Peace are yet hid from our Eyes.

FINIS.
BOOKS written by the Reverend Mr. John How. Printed for Tho. Parkhurst.
1. OF Thoughtsulness for the Morrow. With an Appendix concerning the
immoderate Desire of fore-knowing things to come. 2. Of Charity in Reference to
other Men's Sins. 3. The Redeemer's Tears wept over lost Souls, in a Treatise on
Luke 19. 41, 42. With an Appendix, wherein somewhat is occasionally Discoursed
concerning the Sin against the Holy Ghost, and how God is said to Will the
Salvation of them that Perish. 4. A Sermon directing what we are to do after a
strict Enquiry whether or no we truly Love God. 5. A Funeral Sermon for Mrs.
Esther Sampson, the late Wife of Henry Sampson, Doctor of physic, who died
Nov. 24. 1689. 6. The Carnality of Religious Contention. In two Sermons
Preached at the Merchants Lecture in Broad-street. 7. A Calm and Sober Enquiry
concerning the Possibility of a Trinity in the Godhead. 8. A Letter to a Friend
concerning a Postscript to the Defense of Dr. Sherlock's Notion of the Trinity
in Unity, relating to the Calm and Sober Enquiry upon the same Subject. 9. A
View of that Part of the late Considerations Addressed to H. H. about the
Trinity. Which concerns the Sober Enquiry, On that Subject.
There is now Published two scarce Books, The Fountain of Life Opened; or a
Display of Christ in his Essential and Mediatorial Glory: Containing Forty Two
Sermons on various Texts. And also of (...) or, a Treatise of the Soul of Man.
Both in 4to. By the late Reverend and Learned Mr. John Flavel, Minister of the
Gospel at Dartmouth.


