

THE Lady's New Years Gift: OR, ADVICE TO A DAUGHTER, Under these following
Heads: Viz.

Religion, Husband, House and Family. Servants, Behavior and Conversation,
Friendships, Censure, Vanity and Affectation, Pride. Diversions, Dancing.
The Second Edition Corrected by the Original.

London, Printed for Matt. Gillyflower in Westminster Hall, and James Partridge
at Charing Cross, 1688

ADVERTISEMENT.
THis Book being sent to a Scrivener to be Copied out, the Scrivener
surreptitiously took another Copy of it for himself, and disposing it to a
Person that knew not what to do with it, and ignorant of its worth, he sold it
us: We getting a License for it, as a Book of an unknown Author, put it to the
Press; but finding such a multitude of Faults in it, as has made us ashamed
and troubled that so excellent a Piece (according to the Universal Judgment)
should be so mangled and abused, we have made all the haste we could to get the
Original Manuscript it self, which the said Person had, and Printed this new
Edition. The Reader shall know this right Copy from the other by the Engraved
Figure before the Title.

Matthew Gillyflower. James Partridge.

THE Lady's New Years Gift: OR, ADVICE TO A DAUGHTER.

INTRODUCTION.
Dear Daughter,
I Find, that even our most pleasing Thoughts will be unquiet; they will be in
motion; and the Mind can have no rest whilst it is possessed by a darling
Passion. You are at present the chief Object of my Care, as well as of my
Kindness, which sometimes throws me into Visions of your being happy in the
World, that are better suited to my partial Wishes, than to my reasonable Hopes
for you. At other times, when my Fears prevail, I shrink as if I were struck at
the prospect of Danger, to which a young Woman must be exposed. By how much the
more Lively, so much the more Liable you are to be hurt; as the finest Plants
are soonest nipped by the Frost. Whilst you are playing full of Innocence, the
spiteful World will bite, except you are guarded by your Caution. Want of Care
therefore, my dear Child, is never to be excused; since, as to this World, it
has the same effect as want of Virtue. Such an early sprouting Wit requires
to be so much the more sheltred by some Rules, like something strewn on tender
Flowers to preserve them from being blasted. You must take it well to be pruned
by so kind a Hand as that of a Father. There may be some bitterness in mere
Obedience: The natural Love of Liberty may help to make the Commands of a
Parent harder to go down. Some inward resistance there will be, where Power and
not Choice makes us move; but when a Father lays aside his Authority, and
persuadeth only by his Kindness, you will never answer it to Good Nature, if it
has not weight with you.

A great part of what is said in the following Discourse may be above the
present growth of your Understanding; but that becoming every day taller, will
in a little time reach up to it, so as to make it easy to you. I am willing to
begin with you before your Mind is quite formed, that being the time in which
it is most capable of receiving a Color that will last when it is mixed with
it. Few things are well learnt, but by early Precepts: Those well infused, make
them Natural; and we are never sure of retaining what is valuable, till by a
continual Habit we have made it a Piece of us.

Whether my Skill can draw the Picture of a fine Woman, may be a Question; but
it can be none, That I have drawn that of a kind Father: If you will take an
exact Copy, I will so far presume upon my Workmanship, as to undertake you
shall not make an ill Figure, Give me so much Credit as to try, and I am sure
that neither your Wishes nor mine shall be disappointed.

RELIGION.
THe first thing to be considered, is Religion: It must be the chief Object of
your Thoughts, since it would be a vain thing to direct your Behavior in the
World, and forget that which you are to have toward him who made it. In a
strict sense, it is the only thing necessary: you must take it into your Mind,
and thence throw it into your Heart, where you are to embrace it so close, as
never to lose the Possession of it. But then it is necessary to distinguish
between the Reality and the Pretense. Religion does not consist in believing
the Legend of the Nursery, where Children with their Milk are fed with the
Tales of Witches, Hobgoblins, Prophecies, and Miracles. We suck in so greedily
these early Mistakes, that our riper Understanding has much ado to cleanse our
Minds from this kind of Trash: The Stories are so entertaining, that we do not
only believe them, but relate them; which makes the discovery of the Truth
somewhat grievous, when it makes us lose such a Field of Impertinence, where we
might have diverted our selves, besides the shame thrown upon us for having
ever received them. This is making the World a Feast, and imputing to God
Almighty, That the Province he assigns to the Devil, is to play at
Blind-mans-buff, and show Tricks with Mankind; and is so far from being
Religion, that it is not Sense, and has right only to be called that kind of
Devotion, of which, Ignorance is the undoubted Mother, without competition or
dispute. These Mistakes are therefore to be left off with your Hangingsleeves;
and you ought to be as much out of countenance to be found with them about you,
as to be seen playing with Babies, at an Age when other things are expected
from you.

The next thing to be observed to you, is, That Religion does as little consist
in loud Answers and devout Convulsions at Church, or Praying in an
extraordinary manner. Some Ladies are so extreme stirring at Church, one would
swear the Worm in their Conscience made them so unquiet. Others will have such
a Divided Face between a Devout Goggle and an Inviting Glance, that the
unnatural Mixture makes even their best Looks to be at that time ridiculous.
These affected Appearances are ever suspected, like very strong Perfumes, which
are generally thought no very good Symptoms in those that make use of them. Let
your earnestness therefore be reserved for your Closet, where you may have God
Almighty to your self: In Public be still and calm, neither indecently
Careless, or Affected in the other Extreme.

It is not true Devotion, to put on an angry Zeal against those who may be of a
differing Persuasion. Partiality to our selves makes us often mistake it for a
Duty, to fall hard upon others in that case; and being pushed on with
Self-conceit, we strike without mercy, believing that the Wounds we give are
Meritorious, and that we are fighting God Almighty's Quarrel; when the truth
is, we are only setting out our selves. Our Devotion too often breaks out
into that Shape which most agrees with our particular Temper. The Choleric
grow into a hardened Severity against all who dissent from them, snatch at all
the Texts of Scripture that suit with their Complexion; and because God's Wrath
was some time kindled, they conclude, That Anger is a Divine Virtue; and are so
far from imagining that their ill-natured Zeal requires an Apology, that they
value themselves upon it, and triumph in it. Others, whose Nature is more
Credulousthan ordinary, admit no Bounds or Measures to it; they grow as proud
of extending their Faith, as Princes are of enlarging their Dominions; not
considering, that our Faith, like our Stomach, is capable of being
over-charg-d; and that as the Last is destroyed by taking in more than it can
digest, so our Reason may be extinguished by oppressing it with the weight of
too many strange things; especially if we are forbidden to chew what we are
commanded to swallow. The Melancholy and the Sullen are apt to place a great
part of their Religion in Dejected and Ill-humour'd Looks, putting on an
unsociable Face, and declaiming against the Innocent Entertainments of Life,
with as much sharpness as they could bestow upon the greatest Crimes. This
generally is only a Vizard, there is seldom any thing real in it. No other
thing is the better for being Sour; and it would be hard that Religion should
be so, which is the best of things. In the mean time it may be said with truth,
That this surly kind of Devotion has perhaps done little less hurt in the
World, by frighting, than the most scandalous Examples have done by infecting
it.

Having told you, in these few Instances, to which many more might have been
added, what is not true Religion; it is time to describe to you; what is so.
The ordinary Definitions are no more like it, than the common Sign-posts are
like the Princes they would represent; the unskilful Dawbers in all Ages have
generally laid on such ill Colors, and drawn such harsh Lines, that the Beauty
of it is not easily to be discovered: They have put in all the forbidding
Features that can be thought of; and in the first place, have made it an
irreconcilable Enemy to Nature; when, in reality, they are not only Friends,
but Twins, born together at the same time; and it is doing violence to them
both, to go about to have them separated. Nothing is so kind and so inviting as
true and Unsophisticated Religion: In stead of imposing unnecessary Burdens
upon our Nature, it eases us of the greater weight of our Passions and
Mistakes: In stead of subduing us with Rigor, it redeemeth us from the Slavery
we are in too our selves, who are the most severe Masters, whilst we are under
the Usurpation of our Appetites let loose and unrestrained.

Religion is a cheerful thing, so far from being always at Cuffs with Good
Humor, that it is inseparably united to it. Nothing unpleasant belongs to it,
though the Spiritual Cooks have done their unskilful part to give an ill Relish
to it. A wise Epicure would be Religious for the sake of Pleasure: Good Sense
is the Foundation of both; and he is a Bungler who aims at true Luxury, but
where they are joined.

Religion is exalted Reason, refined and sifted from the grosser parts of it:
It dwells in the upper Region of the Mind, where there are no Clouds or Mists
to darken or offend it: It is both the Foundation and the Crown of all Virtues:
it is Morality improved and raised to its height, by being carried nearer
Heaven, the only place where Perfection resideth. It cleanses the
Understanding, and brusheth off the Earth that hangs about our Souls. It does
not want the Hopes and the Terrors which are made use of to support it: neither
ought it to descend to the borrowing any Argument out of it self, since there
we may find every thing that should invite us. If we were to be hired to
Religion, it is able to out-bid the corrupted World, with all it can offer to
us, being so much the Richer of the too in every thing where Reason is admitted
to be Judge of the Value. Since this is so, it is worth your pains to make
Religion your choice, and not make use of it only as a Refuge.

There are Ladies, who finding by the too visible decay of their good Looks,
that they can shine no more by that Light, put on the Varnish of an affected
Devotion, to keep up some kind of Figure in the World; they take Sanctuary in
the Church, where they are pursued by growing Contempt, which will not be
stopped; but follows them to the Altar: such late penitence is only a disguise
for the tormenting grief of being no more handsome. That is the killing thought
which draws the sighs and tears, that appear outwardly to be applied to a
better end.

There are many who have and Aguish Devotion, Hot and Cold Fits, long
Intermissions, and violent Raptures; this unevenness is by all means to be
avoided: let your method be a steady course of good Life, that may run like a
smooth Stream, and be a perpetual Spring to furnish to the continued Exercise
of Virtue. Your Devotion may be earnest, but it must be unconstrained; and like
other Duties, you must make it your Pleasure too, or else it will have but very
little efficacy. By this Rule you may best judge of your own Heart. Whilst
these Duties are Joys, it is an Evidence of their being sincere; but when they
are a Penance, it is a sign that your Nature makes some resistance; and whilst
that lasts, you can never be entirely secure of your self.

If you are often unquiet, and too nearly touched by the cross Accidents of
Life, your Devotion is not of the right Standard, there is too much Allay in
it. That which is right and unmixt, takes away the Sting of every thing that
would trouble you: It is like a healing Balm, that extinguisheth the sharpness
of the Blood; so this softneth and dissolveth the Anguish of the Mind. A devout
Mind has this Privilege, of being free from Passion, as some Climates are from
all manner of venomous kind of Creatures; it will raise you above the little
Vexations to which others for want of it, will be exposed, and will bring you
to a Temper, not of stupid Indifference, but of such a wife Resignation, that
you may live in the World, so as it may hang about you like a loose Garment,
and not tied too close to you.

Take heed of running into that common Error, of applying God's Judgments upon
particular Occasions. Our Weights and Measures are not competent to make the
Distribution either of his Mercy or his Justice: He has thrown a Veil over
these things, which makes it not only an Impertinence, but a kind of Sacrilege,
for us to give Sentence in them without his Commission.

As to your particular Faith, keep to the Religion that is grown up with you,
both as it is the best in it self, and that the reason of staying in it upon
that Ground is somewhat stronger for your Sex, than it will perhaps be allowed
to be for ours; in respect that the Voluminous Enquiries into the Truth, by
Reading, are less expected from you. The Best of Books will be direction enough
to you not to change; and whilst you are fixed and sufficiently confirmed in
your own Mind, you will do best to keep vain Doubts and Scruples at such a
distance, that they may give you no disquiet. Let me recommend to you a Method
of being rightly informed, which can never fail: it is in short this: Get
Understanding, and practice Virtue; and if you are so Blessed as to have these
for your Share, it is not surer that there is a God, than it is, that by him
all Necessary Truths will be revealed to you.

HUSBAND.
THAT which challenges the next place in your Thoughts, is, How to live with a
Husband: And though that is so large a Word, that few Rules can be fixed to it
which are unchangeable, the Methods being as various as the several Tempers of
Men to which they must be suited; yet I cannot omit some General Observations,
which, with the help of your own, may the better direct you in the part of your
Life upon which your Happiness most depends.

It is one of the Disadvantages belonging to your Sex, that young Women are
seldom permitted to make their own Choice; their Friends Care and Experience
are thought safer Guides to them, than their own Fancies; and their Modesty
often forbids them to refuse when their Parents recommend, though their
inward Consent may not entirely go along with it: In this case there remains
nothing for them to do, but to endeavor to make that easy which falls to
their Lot, and by a wife use of every thing they may dislike in a Husband, turn
that by degrees to be very supportable, which, if neglected, might in time
beget an Aversion.

You must first lay it down for a Foundation in general, That there is
Inequality in the Sexes, and that for the better Economy of the World, the
Men, who were to be the Lawgivers, had the larger share of Reason bestowed
upon them; by which means your Sex is the better prepared for the Compliance
that is necessary for the better performance of those Duties which seemed to be
most properly assigned to it. This looks a little uncourtly at the first
appearance; but upon examination it will be found, that Nature is so far from
being unjust to you, that she is partial on your side: She has made you such
large Amends by other Advantages, for the seeming Injustice of the first
Distribution, that the Right of Complaining is come over to our Sex; you have
it in your power not only to free your selves, but to subdue your Masters, and
without violence throw both their Natural and Legal Authority at your Feet. We
are made of differing Tempers, that our Defects might be mutually supplied:
Your Sex wants our Reason for your Conduct, and our Strength for your
Protection: Ours wants your Gentleness to soften, and to entertain us. The
first part of our Life is a good deal of it subjected to you in the Nursery,
where you Reign without Competition, and by that means have the advantage of
giving the first Impressions; afterward you have stronger Influences, which,
well managed, have more force in your behalf, than all our Privileges and
Jurisdictions can pretend to have against you. You have more strength in your
Looks, than we have in our Laws; and more power by your Tears, than we have by
our Arguments.

It is true, that the Laws of Marriage, run in a harsher style toward your
Sex. Obey is an ungentle word, and less easy to be digested, by making such an
unkind distinction in the Words of Contract, and so very unsuitable to the
excess of Good Manners, that generally goes before it; besides, the
universality of the Rule seems to be a Grievance, and it appears
reasonable, that there might be an Exemption for extraordinary Women, from
ordinary Rules, to take away the just Exception that lies against the false
measure of general Equality: it may be alleged by the Council retained by your
Sex, as there is in all other Laws, an Appeal from the Letter to Equity in
Cases that require it, It is as reasonable, that some Court of a larger
Jurisdiction might be erected, where some Wives might resort and plead,
especially, and in such Instances, where Nature is so kind, as to raise them
above the level of their own Sex, that they might have Relief, and obtain a
Mitigation in their own particular, of a Sentence which was given generally
against Womankind.

The causes of Separation are now so very course, that few are confident enough
to buy their Liberty at the price of having their Modesty so exposed, and for
disparity of Minds, which above all other things requires a Remedy, the Laws
have made no provision; so little refined are numbers of Men, by whom they are
compiled. This, and a great deal more might be said to give a color to this
Complaint; but the Answer is, in short, That the Institution of Marriage is too
sacred to admit of a Liberty of Objection to it; that the Supposition of your
being the weaker Sex, having without all doubt a good Foundation, makes it
reasonable to subject it to the Masculine Dominion; that no Rule can be so
perfect, as not to admit some Exceptions; but the Law presumes there would be
so few found in this Case, who would have a sufficient Right to such a
Privilege, that it is safer some Injustice should be connived at in a very few
Instances, than to break into an Establishment, upon which the Order of Humane
Society does so much depend. You are therefore to make the best of what is
settled by Law and Custom, and not vainly imagine, that it will be changed for
your sake. But that you may not be discouraged, as if you lay under the weight
of an incurable Grievance, you are to know, that by a wife and dexterous
Conduct, it will be in your power to relieve your self from any thing that
looks like a disadvantage in it. For your better direction, I will give a
hint of the most ordinary Causes of Dissatisfaction between Man and Wife, that
you may be able by such a Warning to live so upon your Guard, that when you
shall be married, you may know how to cure your Husband's Mistakes, and to
prevent your own.

First then, you are to consider, you live in a time which has rendered some
kind of Frailties so habitual, that they lay claim to large Grains of
Allowance. The World in this is somewhat unequal, and our Sex seems to play
the Tyrant, in distinguishing partiality for our selves, by making that in the
utmost degree Criminal in the Woman, which in a Man passes under a much
gentler Censure. The Root and Excuse of this Injustice is the Preservation of
Families from any Mixture that may bring a Blemish to them: And whilst the
Point of Honor continues to be so placed, it seems unavoidable to give your
Sex the greater shane of the Penalty. But if in this it lies under any
Disadvantage, you are more than recompensed, by having the Honor of Families
in your keeping. The Consideration so great a Trust must give you, makes full
amends; and this Power the World has lodged in you, can hardly fail to
restrain the Severity of an ill Husband, and to improve the Kindness and Esteem
of a good one. This being so, remember, That next to the danger of committing
the Fault your self, the greatest is that of seeing it in your Husband. Do not
seem to look or hear that way: If he is a Man of Sense, he will reclaim
himself; the Folly of it, is of it self sufficient to cure him: If he is not
so, he will be provoked, but not reformed. To expostulate in these Cases,
looks like declaring War, and preparing for Reprisals; which to a thinking
Husband would be a dangerous Reflection. Besides, it is so course a Reason which
will be assigned for a Lady's too great Warmth upon such an occasion, that
Modesty no less than Prudence ought to restrain her; since such an undecent
Complaint makes a Wife much more ridiculous, than the Injury that provokes her
to it. But it is yet worse, and more unskilful, to blaze it in the World,
expecting it should rise up in Arms to take her part: Whereas she will find, it
can have no other Effect, than that she will be served up in all Companies, as
the reigning Feast at that time; and will continue to be the common
Entertainment, till she is rescued by some newer Folly that comes upon the
Stage, and drives her away from it. The Impertinence of such Methods is so
plain, that it does not deserve the Pains of being laid open. Be assured, that
in these Cases your Discretion and Silence will be the most prevailing Reproof;
and an affected Ignorance, which is seldom a Virtue, is a great one here: And
when your Husband sees how unwilling you are to be uneasy, there is no
stronger Argument to persuade him not to be unjust to you. Besides, it will
naturally make him more yielding in other things: And whether it be to cover or
redeem his Offense, you may have the good Effect of it whilst it lasts, and
all that while have the most reasonable Ground that can be, of presuming, such
a Behavior at last will entirely convert him. There is nothing so glorious to
a Wife, as a Victory so gained: ^ Man so reclaimed, is for ever after subjected
to her Virtue; and her bearing for a time, is more than rewarded by a Triumph
that will continue as long as her Life.

The next thing I will suppose, is, That your Husband may love Wine more than
is convenient. It will be granted, That though there are Vices of a deeper dye,
there are none that have greater Deformity than this, when it is not
restrained: But with all this, the same Custom which is the more to be lamented
for its being so general, should make it less uneasy to every one in
particular who is to suffer by the Effects of it: So that in the first place,
it will be no new thing if you should have a Drunkard for your Husband; and
there is by too frequent Examples evidence enough, that such a thing may
happen, and yet a Wife may live too without being miserable. Self-love
dictateth aggravating words to every thing we feel; Ruin and Misery are the
Terms we apply to whatever we do not like, forgetting the Mixture allotted to
us by the Condition of Humane Life, by which it is not intended we should be
quite exempt from trouble. It is fair, if we can escape such a Degree of it as
would oppress us, and enjoy so much of the pleasant part as may lessen the ill
taste of such things as are unwelcome to us. Every thing has two Sides, and
for our own ease we ought to direct our Thoughts to that which must be least
liable to exception. To fall upon the worst side of a Drunkard, gives so
unpleasant a Prospect, that it is not possible to dwell upon it. Let us pass
then to the more favorable part, as far as a Wife is concerned in it. I am
tempted to say (if the Irregularity of the Expression could in strictness be
justified) That a Wife is to thank God her Husband has Faults. Mark the
seeming Paradox, my Dear, for your own Instruction, it being intended no
further. A Husband without Faults is a dangerous Observer; he has an Eye so
piercing, and sees every thing so plain, that it is exposed to his full
Censure; and though I will not doubt but that your Virtue will disappoint the
sharpest Enquiries; yet few Women can bear the having all they say or do
represented in the clear Glass of an Understanding without Faults. Nothing
softneth the Arrogance of our Nature, like a Mixture of some Frailties; it is
by them we are best told, that we must not strike too hard upon others, because
we our selves do so often deserve Blows: They pull our Rage by the Sleeve, and
whisper Gentleness to us in our Censures, even when they are rightly applied.
The Faults and Passions of Husbands bring them down to you, and make them
content to live upon less unequal Terms, than Faultless Men would be willing to
stoop to; so haughty is Mankind till humbled by common Weaknesses and Defects,
which in our corrupted State contribute more toward the reconciling us to one
another, than all the Precepts of the Philosophers and Divines; so that where
the Errors of our Nature make amends for the Disadvantages of yours, it is more
your part to make use of the Benefits, than to quarrel at the Fault.

Thus in case a drunken Husband should fall to your share, if you will be wise
and patient, his Wine shall be of your side; it will throw a Veil over your
Mistakes, it will set out and improve every thing you do, that he is pleased
with. Others will like him less, and by that means he may perhaps like you the
more, when after having dined too well, he is received at home without a Storm,
or so much as a reproachful Look, the Wine will naturally work out all in
Kindness, which a Wife must encourage, let it be wrapped up in never so much
Impertinence: On the other side, it would boil up into Rage, if the mistaken
Wife should treat him roughly, like a certain thing called a kind Shrew, than
which the World, with all its Plenty, cannot show a more Senceless, Hl-bred,
forbidding Creature. Consider, that where the Man will give such frequent
Intermissions of the use of his Reason, the Wife insensibly gets a Right of
Governing in the Vacancy, and that raises her Character and Credit in the
Family, to a higher pitch than perhaps could be done under a sober Husband, who
never puts himself into an Incapacity of holding the Reins. If these are not
Entire Consolations, at least they are Remedies to some Degree: They cannot
make Drunkenness a Virtue, nor a Husband given to it a Felicity; but you will
do your self no ill office in the endeavoring, by these means, to make the
best of such a Lot, in case it should happen to be yours, and by the help of a
wife Observation, to make that very supportable, which would otherwise be a
Load that would oppress you.

The next Case I will put is, That your Husband may be Choleric or
Ill-humour'd. To this it may be said, That passionate Men generally make amends
at the Foot of the Account: such a Man, if he is angry one day without any
Sense, will the next day be as kind without any Reason; so that by marking how
the Wheels of such a Man's Head use to move, you may easily bring over all his
Passions to your Party; in stead of being struck down by his Thunder, you shall
direct it where and upon whom you shall think it best applied. Thus are the
strongest Poisons turned to the best Remedies; but then there must be Art in
it, and a skilful Hand, else the least bungling makes it mortal. There is a
great deal of nice Care required to deal with a Man of this Complexion; Choler
proceeds from Pride, and makes a Man so partial to himself, that he swells
against Contradiction, and thinks he is lessened if he is opposed; you must
in this Case take heed of increasing the Storm by an unwary Word, or kindling
the Fire whilst the Wind is in a Corner which may blow it in your Face: You are
dexterously to yield every thing till he begins to cool, and then by slow
degrees you may rise and gain upon him: Your Gentleness well timed, will, like
a Charm, dispel his Anger ill placed; a kind Smile will reclaim, when a shrill
pettish Answer would provoke him; rather than fail upon such occasions, when
other Remedies are too weak, a little Flattery may be admitted, which by being
necessary, will cease to be Criminal: If Ill-Humour and Sullenness, and not
open and sudden Heat is his Disease, there is a way of treating that too, so as
to make it a Grievance to be endured: In order to it, you are first to know,
that naturally good Sense has a mixture of surly in it; and there being so much
folly in the World, and for the most part so triumphant, it gives frequent
Temptations to raise the Spleen of Men who think right; therefore that which
may generally be called Ill Humor, is not always a Fault; it becomes one,
when either it is wrong applied, or that it is continued too long, when it is
not so: For this Reason, you must not too hastily fix an ill name upon that
which may perhaps not deserve it; and though the Case should be, that your
Husband might too sowrly resent any thing he disliketh, it may so happen, that
more Blame may belong to your Mistake, than to his ill Humor. If a Husband
behaveth himself sometimes with an Indifference that a Wife may think
offensive, she is in the wrong to put the worst sense upon it, if by any means
it will admit a better. Some Wives will call it his Humor, if their Husbands
change their Style from that which they used whilst they made their first
Addresses to them: Others will allow no intermission or abatement in the
Expressions of Kindness to them, not enough distinguishing Times, and
forgetting that it is impossible for Men to keep themselves up all their Lives
to the height of some extravagant Moments. A Man may at some times be less
careful in little things, without any cold or disobliging Reasons for it; as a
Wife may be too expecting in smaller matters, without drawing upon herself the
Inference of being unkind: And if your Husband should be really sullen, and
have such frequent Fits, as might take away the Excuse of it, it concerns you
to have an Eye prepared to discern the first Appearances of Cloudy Weather, and
to watch when the Fit goes off, which seldom lasts long if it is let alone;
but whilst the Mind is sore, every thing galleth it, and that makes it
necessary to let the Black Humor begin to spend it self, before you begin to
come in and venture to undertake it.

If in the Lottery of the World you should draw a Covetous Husband, I confess
it will not make you proud of your good Luck; yet even such a one may be
endured too, though there are few Passions more untractable than that of
Avarice. You must first take care that your Definition of Avarice may not be a
Mistake; you are to examine every Circumstance of your Husband's Fortune, and
weigh the Reason of every thing you expect from him before you have right to
pronounce that Sentence: The Complaint is now so generally against all
Husbands, that it gives great suspicion of its being often ill-grounded; it is
impossible they should all deserve that Censure, and therefore it is certain,
that it is many times misapplyed: he that spares in every thing is an
inexcusable Niggard, he that spares in nothing is as inexcusable a Madman; the
mean is, to spare in what is least necessary, to lay out more liberally in what
is most required in our several citcumstances; yet this will not always
satisfy; there are Wives who are impatient of the Rules of Economy, and are
apt to call their Husbands Kindness in question, if any other measure is put to
their expense than that of their own Fancy; be sure to avoid this dangerous
Error, such a partiality to your Self, which is so offensive to an
understanding Man, that he will very ill bear a Wife's giving her self such an
injurious preference to all the Family, and whatever belongs to it: But to
admit the worst, and that your Husband is really a Close-handed Wretch, you
must in this, as in other Cases, endeavor to make it less afflicting to you;
and first you must observe seasonable hours of speaking.

When you offer any thing in opposition to this reigning Humor, a third hand
and a wise Friend, may often prevail more than you will be allowed to do in
your own Cause: Sometimes you are dexterously to go along with him in things,
where you see that the niggardly part of his Mind is most predominant, by which
you will have the better opportunity of persuading him in things where he may
be more indifferent: Our Passions are very unequal, and are apt to be raised or
lessened, according as they work upon different Objects; they are not to be
stopped or restrained in those things where our Mind is more particularly
engaged: In other matters they are more tractable, and will sometimes give
Reason a hearing, and admit a fair Dispute. More than that, there are few Men,
even in this instance of Avarice, so entirely abandoned to it, that at some
hours, and upon some occasions, will not forget their natures, and for that
time turn Prodigal; the same Man who will grudge himself what is necessary, let
his Pride be raised and he shall be profuse; at another time his Anger shall
have the same effect; a fit of Vanity, Ambition, and sometimes of Kindness,
shall open and enlarge his narrow Mind; a Dose of Wine will work upon this
tough humor, and for the time dissolve it: Your business must be, if this Case
happens, to watch these critical moments, and not let one of them slip
without making your advantage of it; and a Wife may be said to want skill, if
by these means she is not able to secure her self in a good measure against the
Inconveniences this scurvy quality in a Husband might bring upon her, except
he should be such an incurable Monster, as I hope will never fall to your share.

The last supposition I will make, is, That your Husband should be weak and
incompetent to make use of the Privileges that belong to him; it will be
yielded, that such a one leaves room for a great many Objections; but God
Almighty seldom sends a Grievance without a Remedy, or at least such a
Mitigation as takes away a great part of the sting, and smart of it. To make
such a Misfortune less heavy, you are first to bring to your Observation, That
a Wife very often makes the better Figure, for her Husbands making no great
one, and there seems to be little reason, why the same Lady that chooses a
Waiting Woman with worse Looks, many not be content with a Husband with less
Wit; the Argument being equal from the advantage of the Comparison: If you will
be more ashamed in some Cases, of such a Husband, you will be less afraid than
you would perhaps be of a wise one; his Unseasonable Weakness may no doubt
sometimes grieve you, but then set against this, that it gives you the
Dominion, if you will make the right use of it; it is next to his being dead,
in which Case the Wife has right to Administer; therefore be sure, if you have
such an Idiot, that none, except your self, may have the benefit of the
forfeiture: Such a Fool is a dangerous Beast, if others have the keeping of
him; and you must be very undextrous if when your Husband shall resolve to be
an Ass, you do not take care he may be your Ass; but you must go skillfully
about it, and above all things, take heed of distinguishing in public what
kind of Husband he is; your inward thoughts must not hinder the outward payment
of the consideration that is due to him; your stighting him in Company, besides
that, it would, to a discerning By-stander, give too great encouragement for
the making nearer application to you, is in it self such an undecent way of
assuming, that it may provoke the tame Creature to break loose, and to show his
Dominion for his Credit, which he was content to forget for his Ease: In short,
the furest and the most approved method will be to do like a wife Minister to
an easy Prince; first give him the Orders you afterward receive from him;
with all this, that which you are to pray for, is a Wife Husband, one that by
knowing how to be a Master, for that very reason will not let you feel the
weight of it; one whose Authority is so softened by his Kindness, that it
gives you ease without abridging your Liberty; one that will return so much
tenderness for Just Esteem of him, that you will never want power, though you
will seldom care to use it; such a Husband is as much above all the other Kinds
of them, as a rational subjection to a Prince, great in himself, is to be
preferred before the disquiet and uneasiness of Unlimited Liberty.

Before I leave this Head, I must add a little concerning your Behavior to
your Husbands Friends, which requires the most refined part of your
Understanding to acquit your self well of it; you are to study how to live with
them with more care than you are to apply to any other part of your Life;
especially at first, that you may not stumble at the first setting out; the
Family into which you are grafted will generally be apt to expect, that like a
Stranger in a Foreign Country, you should conform to their Methods, and not
bring in a new Model by your own Authority; the Friends in such a Case are
tempted to rise up in Arms as against an unlawful Invasion, so that you are
with the utmost Caution to avoid the least Appearances of any thing of this
kind; and that you may with less difficulty afterward give your Directions, be
sure at first to receive them from your Husbands Friends, gain them to you by
early applying to them, and they will be so satisfied, that as nothing is more
thankful than Pride, when it is complied with, they will strive which of them
shall most recommend you; and when they have helped you to take Root in your
Husband's good Opinion, you will have less dependence upon theirs, though you
must not neglect any reasonable means of preserving it.

You are to consider, that a Man governed by his Friends, is very easily
inflamed by them; and that one who is not so, will yet for his own sake expect
to have them considered. It is easily improved to a point of honor in a
Husband, not to have his Relations neglected; and nothing is more dangerous,
than to raise an Objection, which is grounded upon Pride; it is the most
stubborn and lasting Passion we are subject to, and when it is the first cause
of the War, it is very hard to make a secure Peace: your Caution in this is of
the last importance to you; and that you may the better succeed in it, carry a
strict Eye upon the Impertinencies of your Servants; take heed that their ill
humor may not engage you to take Exceptions, or their too much assuming in
small matters, raise Consequences which may bring you under great disadvantage.

Remember that in the case of a Royal Bride, those about her are generally so
far suspected to bring in a Foreign Interest, that in most Countries, they are
insensibly reduced to a very small number, and those of so low a Figure, that
it does not admit the being Jealous of them. In little, and in the Proportion,
this may be the Case of every New-Married-Woman, and therefore it may be more
advisable for you, to gain the Servants you find in a Family, than to tie your
self too fast to those you carry into it; you are not to overlook those small
Reflections, because they may appear low and inconsiderable; for it may be
said, that as the greatest streams are made up of the small drops at the head
of the Springs from whence they are derived, so the greatest circumstances of
your Life, will be in some degree directed by these seeming trifles, which
having the advantage of being the first acts of it, have a greater effect than
singly in their own nature they could pretend to.

I will conclude this Article with my Advice, that you would, as much as Nature
will give you leave, endeavor to forget the great Indulgence you have found at
home, after such a gentle Discipline as you have been under; every thing you
dislike will seem the harsher to you, the tenderness we had for you, My Dear,
is of another nature, peculiar to kind Parents, and differing from that you
will meet with at first in any Family into which you shall be transplanted; and
yet they may be very kind too, and afford no justifiable reason to you to
complain. You must not be frighted with the first Appearances of a differing
Scene; for when you are used to it, you may like the House you go to, better
than that you left; and your Husband's Kindness will have so much advantage of
ours, that we shall yield up all Competition, and as well as we love you, be
very well contented to Surrender to such a Rival.

HOUSE, FAMILY, and CHILDREN.
YOU must lay before you, My Dear, there are degrees of Care to recommend your
self to the World in the several parts of your Life, in many things, though the
doing of them well, may raise your Credit and Esteem, yet the omission of them
would draw no immediate reproach upon you; in others, where your duty is more
particularly applied, the neglect of them is amongst those Faults which are not
forgiven, and will bring you under a Censure, which will be much a heavier
thing than the trouble you would avoid; of this kind is the Government of your
House, Family and Children, which since it is the Province allotted to your
Sex, and that the discharging it well, will for that reason be expected from
you, if you either desert it out of Laziness, or manage it with want of skill,
instead of a help you will be an Encumbrance to the Family where you are
placed. I must tell you, that no respect is lasting, but that which is produced
by our being in some degree useful to those that pay it: where that fails,
the Homage and the Reverence go along with it, and fly to others where
something may be expected in exchange for them; and upon this principle the
respects even of the Children and the Servants will not stay with one that does
not think them worth their Care, and the old Housekeeper shall make a better
Figure in the Family, than the Lady with all her fine Cloths, if she wilfully
relinquish her Title to the Government; therefore take heed of carrying your
good Breeding to such a height, as to be good for nothing, and to be proud of
it: some think it has a great Air to be above troubling their thoughts with
such ordinary things as their House and Family; others dare not admit Cares for
fear they should hasten Wrinkles; mistaken Pride makes some think they must
keep themselves up, and not descend to those Duties, which do not seem enough
refined for great Ladies to be employed in; forgetting all this while, that it
is more than the greatest Princes can do, at once to preserve respect, and to
neglect their business; no Age ever erected Altars to insignificant Gods; they
had all some quality applied to them to draw worship from Mankind; this makes
it the more unresonable for a Lady to expect to be considered, and at the same
time resolve not to deserve it; good looks alone will not do, they are not such
a lasting Tenure, as to be relied upon; and if they should stay longer than
they usually do, it will by no means be safe to depend upon them; for when time
has abated the violence of the first liking, and that the Napp is a little
worn off, though still a good degree of kindness may remain, Men recover their
sight which before might be dazell'd, and allow themselves to object as well as
admire; in such a Case, when a Husband sees an empty airy thing that sails up
and down the House to no purpose, and looks as if she came thither only to make
a Visit, when he finds, that after her Emptiness has been extreme busy about
some very senseless thing, that she eats her Breakfast half an hour before
Dinner, to be at greater liberty to afflict the Company with her Discourse;
then calls for her Coach, that she may trouble her Acquaintance, who are
already cloyed with her: And having some proper Dialogues ready to display her
Foolish Eloquence at the top of the Stairs, she sets out like a Ship out of
Harbor, laden with trifles, and comes back with them; at her return she
repeateth to her faithful Waiting Woman, the Triumphs of that day's
Impertinence, then wrapped up in Flattery and clean Linen, goes to Bed so
satisfied, that it throws her into pleasant Dreams of her own Felicity; such
a one is seldom serious but with her Tailor; her Children and Family may now
and then have a random thought, but she never takes aim but at something very
Impertinent.

I say when a Husband, whose Province is without Doors, and to whom the
Economy of the House would be in some degree Indecent, finds no Order nor
Quiet in his Family, meets with Complaints of all kinds springing from this
Root, the Mistaken Lady, who thinks to make amends for all this, by having a
well-chosen Petty-Coat, will at last be convinced of her Error, and with grief
be forced to undergo the Penalties that belong to those who are wilfully
Insignificant; when this scurvy hour comes upon her, she first grows Angry;
then when the time of it is past, would perhaps grow wiser, not remembering that
we can no more have Wisdom than Grace, when ever we think fit to call for it;
there are Times and Periods fixed for both; and when they are too long
neglected, the Punishment is, that they are Irrecoverable, and nothing
remains but an useless Grief for the Folly of having thrown them out of our
Power; you are to think what a mean Figure a Woman makes, when she is so
degraded by her own Fault; whereas there is nothing in those Duties which are
expected from you, that can be a lessening to you, except your want of Conduct
make it so: You may love your Children without living in the Nursery, and you
may have a competent and discreet care of them, without letting it break out
upon the Company, or exposing your self by turning your Discourse that way,
which is a kind of Laying Children to the Parish, and it can hardly be done any
where, that those who hear it will be so forgiving, as not to think they are
overcharged with them. A Woman's tenderness of her Children is one of the least
deceitful Evidences of her Virtue; but yet the way of expressing it, must be
subject to the Rules of good Breeding: And though a Woman of Quality ought not
be less kind to them, than Mothers of the meanest Rank are to theirs, yet she
may distinguish her self in the manner, and avoid the course Methods, which in
Women of a lower size might be more excusable. You must begin early to make
them Love you, that they may Obey you: This Mixture is no where more necessary
than in Children; and I must tell you, that you are not to expect Returns of
Kindness from yours, if ever you have any, without Grains of Allowance; and yet
it is not so much a defect in their good Nature, as a shortness of Thought in
them; Their first Insufficiency makes them lean so entirely upon their Parents
for what is necessary, that the habit of it makes them continue the same
Expectations for what is unreasonable; and as often as they are denied, so often
they think they are injured; and whilst their Desires are strong, and their
Reasons yet in the Cradle, their Anger looks no farther than the thing they
long for and cannot have; and to be displeased for their own good, is a Maxim
they are very slow to understand; so that you may conclude, the first Thoughts
of your Children will have no small Mixture of Mutiny; which being so natural,
you must not be angry, except you would increase it; you must deny them as
seldom as you can, and when there is no avoiding it you must do it gently, you
must flatter away their ill Humors, and take the next Opportunity of pleasing
them in some other things, before they either ask or look for it: This will
strengthen your Authority, by making it soft to them; and confirm their
Obedience, by making it their Interest.

You are to have as strict a Guard upon your self amongst your Children, as if
you were amongst your Enemies; they are apt to make wrong Inferences, to take
Encouragement from half Words, and misapplying what you may say or do, so as
either to lessen their Duty, or to extend their Liberty farther than is
convenient: Let them be more in awe of your Kindness than of your Power, and
above all, take heed of supporting a Favorite Child in its Impertinence, which
will give Right to the rest of claiming the same Privilege. If you have a
divided Number, leave the Boys to the Fathers more peculiar Care, that you may
with the greater Justice pretend to a more immediate Jurisdiction over those of
your own Sex: You are to live so with them, that they may never choose to avoid
you, except when they have offended; and then let them tremble, that they may
distinguish; But their Penance must not continue so long as to grow sour upon
their Stomachs, that it may not Harden in stead of correcting them: The kind
and severe Parts must have their several turns seasonably applied; but your
Indulgence must have the broader mixture, that Love, rather than Fear, may be
the Root of their Obedience.

Your Servants are in the next place to be considered; and you must remember
not to fall into the mistake of thinking, That because they receive Wages, and
are so much Inferior to you, therefore they are below your Care to know how to
manage them. It would be as good Reason for a Master Workman to despise the
Wheels of his Engine because they are made of Wood. These are the Wheels of
your Family; and let your Directions be never so faultless, yet if these
Engines stop or move wrong, the whole Order of your House is either at a stand,
or discomposed: Besides, the Inequality which is between you, must not cause
you to forget, that Nature makes no such distinction, but that Servants may be
looked upon as humble Friends, and that Returns of Kindness and good Usage are
as much due to such of them as deserve it, as their Service is due to us when
we require it. A foolish haughtiness in the Style of speaking, or in the manner
of commanding them, is in it self very undecent, besides, that it begets an
Aversion in them, of which the least ill Effect to be expected, is, that they
will be flow and careless in all that is enjoined them, and you will find it
true by your Experience, that you will be so much the more obeyed as you are
less Imperious. Be not too hasty in giving your Orders, nor too angry when they
are not altogether observed; much less are you to be loud, or too much
disturbed; an evenness in distinguishing when they do well or ill, is that
which will make your Family move by a Rule, and without Noise, and will the
better set out your Skill in conducting it with Ease and Silence, that it may
be like a well-disciplin'd Army, which knows how to anticipate the Orders
that are fit to be given them. You are never to neglect the Duty of the present
Hour, to do another thing, which though it may be better in it self, is not to
be unseasonably preferred. Allot well chosen Hours for the Inspection of your
Family, which may be so distinguished from the rest of your Time, that the
necessary Cares may come in their proper Places, without any Influence upon
your good Humor, or Interruption to other things. By these Methods you will
put your self in possesson of being valued by your Servants, and then their
Obedience will naturally follow.

I must not forget one of the greatest Articles belonging to a Family, which is
the Expenses: It must not be such, as by failing either in the Time or measure
of it, may rather draw Censure than gain Applause. If it was well Examined,
there is more Money given to be laughed at, than for any other thing in the
World, though the Purchasers do not think so. A well-stated Rule is like the
Line, when that is once passed we are under another Pole; so the first straying
from Rule, is a step toward making that which was before a Virtue, to change
its Nature, and to grow either into a Vice, or at least an Impertinence: The
Art of laying out Money wisely, is not attained to without a great deal of
thought; and it is yet more difficult in the Cafe of a Wife, who is accountable
to her Husband for her mistakes in it: It is not only his Money, his Credit too
is at Stake, if what lies under the Wife's Care is managed, either with
undecent Thrift, or too loose Profusion; you are therefore to keep the Mean
between these two Extremes, and it being hardly possible to hold the Balance
exactly even, let it rather incline toward the Liberal side, as more suitable
to your Quality, and less subject Reproach; of the two, a little Money misspent
is sooner recovered, than the Credit which is lost by having it unhandsomely
saved; and a Wife Husband will less forgive a shameful piece of Parsimony, than
a little Extravaance, if it is not too often repeated; Mind in this must be
your chief Direction; and his Temper, when once known, will in a great measure
justify your part in the management, if he is pleased with it.

In your Cloths avoid too much Gaudiness; do not value your self upon an
Imbroidered-Gown; and remember, that a reasonable Word, or an obliging Look,
will gain you more respect, than all your fine Trappings. This is not said to
restrain you from a decent Compliance with the World, provided you take the
wiser, and not the foolisher part of your Sex for your Pattern: Some
distinctions are to be allowed, whilst they are well-suited to your Quality and
Fortune, and in the distribution of the Expense, it seems to me, that a full
Attendance, and well-chosen Ornaments for your House, will make you a better
Figure, than too much glittering in what you wear, which may with more ease be
imitated by those which are below you; yet this must not tempt you to starve
every thing but your own Apartment; or in order to more abundance there, give
just cause to the least Servant you have, to complain of the want of what is
necessary: Above all, fix it in your thoughts, as an unchangeable Maxim, That
nothing is truly fine but what is fit, and that just so much as is proper for
your Circumstances of their several kinds, is much finer than all you can add
to it; when you once break through those bounds, you launch into a wide Sea of
Extravagance, every thing will become necessary, because you have a mind to it;
and you have a mind to it, not because it is fit for you, but because some body
else has it: This Lady's Logic sets Reason upon its Head, by carrying the
Rule from things to Persons, and appealing from what is right to every Fool
that is in the wrong; the word necessary is miserably applied, it disordereth
Families, and overturneth Governments by being so abused: Remember, that
Children and Fools want every thing, because they want Wit to distinguish: and
therefore there is not a stronger Evidence of a Crazy Understanding, than the
making too large a Catalogue of things necessary, when in truth there are so
very few things that have a right to be placed in it; try every thing first in
your Judgment, before you allow it a place in your Desire, else your Husband
may think it as necessary for him to deny, as it is for you to have whatever is
unreasonable; and if you shall too often give him that advantage, the habit of
refusing may perhaps reach to things that are not unfit for you; there are
unthinking Ladies, who do not enough consider, how little their own Figure
agrees with the fine things they are so proud of; others when they have them,
will hardly allow them to be visible; they cannot be seen without Light, and
that is many times so saucy and so prying, that is like a too forward Gallant
to be forbid the Chamber to. Some, when you are ushered into their Dark Ruelle,
it is with such solemnity, that a Man would swear there was something in it,
till the Unskilful Lady breaks silence, and begins a Chat, which
discovers it is Puppit-Play with Magnificent Scenes; many esteem things
rather as they are hard to be gotten, than that they are worth getting: This
looks as if they had an Interest to pursue that Maxim, because a great part
of their own value depends upon it. Truth in these Cases would be very often
unmannerly, and might derogate from the Prerogative, great Ladies would assume
to themselves, of being distinct Creatures from those of their Sex, who are
inferior, and of less difficult access in other things too. Your Condition
must give the rule to you, and therefore it is not a Wifes part to aim at more
than a bounded Liberality; the farther extent of that Quality (otherwise to be
commended) belongs to the Husband, who has better means for it.

Generosity wrong placed becomes a Vice, and it is no more a Virtue when it
grows into an Inconvenience. Virtues must be enlarged or restrained according
to the differing Circumstances; A Princely Mind will undo a private Family,
therefore things must be suited, or else they will not deserve to be Commended,
let them in themselves be never so valuable; and the Expectations of the World
are best answered when we acquit our selves in that manner which seems to be
prescribed to our several Conditions, without usurping upon those Duties, which
do not so particularly belong to us.

I will close the consideration of this Article of Expense, with this short
word, Do not fetter your self with such a Restraint in it as may make you
Remarkable; but remember that Virtue is the greatest Ornament, and good Sense
the best Equipage.

BEHAVIOR and CONVERSATION.
IT is time now to lead you out of your House into the World. A Dangerous step;
where your Virtue alone will not serve you, except it is attended with a great
deal of Prudence: You must have both for your Guard, and not stir without them;
the Enemy is abroad, and you are sure to be taken, if you are found straggling:
Your Behavior is therefore to incline strongly toward the Reserved part: your
Character is immovably to be fixed upon that Bottom, not excluding a mixture of
greater freedom, as far as it may be innocent and well-timed. The
Extravagancies of the Age have made Caution more necessary; and by the same
reason that the too great License of Ill Men has by Consequence in many things
restrained the Lawful Liberty of those who did not abuse it, the unjustifiable
Freedom of some of your Sex have involved the rest in the Penalty of being
reduced. And though this cannot so alter the Nature of things, as to make that
Criminal, which in it self is Indifferent; yet if it makes it dangerous, that
alone is insufficient to justify the Restraint. A close behavior is the
fittest to receive Virtue for its constant Guest, because there, and there
only, it can be secure. Proper Reserves are the Outworks, and must never be
deserted by those who intend to keep the Place; they keep off the possibility
not only of being taken, but of being attempted; and if a Woman sees Danger at
never so remote a Distance, she is for that time to shorten her Line of
Liberty: She who will allow her self to go to the utmost Extents of every thing
that is Lawful, is so very near going farther, that those who lie at watch,
will begin to count upon her.

Mankind, from the double temptation of Vanity and Desire, is apt to turn every
thing a Woman does to the hopeful side; and there are few who dare make an
impudent Application, till they discern something which they are willing to
take for an Encouragement: It is safer therefore to prevent such Forwardness,
than to go about to cure it: It gathers Strength by the first allowances, and
claims a Right from having been at any time suffered with Impunity: Therefore
nothing is with more care to be avoided, than such a kind of Civility as may be
mistaken for Invitation. It will not be enough for you to keep your self free
from any criminal Engagements; for if you do that which either raises Hopes,
or creates Discourse, there is a Spot thrown upon your Good Name; and those
kind of Stains are the harder to be taken out, being dropped upon you by the
Man's Vanity, as well as by the Woman's Malice. Most Men are in one sense
Platonic Lovers, though they are not willing to own that Character; they are
so far Philosophers, as to allow, that the greatest part of Pleasure lies in
the Mind; and in pursuance of that Maxim, there are few who do not place the
Felicity more in the Opinion of the World, of their being prosperous Lovers,
than in the Blessing it self, how much soever they appear to value it. This
being so, you must be very cautious not to gratify those Camelions at the
price of bringing a Cloud upon your Reputation, which may be deeply wounded,
though your Conscience is unconcerned. Your own Sex too will not fail to help
the least Appearance that gives a Handle to be ill turned; the best of them
will not be displeased to improve their own Value, by laying others under a
Disadvantage, when there is a fair Occasion given for it; It distinguishes
them still the more, their own Credit is still the more exalted, and, like a
Picture set off with Shades, shines more when a Lady, less Innocent, or less
Discreet, is set near, to make them appear so much the brighter. If these lend
their Breath to blast such as are so unwary as to give them this Advantage, you
may be sure there will be a stronger Gale from those, who, besides Malice or
Emulation, have an Interest too, to strike hard upon a Virtuous Woman: It
seems to them, that their Load of Infamy is lessened, by throwing part of it
upon others; so that they will not only improve when it lies in their way, but
take pains to find out the least mistake an Innocent Woman commits, in
Revenge of the Injury she does in leading a Life which is a Reproach to them.
With these you must be extreme wary, and neither provoke them to be angry, nor
invite them to be intimate.

To the Men you are to have a Behavior which may secure you, without offending
them: No ill-bred affected Shiness nor Roughness, unsuitable to your Sex, and
unnecessary to your Virtue; but a way of Living that may prevent all course
Railleries or unmannerly Freedoms; Looks that forbid without Rudeness, and
oblige without Invitation, or leaving room for the saucy Inferences Men's Vanity
suggesteth to them upon the least Encouragements. This is so very nice, that it
must engage you to have a perpetual Watch upon your Eyes, and to remember, that
one careless Glaunce gives more advantage than a hundred Words not enough
considered; the Language of the Eyes being very much the most significant, and
the most observed. Your Civility, which is always to be preserved, must not be
carried to a Compliance, which may betray you into irrecoverable Mistakes. This
French ambiguous word Complaisance has led your Sex into more blame, than all
other things put together: It carries them by degrees into a certain thing
called a good kind of Woman, an easy Idle Creature, that does neither Good nor
Ill but by chance, has no Choice, but leaves that to the Company she keeps.
Time, which by degrees adds to the signification of Words, has made her,
according to Modern Style, little better than one who thinks it a Rudeness to
deny, when civilly required, either her Service in Person, or her friendly
Assistance, to those who would have a meeting or want a Confident. She is a
certain thing always at hand, an easy Companion, who has ever great
Compassion for distressed Lovers: She censureth nothing but Rigor, and is
never without a Plaster for a wounded Reputation, in which chiefly lies her
Skill in Surgery: She seldom has the Propriety of any particular Gallant,
but lives upon Brokage, and waits for the Scraps her Friends are content to
leave her.

There is another Character not quite so Criminal, yet not less Ridiculous;
which is that of a good-humored Woman, one who thinks she must always be in
a Laugh, or a broad Smile; and because Good Humor is an obliging Quality,
thinks it less illmanners to talk impertinently, than to be silent in
Company. When such a prating Engine rides Admiral, and carries the Lanthorn
in a Circle of Fools, a cheerful Coxcomb coming in for a Recruit, the
Chattering of Monkeys is a better noise than such a Concert of senceless
Merriment: If she is applauded in it, she is so encouraged, that, like a Ballad
singer, who, if commended, breaks his Lungs, she lets her self loose, and
overfloweth upon the Company. She conceives that Mirth is to have no
Intermission, and therefore she will carry it about with her, though it be to a
Funeral; and if a Man should put a familiar Question, she does not know very
well how to be angry, for then she would be no more that pretty thing called a
Good humored Woman. This necessity of appearing at all times to be infinitely
pleased, is a grievous mistake; since in a handsome Woman that Invitation is
unnecessary; and in one who is not so, ridiculous.

It is not intended by this, that you should forswear Laughing; but remember,
that Fools being always painted in that posture it may fright those who are
wise from doing it too frequently, and going too near a Copy which is so little
inviting, and much more from doing it loud, which is an unnatural Sound, and
looks so much like another Sex, that few things are more offensive. That
boistrous kind of Follity is as contrary to Wit and Good manners, as it is to
Modesty and Virtue; besides, it is a course kind of quality, that throws a
Woman into a lower Form, and degradeth her from the Rank of those who are more
refined. Some Ladies speak aloud and make a noise to be the more minded, which
looks as if they beat their Drums for Volunteers, and if by misfortune none
come in to them, they may, not without reason, be a good deal out of
Countenance.

There is yet one thing more to be avoided, which is the Example of those who
intend nothing farther than the Vanity of Conquest, and think themselves secure
of not having their Honor tainted by it. Some are apt to believe their Virtue
is too Obscure, and not enough known, except it is exposed to a broader Light,
and set out to its best advantage, by some public Trials; these are dangerous
Experiments, and generally fail, being built upon so weak a foundation, as that
of too great Confidence in our selves; it is as safe to play with Fire, as to
dally with Gallantry.

Love is a Passion that has Friends in the Garrison, and for that reason must
by a Woman be kept at such a distance, that she may not be within the danger of
doing the most usual thing in the World, which is conspiring against her Self,
else the humble Gallant, who is only admitted as a Trophy, very often becomes
the Conqueror; he puts on the style of Victory, and from an Admirer grows
into a Master, for so he may be called from the moment he is in Possession. The
first Resolutions of stopping at good Opinion and Esteem, grow weaker by
degrees against the Charms of Courtship skillfully applied. A Lady is apt to
think a Man speaks so much reason whilst he is Commending her, that she has
much ado to believe him in the wrong when he is making Love to her, and when
besides the natural Inducements your Sex has to be merciful, she is bribed by
well-chosen Flattery, the poor Creature is in danger of being caught like a
Bird listening to the Whistle of one that has a Snare for it. Conquest is so
tempting a thing, that it often makes Women mistake Men's Submissions; which
with all their fair Appearances, have generally less Respect than Art in them.
You are to remember, that Men who say extreme fine things, many times say them
most for their own sakes, and that the vain Gallant is often as well pleased
with his own Compliments, as he could be with the kindest answer; where there
is not that Ostentation you are to suspect there is a Design; and as strong
perfumes are seldom used but when they are necessary to smother an unwelcome
scent; so Excess of good Words, leave room to believe they are strewed to cover
something which is to gain admittance under a Disguise: You must be therefore
upon your Guard, and consider, that of the two, Respect is more dangerous than
Anger, it puts even the best Understandings out of their place, till the time
of their second thoughts restore them; it steals upon us insensibly, throws
down our Defenses, and makes it too late to resist, after we have given it
that advantage, whereas railing goes away in sound, it has so much noise in
it, that by giving warning it bespeaketh Caution. Respect is a flow and sure
Poison, and like Poison swells us within our selves, where it prevails too
much, it grows to be a kind of Apoplexia in the Mind, turns it quite round,
and after it has once seized the understanding, becomes mortal to it: For
these reasons, the safest way is to treat it like a fly Enemy, and be
perpetually upon the watch against it.

I will add one Advice to conclude this head, which is, that you will let every
seven years make some alteration in you toward the Graves side, and not be
like the Girls of Fifty, who resolve to be always Young, what ever Time with
his Iron Teeth has determined to the contrary; unnatural things carry a
Deformity in them never to the Disguised; the Liveliness of Youth in a riper
Age, looks like an old patch upon a new Gown; so that a Gay Matron, a
cheerful old Fool may be reasonably put into the List of the Tamer kind of
Monsters: There is a certain Creature called a Grave Hobbyhorse, a kind of she
Numps, that pretends to be pulled to a Play, and must needs go to
Bartholomew-Fair, to look after the young Folks, of whom she only seems to
take care, when in reality she only takes them for her excuse; such an old
Butterfly is of all Creatures the most ridiculous, and the soonest found out.
It is good to be early in your Caution, to avoid any thing that comes within
distance of such despicable Patterns, and not like some Ladies, who defer their
Conversion, till they have been so long in possession of being laughed at, that
the World does not know how to change their style, even when they are reclaimed
from that which gave the first occasion for it; the advantages of being
reserved are too many to be set down, I will only say, that it is a Guard to a
good Woman, and a Disguise to an ill one. It is of so much use to both, that
those ought to use it as an Artifice, who refuse to practice it as a Virtue.

FRIENDSHIPS.
I Must in a particular manner recommend to you a strict Care in the Choice of
your Friends; perhaps the best are not without their Objections, but however,
be sure that yours may not stray from the Rules which the wiser part of the
World has set to them; the Leagues Offensive and Defensive, seldom hold in
Politics, and much less is Friendships; the violent Intimacies, when once
broken, of which they scarce ever fail, make such a Noise, the Bag of Secrets
untied, they fly about like Birds let loose from a Cage, and become the
Entertainment of the Town. Besides, these great Dearnesses by degrees grow
injurious to the rest of your Acquaintance, and throw them off from you: There
is such an Offensive Distinction when the Dear Friend comes into the Room,
that it is flinging Stones at the Company, who are not apt to forgive it.

Do not lay out your Friendship too lavishly at first, since it will, like
other things, be so much the sooner spent; neither let it be of too quick a
growth; for as the Plants which shoot up too fast are not of that continuance,
as those which take more time for it; so too swift a Progress in pouring out
your Kindness, is a certain Sign that by the Course of Nature it will not be
long-lived. You will be responsible to the World, if you pitch upon such
Friends as at the same time are under the weight of any Criminal Objection; in
that case you will bring your self under the disadvantages of their Character,
and must bear your part of it. Choosing implies Approving; and if you fix upon
a Lady for your Friend against whom the World shall have given Judgment, it is
not so well natured as to believe you are altogether averse to her way of
living, since it does not discourage you from admitting her into your Kindness;
and Resemblance of Inclinations being thought none of the least Inducements to
Friendship, you will be looked upon at least as a well-wisher if not a Partner
with her in her Faults: If you can forgive them in another, it may be presumed
you will not be less gentle to your self; and therefore you must not take it
ill, if you are reckoned a Croupiere, and condemned to pay an equal Share with
such a friend of the Reputation she has lost.

If it happens that your Friend should fall from the State of Innocence after
your Kindness was engaged to her, you may be slow in your belief in the
beginning of the Discovery; but as soon as you are convinced by a Rational
Evidence, you must, without breaking too rughly, make a fair and quick Retreat
from such a Mistaken Acquaintance; else by moving too slowly from one that is
so tainted, the Contagion may reach you so far as to give you part of the
Scandal, though not of the Guilt. This Matter is so nice, that as you must not
be too hasty to join in the Censure upon your Friend when she is accused, so
you are not on the other side to defend her with too much warmth; for if she
should happen to deserve the Report of Common Fame, besides the Vexation that
belongs to such a mistake, you will draw an ill appearance upon your self,
and it will be thought you pleaded for her not without some consideration of
your self. The Angel which must be put on to vindicate the Reputation of an
injured Friend, may incline the Company to suspect you would not be so zealous,
if there was not a possibility that the Case might be your own: For this reason
you are not to carry your dearness so far, as absolutely to lose your Sight
where your Friend is concerned: Because Malice is too quick-sighted, it does
not follow, that Friendship must be blind: There is to be a Mean between those
Extremes, else your Excuse of Good Nature may betray you into a very ridiculous
Figure, and by degrees may be preferred to such Offices as you will not be
proud of. Your Ignorance may lessen the Guilt, but will improve the Jest upon
you, who shall be kindly sollicitous to procure a Meeting, and innocently
contribute to the Ills you would avoid; whilst the Contriving Lovers, when they
are alone, shall make you the Subject of their Mirth, and perhaps (with respect
to the Goddess of Love be it spoken) it is not the worst part of their
Entertainment, at least it is the most lasting, to laugh at the believing
Friend, who was so easily deluded.

Let the good Sense of your Friends be a chief Ingredient in your Choice of
them; else let your Reputation be never so clear, it may be clouded by their
Impertinence. It is like our Houses being in the Power of a Drunken and
Careless Neighbor; only so much worse, as that there will be no Insurance here
to make you amends, as there is in the Case of Fire.

To conclude this Paragraph; If Formality is to be allowed in any Instance, it
is to be put on to resist the Intrusion of such forward Women as shall press
themselves into your Friendship, where, if admitted, they will be either a
Snare or an Encumbrance.

CENSURE.
IT will come next to your Consideration, how you are to manage your Censure;
in which both Care and Skill will be a good deal required, to distinguish is
not only natural but necessary; and the Effect of it is, That we cannot avoid
giving Judgment in our Minds, either to absolve or to condemn as the Cafe
requires. The Difficulty is, to know where and when it is proper to proclaim
the Sentence. An Aversion to what is Criminal, and a Contempt of what is
ridiculous, are the inseparable Companions of Understanding and Virtue; but the
letting them go farther than our own Thoughts, has so much danger in it, that
though it is neither possible nor fit to suppress them entirely, yet it is
necessary they should be kept under great Restraints. An unlimited Liberty of
this kind is little less than sending a Herald to proclaim War to the World,
which is an angry Beast when so provoked: The Contest will be unequal, though
you are never so much in the right; and if you begin against such an Adversary,
it will tear you in pieces, and with this Justification, That it is done in its
own defense. You must therefore take heed of Laughing, except in Company that
is very sure; it is throwing Snowballs against Bullets; and it is the
disadvantage of a Woman, that the Malice of the World will help the Brutality
of those who will throw a slovenly Untruth upon her. You are for this Reason to
suppress your Impatience; for Fools, (which besides that they are too strong a
Party to be unnecessarily provoked) are, and of all other the most dangerous.
In this Case, a Blockhead in his Rage will return a dull Jest, which will lie
heavy, though there is not a Grain of Wit in it. Others will do it with more
Art, and you must not think your self secure because your Reputation may
perhaps be out of reach of Ill Will; for if it finds that part guarded, it
will seek one which is more exposed; it flies, like a corrupt Humor in the
Body, to the weakest Part: If you have a tender Side, the World will be sure to
find it, and to put the worst Color on all you say or do, give an Aggravation
to every thing that may lessen you, and a spiteful turn to every thing that
might recommend you. Anger lays open those Defects which Friendship would not
see, and Civility would be willing to forget. Malice needs no such Invitation
to encourage it, neither are any Pains more superfluous than those we take to
be ill spoken of. If Envy, which never dies, and seldom sleeps, is content
sometimes to be in a Slumber, it is very unskilful to make a noise to awaken
it: Besides, your Wit will be misapplied in it, if it is wholly directed to
discern the Faults of others, when it is so necessary to be so often used to
mend and prevent your own. The sending our Thoughts too much abroad, has the
same Effect, as when a Family never stays at home; Neglect and Disorder
naturally follows; naturally follows; as it must do within our selves, if
we do not frequently turn our Eyes inwards, to see what is amiss with us, where
it is a sign we have an unwelcome Prospect, when we do not care to look upon
it, but rather seek our Consolations in the Faults of those we converse with.
Avoid being the first in fixing a hard Censure, but let it be confirmed by the
general Voice, before you give credit to it: Neither are you then to give
Sentence like a Magistrate, or as if you had a special Authority to bestow a
good or ill Name at your discretion. Do not dwell too long upon a weak Side,
touch and go away; take pleasure to stay longer where you can commend, like
Bees that fix only upon those Herbs out of which they may extract the Juice of
which their Honey is composed. A Virtue stuck with Bristles is too rough for
this Age; it must be adorned with some Flowers, or else it will be unwillingly
entertained; so that even where it may be fit to strike, do it like a Lady,
gently; and assure your self, that where you take care to do it, you will wound
others more, and hurt your self less, by soft Strokes, than by being harsh or
violent. The Triumph of Wit is to make your good Nature subdue your Censure; to
be quick in seeing Faults, and slow in exposing them. You are to consider, that
the invisible thing called a Good Name, is made up of the Breath of Numbers
that speak well of you; so that if by a disobliging Word you silence the
meanest, the Gale will be less strong which is to bear up your Esteem. And
though nothing is so vain as the eager pursuit of empty Applause, yet to be
well thought of, and to be kindly used by the World, is like a Glory about a
Woman's Head; it is a Perfume she carries about with her, and leaves wherever
she goes; it is a Charm against Ill Will; Malice may empty her Quiver, but
cannot wound; the Dirt will not stick, the Jests will not take: Without the
consent of the World, a Scandal does not go deep; it is only a slight stroke
upon the Party injured, and returns with the greater force upon those that
gave it.

VANITY and AFFECTATION.
I Must with more than ordinary earnestness give you Caution against Vanity, it
being the Fault to which your Sex seems to be the most inclined, and since
Affectation for the most part attends it, I do not know how to divide them: I
will not call them Twins, because more properly Vanity is the Mother, and
Affectation the Darling Daughter: Vanity is the Sin, and Affectation the
Punishment; the first may be called the Root of Self-Love, the other the Fruit;
Vanity is never at its full growth till it spreads into Affectation, and then
it is complete. Not to dwell any longer upon the definition of them, I will
pass to the means and motives to avoid them: In order to it, you are to
consider, that the World challenges the right of distributing Esteem and
Applause; so that where any assume by their single Authority, to be their own
Carvers; it grows angry, and never fails to seek Revenge; and if we may
measure a Fault by the greatness of the Penalty, there are few of a higher size
than Vanity, as there is scarce a Punishment which can be heavier than that of
being laughed at. Vanity makes a Woman tainted with it, so top-ful of her
self, that she spilleth it upon the Company; and because her own thoughts are
entirely employed in Self-Contemplation; she endeavors, by a cruel Mistake,
to confine her Acquaintance to the same narrow Circle of that which only
concerns her Ladyship, forgetting that she is not of half that Importance to
the World, that she is to her self, so mistaken she is in her Value, by being
her own Appraiser; she will fetch such a Compass in Discourse to bring in her
beloved Self, and rather than fail, her fine Petty-Coat, that there can hardly
be a better Scene than such a Trial of ridiculous Ingenuity: It is a Pleasure
to see her Angle for Commendation, and rise so dissatisfied with the Ill-bred
Company, if they will not bite. To observe her throwing her Eyes about to fetch
in Prisoners, and go about Cruizing like a Privateer, and so out of
Countenance, if she return without Booty, is no ill piece of Comedy: She is so
eager to draw respect, that she always misseth it, yet thinks it so much her
due, that when she fails she grows waspish, not considering, that it is
impossible to commit a Rape upon the will. That is must be fairly gained, and
will not be taken by Storm; and that in this Case, the Tax ever rises highest
by a Benevolence. If the World instead of admiring her Imaginary Excellencies,
takes the Liberty to laugh at them, she appealeth from it to her self, for
whom she gives Sentence, and proclaims it in all Companies: On the other
side, if encouraged by a Civil Word, she is so obliging, that she will give
thanks for being laughed at in good Language: She takes a Complement for a
Demonstration, and sets it up as an Evidence, even against her
Looking-Glass; but the good Lady being all this while in a most profound
Ignorance of her self, forgets that Men would not let her talk upon them,
and throw so many senceless words at their heads, if they did not intend to put
her Person to Fine and Ransom for her Impertinence. Good words of any other
Lady, are so many Stones thrown at her, she can by no means bear them, they
make her so uneasy, that she cannot keep her Seat; but up she rises, and
goes home half burst with Anger and Strait-Lacing; if by great chance she
says any thing that has sense in it, she expects such an Excessive rate of
Commendations, that to her thinking the Company ever rises in her Debt; she
looks upon Rules as things made for the common People, and not for Persons of
her Rank; and this Opinion sometimes provokes her to Extend her Prerogative to
the dispencing with the Commandments: If by great Fortune she happens, in
spite of her Vanity, to be honest, she is so troublesome with it, that as far
as in her lies, she makes a Scurvy thing of it; her bragging of her Virtue,
looks as if it cost her so much pains to get the better of her Self, that the
Inferences are very ridiculous. Her good Humor is generally applied to the
laughing at good Sense. It would do one good to see how heartily she despises
any thing that is fit for her to do. The greatest part of her Fancy is laid out
in choosing her Gown, as her Discretion is chiefly employed in not paying for
it. She is faithful to the Fashion, to which not only her Opinion, but her
Senses are wholly resigned; so obsequious she is to it, that she would be ready
to be reconciled even to Virtue with all its Faults, if she had her
Dancing-Master's Word that it was practiced at Court,

To a Woman so composed, when Affectation comes in to improve her Character,
it is then raised to the highest Perfection. She first sets up for a Fine
thing, and for that Reason will distinguish her self, right or wrong, in every
thing she does. She would have it thought that she is made of so much the finer
Clay, and so much more sifted than ordinary, that she has no common Earth
about her: to this end she must neither move nor speak like other Women,
because it would be vulgar; and therefore must have a Language of her own,
since ordinary English is too course for her. The Looking-glass in the Morning
dictateth to her all the Motions of the Day, which by how much the more
studied, are so much the more mistaken. She comes into a Room as if her Limbs
were set on with ill-made Screws, which makes the Company fear the pretty
thing should leave some of its artificial Person upon the Floor. She does not
like her self as God Almighty made her, but will have some of her own
Workmanship; which is so far from making her a better thing than a Woman, that
it turns her into a worse Creature than a Monkey. She falls out with
Nature, against which she makes War without admitting of a Truce, those
Moments excepted in which her Gallant may reconcile her to it, when she has a
mind to be soft and languishing: There is something so unnatural in that
affected Easiness, that her Frowns could not be by many degrees so forbidding.
When she would appear unreasonably humble, one may see she is so excessively
proud, that there is no enduring it. There is such an impertinent Smile, such a
satisfied Simper, when she faintly disowneth some fulsom Commendation a Man
happens to bestow upon her against his Conscience, that her Thanks for it are
more visible under such a thin Disguise, than they could be if she should print
them. If a handsomer Woman takes any liberty of Dressing out of the ordinary
Rules, the mistaken Lady follows, without distinguishing the unequal Pattern,
and makes her self uglier by an Example misplaced; either forgetting the
Privilege of good Looks in another, or presuming, without sufficient reason,
upon her own. Her Discourse is a senseless Chime of empty Words, a heap of
Complements so equally applied to differing Persons, that they are neither
valued nor believed. Her Eyes keep pace with her Tongue, and are therefore
always in motion; one may discern that they generally incline to the
compassionate side, and that, notwithstanding her pretense to Virtue, she is
gentle to distressed Lovers, and Ladies that are merciful. She will repeat the
tender part of a Play so feelingly, that the Company may guess, without
Injustice, she was not altogether a disinteressed Spectator. She thinks that
Paint and Sin are concealed by railing at them; upon the latter she is less
hard, and being divided between the two opposite Prides of her Beauty and her
Virtue, she is often tempted to give broad Hints that some body is dying for
her; and of the two she is less unwilling to let the World think she may be
sometimes profaned, than that she is never worshipped. Very great Beauty may
perhaps so dazzle for a time, that Men may not so clearly see the Deformity of
those. Affections: But when the Brightness goes off, and that the Lover's Eyes
are by that means set at liberty to see things as they are, he will naturally
return to his lost Senses, and recover the Mistake into which the Lady's good
Looks had at first engaged him; and being once undeceived; cease to worship
that as a Goddess, which he sees is only an artificial Shrine, moved by Wheels
and Springs to delude him. Such Women please only like the first Opening of a
Scene, that has nothing to recommend it but the being New: They may be
compared to Flies, that have pretty shining Wings for two or three hot Months,
but the first cold Weather makes an end of them; so the latter Season of these
fluttering Creatures is dismal: From their nearest Friends they receive a very
faint Respect; from the rest of the World, the utmost degree of Contempt.

Let this Picture supply the place of any other Rules which might be given to
prevent your resemblance to it. The Deformity of it, well considered, is
Instruction enough, from the very same reason, that the fight of a Drunkard is
a better Sermon against that Vice, than the best that was ever preached upon
that Subject.

PRIDE.
AFter having said this against Vanity, I do not intend to apply the same
Censure to Pride, well placed, and rightly defined. It is an ambiguous Word;
one kind of it is as much a Virtue, as the other is a Vice: But we are
naturally so apt to choose the worst, that it is become dangerous to commend the
best side of it. A Woman is not to be proud of her fine Gown; nor when she has
less Wit than her Neighbors, to comfort her self that she has more Lace. Some
Ladies put so much weight upon Ornaments, that if one could see into their
Hearts, it would be found, that even the Thoughts of Death are made less heavy
to them by the Contemplation of their being laid out in State, and honorably
attended to the Grave. One may come a good deal short of such an Extreme, and
yet still be sufficiently Impertinent, by setting a wrong Value upon things
which ought to be used with more indifference. A Lady must not appear
sollicitous to ingross Respect to her self, but be content with a reasonable
Distribution, and allow it to others, that she may have it returned to her. She
is not to be troublesomly nice, nor distinguish her self by being too delicate,
as if ordinary things were too course for her; this is an unmannerly and
offensive Pride, and where it is practiced, deserves to be mortified, of which
it seldom fails. She is not to lean too much upon her Quality, much less to
despite those who are below it. Some make Quality an Idol, and then their
Reason must fall down and worship it; they would have the World think, that no
amends can ever be made for the want of a great Title, or ancient Coat of Arms:
They imagine, that with these Advantages they stand upon the higher Ground,
which makes them look down upon Merit and Virtue, as things inferior to them.
This Mistake is not only senseless, but criminal too, in putting a greater
Price upon that which is a piece of good Luck, than upon things which are
valuable in themselves. Laughing is not enough for such a Folly; it must be
severely whipped, as it justly deserves. It will be confessed, there are
frequent Temptations given by pert Upstarts to be angry, and by that to have
our Judgment corrupted in these Cases; but they are to be resisted, and the
utmost that is to be allowed, is, when those of a new Edition will forget
themselves, so as either to brag of their weak side, or to endeavor to hide
their Meanness by their Insolence; to cure them by a little seasonable
Raillery, a little Sharpness well placed, without dwelling too long upon it.
These and many other kinds of Pride are to be avoided. That which is to be
recommended to you, is, an Emulation to raise your self to a Character, by
which you may be distinguished, an Eagerness for precedence in Virtue, and all
such other things as may gain you a greater share in the good Opinion of the
World. Esteem to Virtue is like a cherishing Air to Plants and Flowers, which
makes them blow and prosper; and for that reason it may be allowed to be in
some degree the Cause as well as the Reward of it. That Pride which leads to
a good End, cannot be a Vice, since it is the beginning of a Virtue; and to be
pleased with just Applause, is so far from being a Fault, that it would be an
ill Symptom in a Woman, who should not place the greatest part of her
Satisfaction in it. Humility is no doubt a great Virtue; but it cease to be
so, when it is afraid to scorn an ill thing. Against Vice and Folly it is
becoming your Sex to be haughty; but you must not carry the Contempt of things
to Arrogance toward Persons, and it must be done with fitting Distinctions,
else it may be Inconvenient by being unseasonable. A Pride that raises a
little Anger to be outdone in any thing that is good, will have so good an
Effect, that it is very hard to allow it to be a Fault. It is no easy matter
to carry even between these differing kinds so described; but remember, that it
is safer for a Woman to be thought too proud, than too familiar.

DIVERSIONS.
THE last thing I shall recommend to you, is a wise and safe method of using
Diversions; to be too eager in the pursuit of pleasure whilst you are Young, is
dangerous; to catch at it in riper Years, is grasping a shadow that will not be
held; besides, that by being less natural it grows to be indecent; Diversions
are the most properly to be applied, to ease and relieve those who are
Oppressed, by being too much Employed; those that are Idle have no need of
them, and have no need of them, and yet they above all others give themselves
up to them. To unbend our Thoughts, when they are too much stretched by our
Cares, is not more natural than it is necessary, but to turn our whole Life
into a Holy Day, is not only ridiculous, but destroys pleasure instead of
promoting it; the Mind like the Body is tired by being always in one Posture,
too serious breaks it, and too diverting looseneth it: It is Variety that
gives the Relish, so that Diversions too frequently reaped, grow first to be
in indifferent, and at last tedious; whilst they are well chosen and well
timed, they are never to be blamed; but when they are used to an Excess, though
very Innocent at first, they often grow to be Criminal, and never fail to be
Impertinent: Some Ladies are bespoken for Merry Meetings, as Bessus was for
Duels; they are engaged in a Circle of Idleness, where they turn round for the
whole Year, without the Interruption of a serious hour; they know all the
Players Names, and are Intimately acquainted with all the Booths in Bartholomew
Fair; no Soldier is more Obedient to the sound of his Captain's Trumpet, than
they are to that which summoneth them either to a Puppit-Play or a Monster; the
Spring that brings out Flies, and Fools makes them Inhabitants in Hide-Park;
in the Winter they are an Encumbrance to the Playhouse, and the Ballast of the
Drawing Room; the Streets all this while are so weary of these daily Faces,
that Men's Eyes are over-laid with them; the sight is glutted with fine things
as the Stomach with sweet ones; and when a fair Lady will give too much of her
self to the World, she grows lushious, and oppresses instead of pleasing.

These Jolly Ladies do so continually seek Diversion, that in a little time
they grow into a Jest, yet are unwilling to remember, that if they were
seldomer seen they would not be so often laughed at; besides, they make
themselves Cheap, than which there cannot be an unkinder word bestowed upon
your Sex. To play sometimes, to entertain Company, or to divert your self, is
not to be disallowed, but to do it so often as to be called a Gamester, is to
be avoided, next to the things that are most Criminal. It has Consequences of
several kinds not to be endured; it will engage you into a habit of Idleness
and ill hours, draw you into ill mixed Company, make you neglect your
Civilities abroad, and your business at home, and impose into your Acquaintance
such as will do you no Credit. To deep Play there will be yet greater
Objections; it will give Occasion to the World to ask spiteful Questions, how
you dare venture to lose, and what means you have to pay such great sums. If
you pay exactly, it will be enquired from whence the money comes; if you owe,
and especially to a Man, you must be so very Civil to him for his forbearance,
that it lays a ground of having it farther improved if the Gentleman is so
disposed, who will be thought no unfair Creditor, if where the Estate fails
he seizes upon the Person; besides, if a Lady could see her own Face upon an
ill Game, at a deep Stake, she would certainly forswear any thing that could
put her looks under such a Disadvantage.

DANCING.
TO Dance sometimes will not be imputed to you as a fault, but remember that
the end of your Learning it, was, that you might know the better how to move
gracefully; it is only an advantage so far; when it goes beyond it, one may
call it excelling in a Mistake, which is no very great Commendation: It is
better for a Woman never to Dance, because she has no skill in it, than to do
it too often, because she does it well; the easiest as well as the safest
Method of doing it, is in private Companies, as amongst particular Friends, and
then carelessly, like a Diversion; rather than with Solemnity, as if it was
business, or had any thing in it to deserve a Months preparation by serious
Conference with a Danceing-Master.

Much more might be said to all these heads, and many more might be added to
them; but I must restrain my thoughts, which are full of my Dear Child, and
would overflow into a Volume, which would not be fit for a New-Years-Gift. I
will conclude with my warmest Wishes for all that is good to you, that you may
live so as to be an Ornament to your Family, and a Pattern to your Sex, that
you may be blessed with a Husband that may value, and with Children that may
inherit your Virtue; that you may shine in the World by a true Light, and
silence Envy by deserving to be esteemed, that Wit and Virtue may both conspire
to make you a great Figure; when they are separated, the first is so empty, and
the other so faint, that they scarce have right to be commended: May they
therefore meet and never part; let them be your Guardian Angels, and be sure
never to stray out of the distance of their joint-protection: May you so raise
your Character, that you may help to make the next Age a better thing, and
leave Posterity in your Debt for the advantage it shall receive by your
Example: Let me conjure you, My Dearest, to comply with this kind Ambition of a
Father, whose thoughts are so engaged in your behalf, that he reckons your
Happiness to be the greatest part of his own.

FINIS.

