THE GLORY OF THE True Church, DISCOVERED, As it was in its PURITY in the
PRIMITIVE TIME.

Also, A Manifestation how and when the Apostasy came, and how long it has
continued in the Church of Rome; proved to be in it, because she differs in
Doctrine and Practice from the Church of Christ in the Apostles days.

Published for this end, that People may be informed, and their understandings
opened to discern of the times and seasons, and see the difference between the
Lambs Wife and the Mother of Harlots.

By one who desires that all may come to the Knowledge of the Truth and be
saved, and walk in the Light of the Lord, FRANCIS HOWGIL.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Blackspread-Eagle, at the West End
of Paul's, 1661.

TO THE READER OR Readers.
GReat has been the Wisdom which God has shed abroad in the hearts of his
People, and made known unto his servants through Ages, wherein he has made
known his mind and will at sundry times and in diverse manners, sometimes by
Types, sometimes by Shadows and Representations, sometimes by Dreams, sometimes
by Visions, sometimes by Prophecy, and there was not the least Ministration,
but it had a glory in it, and the one living God manifested his mind unto the
sons of men who feared his Name in every Generation, and showed unto them, and
signified his mind unto them what he was, and showed unto them how he would be
worshipped, and they that were obedient unto that which was made manifest in
every Age and Ministration found acceptance with the Lord, and the peace of God
in their hearts; After man had transgressed and gone from his Maker, and lost
the guide of his youth, and broken Gods Covenant, then blindness came upon him,
and a vail was betwixt him and his Maker, and man increased and grew in an
earthly part, and lusted after earthly things, whith fed and increased that
part, and the Image of God was lost, in which the creature delighted, yet
notwithstanding such was and is the Love of God toward his Creation, and to
his workmanship, that he did not utterly cast off man for ever, but followed
him to draw him back again out of the transgression, to have unity with him who
was his Maker, and when man was gone into the darkness, the Lord stooped so low
as to come near him, and to that state he was in, and made a Covenant with man,
(when man's heart was outward upon outward things) and gave him commands
outward, and Statutes and Ordinances outward, that he might worship therein,
which were shadows and types of some better thing to come, and these were the
Ordinances of the first Covenant which pertained to the changeable part that
was above the seed, but they typed forth more Heavenly things which was to be
revealed in due time, and when the seed came to be manifested and raised up,
they had an end and the cloud passed away, and the day did spring forth in
clearness, and he brought forth which restored all that believe unto God, viz.
Christ Jesus; then did God more clearly manifest himself in the earth through
his Son, who had the will of the Father and declared it, who rent the vail, and
put an end to the shadows, and blotted out the handwriting, and ended the types
and figures, and all that believed in him, who was the end of them and the sum
of all, he overthrew the nature in them which was changeable, unto which they
pertained until the time of Reformation, which was when he was sacrificed up a
Propitiation for the sins of the whole world, and they that did believe and
received him came to be the Sons of God, and declared the mind of God as it was
revealed, and as the spirit gave utterance, and many did believe, and did grow
up and become of one heart, mind and soul, and worshipped God with one accord,
and in the spirit and in the power of the Father, and separated from the Jewish
worship and the form thereof, and met together in the Power of God, and
glorified God, and spoke of the things of his Kingdom unto all that waited for
it freely, and the Lord was honored by them, and glorified in them. But soon
after the mystery of godliness was brought forth, the mystery of iniquity began
to work and opposed the work of the Lord, and transformed into the similitude
and outward appearance and form, and yet lived in the flesh, and there began to
be an apostasy, and a deviation from that glory and power which was once
revealed, and Antichrist wrought with signs and lying wonders, and got the
words, and hated the life and power, and them that appeared in it, and then
they that were under his Government and Reign hated the Reign of Christ, and
said in their hearts we will not have him to rule over us, though in words they
confess him, and then persecuted and drove the true Church into the wilderness,
and set up imitations, and inventions and traditions, and vain customs which
they have called Apostolical, and holy Institutions, which are contrary unto
Primitive Institutions and Ordinances, only brought in by them when darkness
began to spread over the earth, when the Bishops, in the first three hundred
years after Christ, began to contend about days, and times, and meats and
drinks, and Rome began to claim superiority over all Churches called Christian,
and the Pope became as a Lawgiver.

I have led thee through diverse ages and times as briefly as possible may be,
to single out the Original and beginning of those things, and who were the
first Ordainers of them betwixt this and the Apostles days, which are now
accounted as holy Institutions; The state and glory of the true Church in this
Treatise thou will see before the Apostasy, and the state in the Apostasy, how
she fled into the wilderness, and how Mystery Babylon was raised, and the false
Church called her self visible, many of her Doctrines and Practices which are
contrary to the Primitive Church are here discovered, and the Authors and
formers made known, whereby thou may come to see a difference in the Ordinances
of the true Church, and the Traditions and Inventions of the false Church,
which are too much contended for in this day by them who say they are come to
the true Reformation, according to the Primitive times; but thou will see as
thou compares but their practice with the Primitive times, to be quite
contrary, and to be but smoke, and that which has darkened the air, clouded
peoples understandings, and has led them into ignorance and darkness, so that
the way of Truth has not been discovered unto many; but the Lord is arisen and
that which comprehends time is made manifest, and all that which has got up in
the Apostasy is viewed and seen and laid open to the view of all, that they may
depart out of these things which are but the inventions and traditions of men,
in which Eternal Life is not to be had. Read with meekness, and in that which
is spiritual in thy self, through which the things of God are made manifest,
for with that I have unity, and in that as thou live and walk, I bid thee
farewell.

F. H.

The Principal Heads treated upon in this following Discourse.
1. THe State of the Church from the manifestation of Christ in the flesh to
the end of the Apostles, briefly discovered.

2. The entering in of the Apostasy and the declination from that purity and
Doctrine, Worship and practice, downward unto this present age and time.

3. The Reformed and separated Congregations called Parochial, proved in the
Apostasy, compared with the Primitive times in Worship and Practice.

4. A few words unto all, how they may come out of the Apostasy to the true
Church which is in God the Lambs wife.

5. Concerning Baptizing or sprinkling Infants.

6. Concerning the sign of the Cross, and ordaining of Parishes and Parochial
Churches.

7. Concerning swearing by the Gospel as it is called, and kissing the Book and
Bishopping of Children, the first Authors shown.

8. Concerning Fasts and Feasts, and Holy days, their Institutions and
founders in the Apostasy.

9. Concerning Priests Vestures and Garments, and Bells, their Authors shown
which are practiced amongst Christians as Apostolic Institutions.

10. Concerning the Mattens and singing of Psalms by course in Musical tunes,
and supplications, and short Prayers called Lettanies, their Authors shown.

11. Conrerning the Passover and the Lords Supper, and the Ceremonies about it.

12. Concerning Ministers and their Office under the Law, and under the Gospel.

13. Concerning the ten Persecutions under the Heathen Emperors, and how
diverse vain Traditions and Institutions got up among the Christians in those
times, and Constitution amongst the East and Western Churches after the
Apostasy was entered in the first 300. and 400. years after Christ.

14. Of the decrees of the Church of Rome, and Ordinances which are held as
Apostolic Institutions.

15. Concerning the general Councils since the Apostles days which belonged to
the Church of Rome; their Decrees not infallible but are contradicting one
another.

16. Concerning the worship of God, and whether Kings and Rulers ought to
compel in Spiritual things, declared; and some Scriptures cleared, and diverse
objections answered about this thing.

17. Concerning Oaths in the first Covenant, and the Lawfulness thereof and the
unlawfulness thereof discovered in the new Covenant in the Gospel times, though
the Apostates mingle the Ordinances of both together.

18. Tithes in their first Institution unto whom they were due according to the
Command of God, declared; And that Tithes are no way lawful to be received,
neither sought for by any who are Ministers of the new Covenant, and the
everlasting Gospel, proved out of the Scripture and Antiquity.

19. Respecting of Persons and Complemental bowings and worshipping one
another, and flattering Titles no good manners, but are in the transgression,
and has been anciently reproved and condemned.

20. Universities and Schools of Natural Learning are of no use, as to the
making of Ministers of Christ in the Primitive times, but a thing introduced,
and brought in, in latter ages, by the Apostates who had erred from the Spirit,
who then admired and set up natural Languages and Philosophy, that thereby they
might be furnished to make discourses, speeches and Sermons to get money by;
and as they are holden up at this day, are made an absolute Idol; and as to
their Practice, its generally known to be profane, and no way meet to advance
the Church of Christ.

CHAP. I. The State of the true Church, from the manifestation of Christ in the
flesh, to the end of the Apostles days, briefly discovered.
GOd according to his determinate will, and everlasting Counsel, in the fullness
of time, sent his only begotten Son into the World, to be the Light of the
World, and to be a Leader to the People, and to be a Propitiation for the sins
of the whole World; Who obeyed the will of the Father in all things, according
as it was testified of him by Moses and the Prophets, and as it was said by
David concerning him, in the volumn of thy Book it is written concerning me. I
come to do thy will O God, Psalm. 40. 7. And so he did as it was written of him,
he fulfilled all righteousness, and ended all the Types, and Figures, and
Shadows, and Worship of the first Covenant, as the Apostle testifies of him,
Heb. 7. 12. The Law was changed, and the Priesthood changed, in that they were
but Figures and Shadows of Good things to come; and in regard that they were
faulty and did not make the comers thereunto perfect, as pertaining to the
conscience, but the bringing in of a better hope did, and the better Covenant,
to wit, the Covenant of life and peace, which the Prophets by the Spirit had
testified of from Moses to Samuel, and till John, and John likewise bore
Testimony of him, who was the Lamb o God, that took away the sins of the world,
Joh. 1. 29. 36. And now he being come ^o whom the Prophers testified, who was
not made by a carnal Commandment as was Aaron, and the rest of the Priests
under the Law, but after the power of an endless life, offered up himself once
for all (putting an end to all the offerings of the first Covenant) for the
perfecting them that are Sanctified. Heb. 10. 14.

Now he being come into the fullness of time manifest, according to the
Testimony of the Prophets, he fulfilled all things which the Prophets Testified
of him, and his works did Testify of him that he was the Son of God; Now he
declared the will of the Father, and discoursed with them who were Doctors and
Ministers of the first Covenant, declaring unto them diverse times, and showing
unto them in diverse places, that the Kingdom of God was at hand, and to be
manifest in power, and testified of himself and the Father also with him, and
his works declared the same, that he was the everlasting high Priest, which put
an end to all the first Priesthood, Covenant, and Ordinances thereof, and he
preached the word of the Kingdom, and declared against them who sticked behind
in the figures, and types, and shadows* and did reprove them, to wit, the
professors of the first Covenant, who were searchers of the Scriptures, and
said, you will not come unto me that you may have life; I am the bread of Life
that came down from above, and came to fulfill the Law and all righteousness,
and to publish the word of Faith, which did not make void the Law, but
establish it which was new* And so he said while you have the ^ight, believe in
the Light, that you may be children of the Light; And this he spoke to the
Pharisees, which had the Law and the Prophets, and were acting in the Types,
and Figures, which were shadows of the thing it self, but not the very thing,
but he preached the very thing; The word of the Kingdom, the word of power, and
the word of life, and many were quickened by it in their hearts and minds, who
believed and heard the voice of him who was the Son of God, and so came to
live; Who could not be made alive in the exercising themselves in the
Ordinances, and many believed in him, and he chose unto him Disciples who
believed in him, and sent them out to preach Repentance, and to begin at
Jerusalem, though they were the chiefest professors and ordinance men, and were
for conformity to the Ordinances of the first Covenant, yet repentance was to
be preached to them, and the first Principles of Religion, though they had been
and were the greatest professors and observers of the Ordinances of the first
Covenant that was in the Earth at that time. And afterward he sent out
Disciples, and gave them Commandment to preach, and Disciple all Nations in the
name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost, and these which he sent out to preach
the Gospel, unto whom he gave power to cast out Devils, and work Miracles,
Prophesied after a season the word of the Kingdom, both to Jews and Gentiles
according as the Prophets had testified; And these who was sent out and made
Ministers by the holy Ghost, and received gifts from the holy Ghost, for the
work of the Ministry, they preached not up the Ordinances of the first
Covenant, but preached Christ the everlasting Covenant, and the power of God,
and the wisdom of God for the remission of sin, and the word of faith they
declared in the mouth and in the heart, and went not to Tables of stone to
direct people thither, but to bring people to believe in him who was the Light
of the World, and lights every man that comes into the World, that all men
through him might believe.

And many did believe in him who was the Covenant, and did believe through the
Apostles words who was commissionated, and fitted for the work of the
Ministry, and through their words which they declared many did believe, both
of Jews and Gentiles, and as many of Jews as did believe, and separated from
the Temple, Priests, Sacrifices, Ordinances of the first Covenant; and they met
together in houses and other places, Acts 20. 7. Chap. 28. 30, 31. And the
Gentiles which believed separated from their dumb Idols, after which they had
been led formerly, and from their Temples, and ceased any more to* offer unto
Idols; and they met together at certain places, in Towns, and Cities, not only
at Jerusalem, but also at Antioch, Collosse, The ssolonica, Corinth, and diverse
other places, which were long to enumerate; Act. 11. 9. Chap. 17. 1, 2. Chap.
18. 4.

But now mark this, that by which the Apostle gathered them from the Jewish
Temples, and Priesthood, and the Gentiles from their ^dols Temples, was by the
preaching of the everlasting Gospel, to wi^, no^ the Law, nor the Ordinances of
the first Covenant, but the Power of God, and the word* of reconciliation; for
the first Covenant of the Jews made not the comers thereunto perfect as
pertaining to the conscience; Neither the Gentiles Idols Temples nor Worships,
made them perfect as pertaining to the conscience, but rather made them worse
and more corrupted, Heb. 9. 9.

But the preaching and publishing of the word of reconciliation that did, it
was committed to the Disciples, it was received and believed in by many, both
Jews and Gentiles, as at Ephesus and elsewhere, and they were made a habitation
of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 22.

Now mark this, they preached not up the Letter of the Law, nor that which was
written in Tables of stone, for the first Priesthood that was ended, and the
Ministry of that, and the veil was over their hearts while Moses was read, and
their ability stood not in the litteral knowledge, or in that which was
written; But they were able Ministers of the New Testament of the Spirit, and
so all that did believe both Jews and Gentiles, who received the word of Faith,
which was nigh in the mouth and in the heart, Romans 10. 8. They grew up in the
knowledge of God, and of his holy Sprit, and great gifts grew amongst them, as
of Prophecy, of speaking with Tongues, of Interpretation, and there was
diversity of gifts, and diversity of operations, yet all by the same Spirit
which the Apostles was made Ministers of, and which, they that did believe and
receive, received gifts from it, and knew the operation of it, which wrought in
them mightily to the throwing down the strong holds, 2 Cor. 10. 4. And the
principalities and powers of Darkness, and to the translating and changing of
them from darkness to Light, and from Sa^ans power, to the power of God, even
into the Kingdom of his dear Son, Col. 1. 13. And several Congregations in
diverse Places were all one body, whereof Christ the life was the head, in which
they had believed, and of whose power they had tasted, grew up in knowledge,
and wisdom, and gifts; and the day of Christ approached which Abraham saw; And
they exhorted one another and admonished one another, and when they met
togethere at several places, every one according to the gift of God, as he had
received (nor from the Letter) but from the Spirit, did and might admister to
the edification one of another, and to the building up and comforting one
another in the most holy faith, which gave them victory over sin, which faith
was ought in them by hearing of the word that was nigh them, in the mouth and
in the heart, which was the word of consolation, which was in the beginning.

Moreover when they met together, they might Prophecy one by one, and every
one exercise his own gift to the edification and comfort of the body, as the
Spirit did lead them in order, and if any went out from his measure, he was
judged by them that were in the Spirit.

Furthermore they that had believed the Gospel which was published to them for
remission of sin, they grew up into great enjoyments and seize in the
righteous life of Christ, which was manifest in them; And though first they
knew the Ministration of Condemnation and the sentence of death, yet afterward
came to know the Ministration of the spirit, and the sweet assurance ard
Testimony of it, bearing witness to the Spirit, that they were the Sons of God,
and they were made heirs according to the promise, Heb. 6. 17. and were made
joint heirs and coheirs with Christ in the Kingdom which is immortal which
fados not away, and did come to know Mount Sion, and the City of the Living
God, Heb. 12. 22. and it were large to speak of the glory and the transcendent
excellency of the Church of Christ (which became a purchased possession to him)
in the primitive times, or the first hundred years after the manifestation of
Christ in the flesh.

But take notice of this, that them that were sent out, who had received freely
of the Father, of Christ, and of the Spirit, Ministered freely, as they had
received freely without making any Covenants, or enquiries after wordly
revenews; but went from City to City preaching the Gospel of Christ freely, as
they had received without any conditions from the people; And as many as
believed and received the Gospel, did Minister freely, their hearts being open
unto them, who had declared unto them spiritual things, Acts 4. 34. Mat. 10. 8.
etc. So that we read of no compulsion, or forceing maintenance from any of the
Cities whether they believed or not believed, the Father took care of such
harvest men, and what they received was given freely, and there was no
complaint, though often they denied that which was proffered to them, and their
care was to make the Gospel of Christ not burdensome or chargable, but rather
their hands should Minister unto their necessities, Act. 18. 3.

Again, though diverse gifts were given unto the Disciples before and after
Christ's ascension, as some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists,
some Pastors, some Teachers, and some Elders or Bishops; yet they were all made
Ministers by the holy Ghost, yet it were large to speak of the Power and of the
wisdom, and of the enjoyments of God in that day and time, and of the gifts,
and of the order which was in the Church at that time. But in a word the Son of
God was made manifest and gave them an understanding, and they knew him that
was true, (Truth it self) and Christ was revealed in them, and manifested to
them the hope of their Glory, Col. 1. 27.

Furthermore, they came to see over the new Moons, and Fasts, and feasts, and
Days, and Times, and Meats, and Drinks, and nonecould judge of them, or ought
to judge of them in those cases, for they saw the Body Christ, for the
man-child was brought forth, and the woman was clothed with the Sun, who had
the Crown of twelve Stars upon her head, who brought forth the holy Child
Jesus, who saves his people from their sins; In whom all Shadows, Types,
Figures, representations ends; This in short was part of the glory of the
Primitive Church, which would be large to spoke of, as it was in the first
State of its purity; But hereafter some fuller thing the Lord may bring forth
in his own time and day.

CHAP. II. Concerning the entering in of the Apostasy, and the Declination from
that purity of Doctrine, Worship and Practice, and when it began downwards from
the entering of it in, until this present age and time.
CHrist the true Prophet, which Moses spoke of, whom the Lord raised up, and
manifested in the fullness of time, he prophesied and declared of false Prophets
that should arise, Mat. 7. 15. Beware of false Prophets which shall come unto
you in sheeps clothing, which are inwardly ravening Wolves, ver. 16. ye shall
know them by their fruits; and in Mat. 24. 11. But many false Prophets shall
arise and deceive many, and this came to be seen, and fulfilled in the age of
the Disciples; and John Testified, 1 John 2. 18. Little children it is the last
times, as ye have heard that Antichrist should come, even now there are many
Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time, they went out from us,
but were not of us; and Chap. 4. 3. So they entered in then and went out from
the Light, from the Power of God, which the Apostles preached for the
remissions of sins. And Jude he testified against such as was entered in, who
was in Cains way, that were degenerated, and killed, and in Balaams way for
gifts and rewards, and yet preached up the words which the Apostles spoke, (but
for filthy Lucre) and had men's persons in admiration because of advantage. And
Peter said, false Prophets and false Teachers should arise, that should bring
in damnable Heresies, that should deny the Lord that bought them, and many
should follow their pernicious ways, 2 Pet. 2. 2. And the Apostles wrote to
Timothy the Bishop or overseer, that the Spirit spoke expressly that in the last
times some should depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and
Doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in Hypocrisy, forbiding to Marry, and
abstain from meats, etc. 1 Timothy 4. and again Paul in the 2 Timothy 3. saw the
Apostasy coming in, and perilous times should come, that men should be lovers
of their own selves, Covetous, Boasters, without natural affection,
Truth-breakers, False accusers, dispisers of them that are good, Traitors,
Heady, High-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God, men of corrupt
minds, reprobate concerning the truth, having a form of Godliness, but denying
the power; and as the same Apostle says in another place, was enemies to the
Cross of Christ; And these went out into the world, and this is 1400. years
ago and upwards. Then the mystery of iniquity began to work and worught, and
they went out and did not preach up the Jews Religion, the ordinances of the
first Covenant: But they preached Christ in words, and transformed into the
form of the Apostles words, but denied the Cross, and spoke those things they
ought not for filthy Lucre sake; and there was the beginning of the Hirelings
that care not for the Flock, and those went out into the world, and many
followed their pernicious ways, and there held the form but denied the power,
and so indeed preached another Gospel, and they lived in the liberty of the
flesh, and held People in the Liberty, yet prosylited them into a kind of a
faith which was seigned, and these kind of false Apostles, and deceitful
workers, led many after them; and there was the beginning of the Apostasy, and
they published these things in the World, and when the Name of Christ came to
be in reputation, and the preaching of the Gospel to be in request, then they
for filthy Lucre went out with the words, and retained the form, not the Jewish
from altogether, but the form of the Saints worship and practice, which were in
the Church of Christ, which were elect and precious; and they grew to such a
head and to such a body, and became such a number; and yet gainsayers, and in
Cains way, for they were out of the power, and out of that which mortifies the
deeds of the flesh; and they spread themselves over Nations, and Kindreds, over
Tongues, and People; and Nations, and Kindreds, and Tongues, and People, have
now got the name of a Church, and the seat thereof came to be great, the false
Church the Harlot, Mystery Babylon the Mother of Harlots, which had denied the
Husband Christ, the power of God; her seat was set upon Nations, Kindreds,
Tongues, and People, and these were her seat; And John said these were the
waters, which he saw the Whore or false Church sit upon, and she turned, and
all her children against the freewoman, the Lords spouse, the Lambs Wife, and
made her fly into the Wilderness, for a time, times, and half a time, and she
reached out her Golden Cup (a fair outside) but full of fornication within,
and she claimed Christ to be her Husband, and sat as a Queen, and the Kings of
the Farth, John sa^ in the Revelation drink of her Cup, and bewitched by her
Sorceries; and then all the Nations becoming Water, and unstable, being drunk
with fornication, sraggered up and down, and reeled up and down, and stood in
nothing, being out of the power which should have stablished them: And then a
great Beast arose (out of these Nations, Kindreds, and Tongues, and People,
which are these waters) with seven heads and ten horns, and then these
Apostatized Disciples or Ministers which preached for filthy Lucre, and them
that believed them, sheltered them under the Beast, and cried, who is able to
make war with the Beast? and the Kings of the Earth gave their strength to the
Beast which arose out of the waters; and now the false Church gets upon him,
(these that had the form of Godliness and out of the power) and rides upon the
Beast and he carries her, and has done this many years, and she has traveled
in the greatness of his strength. And then Laws began to be made about
Religion, and then began compelling; we heard of none in the Primitive times,
nor in the true Church, but now the false Church calling her self by the
Free-Womans name, and getting on the outward dress, and habit, and attire,
says I am she; have not I the form and ordinances which was practiced in the
Apostles days? Who doubts of that, may look into the Primitive times, and see
that I am conformable to the form which was amongst the first Christians in
things that are outward. And thus she has deceived the Nations, Rev. 18. 23.

Now Rome look to thy beginning, and read thy Original, and view thy Antiquity.
We will grant thee every dram, and every hour of time these thirteen hundred
years, and prove thee to be in the Apostasy in doctrine and practice from the
Primitive time, after the first hundred years after Christ was manifested in
the flesh. And Christendom look about thee, for thou art measured, and thy
compass is seen; If Nations, and Kindreds, and Tongues, and People, have drunk
the Whores Cup, since Johus days, as will be made manifest; then what cause
have thou Rome, to boast of Antiquity, and universality, for that does the
sooner prove thee to be a Harlor then the true Church, and thy universality
which has long been boasted of, proves thee no more to be the true Church of
Christ, then the sea can prove it self to be a Rock; for if Nations, Kindreds,
and Tongues, and Languages, and People universally be the waters that the Whore
sits upon, and the Beast rose out of the Waters. Now read thy self; we have
measured thee as in the hollow of a hand, and we have thee in the Apostasy,
clear thy self when thou can; If the Beast compelled all both small and great
to worship him, and made war with all that bore not his Image, then we have
thee between us and the Apostles time as in a press, for not such compelling
was in the true Church, by any Ecclesiastical or Secular power; Instance if
thou can from the Apostles writings any such thing, or where Cains Weapons was
lifted up, or Creatures men and women killed by the Sword, or destroyed with
lingering torments in the time of the Apostles. Now in that it is said the
Church has been universal, to that more might be said. Europe or some parts
adjacent is not all the Earth, and it is no where found since the Apostles,
that klling, and compelling, and forcing has been but by thee, and them that
are at the best, but in the Suburbs of thy City which afterward I shall in
brief descend to, and so it is evidently known, that thy Church (so called)
has been upheld more by cruelty and force then any sound Doctrine or Practice
agreeable to the Apostles days: Though thou may wipe thy Mouth, and say I am
clear, we persecute none to death, we have a Beast to ride upon, and will make
war for our City, and will compel to our worship, and institutions, we will cry
him up for the higher power, and we will frighten people that who resists this,
resists the ordinance of God; And he will kill, and destroy, and compel, and
force, and we shall be clear, and he will call us the holy Church, and we will
call him the higher Power; And so it is clear and evident by what has been
said that thou art in the Apostasy, as hereafter shall be manifested by name
and practice.

First, thy Ministers are not according to the Ministers of Christ in the
Primitive times, their call not such, their practice no^ such. They were made
Ministers in the primitive times by the holy Ghost and by the Spirit, but yours
by natural parts, Tongues, Arts, Philosophy, and Study, and packing up Old
Authors together to make a little discourse of, and this must be called the
Gospel.

Secondly, the Ministers of Christ they preach freely, not for gifts, and
rewards, and Tithes; but you have brought in Judaisme, Tithes which belongs
to the first Priesthood, your Oblations, Obventions, your Mortuaries, and
these Invented, and Introduced things to maintain your Ministers by.

Thirdly, the Ministers of Christ did not compel any at Corinth, Thessalonica,
Macedonia, or any other Church to give them such and such maintenance by force,
who received not their Doctrine. But you compel and force, and have made that
which you call the Gospel, chargeable to the Earth where you have power, 1 Cor.
9. 18.

Fourthly, your Doctrine is contrary to the Doctrine of Christ and the
primitive times, as that the real and substantial presence of Christ's Body and
blood (after the consecration of Priests) is in the bread and wine which may
corrupt, and so does not the body of Christ do contrary to Christ's Doctrine,
who says he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood shall live for ever, Joh.
6. 56. But you that eat that which you call his substantial and real Body and
blood; both it and you shall corrupt.

Fifthly, of the unbloody Sacrifice of the Mass, this sacrifice does no good
at all, for where there is no blood there is no life, and where there is no
blood there is no remission says Paul, Heb. 9. 14. and so your sacrifice is
abominable, and an Idol, and such an one as there is no mention made of in the
Scriptures.

Sixthly, of your Liturgy, and public prayers in an unknown tongue, this is an
unprofitable and a vain Worship, and this is like your unbloody Sacrifice;
herein you are like Barbarians one to another, and how should they that worship
with you say Amen, when they know not what you say, you praying in an unknown
tongue is contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, who said, 1 Cor. 14. and the 18
verse. I thank my God I speak with Tongues more than you all, verse 19. yet in
the Church I had rather speak five words with my understanding that I might
reach others also, then ten thousand in an unknown Tongue.

Seventhly, your Doctrine of Purgatory, an invented and an imagined thing, as
to cleanse from sin; this is contrary to the Primitive Doctrine, the blood of
Christ cleanses from all sin, John 1. 7. and your distinctions of mortal and
venial sin is to blind people withal, for the wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23.

Eighthly, Of worshipping and invocation of Angels, and Saints as mediators
between us and God; this is contrary to the primitive Doctrine, there is one
Mediator between God and man, even the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. and he
alone makes intercession for all them that believe. Heb. 7. 25. and the Angel
reproved John, Rev. 22. 8, 9. when he would have worshipped him, and said unto
him, see thou do it not, for I am thy fellow Servant, etc. and the Prophet said
thou art onr Father though Abraham know us not, and Israel be ignorant of us,
Isay. 63. 6.

Ninthly, of Relics and sacred Images, this is contrary to what the Lord
spoke by the Prophets, Lev. 26. 1. ye shall make you no I dols nor graven
Image, neither rear you up a standing Image, neither shall you set up any Image
of stone in your Land, to bow down unto it, Deuteronomy. 6. 22. neither shall thou set
thee up any Image, which the Lord thy God hates; and Ezekiel. 6. 4 and your
Images shall be broken; and Romans 1. 23. there they were condemned that changed
the glory of the incorruptable God, into an Image made like to corruptable man,
etc. Thus you may plainly see your Idolatrous Image worship is forbidden, and
condemned in the Law, Prophets, and new Testament, and as for your Reliqne
worship you have neither command nor example for it from Christ nor his
Apostles.

Many more things might be enumerated, which is found among you in the
Apostasy, as your voluntary poverty, and feigned humility, and your wilful
vows, and many more things which are found to be contrary to the Church of
Christ, which must be turned from and denied, if ever you come to know the
everlasting Gospel which is to be preached again to the Nations, by which they
must be brought out of all this Apostasy.

Furthermore, as to the practice and Discipline of the Catholic Church (as it
is called) which pleads for antiquity, we find it not consonant and agreeing to
the Churoh in the primitive times, the first hundred years after Christ.

As for the vestmeuts your Priests wear at certain times, one on this manner,
another on that, your Ecclesiastical men, or Church Officers of several ranks
and orders, such we find not in the primitive times, in that which may be truly
called primitive.

And for the invented holy days and their eves, for fasting, and feasting, we
find no such things in the Primitive Times, and such a service for such a day,
and such a worship for such a day, we find not in the first hundred years after
Christ.

And for your Lent, which one of your Fathers invented, and this was his
ground, because God had the tenth of the increase or Tithes due to himself, and
for his Ministers under the Law, therefore it was necessary that the tenth part
of days should be allowed as Tithes to the Lord; O gross ignorance, and
palpable blindness, midnight it self came upon you in the time of your
visibillity, when the True Church was fled into the Wilderness. As though the
Lord was not Lord of all days, and as though all days were not his, and to be
used to his glory.

And your prohibiting meats, and distinguishing of meats, one holy for such a
day, another for such a day, flesh one day, and fish another day, as though
there were not the flesh of fish, or one thing were clean and another unclean.

And this invented trumpery has been observed for Catholic and Apostolic
Doctrine, but by whom we must needs tell you, by the Nations, Kindreds, and
Tongues, and People, upon which the Whore sits, and out of which the Beast
rose. And we will grant you antiquity enough this many hundred years, and yet
we will prefer the Primitive times before you, and bring their Doctrine, and
practice to reprove you, though we do not desire to go in Cains way, and to
kill Creatures that are out of the Doctrine of Christ, and contrary to
Apostolic and Catholic Doctrine, which wrestled not with the flesh and blood,
but with spiritual wickedness, whose weapons were not carnal, but Spiritual,
and yet they had great might in them, and threw down by these weapons, that
which never could be by Carnal, 2 Cor. 10. 4.

Again, your forbiding to marry, which is reckoned by the Apostles Doctrine to
be a Doctrine of Devils, and contrary unto that the Apostles Doctrine was,
marriage is honorable in all estates, the bed undefiled, Heb. 13. 4.

And seeing you plead Peter was at Rome, and Peter's chair, and that the Bishop
of Rome does succeed him, and has the Keys as Peter had; Why do you exclude
the chief Bishops as you account them, from marrying, and diverse other orders,
seeing Peter had a wife, and seeing that it is Catholic, and Apostolic
Doctrine (before you could claim the name of visible Church) that a Bishop
should be the husband of one wife, and should not be covetous nor no striker,
nor given to Wine, nor filthy Lucre, etc. But since the Bishop of Rome has
appropriated to himself, to be the head of the Church, and the chief Bishop
over all the Catholic Church, It has been manifested how much covetousness,
and covetous practices has been acted, as money for Pardons, and Indulgences,
and get money for the living and the dead, and the invented Purgatory has
filled your coffers, and your meritorious works have been sold at a dear rate;
In so much that a poor Woman who has lost het husband, and he deceased must
pay ten shillings for a mortuary, that he may be prayed for, or some of your
merits may be accounted to him which you have in store as a stock to sell to
any, who come with a prize in their hand. And from whence have you all these
Tithes; have yo^ not borrowed them of the Jews? And yet you are no Jews, and
such things we do not read among the Jews were Tytheable, as Pigs, Eggs, Hens,
and Geese; to omit greater matters, and the smoke passing up the chimneys, and
that which you call your Peter pence. And this is contrary to the Catholic and
Apostolic Doctrine, which Peter would have been ashamed, to ever have
mentioned either amongst Jews or Gentiles.

And now I would ask you a question or two, seeing John saw the true Church
flee into the Wilderness, the woman that was clothed with the Sun who brought
forth the man-child. What cause have you to boast of visibility, or
universality? Now when were you in the wilderness? if your Church has not
been so, then it demonstrates that your Church is nor the woman clothed with
the Sun, for she did fly into the wilderness as with the wings of an Eagle.

Secondly, whether has your Gospel been universally and publicly preached
these sixteen hundred years or nay? And is it the very same that was preached
in the first hundred, or two hundred years, seeing that John says, that all
Nations did drink of the whores cup of fornication. And then N^tions were
Waters, Seeing he says the Gospel shall be preached again to Nations,
Kindreds, and Tongues; which clearly demonstrates, there was a time when the
everlasting Gospel was not preached to the Kindreds, and Tongues, which are the
waters upon which your Church is Situated; And it is evidently manifested that
yours has been another Gospel then that which was preached in the Apostolic
Church, and in the Catholic Church, the first hundred or two hundred years
after Christ was manifested in the flesh. Much might be said, to demonstrate
the Truth which is in hand, that there has been an apostasy, the beginners
whereof came forth in the Apostles days, and afterward; grew into a body and
became like a great Sea, which according to the best Ecclesiastical writers,
which have given a narrative of the first five hundred years, declared that
there was a great loss within 300. years; but in five hundred years or less,
the very power of Godliness was denied, and very much of the form. And though
your Church pleads Antiquity for a Thousand years for these things a fore
mentioned, which they would be hard to prove; For although it should be granted
them, yet we will join issue with them in this thing, and are able to prove
all these Doctrines and Practices, not to be as it was in the first two hundred
years (except they will own such as taught the Doctrine of Balaam, and taught
the Doctrine of Devils, and went in Cains and Chores way) for an example.

It were not hard to prove the introducing of all these things before
mentioned, and how they have come in by degrees, one Counsel that rose out of
the waters ordaining this, another ordaining that; and so have risen up into
this great body of darkness, some of the practices borrowed from the Jews, and
some from the Heathen, and some invented of themselves in latter ages; So that
the worship that was in the Spirit and in Truth, in Christ's and the Apostles
days is turned from, and such a numberless number of vain Traditions,
Avemaries, Creeds, and Pater nosters, and such a deal a do as there is about
their unbloody Sacrifice of the Mass, that they are glad to be counted by
their beads on strings, as many very well know; By all that which has been
said may easily be collected, that there has been a great Diviation, and
apostasy from the Doctrine and practice of the Primitive times; thus far as I
am descended I leave it to the Reader to judge, and compare these things with
the Churches doctrine and practices in the first hundred years after Christ,
and if these things be found invented, and without footing or ground, then let
them that are informed, depart from them.

CHAP. III. But now to descend a little further, nearer unto our own age, to
speak something to them, which I believe look upon themselves, to be Catholic
and Apostolic in Doctrine and practice according to the Primitive time and
order, and that they are totally come out of the Apostasy.
THis I have to say to you, which is my judgment and belief, and that upon
good ground, that you are in many things in the Apostasy, as hereafter I shall
demonstrate, and to tell you nakedly and plainly we look upon the reformation
which was made in denying the Church of Rome, to be but very weak, and poor,
and feeble, and imperfect, comparatively with the Doctrine and practice, and
order in the Primitive times, in so much that we judge upon good grounds that
it cannot be parrelled with the Church in the Primitive times, which I have
spoke of before, in that you have denied the Pope to be the head of the Church,
and so are called Protestants; So am I, knowing that Christ is the head of the
Church, and ought to rule by his Spiritual Scepter and his eternal power in the
hearts and consciences of people, and in and over the true Church which is his
body whereof he is the head; and let all take heed who does intrude, and take
upon them that which belongs to the King of Kings, and King of Saints, as to
matter of head-ship, Regulation, or Government, for all power is committed unto
him in Heaven and Earth, and the Father has given it to him, and will not have
any other have that Glory; But whosoever seeks it must be condemned, and his
glory he will not give to another. For the Lamb is worthy of glory and
strength; And though the Church of Rome be generally acknowledged to be in the
Apostasy, by them that are separated from them, and that upon good grounds, yet
I say the Separation is in some little or small part, more in name then in
nature, more in form then in power, more in some circumstantial things, then in
the very ground it self, and very many of these Doctrines, Practices,
Discipline and order (as they call it) I find to be upholden, practiced, and
contended for, which are found in the former I have mentioned.

First of all to instance that which is generally holden out by the reformed
Protestants, is, that the writings of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, and the
several Epistles is the Gospel which the Primitive Disciples and Ministers
preached and published, and which People did receive, and by believing the
found thereof, were accounted Christians, and believers.

We would have all to know the Gospel was preached to Abraham, before Matthew or
Mark or any of the Apostles writ a word. Moreover we would have all to know,
that Christ had preached glad tidings to the captives, and some of the
Disciples had preached the word of the Kingdom, before Matthew, or Mark, or
Luke, or John had wrote a word; my reasons are diverse, Matthew, Mark Luke, and
John must needs hear and see that done which they testified of before they
writ, and if Matthew, Mark, Luke and John be the Gospel, the writings of them I
intend, then the Disciples could not preach it before it was given forth; and
if the Epistles be a part of the Gospel, this the Disciples, could not preach
before it was written, for Paul succeeded and was converted, after diverse of
the Apostles had preached the Gospel; so then doubtless the Disciples and
Apostles, had something to say, and declare and p^blish before any of the new
Testament was written; and it is manifested that they were not sent out to
preach the Law, nor the ordinances of the first Covenant, after Christ were
offered up the end of the first; So then there was something, and is something
which was preached by them, and is to be published now to all that are made
Ministers by the holy Ghost, and that is in few words (the power of God) which
was before the new Testament (so called) though the words declare of it, but is
not it; Now they went and preached, and Discipled in the Name of the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, which is a Ministry far beyond the written or declarative
sound; and indeed is a Spiritual and invisible thing, which the Apostles, Acts,
26. 18. declaring his Message which he had received by the holy Ghost, says, I
was sent to turn them, (viz. the Gentiles and Jews, and them of Arabia and else
where he Sojourned) from darkness unto light, and from Satan's power unto Gods
Power, that they that believed in the light and received the power of God,
which he preached to them, might receive remission of fins, for remission of
sin was only preached in his Name, and no name under Heaven there is, by which
men can be saved, but by the Name of Jesus, though the Apostles spoke according
to the motion of the Spirit, in diverse words, calling him the gift of God, the
free gift of righteousness, the unspeakable gift, the true Light that lightneth
every man that comes into the World, the Power of God, and the wisdom of God,
which wisdom and power they had received, and because the Son of God was
revealed in them, The Apostle said, I am a debtor to the Jews, and the Greeks,
Rom, 1. 14. and he having received this freely of the Father, he went to the
^ews, and went to the Greeks, to the Gentiles and Heathen, where the name of
this gift and power, and Jesus had not been named and published, freely without
gifts and rewards, and the necessity did lie upon him, 1 Cor. 9 16. and the
love of Christ which was shed abroad in his heart constrained him, and made him
reckon himself as a debtor unto all, because of the abundant loving kindness
and riches of Gods love and grace, and spiritual gifts, which he had received,
he longed, and thirsted, and traveled to communicate it unto others.

Largely I might speak of this hidden mystery, as to demonstrate what the
Gospel of Christ was and is, but in what I have already said, them that are any
thing spiritual minded will judge, that the Law and the Prophets, Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John, and the Epistles, was not the everlasting Gospel, but it
was a thing beyond and above, and before any of these writings was; although
they all in their several ages, bore Testimony of it, (viz.) the power of God,
which condemns sin in the flesh, and mortifies the deeds thereof, and gives
victory over it, and takes up all that believe in it into one life, power and
virtue, into pure peace, and heavenly contentment, and perfect satisfaction: So
you who are calling the letter the Gospel, or the new Testament writings the
Gospel, I would ask you a question also; when was there a time since the first
hundred years after Christ, or in that time till now, but these words and
writings have not been spoken and preached bought and sold as a Gospel, not
only in the Church of Rome, but also among all them that are separated from
her, even until now, this has been preached to Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, and
People; and if the writings be the everlasting Gospel, then how does John say,
or why did he so say, that the everlasting Gospel should go forth again, and be
preached again after the Apostasy, or to bring out of the Apostasy; But it
clearly implies the words had been preached and published, and the temporary
writings which was given sorth at diverse times had been preached up for Gospel
these many hundred years, which many have received by tradition; but the power
of God, and the gift of God, by which, and from which the Ministers of Christ
in all ages ministered, has been wanting, if not altogether lost, for the most
part among them that are called Christians; Then what is the quarrel betwixt
you and the Romanists, its but in translation at the most; and while words and
translations, and vertions have been contended about, the everlasting Gospel
has been hid; Therefore all people are upon heaps, and the Nations like waters
rolling up and down in instabillity. Now the reformed Ministry (so called) are
in many things in the same practice with the former; You deny an immediate
call; and sets up an outward Ordination, and a form of Laying on of hands
without the holy Ghost, ordaining such and such who have some skill in natural
Tongues, or some words of Oratory, to be a subject matter to make Ministers
upon; and that which they preach in words, which has been held in the form
long without the life, you call the Gospel; and these are confined to a Parish,
as the former to such a Cloister, and such a Monastry; and these preach for
hire, and gifts, and rewards, and for maintenance, and kepts up all the
soresaid ways, and maintenance, as Lawful, and will make people believe it is
according to Gospel institution, when alas it is but the Popes Tithes,
Oblations, Obventions, Mortuaries, and Prayers for the Dead, keeping up the
wages but denies the work; And Tithe of all things, as Piggs, and Geese, Hens,
and Eggs, Apples, and Cherries, and Turnips, and all, nothing excepted; this is
a feeble thing, as to hold out to people for Gospel maintenance, and the
preachers of the Gospel are ashamed of it.

Furthermore, them that will not give it, sue them at Law, throw them into
holes till they dye, take away ten fold that which is claimed, say the man is
not subject to Gospel order, denies Ministers maintenance; this has been crime
enough to take away the estates and lives of men; all this is in the Apostasy.

And seeing it is said we are under a Gospel administration, and ordinances;
what do you with Organs, whistlers, and Pipes in any part of your Services?
this pertained to the Jews and not to the Primitive Church. And what do you do
with Surplices, Tipets and Hood, and other strang^ kind of Garments? It may be
the Highpriests Garments, or the Priests linin Ephod, or linin breeches, must
be brought in for a Gospel proof, and for an Apostolic Ordinance; And what do
you with the Popes Lent? And why should the Popes Lent be among the reformed
Protestants Churches, forbiding meats and drinks? And why forbidding marriage
in Lent, and who ordained these days? What have they been borrowed from the
Heathen? Or are they looked upon to be such days as used to be cited in the
Callender for the dog-dayes, which have been brought from the Heathen, and
stands to this day, in too much credit among believers so called.

And why is one day preferred before and above another, and some counted holy
days, as though some others were unholy days? and why such a Collect, and
such a Gospel, and such a Chapter, and such a Psalm, mincing, and cutting, and
severing the Scriptures into pieces and shreds? Is this like Apostolic
Doctrine? Truly friends, many things we have to say, if you had an ear to hear,
and that upon good grounds we can speak, that we look upon all these thing, to
be feeble, and poor, and beggarly things, and has no agreement, or congruity
with the primitive times.

And should people be limited or stinted to such a certain form of words,
called service, or prayer, and divine worship? Was that ever reckoned divine
worship, that was not from the Divine Spirit? But it may be you will say the
words are good or some of them; I am not speaking about words, but the Spirit,
from which every service ought to be performed to the Lord God; and the
primitive Christians prayed in the spirit, and with understanding, and sung
with the spirit and with understandnig, 1 Cor. 14. 15. And there was some that
knew not what to pray for as they ought, but the Spirit helped their
infirmities. Romans 8. 26 But you konw what to pray for, and how much must be
said on such a day, or such a time, and if there be a Homily, or a Sermon,
Lettany must be missed.

Now I say if it be Divine worship, or any thing wherein God is honored, and
the people bettered, nothing of it ought to be wanting.

But these things the Primitive times does not countenance; but when the power
was lost, and the life gone from, and the Spirit erred from, these things have
come into the latter days, which have been very perilous times, as to them
who have kept the Apostolic faith, and the order of the primitive Church.

Many more things we could instance which are practiced, as for discipline and
order, and some for necessity, which has no affinity or union at all with the
Primitive Churches, but rather are things which are too near of Kin unto her
that sits as a Queen upon the waters, whose flesh must be burnt with fire, who
has drunk the blood of the Saints; and how many of the Lords servants have
suffered in and about these things, not only in the Church of Rome, but also by
them which have been called reformed, many have known and are living witnesses
thereof.

And all these Temples, Bells, Hour-glasses, Pulpits, and Cushons, Altars,
Tables, and Founts, which are things that pertain to them that locks they are
come out of the Apostasy; but the Spiritual minded sees over them, and beyond
them, and before these things; And also sees through the Spirit of Prophecy
and time when they shall be no more adored, worshipped and honored; But God
shall be feared in the hearts of the Sons of men, and glory shall be given to
him, and he shall be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth as he was in the
Primitive times, when the Beast and the false Prophet, and them that wrought
Miracles before him, and all they that have cried who is able to make war with
the Beast, and have cried worship him, All must be taken alive; Remember that
(alive) in their strength, and cast into the Lake, and the Mother of Harlors
shall be made desolate, her Cup of Fornication thrown under foot; The Kings of
the Earth shall deny it, and to give their strength any longer to the Beast;
and then shall that be fulfilled, Rejoce ye Prophets and holy men of God, and
ye that have suffered, for the hour of his Judgment is come, and as she has
served the Saints, so shall she be served, and rewarded double, and the day
hastens, and the times and seasons we see and know as God has made them
manifest. The man-child is descended again, who has right to rule the Nations
with a rod of iron, and break the ungodly in pieces as at potters vessel, and
stamp the residue of his enemies under his feet; And the Church is coming out
of the wilderness again, who leans upon the breast of her beloved; who is
clothing her again with beauty in stead of ashes, and putting upon her again
the beautiful garments of glory and excellency, even his own righteousness, and
they that see it, their hearts shall be made glad, and their souls rejoice in
God, and their flesh rest in hope, for the time is come when she must appear
again, which has been retired and hid in a place which God has prepared for
her, while the false Church sat as a Queen, and the Apostates as Princes, and
their merchandise sold at dear rates; But their joy shall be turned into
mourning, and alas, alas, shall be the cry of them that have been in Glory with
her, for their frankincense, odours, and sweet perfumes, and scarlet, and
purple, and gold, and silver, and wood, and Tin, and Iron, and Brass, none will
buy any more, none of the Lambs followers, nor none of the true Churches
children, who worship God in the spirit, and have no confidence in the flesh,
neither in any outward appearance, but in the hidden life of God, but in the
immortal life, which he has brought to light through his blessed Gospel, which
he has caused to be published again; the joyful sound whereof many captives
have heard and are glad, and a numberless number shall hear the joyful sound
thereof, and shall enquire after the brightness of the rising of the Son.
Therefore all Apostates, Hills and Mountains, make room, make way, the Lord is
risen in power and in Glory, which shall dazzel the eyes of all the Earthly,
and shall extinguish and put out the very brightness and the glory of all
invented worships, in the Apostatized ages, and shall bring them that believe
in the everlasting Gospel to stability, to the rock of ages, to the valley of
Achor, to Mount Sion, to the blessing of the everlasting hills; And blessed are
they that hear, and believe, and wait to be made partakers of that which the
Lord is about to do in the Earth, as he has shown, and foreshewn to his
servants the Prophets.

CHAP. IIII. Now a few words to show unto all, how they may come out of the
Apostasy, to be members of the true Church, which is in God, the Lambs wife.
SO far as God did appear in any age or generation. or manifest himself unto
the Sons of men, in any shadows, figures, representations, or outward
appearances, the evil Spirit, and Serpents seed. and evil doer, always took up
the form of the thing, when it came into reputation, as largely might be
demonstrated and instanced through all ages and Generations, till the closure
of the Apostles Writings; something whereof has been briefly hinted at before,
so in this I shall be very brief.

The Jews held up the Types and Figures of the first Covenant, and the
ordinances thereof, and opposed Christ the Light, the everlasting Covenant, and
also the publishers thereof. Moreover, when the name of Christ came to be
spread abrood, then false Apostles and deceitful workers, who were enemies to
the Cross, and to the power of God, they preached Christ out of contention, and
envy, and for filthy lucre, and by wicked practices made the name of Christians
odious among the Heathen, as it is this day, and caused the worthy name by
which the Saints were saved, to be blasphemed by their ungodly practices, Romans
2. 24.

When the Apostle gathered together many that believed, and settled them in the
order of the Gospel, and the order came well to be accounted of, and the
conversation of the Saints of good account amongst many; diverse false Prophets
and deceitful workers got up, and as the Apostles met in houses, and the Saint
met together in houses, the false Apostles they crept into houses, and held the
form, as I said before, and denied the power, and they were to be turned away
from, by the Apostles exhortation to Timothy.

Now since the true Church fled into the wilderness, the false Church came
into visibility, and to sit as a Queen upon the Waters, the Nations and
Peoples'; other things have been brought in, other things are brought in and
invented, which were not constitutions of Christ or the Primitive Churches; And
these the world have wondered after, in the dark night of Apostasy. And the
worship has been made up, and compacted partly from the Jews worship, partly
from the Heathen, and partly from themselves, being corrupted, and the
Scriptures perverted every way to prove all this deceit.

Now many have Judged to relinquish the former superstitious practices, and to
come and to take up the form and practice again in the outward, as it was in
the Apostles days, is to come out of the Apostacv. Let all know this, the
outward Court of the City was given to be trodden under foot of the Gentiles,
to pollute and defile it, and many may wait there, and look there in the
polluted Court, and in the outside, that has been defiled; and many may visit
the Sepulcher and wait for Christ when he is risen, and so look for him to
appear in that which he is risen out of, the Jews at their Temple when it is
left desolate, the Christans (so called) may glory in their outward Court,
though it be defiled, and so defiled as God will not appear therein again; for
he has another way manifested himself unto the sons of men.

And now, that worship that God requires, that service that he requires, and
that glory wherein he will manifest himself, is, and will be in the Spirit,
which all people is to wait for, which comes to witness restoration, and to
come to the end of the night of error, to the Bride the Lambs wife again. Now
a measure of Gods spirit being given to every one to profit withal, which shows
them sin and transgression, and will lead out of it, which shows formal
worship, and how deceit has transformed into them, and leads them that
believed in it, out of that which is polluted, and out of deceit, to Christ the
sure foundation, and mighty power of God; and to know Gods peace, and good will
to all men. And that which must restore all people, and bring them out of the
Apostasy, into purity, and to have fellowship with the Father and the Son, and
one with another, as it was in the Primitives times, is the mighty power of God
alone, which must be waited for, and believed in, and received, and made
manifest in the heart of the People, or else thev cannot come out of the
Apostasy, nor see to the end of those things that are to be abolished; And this
is that which must be witnessed by every man, that comes to be a living stone
of the holy City, and a living Son of the freewoman, and true member of the
Heavenly Jerusalem, which God has caused to descend, which is the Mother of
all the Saints, and the womb that brings them all forth, and the breast at
which they all suck, and are satisfied and nourished up to everlasting life.

These sayings are faithful and true, and blessed is he that hears,
believes, and receives them.

And this is a Testimony of the People called QUAKERS, whom God has brought
out of the Apostasy, to the beginning again, to see the brightness of the day
of the Lord, wherein there is not a Cloud.

Furthermore it is manifest how many things have been introduced and brought
in, concerning worship, and ordinances, and are taught to be Doctrines of the
Primitive times, when as they are brought in by men of corrupt minds in latter
ages, which had lost the faith once delivered to the Saints, and had lost the
Gospel order, and compelled people by outward Law to submit unto them, and yet
all those things they would fasten upon the Scriptures, and bring some
Scripture which they pervert, as a cloak and a cover to blind people withal;
but I shall descend to some particulars.

CHAP. V. Concerning Sprinkling Infants.
ANd first concerning baptizing or Christning Infants (as it has been called)
which is without prescribed command or example, commanded or ordained by Christ
or his Apostles, although many in these latter ages, have wrested the
Scripture, thinking thereby to make their own inventions to be reckoned or
accounted to be Ordinances of God, and the main ground which the greatest
Rabbis have given, has been from these or the like Scriptures; Go teach and
baptize all Nations, Mat. 28. 19. but this is nothing at all to prove baptizing
of infants; here teaching was to go before baptizing, or Discipling as the
words may be rendered, for they were not like to be Discipled which were
untaught; now Infants not being capable of teaching, so are not capable of
being made Disciples: Now to baptize Infants, or sprinkle them with water which
are untaught, and not capable of being Disciples, is a ridiculous thing, and to
do it so as the Church of Rome uses it, and they who are separated from them,
is contrary to the Scriptures, and there is no mention made of water at all,
nor Insants; and their other Scriptures they have offered for proofs, to prove
this an Ordinance of Christ (and why) only because Christ took up Children into
his Arms and blessed them, and because he said, whosoever enters into the
Kingdom of God, must enter as a little Child; these Scriptures have been
tendered for good proofs, but the Spiritual minded will judge of the weakness of
them who offer these things for a proof. But again it has been said and
accounted Orthodox, that baptism came in the room of Cricumcision, but how they
will prove it is yet unknown to many, for the Scriptures make not mention of
any such thing, for one Type did never Type out another, but every Type
Typified a substance; Now circumcision, was a Type or a Figure, and cutting off
the foreskin was a Figure of Circumcision, and cutting off the foreskin of
the heart; now baptism with water is a Type or a Figure, 1 Pet. 3. 21. which
Typed out the spiritual washing of Regeneration; and if baptism of Infants came
in the room of Circumcision, then how do they agree in a parallel? the males was
only circumcised, and why are the females now baptized, if baptism came in the
room of Circumcision?

Another thing which has been alleged for a proof that which Christ spoke to
Nicodemus, John 3. 5. Except a man be born again of water and the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of God; from whence it has been inferred by
many, that baptism of infants was absolutely necessary to salvation: Christ
spoke of that which did regenerate and make a new, and cleanse the heart, and of
the clean water which the Prophet Ezekiel spoke of, which he would pour upon
his people; visible water cleanses not the inside, neither does regenerate, but
the water which Christ gives to every one that thirsts to drink, is the
water of life, and this washes the inside, and cleans the heart, and this is
the washing of regeneration, which whosoever comes not to know, connot enter
into the kingdom of God, because that which is defiled is shut out, but they
that do not look after the substance, has made an idol of the figure; but the
Chuch of Rome themselves which were the first inventers and setters up of this
humane institution, have said that this must be recieved by tradition, and not
from the Scriptures, because it could not be proved as a commandment, witness
Claudius Espontius a Popish Bishop at a counsel at Pysoy Claudius Espontius
ordain^d a^a counsel at Pysoy in France, that Infants baptism should be
received by tradition, because it could not be proved as a command from the
Scriptures.
in France 1500. and yet this Doctrine has been held out to the Nations for
Catholic and Apostolic, which the Primitive Churches made no mention of,
neither the Apostles taught any such Doctrine, but was preached up by such who
went out of the light, and from the power into the Nations, which became as
waters; for the first ordainer of baptism of Infants, and that they should have
a Godfather and Godmother, was (Ignatius) Bishop of Rome, long after the
Ignatius Bishop of Rome was the first ordainer of Infants baptism, and that
they should have Godfathers and Godmothers, etc.
Apostles daves, when Rome was got up into pride, and claimed authority over
all Christian Churches to impose upon them what ever they listed for Doctrine;
and such dark things as these have been brought forth whereof mention might be
made of many things, and what unsavory words, as Godfathers and Godmothers is
used not only amongst them, but also amongst the Protestants to this day, who
is Gods father, or who is Gods mother? is this Apostolic Doctrine? as though
God was begotten by generation, indeed is it not Blasphemy to affirm such
things, and also to hold up such things, all which demonstrates these things to
be in the Apostasy. And therefore you who profess your selves that you are come
out of the Apostasy, and are reformed Churches, for shame leave off practicing
and pleading for the upholding such things which the Scriptures do not own, or
else the practice of the Saints in former ages will judge you; And it has been
reckoned as absolute necessary to salvation, and therefore Victor Bishop Victor
Bishop of Rome instituted that children might be christened by Laymen and
Lay-women in case of necessity.
of Rome did institute, that the children might be christened by a Layman or
Lay-women in time of necessity, because infants were often in danger, as
Polydore makes mention, Lib. 4.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the Sign of the Cross, and ordaining of Parish Churches.
LIkewise the Sign of the Cross, and the Chrism, are invented things which are
in the Apostasy, and therefore you who profess your selves reformed, for shame
leave off these things and come out of them, and deny them.

Secondly, Parishes and Parish Churches, which were ordained and builded in the
Apostasy, and dedicated unto Saints, which stand to this day both in the Church
of Rome, and in the reformed Churches so called, and Churchyards, which they
call holy and consecrated ground to bury their dead in, this is an invented
thing and superstitious, and yet it stands as an Apostolic order both among
Papists and Protestants in the Primitive times, in the days of the Apostles;
The Scriptures make mention of the Jews Temple at Jerusalem, and of the
Gentiles Idols Temples in which they worshipped, the Apostles and Ministers of
Christ, who published the word of reconciliation, and Christ the substance of
all figures, they gathered them that did believe of the Jews from the Temple
and Temple-worship, and the Gentiles from their Temples and Idols, to worship
God in the spirit, and they met together in houses; we read of no Parish
Churches dedicated to Saints nor consecrated ground, for they knew the earth
was the Lords and the fullness thereof, and was clean and good and blessed to
them that believed, and there was no dividing into Parishes then, nor no
compelling; then Corinth was not divided into a Parish, Antioch, Philippi,
Thessalonica, Philadelphia, and Smyrna, and the rest were not all made into
Parishes, neither were them that believed not compelled or forced to come to
the Christians meeting at Antioch, Philippi, Thessalonica, Philadelphia, or any
other place that we read of in the Scriptures; and the Apostles were not
confined, nor their spirits were not so strait as to stay over one hundred or
fifty families twenty years, and call that their Parish between such an hedge
and such a ditch, and such a water and such a way, as Parishes are now divided
into; though I say they had houses to meet in, and preached the Word, and brake
bread from house to house, and sometime by the seaside they congregated, and
sometimes on an hill, and at certain places they met together to worship God,
they went not back to the Jews Temple nor Gentiles Idols Temples, neither
forced any of their maintenance as to minister unto them, by which all may see
that these invented Churches and Churchyards for holy ground and Parishes are
not Apostolical, nor was no Catholic nor universal thing then in the Primitive
times, neither was there any command given to the Christians to do any such
thing, neither reprehension for not doing such things.

The first Church or Temple that we read of was consecrated by Pius Bishop of
Rome in honor of the Virgin Pius Bishop of Rome built the first Temple after
the Apostasy, in bonour to Prudentia.
Prudentia, and afterward Calistus made a Temple to the Virgin Mary a place
beyond Tibris, and instituted a Churchyard in Apius his street, and called it
after his own name; And Dionysius in Dionysius in the year 267 divided both in
Rome and other places into Parishes and Dioceses for Bishops.
the year 267, divided both in Rome and other places, Churches and Churchyards
to Curates, and made Parishes and Diocesses to Bishops, and commanded that
every man should be contented with his prescript bonds, and there was the
beginning of Parishes, Churches and Churchyards, consecrated ground; and in
process of time when all Nations had drunk of the cup of fornication, the
Nations began to imitate their mother, and to build and consecrate Temples, and
Churches and Churchyards, to this Saint, and the other Saint, as is too too
manifest through Christendom to this day; And here is the rise of holy Parish
Churches, which of late have been preached up for the house of God, and the
house of prayer, which bears the name yet by which the Pope baptized them,
Saint Peter, Saint Paul, Saint Mary; Saint Hellen, Saint Katherine, Saint
Gregory, Saint Maudlen, Saint Alban, Saint Anthony, Saint George, Saint
Margaret, Saint Dunsto^, Saint Clement, Saint Christopher, Saint Giles, Saint
Martine; and painting and garnishing these houses with Images and pictures, and
hanging of flowers and boughs and garlands, this came from the old heathen who
sacrificed to Saturn and Pluto; and this hanging up candles, and their
Candlemas days, this came of the Gentiles and Pagans, who honored their false
God Saturu, and their Altar which they have builded in this Temple, and their
tables upon which they offer and set their sacrifice, these Boniface the third
commanded that they should be covered with linen clothes, and here was the
beginning of these kinds of orders; so that as I said before, most of the^e
things in and about the worship, which has been since the reign of Antichrist,
and since the Whore has sat as a Queen, they have been either borrowed from
the Jews, or else from Pagans and Heathens, and the mother of Harlots has put
these things off for Apostolic institutions, these many hundreds of years, and
diverse other things which are in and about the Parish Churches, your many
crosses in and about them of wood and stone, your baptized bells, and
consecrated pulpits, and sonts, and hour-glasses, and soft cushions to preach
on, all these the Scriptures makes no mention of, not in the Christian Churches
the first two hundred years after Christ.

Now Protestants who have denied the Church of Rome and their practices, which
was contrary to the Primitive and the Scriptures, look about you and see how
you are sticking yet in Babylon, and buying yet the merchandise thereof; and as
for your holy ground called your Churchyards, which you only judge fit to bury
the dead in, and would compel all to come thither, because there are many
Officers in and about this Temple, who are greedy of rewards, so that they
would not miss any thing that might be commodious unto them, and so would
compel all to come there for their gain; But, Abraham was the first we read
Abraham and his Wife buried in Hebron, in a piece of ground he bought.
of that made any place of burial in Hebron, which he bought so Ephron an
Hittite for thirty shekels of silver, and there was he and his wife buried, and
this was no Parishyard, neither did he leave any Priest or Clerk that we read
of to receive wages and fees, and for ringing a bell, and reading and singing
over the dead; and so for shame, you who profess the Scriptures and the
Apostolic order and institutious of Christ, come out from among all this
trumpery, and wait that you may come again into the order of the Gospel, and
the primitive order which has been talked of these many years, and yet not
known.

CHAP. VII. Concerning swearing by the Gospel and kissing a book, and that
which is commonly confirmation or Bishoping Children, things invented contrary
to the Apostles Doctrine, and are in the Aopstacy.
IN the first Covenant the Jews were commanded to swear by the Lord, and oaths
were observed by the Jews that were in the first Covenant which was faulty,
Heb. 8. 7. which Ordinance did nor make perfect as pertaining to the
Conscience, and so there came to be an end of that Covenant, and the better was
brought in, which stood upon better promises, and then the Priesthood, Law,
first Covenant, and the ordinances thereof (which was only to continue till the
time of Reformation, H. b. 9. 10) by Christ the everlasting Covenant came to be
made manifest, the everlasting offering, who perfected them that are
sanctified, who is the oath of God, the end of oaths, and of all strife and
contention; his Doctrine was, Swea^ not at all, Mat. 5. 32, 24, 35, 36, 3^.
neither by the head nor (...), nor Books, nor Gospel, nor any other thing, but
that yea should be yea, and nay nay in all things; and James an Apostle of
Christ Jesus, who knew the New Covenant which was everlasting, which saw over
the ordinances of the first Covenant of the Jews, says, Above all things my
brethren swear not at all, neither by heaven, neither by the earth, nor by any
other oath; but let your yea be yea, and vour nay nay, lest you fall into
condemnnation, James 5. 1, 2. and this was Apostolical and Catholic Doctrine
in the Primitive Churches.

But afterward the faith being lost which once was delivered to the Saints,
and the power lost, they began to set up oaths again, imitating the Jews, and
bringing the commands of the Jews who were under the first Covenant as their
Ground; But this was in the Apostasy: And Justinian the Emperor appointed,
first, that men should Justinian the Emperor ordained that men should swear by
the Gospel or Book called the Gospel, and lay their hands thereon and kiss it,
saying, So help me God.
swear by the Gospel or book called the Gospel, and lay their hands thereon,
and kiss it, saying, So help me God, and here Christendom may see who are in
the Apostasy, and who were the first instituters of this Swearing, and the
manner thereof, which the teachers of these latter ages do ignorantly press for
an ordinance of God.

In the primitive times, they that had the word of reconciliation, who had
received the holv Ghost and gift of prophecy, and were made able Ministers of
the Spirit, who had discerning, and saw by the Spirit who was fitted for the
work of the Ministry, and fit to be Elders and helpers in the Church; they laid
hands on them in Gods power, and they received the holy Ghost; but now since
the Apostasy came in, this kind of Imagination of laying on of hands one
Hypocrite upon another, who are out of the power, who have not received the
holy Ghost, neither they upon whom their hands are said, but afterward it came
to be a custom, and a holy rite to be performed upon Children. Sylvester Bishop
of Rome ordained; that all that were Christened Silvester Bishop of Rome
ordained that all Churches should be Christened and should be anointed with oil.
Churches and Chalices should be anointed with oil; And Fabianus commanded that
it should be renewed every Monday and Thursday. Clement the first ordained that
Clement Bishop, ordained Confirmation of Children, and said none was a perfect
Christian if he wanted this, and thus Children should be smo^e on the cheek
signed with this Cross.
Children that were Christened should be anointed with Chrisme, and he also
instituted the Sacrament as it is called of Confirmation, or as it is now
called Bishoping, and did suppose that no man was a perfect Christian if this
Rite and Ceremony was omitted; and for this cause it has been judged, and
looked upon as Catholic Doctrine, both by the Church of Rome and the
Protestants, that the holy Ghost is more plentifully given them by the hands of
the Bishop* and on this wi^e in the first Institution thereof it was only
administered by the Bishop; First he asked the name of the child, making the
sign of the Cross in his forehead, saying, I sign thee with the token of the
Cross, and confirm thee with the Chrisme of Salvation, in the Name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, etc. and smote the cheek of the Child softly; but
if of greater age, which was to be confirmed, the Bishop gave a sharper stroke,
that he might remember this great mystery; and here you may see how these
things came in, and the traditions, and inventions and precepts of men have
been and are taught for Doctrine and Apostolic institutions, many of which are
upholden in the reformed Churches, so called, unto this day, and so people are
kept in blindness in a multitude of traditions and heathenish customs, and
their minds led out from seeking after the living God.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning Fasts, Feasts, and holy days.
THe Jews in the first Covenant had many Fasts, and Feasts, and holy days, as
the Sabbath and feasts of the new Moon and Passover, and Feasts of unleavened
bread, Penticost, the Feast of Tabernacles, and Feast of Dedication, which are
largely shown in the Books of Moses; all which things as the Apostle says to
the Hebrews, were but shadows of things to come, and not the things themselves,
which only continued till the time of reformation, and till the better hope
which brought in the better Covenant, which stood upon better promises; Now in
the Primitive Churches they came to see the end of these things, and were
brought to him that was the substance, in whom all Figures, and Shadows do end,
C^l. 2. 16, 17. Let no man therefore judge you in Meat or Drink, or in respect
of a holy ^ay, which are a shadow of things to come, but the Body (...) Christ;
Now afterward when they minded the form more than the power, they run out into
those things with many additions, some borrowed from the heathen, and some by
their own invention, and then press them as Apostolic Ordinances upon
Christians, which things stand in force with many until this day, too too much
among them that are called reformed. Victor Bishop of Rome about the year 196.
decreed, that Easter should be kept and Celebrated on the Sunday, from the
14th. day of the first Mon^h, that is March, to the 22d of the same; Now the
^ews kept it sooner, and so it is without ground from the Jews practice, and
merely an invention of their own, which led people back into days, and about
what time they judged any thing to be done, which Christ or the Apostles did,
they invented a day and a time to keep for it, as to reverence Sunday in advent
and Nativity, Circumcision* and Epiphany, Purification of Mary called
Candlemas, Lent, Palm Sunday, Monday, and Thursday on which Christ washed his
Disciples feet, as it has been imagined, good friday, Easter, Pen^^^^st, was
kept by the Jews; and this they would hold out for an Apostolic example to
Christians and for all the former days they were invented with many more which
have been brought in since; And so they were decreed and ^a^ified at a Council
at At Lions in France they appointed holy days to increase their Religion.
Lions in France, that such days as either the holy Saints departed this life,
or did any notable deed, a day should be kept holy as they said in that Council
for the increase of their Religion: there was also other days instituted, the
feast of Saint Steven and Innocents, by Pope B^nifa^e the fourth, and likewise
John Baptist, Boniface, the fourth ordained Stephen, Innocents, Lawrence
Michael, Martin, John Baptists, and All Saints to be kept holy.
and that which they call Lady day, Lawrance, Michael, and Martin, and
generally of All Saints, and these were his institutions which are practiced by
the Church of Rome, and oractised among the Pro^estants to Corpus Christi day
ordained by Urbanus the fourth.
this day.

Likewise that which is called Corpus Christi day, this was made a holy day and
dedicated by Urbane the fourth; Sylvester assigned the day of advincula
Sylvester Bishop ordained Lammas day in memorial of Peter's pain^.
Sancti Petri, commonly called Lammas in memorial of Peter's pains and
persecution; Felix the first to magnify the glorious commendation of Ma^tyas,
made a Statute that a yearly oblation should be had in memorial of them: And
Gregory would that Mass should be said over their Gregory ordained that Mass,
or short prayer, should be said over the Tombs of the dead.
Tombs or graves* Now Priests read the original of your service over the
graves of the dead and see if this be Apostolical.

The fast of Wednesday and Friday was appointed, the one day Christ was
Crucified, and on wednesday Judas purposed in his mind to be^^ay him.

Gregory was he that ordained that neither flesh nor any thing Gregory
appointed wednesday and friday should be fasted.
that had affinity with it, as Cheese, Milk, Butter, Eggs, should not be eaten
on such days as were fasts, and here came in this Doctrine of Devils.

Soulmass day this was begun by Soulmass day was ordained by Odilo.
Odilo that was Provost or Provincial of Cluniassentis Order, upon the occasion
he heard about Etna the burning Mountain of Sicily oftentimes great
lamentations, and cryings and weepings was heard, which he supposed to be the
w^epings of evil spirits that bewailed because the souls of dead men were taken
from them by the pe^itions and Sacrifices of well disposed Christians;
therefore he appointed his Covent to make a general oblation for all Souls the
next day after the feast of all Saints; and this great institution was ordained
about the year. 1002. and so all whose eyes God has opened, will see all this
heap of Invention hathbeen practiced since the Beast rose out of the Sea, and
the Whore has sat upon the waters, which is since the Apostles days.

CHAP. IX. Concerning Priests Vestures and Bells, which are Practiced among
Christians as Apostolic Institutions.
THe Jews high Priests had Vestments, and the rest of the Priests who offered
Sacrifices and Oblations at the Temple and Tabernacle, Lev. 8. 6, 7, 8, 9, etc.
13. And Aaron the Priest had a coat girded with a girdle, and clothed him with
a robe, and put a linen Ephod upon him, and put a Breast Plate upon him, and a
Mitre upon his head; And Aarons Sons had coats with Girdles and Bonnets, as was
commanded by the Lord; and Chap. 16. 4. and he put on a linen coat, and linen
Breeches, with a Coat and Mitre, and girded it with a linen girdle, and these
were the holy garments, and these Garments were to be put off in the holy
place, and diverse other Garments and Vestments, which were worn by the Priest
about the Temple-worship and Sacrifice, which were Shadows of better things,
and of more holy Garments, but this was in the first Covenant that made nothing
perfect which was fault, and was to continue until the time of Reformation;
But Christ being come and offered up, all shadows had an end, and they Preached
up the everlasting offering, and him who offered up himself once for all; Now
Christ sent out his Disciples without great provision as to attire, for they
were to take neither staff, nor scrip, nor shoes, nor money, nor brass in their
purses, and yet they were to go among them that were like wolves, renting and
tearing, devouring and destroying, and there was no great likelihood of
obtaining any earthly thing from such while in that nature; but the Apostles
lived by faith, Mat 10. 9. 10. and Luke 10. 3, 4. and they were not to take two
coats, and the Apostle in his travels was often in necessities, in hunger, and
cold, and nakedness, and did not go in costly array, nor in disguised habits,
but in his old age wore sometimes a Cloak among the Churches which he sent for
to Troas, an ordinary Garment, 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9, 10. chap 6. 4. 10 the 11 verse,
2 Timothy 4. 13. and John the Baptist who was a great Prophet, had a Coat made of
hair, and a leathern-girdle about his loins, Mat. 3, 4. and the Primitive
Christians wandered up and down in Sheeps skins, and Goats skins, being
destitute, of whom the World was not worthy, Heb. 11. 37, 38.

But after the Apostles decease, deceitful workers and evil Beasts, and they
that abode not in the Doctrine and Ordinances of Christ, went out into the
World, and the World went after them, and so lost both Power and form of
Godliness, and invented things some from the Heathen, and much from the Priests
under the Law.

Sextus the first commanded that the Corporis should be of Sextus Commanded
that no Lay People should touch the Priests Garments,
linen cloth only, and that of the finest and purest, and forbad that Laymen
should handle the Hallowed Vessels, and namely Women were Prohibited hallowing
the Priest; Vestures, and Altars and Clothes, diversity of vestures of sundry
orders were muchwhat taken from the example of the Hebrew Priesthood, was
practiced and ordained by S. even Bishop of Rome. And Sabinianus decreed first
that the people should be assembled together Sabinianus ordained that people
should come together to hear Service by ringing Bells.
to hear Service at certain hours by ringing of bells; And John the 22. Bishop
of Rome ordained that bells should be roled every day three times, John 22.
Bishop ordained bells to be tol'd three times a day.
and that the^ every man should say three times A^emary as Polidore says, Lib.
6.

The invention of bells was from imitation of the Hebrews, because the
High Priest had in the skirts of his uppermost garments little bells to ring
when he was in the holy place within the veil.

And the banners and trophies which are hung up in Churches, were taken from
the Heathen, which did bear them to signify the Conquest of their enemies; and
these have been set up in the Churches, so called, by some of the Bishops of
Rome, to declare as they said, the triumph of Christ over death and hell. Now
all Nations who are called Christians, look to your original and from whence
these practices have risen, and those things are continued, even amongst the
Protestant Churches, are either from the Jews or from the Heathen, or from the
Apostatized Bishop of Rome, long after the days of the Apostles; and so these
Hoods and Surplices, and Caps and Bonnets, and Cowls and Tipets, and Miters and
canonical Coats, and Girdles, and diverse strange attires; it is like to prove
these things we must have Aarons breeches brought in, and the linen Ephod, and
his Sons Girdles and Coats, and Bonnets, and the Highpriests Mitre, and all
these Candlesticks for a Gospel proof.

CHAP. X. Concerning Mattens and singing of Psalms by course in musical tunes,
and supplications and short prayers, called Letany.
THE Jews under the Law had many Officers which belonged to the Temple-worship,
among which were singers, as the sons of Corah and the sons of Asaph, and
Exrahites and chief Musicians, etc. and diverse Psalms were given forth by the
Spirit of God by David and others upon several occasions, sometimes after
victories, and sometimes when he felt the presence of God, and the working of
his power, and who were eyewitnesses of his wondrous works, as the rest of
Israel was many times, as at the dedication of the Temple, and also when they
came out of captivity, Neh. 7. 44. chap. 12. 27. 42, 43. Psalm. 149. 3, and 150.
3, 4. and all these Singers of songs pertain to the Temple and the first
Covenant, and to that Priesthood which could not continue by reason of the
faultiness thereof, Heb. 8. 7. and because all these things did not make
perfect as pertaining to the conscience, and was but to continue for a time
until the time of Reformation, and then an end of the Temple Priests and
Worship, of the Singers and Porters, and Organs and stringed Instruments as in
matter of worship, an end was put to all these when he was offered up that
perfecteth for ever them that are sanctified.

And the Christians and true Believers in the primitive times, who had received
the spirit in which they did Rejoice, in and with what words the Spirit was
pleased to utter, and they that had received the Holy Ghost did joy in the Holy
Ghost, and they that did sing sang in the Spirit, and with the Spirit, and with
understanding, from the feeling of the living which they had in their hearts of
Gods presence and his assurance; and he that had a Psalm might sing, but all
the Church did not sing together, a Psalm was a gift of the Spirit, every one
had it not, there was diversity of Gifts, and diversity of Operations,
Prophecy, Interpretation, and a Psalm were Gifts which were received from the
Spirit and not by tradition, 1 Carinth 14. 15. Ephesians. 5. 19. James 5. 13. And
they that overcome and were redeemed from the Earth, who had followed the Lamb,
who had given them victory over s^n, death and the Grave, they sang a new song,
which none could learn but those whose names were Written in the Lambs Book of
life. Rev. 14. 1, 2, 3. chap. 19. 1. 6. and these were the songs of the
redeemed which God had delivered our of their Enemies Hands, and they were
witnesses of his Wondrous Works, and praised the Lord in the Spirit and with
understanding, and did not get a form of words, of David's words which he spoke
after his victories and Triumphs over his enemies, and also they prayed in the
Spirit and with understanding, and spoke as it gave utterance, and as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost, and were not limited as how Short or how Long, but as
the Spirit gave utterance, and not limited to hours and set times, but when the
Spirit of God which they had received moved thereunto, and then their Prayers
were accepted, and were as sweet incense, Rev, 5. 8. chap. 8. 3. (...). and
were not stinted to set hours, but as they saw in the Wisdom of God, and were
moved by his Spirit.

But since the Apostasy that the Spirit has been lost by many and the power,
and some of form retained, and then they began to imitate three times a day,
and seven times a day, but Mattens at set times, and hours was appointed by
Hierom, as Polydore and others Singing of Mattens at set times Hierom appointed.
say. Also the Heathen they had Mattens, as Apuleus says, which they sung at
diverse times of the day, and so sorted the hours of the day for sacrifices
which they did offer unto their Idols.

Pelagius the second, was the first that Commanded Priests to Pelagius the
second commanded Priests to say them daily.
say them daily, and said, as the just man falls seven times, so by instant
prayers and Mattens, he might as often rise and amend.

Urbanus the second ordained the Mattens called the Ladies Mattens to be said
daily, and confirmed them in a Council which he had at Mount Clear in France;
and Damasus Bishop of Rome gave Commandment, that Martens should be said or
sung in all Churches, and added Gloria Patri to the end of every Psalm. Damasus
also instituted that Psalms should be said or sung by course; Damasus also
Commanded that the Creed should be said every hour: And Vitilianus invented the
decent tunes wherewith the hymns be sung, and joined the Organs; but there was
diverse and sundry manners of prayers, and forms and Mattens, and singing
devised by many, as Bennets Monks had one use, and Bernard another, and
Dominicks brethern had one order by themselves, and every provincial Bishop
made a several use in his Diocese, and all was confirmed by the Bishop of Rome
Telesphorus appointed that Lent ^elesphorus appointed that Lent should be kept
before Easter and fasted.
should be kept before Easter, and added another week to it, which we call
Quinquagesima, and this week he commanded Priests to fast more then the Laity;
and thus one runs into one invention after another, and has brought in all
this mountain of darkness, so that the practice of these things since the
Apostles days has been muchwhat corrupted, and imitation at the best without
life, and are either from the Jews and their worship, or from the Heathen, or
from their own inventions and imaginations, which are so many in their Mattens
and their prayers, that at last Beads where glad to be got to tell them; and so
all who view these things and sees them to be in the Apostasy, come out from
among them, and them that are joined to Idols let them alone, and keep your
selves from them, and compare but the worship and practice of the primitive
times in the Apostles days, with all this which has been brought in since,
part of which is here demonstrated: and much more might be said, but you will
see that these practices are not Apostolical, neither agreeable with the purest
times, but people have been corrupted with them, and made twofold worse than
before.

And as concerning the Mass and Letany which are used in Concerning Mass and
Letany many Authors patched it up at sundry times.
many congregations, there has been so many Authors about patching them up,
that they are almost past numeration, but take a short hint of the forming of
them up near unto the Apostles time, although they did celebrate the Sacrament
as it was called, it was done with little mixture or ceremony but only
repeating the words of Christ, and after the consecration they joined to it the
Pater noster; Celistinus ordained some prayers that the Priest should say when
he re-vesteth himself to Mass, or putting on his clothes, and began Judica me
Domine, etc. And in the Church of Greece they sang when the people assembled
together; Damasus instituted the confession at the beginning of Mass; And
Gorgius caused confession to be said nine times over in the Latin Church;
Gregory in Excelsis is ascribed unto Telesphorus and Hilarus. And also
Telesphorus ordained Epistles and Gospels, and Damasus divided them as they are
read at this day in the reformed Churches: And Anastasius commanded that People
should stand at the Gospel; Marcus ordained the first part of the Creed to be
read after it was made by the Council of Nice, and the second part, and
Spiritum Sanctum, that the Council at Constantinople composed; Eutichianus
instituted the Offertory to be sung while the people offered something to the
poor; Galasius made the prefaces, in the beginning they used but one; An^ekius
added the Snactus out of the Prophet Esaias; Burning of incense that which was
occupied in the Old Testament by Aaron and the Pannims in their superstitious
rites. Leo the third ordained it to be had in the Latin Church, and privity of
Mass, called the Common, was made by diverse persons, as Gallatius made
reigitur, Satitius added Communicantes; and Alexander made qui pridie, hanc
igitur Leo joined to it; Gregory annexed three petitions in the same, Dies qui
nostros, etc. Innocentius, Priests in the upper part of the Church called the
Quire should kiss one another, that Pax should be born to the people; blessed
with hands and challices came out of the Hebrew Ceremonies, Christ at his
ascension blessed his Disciples; and Surgius from this ordained Angus Dei seven
hundred years after Christ's ascension, to be sung of the Clergy at the time of
Communion, and often turning the Priest to the Altar, and wheeling about when
he says Dominus vobiscum, or Oratis Fratres, these came from the Hebrew rites;
When the Mass is ended, the Deacon turns to the People, and says, Ita missa
est, which words are borrowed from the Pagans, they were used in the Sacrifices
of Isis, that when the Sacrifices was done, this was the Watchword that the
People might depart, and of this sprang the custom of singing Ita missa est,
signifying that all service was ended.

Mass is an Hebrew Word, signifies an Oblation and sacrifice, with all
circumstances concerning the same; Alexander inhibited that they should not
sacrifice but once in a day; Telesphorus ordained three Masses to be said on
Christmas day, the first at midnight when Christ was born, the second in the
morning when the Shepherds visited him, the third further on the day, as at the
third hour. Foelix decreed on that Mass might be said but in places
consecrated, and none was to meddle with the mysteries of consecration but the
Priest. Anaclatus ordained that no Mass should be said but in the presence of
two in the least least the Priest should say in vain to bare walls, Dami us
vobiscum, the Lord be with you, when none were present; and so on this wise,
one piece and scrap was added to another, with much more, which I shall not
trouble the Reader with; by which Peoples minds have been drawn from attending
on Gods Spirit, to hearken to these foolish ceremonies and invented charms, and
so have been led out into ignorance and into the region of the shadow of death,
where many have taken up their habitations; and Babylons Merchants these many
hundred years have traded with such Merchandise, under the name of Apostolical
Ordinances and holy Institutions.

CHP. XI. Concerning the Passover and the Supper.
THE Passover was a command of God by Moses unto Israel, while they were in
captivity in Egypt, which God manifested his wondrous works in the land of
Egypt, and in the field of Zoan, for their deliverance, Exodus 12. 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8. That every family shall take to them every man a Lamb, according to the
house of their Fathers, a Lamb for an house, and where the family was little
the Neighbors were to join with him, ver 21. Then Moses called for all the
elders of Israel, and said unto them, draw out and take a Lamb according to
your families, and kill the Passover, and ye shall take a bunch of Hysop and
dip it in the Blood that is in the basin, and sprinkle the lintel and the two
side posts of the door with the Blood, and none of you shall go out of doors
until the morning, ver. 22, 23. The Lord will pass through to smite the
Eyptians, and when he sees the Blood upon the lintels and posts, he will not
suffer the destroyer to come into your houses to smite you, and ye shall
observe this thing as an ordinance for thee and thy seed forever, ver. 24. And
it shall come to pass when the children shall say unto you, what means this
service? ye shall say it is the sacrifice of the Lords Passover, who passed
over our Houses in Egypt, and smote the Egyptians; And this was the Ordinance
which was performed, and this is that Passover which Christ sent his Disciples
to prepare according to the time prescribed, because it became him to fulfill
all Righteousness, and he being not yet sacrificed up, this offering was not
ended, but now he being offered up, this is to be witnessed in the Spirit, and
in the hearts of his people who are marked and bear his spot, when a destroyer
comes to execute vengeance upon the Wicked, he passes over his Seed which bears
his Image. And when Christ came with the twelve and sat down in the place
appointed in the even, the same night he was betrayed, And he said unto them, I
have desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer, Luke 22. 15, 17,
19. And he took Bread, and gave thanks and brake it, and gave it unto them,
saying, this is my Body which is given for you, this do in remembrance of me;
likewise also the Cup after supper, saying, this is the Cup of the New
Testament for you in my blood, ver. 20. and this he gave as a sign and a token
to the Disciples, that as often as they did eat the bread, and drink the Cup,
they should remember him; and it should show forth his death till he came
again, and this was practiced by the Disciples according as Christ had said
unto them, therefore the Apostle said 1 Cor. 11. 23. That I receive of the
Lord, that delivered I unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same night he was
betrayed, took Bread, and brake it, and said, take, eat, this is my Body which
is broken for you after the same manner also he took the Cup when he had
supped, saying, this Cup is the New Testament in my blood, this do ye, as often
as ye do it in remembrance of me, ver. 24, 25. For as often as ye eat this
Bread, and Drink this Cup, ye show forth his death till he comes; and so he
pureth them upon examination, ver. 28. Let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ver. 29, For he that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the
Lords Body; But Believers grew in the knowledge of the mystery, which was
revealed through the Spirit, and came to see beyond these outward things, and
things visible, 2 Cor. 4, 28. While we look not at the things which are seen,
but at the things which are not seen; for the things that are seen are
temporal, but the things that are not seen are eternal; So that which was given
for a sign to be observed in remembrance of Christ till he came, was visible,
to wit the bread and the Cup, which he gave to the Disciples at supper, which
they were exercised in for some time, in the time of weakness while their eyes
and minds where much outward, but they came to look at things which are beyond
time, and things they saw which are not seen in time, but things that were
Eternal, and this they sed upon; and so the Corinthians grew up in the Life,
and knew the flesh of Christ and his Blood, and they did eat his Flesh and
Drink his Blood, and had Life in them; now they which eat his flesh and drink
his Blood, need nothing to put them in memory of that which they already enjoy
and possess, and so the Apostles brought them to a further examination, not to
look at things visible, but to examine themselves whether they were in the
Faith, for he that is in the Faith, is in that which is visible, Prove your
selves, know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except
you be reprobates, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Now they who came to witness Christ in them,
knew the Resurection and the Life in them, and witnessed the Life of the Son of
God to live in them, and they in it, and this was a further state then looking
at visible things, which was in remembrance only of his death; and blessed are
they who have an eye to see, and an heart to believe these things.

And now the Apostle spoke unto wise men, and bad them judge what he said, 1
Cor. 10. 15. So that novices or them that were young, or Babes, had hardly been
able to discern if he had spoken such things to them, but he spoke to wise men
which could judge of what he said, and ver. 16. thus he said, the Cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? and
the Bread which we break, is it not the communion of the Body if Christ? ver.
17. for we being many are one Bread and one Body, for we are all partakers of
that one Bread, and that one Bread was Christ, who said, I am the Bread of
Life, and this they witnessed, and these are great mysteries, and them whose
eyes are toward visible things cannot see them. And what a noise and a stir
has been made these many hundred years, and what killing and persecuting about
things that are seen.

And since the Mystery has been lost, and the key which opens the Mystery,
how people have waded in the dark till they have lost themselves, and are sunk
down into utter darkness, as has been manifest about visible things which do
corrupt; how many have been killed about this Bread and this Cup which are
visible, since the Apostles days? and how many Institutions and Laws have been
made about this, and have foughten like Swine about the husk, and discerns not
the life, neither the Lords Body.

It is endless to declare what stir they make about this Bread and this Wine in
the Church of Rome, which I shall not now stand to particularize much; but
however after the Priest have consecrated it, they conclude it to be the very
Body and Blood of Christ, and yet a thing which may be seen, and that is a
temporal thing, and so gave it names past numeration.

And what work they have made about times and days, when it was fi^ to be
received, and how many Decrees have been made about these things. Anaclatus
caused a Decree to be made that all was to come to it under pain of
Excommunication. And Victor denounced that those should be interdectid from all
service, when they should receive the Sacrament that would not be reconciled to
their Neighbors of all Gurdges and hatred. Again Clepheranius one hundred
years after Anaclatus, commanded that all that professed Christ or bare the
name of Christians, being of the age of twelve or fourteen years, should at
least once a year at Easter receive the blessed Sacrament. Fabianus decreed
that they should receive it three times in a year; and Innocentius the third,
decreed it should be kept in the Church, that it should be ready at all times,
least they that were sick should want the spiritual comfort of it; And Honorus
the third confirmed the same; And Austin concluded, the Eucharist to be of
absolute necessity for Infants.

And what a stir has been in the reformed Churches so called about this? And
what disorderly work, and what high Imputations they have gained to it, when as
they commanded the Parishes to buy it, and then sells it them again, that the
Priest must have an offering at Easter; also a token of a piece of lead, a
token that they are at unity with the Priest, or else they may not have their
bread and wine again for which they paid before, and this has been called a
great mystery.

CHAP. XII. Concerning Ministers and their Office, under the Law and the Gospel.
BEfore the Law was given forth, there were diverse did offer sacrifice, and
buidled Altars unto the Lord, as Seth, Abel, Melchizedeck, Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, who pere guiders and directers of People in the way of righteousness,
who instructed their Families in the fear of the Lord; But after the Law was
given forth, Aaron and his Sons, and they were to offer sacrifice according to
the command of the Lord, and to perform the worship that God had appointed; For
that time and age at the Tabernacle and Temple there was Levites who bore the
Ark, and looked to the vessels, and pitched the Camp, and div^^ other services,
as singers and readers of the Law and Prophets on their Sabbath days, and
Porters and the like, and all these petrained to the first Covenant and
Priesthood, which was to have an end, both the Priesthood, and the Law and the
service thereof; for it was but to continue till the substance came.

Now Christ being come the end of the Law, for righteousness unto all that
believe, made after the order of Melchizedeck and not by a carnal commandment,
he offered up himself once for all, and became the Author of eternal Salvation
unto them that believe, put an end to the first Worship and Priesthood.

Before he was offered up, he chose Disciples unto him, Twelve and also
Seventy, and endued them with Power; and many did Believe through their words,
and they were not Men of great parts, but as they were sitted by the Holy Ghost
that gave them utterance; and they were sent out not to Preach the Law but the
Word of the Kingdom, and many did Believe, and grew and were confirmed in the
Faith; and after Christ's Ascension the Holy Ghost was Poured forth upon them in
a more ample manner, and it did bring to their remembrance, as Christ had
foretold, and they received great Gifts for the work of the Ministry; some were
Prophets, some Apostles, some Evangelists, some Pastors, some Teachers, and all
made Ministers by the Spirit for the work whereunto they were chosen, and many
were converted and did believe, then they that had the Word of God to publish,
traveled as they were led and Moved by the Spirit, to publish the glad tidings
of the Gospel; and when the Believers were many, and many young in the Faith,
they ordained Overseers, or Bishops, or Elders, who were sound in the Faith, to
watch over them that were begotten; but mark, they were approved men and
Faithful, and of blameless lives, not given to covetousness, neither did
tirannize over them in rigor, but were apt to teach and instruct in love and
gentelness; and they that had been Ancient Laborers in Gods Work did so, who
had received a Gift to Minister unto others, and as to be helpers in the Work
of the Gospel, and all that were ordained, were ordained by the Holy Ghost
although its true they had the consent of the Brethren and the Church in that
thing, and there were also Deacons ordained, which served to look to the Widows
and for the Ministration of the Poor, and these were faithful men, and had also
a gift. Stephen was one full of the Holy Ghost, and these were helps unto the
Apostles, also the^e were some Faithful Widows, who were examples to younger
men, and to instruct them, and to be patterns unto them, and all was as a body
knit together in love, and served the Lord, and strengthened one another in the
faith, and served one another in love, and all these forementioned served the
Lord freely and willingly, and not for rewards, and gifts, and benefices, and
earthly things; this was the state and glory of the Church in that time in
short, and these are the Ministers we read of in the Primitive times.

But since the Apostasy has entered in, and the Power has been denied of
Godliness, there is such a numberless number of names crept in we never heard
of then, and so many offices, and yet none of that work done which the
Ministers of Christ did, but certain new invented things brought in for worship
and service, and the power despised, and men seeking offices, and great titles,
and great benefits, and great revenues, and the heritage of God is laid waste,
and the earth become like a wilderness unplanted with good, and the sheep is
scattered; And so all may compare these ensuing names and off^es with the
Apostles days and the primitive Church, and see if they be alike.

First of all, The Pope, his holiness, Christ's Vicar, universal Bishop,
Metropolitan Bishop, Lord Cardinals, which were but Priests at the first
ordained to baptize the Heathen, who came to Rome when the seat thereof began
to be had in honor; but now they are swelled big and become Princes and the
only men to govern States; also Monks of diverse orders; and Friars of diverse
orders, Hieroms order, of Austins order, Gregorys order, Carmalite Friars,
Cross or Crouchet Fryors, of Dominicks order, of S. Frances order, Benets
order, and all of these orders sprung up and were ordained in the midnight of
darkness, within this four hundred years at the most, as were easily proved;
and Trinity order, and Brigandine order of Jesuits and Hermites, and Anthonies
order, and Clunisencies order. And Nuns sprung up; First, of one St. Clara, one
order, then Brigidia a widow in the time of Urban the fifth, in the year 1370.
and all these kind of orders were distitute of the true order of the primitive
Church, and their service was appointed by them that ordained them, and these
practiced the patched inventious that were given them for worship which has
not concord with the primitive Doctrine, but borrowed from the Jews or Heathen;
And all these kind of Offices, and Officers have been acting their parts this
many years, and led people into superstitious blindness, and further from the
Lord then ever.

But to come to the reformed Churches so called, and there is so many Officers
and names, but few that do accord with the Apostles times either in name or
nature; As Metropolitan Bishops, Archbishops, Lord-bishops, we heard not of
Lord Timothy, or Lord Titus Bishops, before mentioned; but to come on to other
Orders, Archdeacons, Deans and Chapters, Prebends, and these must attend on
some old superstitious Buildings called Cathedrals or Ministers, and there
performs a service somewhat like the former, and these are enjoined their
service like the Levites and Priests of old by turns and course, as once in a
month or two it may be, and have a hundred or two hundred pounds in the year
for the same, and hardly stir from thence till they die, except some greater
advance offer it self; also Commissaries, Procters, Parotters and these are
subservient to the former: then Chancellors, Vice-chancellors, Doctors of
Divinity, Batchelors, of Divinity, Doctors of Art, Masters of Art, Batchelors
of Art, Graduates, under-graduates, and these belong to the former; then
Prelates, Parsons; Vicars, Priests, Curates and Church wardens, all which
titles and names, and Officers, if they be but compared with the Scripture,
there will be hardly any parallel either concerning office, work, or Doctrine;
and notwithstanding all these orders and sorts who are fitted by humane
learning or natural study, though diverse years exercised therein, are not
skilled in the word of righteousness, neither has the tongue of the learned
to administer a word in season to the weary, nor to turn the sinner from his
sins; and thus the form of things, titles and names are holden up, but who
seeks after the power of God, or to be made able Ministers of the Spirit.
Literal Ministers enough while maintenance lasts, but the ministration of the
Spirit few is acquainted with; and if there be any such, it is well if they be
not Persecuted; So in that which I have said the understanding will see, that
there has been a great Apostasy since the Apostles days in the Ministry, in
Doctrine, in Worship and practice, diverse of which I have touched upon, to the
intent that they that enquire after the Lord, may depart out of the mist of
ignorance and come to worship God in spirit and truth, and in the Temple made
without hands, and be joined to the Church which is in God, which the Gates of
Hell prevails not against; though many will claim Authority from the Apostles,
few will own their life, neither walk after their example; so take but a few
more Institutions which is called Apostolic to this day, among them called
Christian Churches.

Clatus the third Bishop of Rome, was the first that wrote this tittle, that
is, greeting and Apostolic blessing, he ordained the order of Priesthood.

Everastus the fifth Bishop, ordained that Priests should be honored, and that
they should be shaven.

Alexander the sixth Bishop of Rome, ordained that Matrimony should be only
solemnized, and that the married should be Blessed with the Priest, there was
the beginning of being married by Priests.

Sextus about the year 114. after Christ, the seventh Bishop of Rome, ordained
Holy Water, and ordered that it should be strowed abroad in Christians houses,
and when the People met to worship.

Telesphorus the eight Bishop of Rome, ordained that the Communion should be
laid upon an Altar, and that Lay people should not touch the Holy vessels nor
the Holy Garments of the Priests; he ordained Lent which was to be kept by the
Clergy in the year one hundred forty two.

Higinus the ninth Bishop ordained the Communion to be celebrated three times
at Christmas, and that Lent should be fasted.

Pius about the year 147 after Christ, the tenth Bishop, ordained that Crism
should be Ministered as Baptism, and that Children should have Godfathers and
God mothers; here was the beginning of this great Ordinance, and he ordained
that Easter Day should be kept on the Sunday.

Urbanus the seventeenth Bishop of Rome ordained Churchyards to be hallowed,
and forbad marriage of Priests.

Pontianus the eighteenth Bishop, ordained that Psalms and Mattens should be
sung in Church night and day to drive away evil spirits.

Sextus the twenty fourth Bishop in the year 222. after Christ, ordained that
Priests should wear Holy Garments, as Coops and diverse other things in
imitation of Aaron, and then came up surplices; he commanded Images to be set
up in Churches.

Foelix the twenty sixth Bishop of Rome ordained division of Parish Churchres
and Diocesses to Bishops.

Leo the Emperor gave Commandment that all Images and Pictures of Saints should
be taken out of the Churches for the avoiding of Idolatry, but the Bishop of
Rome withstood the Emperor; the Emperor for his confirmation of taking of
Images away, called a Council of Bishops about three hundred and thirty, and
they ordained and decreed that all Images should be taken away and burned in
the 740.

But in the year 769. Gregory the third called a Council together at Rome, near
a thousand Bishops, and condemned Leo the Emperor and three hundred Bishops for
taking Images out of the Churches, and yet the former Counsel and this, all of
one Faith and Church, which they use to say could not err, and the latter
decreed they should be adored and Worshipped with all reverence.

Boniface the eighth, he gave license to the mendicant Friars to hear the
private Confession of sins, that people should confess to them.

Pope Alexander gave commandment that the Sacrament should be made of the Sweet
Bread, and commanded that water should be mingled with wine.

Innocentius the third ordained that People should confess their sins to a
Priest once a year, in the year at the least.

And these kinds of Decrees stand for Apostolical to this day among the
Apostates; and the reformed Churches so called do own many things that are too
near a kin to them, and preffeth them for Ordinances and holy Institutions; yea
in many Countries the self same things are both owned and practiced in many
particulars, which I have mentioned before in other parts of this Book, and are
looked upon as divine service and holy Worship, which the Ministers of Christ
who have the word of reconciliation to publish, are ashamed of, knowing them to
be such things as never was practiced nor holden out by Christ or his Apostles,
but are brought in since darkness has overspread the Earth, and the Power of
God has been lost; And at the first Institution thereof, though there might be
some show of a good intention in the formers of them, but now they are become
absolute Idols; and however at the first some of the things mentioned might
seem to some to be indifferent, yet now being pressed of necessity, as the
Ordinances of God, they are become Idols, and ought to be thrown away and
departed from by all that professes the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and the
worship of God in the Spirit.

For the Lord God has drawn away his presence, out of all formal and visible
appearance, since Antichrist and the false Church has got them on for a
Garment, and to cover themselves withal, to the deceiving of the Nations; And
now in this the day of his power has appeared in a more mysterious, and secret
and hidden way, and in a more spiritual appearance; Into this, deceit cannot
enter nor transform, and therefore all Babylons Merchants are angry, and
Antichrists followers are full of Wrath, and the Dragon cast out floods after
the heir, and her that brings him forth, and makes War with her Seed, but the
Lord is putting on her Beautiful Garments, and Marrying her to himself, and she
shall reign, and her Seed who are born of the Spirit, when she that sat as a
Queen upon the Waters shall have an end, and the Dragon shall be laid hold on
and Chained up, and the Beast and false Prophet be cast into the Lake for ever.

Blessed are they who keeps in the Faith and patience till these things be
fulfilled, their hearts shall rejoice, and their tongue praise the Lord, and
magnify him, whose throne is established in the Heavens, and his Kingdom is
over all.

And although there was a defection from the Faith and practice of the Apostles
in the first two hundred years after Christ, yet doubtless there were many who
lived and died in the Faith, and suffered as Martyrs in the time of the great
Persecutions by the heathen Emperors, and many who could not, nor did not
sacrifice to their Idols, suffered death, and under-went cruel torments by the
Heathen who were in the Dragons power, for the Testimony of a good Conscience,
for confession of Christ Jesus; and although diverse of the Bishops of Rome and
other places, did bring in things which they instituted as matter of worship,
and so people was darkened by them, yet in the ten Persecutions by the Heathen
Emperors many of them suffered Death, and thousands of the Christians besides;
but deceit crept in by degrees, and invented things were brought in by the
Leaders of the People, but these things that were invented, were pressed to be
observed in their Diocesses and Parishes which they had made and sat down in,
but there was little compelling yet till the Dragon gave his power to the
Beast, and it was 650 years before ever the Bishops of Rome did climb up unto
their height, as to claim the title of the Universal Bishop or head of the
Church, or challenged Supremacy over all Christian Churches; yet before this
time abundance of Darkness was entered in, and the power was much lost, and
diverse innovations were brought in for Ordinances, diverse of the Jews
Ceremonies, and diverse of their institutions which belonged to the first
Priesthood, and these were pressed upon the Churches by several leaders or
Bishops, as Apostolic Ordinances, which had no concurrence with the Primitive
Church in the firist hundred years after Christ, as hereafter may be shown in
diverse things wherein they were Apostatized from the life and Power of God,
and from the practice of the Saints mentioned in the Scripture, and of the
Churches planted in the Apostles days.

CHAP. VIII. Something concerning the ten Persecutions by the Heathen Emperors
of Rome.
FOR the first three hundred years after Christ, who was born in the reign of
Augustus Caesar then Emperor of Rome, and was rejected and crucified by the Jews
in the seventeenth year of the Reign of Tiberius Caesar then Emperor of Rome,
who Reigned eight years after Christ was crucified, when Pilate gave sentences
against and delivered to the Jews, the said Pilate was banished by the Emperor,
and afterward he killed himself, in which time Stephen the Martyr was stoned
to death by the Jews, and the same day Stephen was stoned (Dorothees says)
Nicanor one of the Deacons suffered with two thousand Christians more in his
Reign; about this time Paul was converred.

The next Emperor that succeeded Tiberius Caesar was Caesar Caligula, who
commanded his Image to be set up in the Temple at Jerusalem to be worshipped as
God; Herod who Mocked Christ with his soldiers, and set him at naught, was
banished and died miserably; he likewise put forth Caiaphas the High Priest,
and afterward in the fourth year of his Reign, Caligula was slain.

Claudius Nero succeeded him, and Reigned thirteen years, a grievous Tyrant and
an hater of all good; by him was James the Son of Zebedee Martryed, and Simon
and Pemenius the second of the seven Deacons Martyred, and Thomas who Preached
to the Medes and Persians, was slain with a dart in his Reign; about this time
Simon Zelotes who Preached in Africa, was crucified, Andrew and Matthew, the
one crucified, and the other slain with a spear; Matthias and Philip, the one
was crucified, and the other stoned to death.

About the 62. year after Christ, James the Son of Alpheus called the Brother
of Christ, was stoned to death with many more, and Mark slain at Alexandria.

Domitius Nero began his Reign about the sixty seventh year after Christ, he
Reigned fourteen years Emperor of Rome, under him was the first of the ten
Roman persecutions, he caused the Christians of all ages, sects and sorts to
suffer; he commanded Rome to be set on fire in tewlve places, and to avoid the
infamy thereof, he accused the Christians with it, and caused them to be
persecuted and put to death; and in the latter end of his reign, Paul was put
to death for the Testimony of the Faith of Christ. In the year sixty nine, this
Nero was afterward proclaimed by the Senate of Rome, an enemy to all Mankind,
and condemned to be drawn through the City, and to be whipped to death, for fear
of which he fled, and afterward slew himself, and the Church had rest for a
season from persecution after him.

In the ninety sixth year began Domitian the Emperor to reign, who began the
second persecution, who was a blasphemer against God, and an Idolater; In his
days was Simon Bishop of Jerusalem crucified, and John the Evangelist Banished
into the Isle of Patmos; but after the death of Domitian he was released by
Pertinax; this Domitian the Emperor fearing the coming of Christ again,
commanded that all that could be found of the stock of David in Jury should be
slain, and many false accusations was brought against the Christians, and the
Inquisition was this, Swear the truth whether thou art indeed a Christian, and
if they confessed, they were condemned and put to death for that alone.

Clement succeeded Anaclatus the Bishop of Rome, and after him Everistus who
was Martyred under Trajanus in the 102. year after Christ. In the Reign of
Trajanus the Emperor, began the third persecution of the Christians, Simon who
was said to be Christ's Kinsman was Bishop of Jerusalem, and Ignatius Bishop of
Antioch who suffered Martrydom in the reign of Trajanus, in the year 111. with
many other of the Christians who were destroyed in this Persecution; the Church
of Rome was not so highly exalted as afterward she usurped Authority; neither
were the Officers thereof nor Bishops so corrupt as afterward they came to be
both in Doctrine and Practice.

Marcus Antonius Verus began the fourth Persecution in the year 162. in whose
time a great number who professed Christ, suffered cruel deaths in Asia and in
France, and other parts, amongst whom was Policarpus the Bishop of Smyrna; this
Persecution continued thirteen years; The Church had some rest under the reign
of Lucius Antonius Comodus, and then the Christians began to wrangle and jangle
about the celebration of Easter, and about observation of times and Feasts, and
run into things outward, and contended about them, and so weakened themselves,
and, hurt one another. Alexander Bishop of Rome succeeded Everistus, and
Telesphorus succeeded him likewise, and Higinus, and Pius, and Ansatus Soler,
and Elutherius; all these were Bishops of Rome, but many things began to creep
in in their time, but being kept under by the Roman Emperors, they did not get
much outward power, because they had no outward compelling Laws to force their
Institutions in diverse things which were contrary unto the former Apostles
Practices, yet notwithstanding there was something of Truth, and of the Power
of it kept, and they testified against the Idolatry of the Heathen, and so
suffered Death.

Severus succeeded in the Empire about the year 195. under whom was the fifth
Persecution against the Christians, who Reigned eighteen years; in the
beginning of his Reign he was somewhat favorable to the Christians, but
afterward through the malicious suggestions and accusations of wicked men, he
was so enraged and incensed against the Christians, that by proclamation he
commanded through the Empire, that no Christians any more should be suffered,
whereby a great number were destroyed and killed, as Eusebius says in his
sixth book about the year 205. This Severus the Emperor was slain in Britain
about the year 214. and was buried at York.

Aurelius Alexander Severus began his Reign about 224. at this time the Church
had gotten some rest from persecution, at this time the Christians had gotten
some house or place to meet in in this time of rest in Rome, and the Cooks and
Tiplers challenged it to belong to them, the matter being brought before the
Heathen Emperor Severus, he judged it to be more honest and reasonable, that
this place should be continued to the Christians to Worship God in, then that
the Cooks and Victuallers, and Tiplers should enjoy it; by this all may
understand that there was no great Ministers, Steeple Houses, or places called
Churches erected in Rome unto this time for the Christians, although there be
so much ado in this time about Steeple Houses and Ministers, and Parish
Churches, within this latter age, by them that are run into visible things have
been so strongly pressed for a House of God, and a Holy Church; so that in this
time the Christians had no Mass-houses with steeples, and Crosses, and Bells,
and Organs. standing East and West, which are pleaded for to be decent and Holy
Institutions, yet notwithstanding the moderation of this Emperor, Calistus and
Urbanus Bishops of Rome were put to death, but yet the Bishops of Rome did not
arrogate to themselves to be universal, and these were not called Popes, though
diverse superstitious things crept in, and were allowed by the said Bishops, and
they were declining from the doctrine and practice of the Apostles in the first
Century, and this was about the year 226.

Maximinius the next was chosen Emperor rather by the wilfulness of Soldiers,
then the will of the Senate, he caused the sixth Persecution, which was great
against the Christians, especially against the Leaders and Teachers, hoping
that when they were smitten, the Sheep would soon be Scattered, this was in the
year 237. Pontianus Bishop of Rome was banished by his Emperor, and many more
Christians suffered under this Emperor, and were put to death, and more its
likely would have suffered, but the Lord shortened his days and his tyranty,
for he Reigned but three years.

The next Emperor was Gordianus in the year two hundred and forty, who was more
moderate toward the Christians, so that the sixth Persecution ceased; but
after he had Reigned the space of six years, he was slain by Philip the
succeeding Emperor.

Philippus who slew Gordianus who was called the first Christian Emperor, who
slew Gordianus, and began with Blood, he with his Son Philip governed the
Empire seven years; about the year 246. it is said this Philip with his Son and
Family was converted by Fabianus and Origin; it is said that both he and his
Son was slain by Decius one of his own Captains, and though being the first
that brought in Christianity into the Emperial seat, but the name of
Christianity would not save him, being out of the nature beginning with Blood,
it was required at his hands, and Anthetius Bishop of Rome after Pontanius;
Damasus says, that this Bishop was put to death, because he recorded the
deaths of the sufferers, and here was the beginning of that which they call the
Legend of Martyrs in the Church of Rome.

The seventh Persecution began by Decius who succeeded Philippus in the year
250, by whom was moved a terrible Persecution against the Christians, which is
noted to be the seventh Persecution. Fabianus being a married man, and had a
wife, was chosen Bishop of Rome; this Doctrine of Devils forbidding to marry,
was not yet brought in, which the Apostle to Timothy Prophesied of, no not in
the Church of Rome, not for 250. years after Christ; So the Emperor Decius put
him to death, and gave forth a Proclamation that all that Prosessed the name of
Christ should be put to death. Origin suffered many bonds, Wrackings, Torments
for Religion, yet afterward it is said he sacrificed to Idols, and was
excommunicated, yet afterward Repented; And Nicephorus says of this
Persecution under the Emperor Decius, that it was as easy to number the Sands
of the Sea, as them that Suffered under him. Cheremon a Married Bishop fled
with his Wife into the Mountain of Arabia, and never was seen more; the
Prohibition of Ecclesiastical men, or Ministers Marrying was not yet begun, no
not in the Church of Rome, although they plead Antiquity for their Institutions
and Practices; the Emperor Reigned but two years, and was slain by the
Barbarian; about this time diverse Bishops suffered, and others were condemned
to the Metal Mines; Cyprian Bishop of Carthage was Banished; these had no
power yet to give forth Laws nor Inquisitions, nor to force things upon People,
for they had not the outward Authority then, though diverse things which were
unfound Crept in by little and little, even amongst them; About the year two
hundred and fifty five, Valerianus together with his Son Gallienus came to be
Emperors, who Reigned together; at first they were moderate to the Christians
for about two or three years, insomuch that in the Emperors Court there were
many Christians; but afterward being moved by an Egyptian, was stirred ^p to
Persecution, which was about the year 259. this Emperor was stirred up to
Persecute the Christians, which was the, eighth Persecution, being Instigated
by the Egyptian who was great in his Court, telling the Emperor that the
Christians was the cause of the evils of famine and plague upon the Empire;
diverse Bishops and many hundreds were put to death besides; Stephanus suffered
with six more which were leading Men, also Lawrence suffered, who was pinched
with fire tongues, and laid upon an Iron Grate or Grid-iron red hot, and so
broyled to death.

In the sixth year of the Reign of Valerianus Gallianus, having laid for the
space of three years in Prison with Claudianus and Bossa his Wife, were put to
death for being Christians; Likewise Fructuousus Bishop of Tarracona with two
Deacons were burned the same year for being Christians; this Valerian the
Emperor Reigned seven years, and was taken in the War by the King of Persia,
who made him his Block to take Horse on to his dying day; and though the
Christians in this time were much Darkened, yet they were much more justiffed
in the sight of God then the Heathen Emperors, who came all or most of them to
a woeful End for their Cruelty, and Tyranny, and Murder; for the hand of the
Lord who distributes Justice equally to every man according to his Works, found
them out; and Gallianus the Son of Valerianus who joined with his Father in
Persecution had many earthquakes, and thirty rebellions and insurrections
raised in his time, in the Empire in nine years time, and this stopped their
Persecuting of the Christians somewhat; And after Gallianus the Emperor
succeeded Claudius, who Reigned two years, and after him Quintilian^s the
Brother of Claudius, who continued only seventeen days, about the year 274. in
this time the Christians had some rest from Persecution.

The ninth Persecution began under Aurelianus, who began his Reign mildly, but
soon after moves the ninth Persecution, about this time many Christians
suffered, and some of the Bishops of Rome, and Sixtus, and Dionysius, and many
others in the middle of his Reign, there was a Council of the Christians at
Antioch, the Emperor seeming not to be against it, nor them, but afterward he
was about to seal an Edict for further Persecutions of the Christians, but he
was so terrified with thundering and lightning, that it stopped his tyranny, in
the sixth year of his Reign, he was slain about the year 276.

After him succeeded Tacitus, who Reigned but six Months, and Florianus Reigned
next, who Reigned but sixty days, and after him Reigned Marcus Aurelius
Probus, who Reigned six years and four Months, in this time there was no
Persecution, but the Christians had rest as in matters of Religion, but he was
slain by his soldiers in the year 248.

Carus with his two Sons Carinus and Numerianus succeeded Probus in the Empire,
the Reign of which Emperors continued in all but three years; Carus was slain
with lightning, and Numerianus was also slain, and Carinus the other Son
Reigned alone in Italy with much Wickedness, who afterward was slain by the
hands of the Tribune at Rome; so that from the latter end of the Reign of
Valerianus, unto the Reign of Dioclesia, there seeming to be about forty four
years, in which there was little Persecution of the Christians, but they had
rest and enjoyed their Worship in quiet, and they were kept under sufferings,
and the Law, and did not exercise Authority over the consciences of the rest,
as afterward they did, when they came to have Power in their hands, although
as I said before, diverse things were brought in by the Bishops of Rome in this
time, which were much disagreeing from the Apostles days, yet they held part
of the true Worship, and bore a Testimony against the open profaneness and
cursed Idolatry and Pride of the Heathen Emperors; who killed one another for
the Impeiral Seat; and in this Testimony that they bore for God, I Believe they
were accepted, and had peace with God.

The tenth Persecution began under the Reign of Dioclesian, which was in the
year 289. this was the last Persecution against the Christians, which was
horrible and grievous, that never was any Persecution before or since
comparable unto it, for the time which it continued, which was the space of ten
years together, though there were more Emperors which had an hand in this
Persecution, yet principally it bears the Name of Dioclesian; This Dioclesian
the Emperor took unto himself Maxillianus to be Partner with him in the Empire,
those two Emperors chose two others to themselves, that is to say, Gallerius
and Constantius whom they called Cesars; Gallerius was sent into the East parts
against the Christians, and Constantius to the West to Britain, these two last
Reigned moderately and did not Persecute the Christians for about 10. years, so
they Prospered in their Wars abroad, but afterward by reason of their
victories were puffed up with pride in their hearts, they Ordained a triumph at
Rome, after which triumph Dioclesian gave commandment that he himself should be
worshipped as God, and said he was Brother to the Sun and Moon, and so commanded
the People to kiss his feet, which afterward when the chief Bishop of Rome got
up into pride, and claimed superiority over all the Christian Churches, having
got the Authority of the Dragon, commanded the Emperors, and Kings then to kiss
his feet, and so in this the Pope has imitated the Heathen Emperor, who was
the greatest Persecutor that ever we read of; But to return to Dioclesian, he
began a great and grevious Persecution of the Christians which was the
nineteenth year of his Reign; in the year of Christ 103. he commanded all the
meeting places of the Christians to be spoiled, and the Books of the holy
Scriptures to be Burned, he sent out a Proclamation for casting all the Bishops
and Elders into Prison in his Empire, and constrained them by several torments
to Worship Idols, and so great Persecution there was among the Christians, and
grievous torments they suffered, because they would not offer sacrifice to
Idols; one Nobleman at Nicom plucked down the two Emperors Proclamations against
the Christians, not fearing the Emperors who were then in the City, for which
act he was put to most bitter death; afterward they were so mad that they
sought to destroy all the Christians in the World, it can hardly be expressed
with words what numbers suffered, and what Blood was shed throughout all the
Regions, and they cast the Christians among the Lions, Bears, and Leopards who
were kept Hungry for that purpose, and them that the wild Beast would not
Devour, they, slew them with the Sword, and threw them into the Sea. Cerena the
Wife of Dioclesian he killed, because she was a Christian; two thousand were
burnt in one place, many suffered in Phrygia, and were burnt with the whole
City in this Persecution; likewise in France, Spain and Brittan, so that some
Rivers were Colored with Blood, one thousand slain sometimes in one day, and
they slew them by ten, twenty, sixty, and sometimes an hundred Men, Women and
Children. Damasus, Beda, Oratius, Honorus, and others do testify that there
was slain in the space of one Month seve^^een thousand Persons; likewise Peter
Bishop of Alexandria, and three hundred more were slain with axes there;
Mauritius was slain with 6666. Victor with 360. were slain in the City of Troy;
the Christians notwithstanding all this Persecution did increase, and though a
Cloud was over many, and darkness entered in in part, respectively to what had
been in the first Century, yet they were the best Witnesses for the Lord in
their generations, and the Christians did increase, so that the two Heathen
Emperors were tired with Persecuting, and gave up their Empire, and led a
Private life, having Reigned one and twenty years, which was in the year 305.
these two latter Emperors Maximinius and Constantius who were called Cesars,
now became the Emperors of the whole, one in the East, and the other in the
West. Maxentius was set up Emperor by the Soldiers, and goes against
Maximinius the Emperor, who sent Severus his Son to War against him, which
Severus being slain Lycinius Caesar was chosen in the room, so that Maximinius,
Constantius and Maxentius continued the tenth Persecution after Dioclesian and
his partner had given over, saving Constantius, and esepcially his Son
Constantius were kind to the Christians; Constantius Chused those who refused
to offer Sacrifice and commit Idolatry to be in his Court, and Banished the
Heathen Idolaters as unfit for his service that were Traitors to God, and this
was about the year 311. On the other hand. Maximinius the Emperor and his
partner was very Wicked in Idolatry and Cruelty, God struck him with a great
Plague in the Belly and secret parts, which purrifying broke our with swarms of
Lice, which caused such a stink that the Physician could not endure the same,
wherefore he slew the Physician, and by the anguish of his Disesase, he slacked
Persecution, making confession that his Persecuting of them had brought this
upon him, and so acknowledged his offense; and the Infidels diverse exalted the
God of the Christians, yet afterward being incensed against the Christians,
this Emperor set up Decrees afresh, to Persecute the Christians, whereby many
Bishops and others were Martyred; here was no titles of Lord Bishops and
Archbishops not yet in the first three hundred years, neither was there any
Pope then that did lay claim to supremecy over all the Churches, neither had
these Bishops whole Counties and Provinces for their maintenance, neither all
Rome, Constantinople, Antioch, and Jerusalem, and all People therein for their
Dioceses, but them only of the Christians who believed, in each of those
places; but afterward in the great Persecution there followed great famine and
pestilence on the Heathen, which caused the Persecution to cease, and caused
Maximinius to revoke his Decrees, and punished the Inchanters that incensed him
against the Christians; Maxillianus who was joined in the Empire with
Dioclesian, who laid down the Government of the Empire, endeavored to have
slain Constantius the Emperor, that he might have got up again into the Empire,
but failing of his enterprise, was slain of Constantius. Maxentius this time
Reigns wickedly and tyrannically at Rome, which caused the Romans to entreat
Costantine to come against Maxentius for his Wickedness, who made War against
him, and upon a Bridge made of boats over the River Tyber, he was intraped by
Constantine, and drowned in Tyber; and thus the Righteous Judgments of God at
last came upon them for their Blood and cruelty, as a recompenence and a reward
for their deeds, but Constantine set forth Decrees of favor to the Christians.

Marcellinus was Bishop of Rome about the tenth year of Dioclesian, in the
Persecution he sacrificed to Idols, and was excommunicated by three hundred
Bishops, but afterward was killed in the Massacre of Dioclesian. Marcellus
succeeded, and one Lucina a rich maid of Rome dying, made Marcellus her heir,
and gave him all her substance, and from that time says Pollidore lib. 1. the
Bishops of Rome were greatly enriched, and so began to grow up in earthly
honors higher and higher.

But Constantine the Emperor, about the year 318. caused a Cross to be made of
Gold and precious stones, and to be born before his Army instead of a Standard,
when he went to fight against Maxentius, Maximinius, and Lucimus, these were
the least Persecutors of the Christians in the Roman Monarchy, which this
Constantine did vanquish, and set the Christians at liberty who had been
Persecuted about three hundred years; and so afterward this Cross others began
to Imitate and set up in their Churches, and became a flat Idol;
notwithstanding after this, some Persecution was stirring in the Eastern
Counties, yet in Rome and the Western parts, and there was no general
Persecution for many years, and also in the East part he subdued those Tyrants;
and we read of no Persecution against the Christians, until the time that John
Wickliff suffered, which was when the Spirit of the Heathen was entered into the
Bishops of Rome, and Popes, who had retained the name of Christian, but lost
the life and the Power; he began with fire to Persecute the Members of Christ.

But long before this time the Wisdom and Power of God was much lost among many
of the Bishops of Rome, and also diverse others, that the Apostasy was entered
in, and they made great contentions about Easter, and about days which should
be Fasted, and some was for two, and some was for three, and some was for forty
days, all the Churches of Asia, and their Bishops was for keeping it the
fourteenth Moon, as Eusebius says, lib. 5. For Asia observed the Feast of
Easter, and they called a great Council together, and decreed that it should be
observed the fourteenth Moon upon what day soever in that week the Moon fell,
and appointed fasting days, and Meetings and Synods in all parts met together
about this trivial matter, in the year 199. At Rome likewise there was a Synod
gathered together, wherein Victor the fourteenth Bishop was President. and the
Eastern Churches decreed it the day aforesaid, and fastings before it, and a
Western Church decreed it to be the day wherein Christ rose from death to Life;
but Victor Bishop of Rome with the adjoined Congregations, pronounces flatly
all the Westren Churches to be excommunicated Persons, and gives them up to
Satan, so that it became a Proverb, that the Bishop of Rome must judge all,
and be judged of none; this was about the year one hundred ninety nine after
Christ, when they had respit from Persecution. And Iraeneus Bishop of Lions, he
was of Victors mind, that it ought to be celebrated on the Sunday only, yet
reproved Victor Bishop of Rome, Peter's successor as they say, for cutting off
all the Churches of God in Asia for such a trivial thing.

And Policarpus and Anisatus contended about trivial things; and although there
was much good in them both, yet this weakened the Christians, and led the minds
of People out into the observance of outward things, and neglected the life and
the Power.

Lucius the two and twentieth Bishop of Rome, about the year 255. and Stephanus
who succeeded him, a great contention in their time about baptism; the matter
was, whether they that returned from any heresy should be rebaptized or be
received in with Prayer, and laying on of hands only; and so here was a great
jangling and contention about outward things, which were geting up as Idols;
And Cyprian Bishop of Carthage judged that Heretics had no way to be purged
from Error, but by baptism; but Stephanus was greatly offended with Cyprian for
this.

After Stephen Xystus succeeded, and Dionysius writes unto him, how that all
Cilicia, Cappadocia, Galatia, and the bordering Nations, how great Synods had
decreed, that they would not communicate with them because they rebaptized
Heretics; and says further, the greatest Synods of Bishops has decreed that
such as renounce any heresy, should first be instructed, and then Washed and
Purged of their impure leaven; and thus they Wrangled and Jangled about things
with one another, and brake into Fractions; notwithstanding many of these men
Suffered under the merciless Cruelty of the Heathen Emperor; likewise they
excommunicated one another, and called Councils, and censured one another, and
hurt the spreadng of Truth amongst them that believed in the Name of Jesus; all
this is to show that they were declining and coming to loss in this time,
though so near the Apostles time; and though they suffered under the Emperors,
and found peace with the Lord, yet many practices and institutions were made
which are not according to the Primitive times, which ought not to be binding
to all generations afterward because of the Antiquity of them, as the now
called Church of Rome would have all to receive as Apostolic Doctrine.

But to return to Constantine the Emperor, when peace was established in the
Empire, he set forth a general Proclamation or Edict, not constraining therein
any man fro any Religion, but giving liberty to all men to exercise their
Religion, whether Christians or others, which thing was taken well by the
Romans and all wise men; this Licinius joined with Constantine in the
Government of the Empire, and seemingly favored the Christians, and joined
with Constantine in setting forth an edict for the Christians liberty, yet
afterward he had great hatred toward Constantine, and conspired his death,
rejecting the Christian Religion, and Persecuted them, who said he would become
an Enemy to the Christians, for that in their Meetings and Assemblies they
prayed not for him but for Constantine; so cast the Christians into Prison, and
Persecuted them within his Dominions, and many were put to death, but at length
he was slain after several battles between him and Constantine by the soldiers
in the year, 324. Constantius the Emperor the Father of Constantine dyed a
natural death, and was buried at York, Dioclcesian died at Salena, as some say
by his own Poison in the year 319. he was the chief of the seven Tyrants in the
tenth Persecution. Maximinian the second, who was hanged at Mazilla by
Constantine in the year 310. Thirdly Galerius who was plagued with a terrible
disease; Severus the fourth was slain by Maximinian the father of Maxentius the
wicked Tyrant, who was Banished by Constantine in the year 318. The sixth was
Maxentius who dyed not long atfer in the year 320. Lastly, Licinius was
overcome by Constantine, and slain about the year 324. And thus the Lord
Plagued the cruelty of the Heathen Emperors who knew not God, but hated his
appearance, and rewarded them according to their deeds.

The Christians in these three hundred years wherein was the ten Persecutions,
they were sufferers under the Power of the Dragon, who ruled in the Emperors,
and then they were not Persecutors, having not the outward power in their hand,
but when they had the outward power, then they turned Persecutors, especially
the Bishops of Rome, when they had the outward power on their side, then they
were worse then Constantine the great, who gave liberty to all Christians and
others to Worship God without forcing of any, as their actions following
afterward makes it appear; for being countenanced by the Emperor, they grew
proud and lordly, and increasing in power and outward Authority, though set up
at first by the Emperor, at last excluded him for having any Authority or Power
over the Sea of Rome. as after a season may be made appear.

In the year 367. Damasus was Bishop of Rome 18. years.

Also in the first three or four hundred years before ever the Bshop of Rome
did get so high as to be called universal Bishop, abundance of Darkness spread
over, and abundance of Idolatry and superstitious things was invented, and
abundance of Orders, as Friars, and Monks, and Monasteries, and Nunneries,
wherein they were diverted from the order of the Gospel, and a great Apostasy
came in.

In the year 260. Anthony is called the Father of the Monks, who followed the
Example of Paulus born at Thebes in Egypt, who retired himself to a private
Gave under the foot of a Rock in the seventh Persecution by Decius; And one
called Basil is said to be the first that built Monasteries, and ordained vows
of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience; and these are called the Monks of Basils
Order, and are bound to abstain from all kind of Flesh; and here began this
Doctrine of Devils, contrary to the Doctrines of the Apostles of Christ. The
next who prescribed Orders, was Augustine born in the year 350. this order was
called Austin Friars, they wear a Lethern girdle to distinguish them from the
Monks; the first Order of the Eriars was Mendicants; the third that Prescribed
Orders was Benedict in the year 472. and out of this Order did spring the Monks
of Benedict, and diverse other Orders which I have mentioned before in the
former part of the Book. The fourth that Prescribed Orders was Francis of
Assis, these are called Franciscans or Gray Friars, their rule and order was
confirmed by Innocent the third, these are the fourth Order of Friars
Mendicants, or begging Friars, and from this order sprung Friars, Miniries, and
Capouchen Friars; Miniries were ordered by Franciscus de Pola, and Capouchens
were ordained by one Matthew Basa of Acona; The Jesuits were first founded by
Ignatius Loyolla born in Navar, they were first confirmed by Paul the third.

The Nuns first Author was one Clare the Daughter of Asses who forsook her
Fathers House, and devised an Order of religious Women who vowed Poverty and
Virginity, they were confirmed by Honorius the third; but many of these being
mentioned, and their Practices which are contrary to the Primitive time is
mentioned before in this Book, and so let them pass, and to return to the
Bishops of Rome; but diverse contentions and sects began to break forth, and
the Bishops not only of Rome, but of Alexandria and Nicomedia, and Miletus, and
one clashing against another, Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, and Eusebins
Bishop of Nicomedia, and many Bishops in other places joining one to one side,
and one to another, and envying one another, insomuch that as Eusebius says, a
man might have seen not only the Presidents and chief Rulers of the Churches
envying one against another with spightful approbrious Terms, and also the
Multitude severed into parts, that the Christian Religion was openly derided of
all Men, and so called Councils and Synods, and condemned one another, and
excommunicated one another as Heretics, and so went out of the Long-suffering,
and Patience, and forbearance which the Apostle exhorted unto.

And so no less then four hundred years many run wholly out into contention
about days, and Meats, and Drinks, some Running this way, and some that way,
and forging things upon the Apostles and Churches in Asia, saying, that John
the Disciple gave them an order to observe Easter the fourteenth day of the
Month; And Rome and the Western parts allege Peter and Paul for their Author,
how they left them this tradition, both alike true, for this came up more by
custom, then any injunction from the Apostles, or tradition either; for they
condemned such things in their life time, and called them beggarly rudiments,
such as inhabit at Rome, they began to make fasts, and fasted three weeks
before Easter, excepting the Saturday and the Sunday; Illyricum, Greece, and
Alexandria began their fasting days six weeks before Easter, and that they
call forty days fasting, or Lent, others begin to fast seven weeks before
Easter; Yet in all the while they use abstinency but only fifteen days, and
has intermission amongst those days, and yet calls these forty days fasting
or Lent; so that they disagreed in the time, disagreed in the months, disagreed
in the days, and times, and in the abstinence, and contended about these
things, or for life and death, and excommunicating one another, and judging one
another Heretics, and at last when they got power, killed one another, and
stirred up the Emperors one against another, and this in the 350 or 400 years
after Christ.

And all this fasting was but from some meat, as though some had been clean and
some unclean, some abstained only from flesh, and fed only upon fish, and
abstain from all other Creatures, others upon fish and fowls of the Air,
affirming their Original is of the water, and so no flesh; and others some
fasted till nine of the Clock, and then eat of diverse sorts as they pleased;
and here was their fast and their Lent, about which all this contention and
stir; all which practices are condemned in the Apostles writings, and such
ignorance and hypocrisy; for the Kingdom of God stands not in meats and
drinks, and yet the Protestants and them that calls themselves reformed will
needs press these things as holy Institutions, when as it is manifest when the
Christians in former days began to judge one another about these things, and
strive, and bite one another, and devour one another, and they lost the power,
and then Mystery Babylon began to rise, these things became her Merchandise,
and these practices became to be called Christianity, which Christ and the
Apostles would have been ashamed of.

And about the Sacrament great contention arose, as about the time and the
manner, some did receive the bread and wine every Sabbath day, yet Alexandria
and Rome do not use it: Yet the Egyptians joining to Alexandria, and the
Inhabitants of Thebes they had another order, they did receive it when they had
banquetted, and filled themselves with delicates, and then received their
Communion, and so they judged one another in these things: In Thessalonica,
Macedonia, and Hellas in Achaia, they baptize only on the Easter holy days:
Likewise in Hellas, Jerusalem, and Thessalia, their service they said with
Candlelight: likewise in Caesaria, Cappadocia, and at Cyprus the Priests and
Bishops expound the Scripture on the Saturdayes and Sundays by Candlelight,
as Socrates says Lib. 5. In this time it is said the Customs and observations
were so many that none was able to find two which did retain one Order of the
service. At Caesaria in Cappadocia, they receive not into communion such as sin
after Baptism, and even so the Macedonians in Hellespont did the same. The
Phrygians allow not of two Marriages: The Original Authors of so great
diversity of services, rights, and customs were Bishops which governed their
Churches at several times, and such as do like of such practices have commended
them to posterity for Laws, and such vain and frivolous Contentions did arise
in this age, whereby it is manifest the Apostasy from the life and power of God
was great, and Gods wisdom and the Unity of the Spirit was wanting, and
Philosophy and customary practice was their chief Foundation. And one Bishop
exiled another, and complained to the Emperors, and banished one another, and
so the sheep was made havoc of, and starved, and scattered, and the name of
Christ and Christian came to be evil spoken of by the many fractions and
contentions that were amongst them.

But to return to the Bishops of Rome after the reign of Constantine in which
persecution ceased, many Superstitious Injunctions and Idolatrous practices
were set up in the first five hundred years, which I shall not much trouble the
Reader with further then what is already said; But diverse other things were
brought in afterward more gross then the former. Gregory called the Great, the
Bishop of Rome, of whom it is said of all that went before him, he was the
basest or worst, and of all that came after him, he was the best; It is he that
brought in this Title among the Roman Bishops, to be called the servant of Gods
servants, but by his practice he proved a Lord over Gods servants, consciences,
and over their faith, he made an Act that Priests should not marry a wife, and
he ordained a book called the Service or Letany, which goes under the name of
Gregory's Mass Book to be recived in all Churches.

After the death of him, Fabianus was Bishop, who continued scarce 2. years, he
was the last of the Roman Bishops, who had not the Title of universal Bishop or
Head of the Church, he was the last of sixty five Bishops before the first
Pope, he died in the year six hundred and five.

Palagius, the first was the 69 Bishop of Rome in the year 355. he ordained
that Heretics and Shismaticks should be punished with temporal death; there
was 65 Bishops before Boniface the third, who was the first Pope, and since
there has been 179 Popes.

Boniface the third (who succeeded Fabianus was the first Pope, he reigned but
one year, and did more hurt in that year then Gregory could do in many, before
he obtained of the Emperor Phocas that he and his Successors after him in the Sea of Rome above all other Churches should have the pre-eminence, and that the
Bishop of Rome should be the head of all the Churches of Christ in Christendom;
alleging this frivolous and reasonless reason, that Saint Peter had left to
Saint Peter his successors in Rome the Keys of binding and loosing; for before
this Constantinople, Asia and other Churches, their Bishops had some stroke,
and diverse times many of the Bishops of Rome were reprehended by the rest, but
now obtaining this Decree of Phocas, he began to take head over all other
Churches, and this Phocas to aspire to the Empire of Rome he murdered his own
Master, and Mauritius the Emperor and his Children; so Phocas somewhat fearing
and willing to have Boniface his favor, gratifies him and condescends to all
his petitions, and grants him to be universal head Bishop over all Christian
Churches, and there was the first rise of the Pope; But Phocas for his murder
was justly rewarded, for Heraclius the Emperor cut off his hands and feet and
cast him into the Sea; but Rome would not so soon loose her supremacy once
given as the giver lost his life, and ever since that time the Popes have
holden, defended and maintained the same by all force, policy and cruelty that
possible can be; this was in the year 606. And so the Bishop now became Pope,
his rise was not because of his holiness or righteousness, or doctrine or holy
practices suitable unto Peter. whom he says he succeeded for his Doctrine and
practice, Peter had condemned the same things before Boniface was, but his rise
was by a Heathen Emperor who had Command over a great party at that time, and
so by the force of his edict he claims authority.

Vitilianus, the eleventh Pope in the year 657 he confirmed that practice which
was set up before by some other of the Bishops of Rome, that organs should be
set up in Churches.

Paschal, in the year 817 was the first that appointed Cardinals to be in
number 70.

Adrian the third the 47 Pope in the year 884 ordained that the Emperor of
Rome from thenceforth should have no more to do with the election or
confirmation of the Pope, but that it should be left wholly to the Roman
Clergy; So now that which first gave the Pope power, to wit the Emperor, he
now throws off the yoke, and if the Emperor please not him, has stirred up
the people to manage war against him, and against diverse Princes, as may be
seen in the histories of latter ages.

Sergius the third was the first who ordained bearing of Candles in the feast
of the purification of Mary, thence called Candlemas day.

Calistine the second in the year 1143 was the first inventer of cursing or
anathamizing any who received not his Ordinances, with Bell Book and Candle.

Innocent the third 1198 was the first that brought in the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and imposed auricular confession upon the people.

Clement the fifth 1350 was the first that sold indulgencies and pardons.

Sixtus the fourth 1471 brought in the beads to be numbered when they prayed,
and authorized the Ladies psalter. Leo the tenth in the year 1553 set
Indulgencies and pardons on sale in Germany and France, which things caused
Luther in Germany and Zunglius amongst the Switzers to write against the Popes
Ministers, and afterward questioned many points of the Popish Doctrine upon
which the Pope burned Luthers writings and condemned him for an Heretic, and
Luther burned the Popes Canon Law at Wittenburg, and declared the Pope to be a
persecutor and a very Antichrist.

The Inquisition began first in Spain which was set up by the Papists there, to
terrify the Moors who had inhabited Spain for 760 years, and so long Spain was
governed by the Emperor of the Moors in Africa until the year 1492. And after
this time the inquisttion began against the Moors, which was not so cruel at
first as afterward it began to be against the Protestants, and is now
accounted the greatest violence and torture, and the greatest Tyranny and
severest kind of persecution upon the Earth, insomuch that many papists abhor
the very name and mention of it, and to the death withstand the bringing in of
this slavery amongst them; the extremity and rigor of this inquisition until
the year 1609. in Philip the third King of Spains time, notwithstanding, though
the Moors did make a show of the Papists Religion because of the Inquisition,
yet eleven hundred thousand of them was forced to quit the Country it was so
dreadful; And all these kind of Ordinances and Institutions before mentioned,
compare them with the Scriptures, and the cruelty and severity which has been
exercised toward them who could not receive them; none who have their eyes
open in any measure, but must needs conclude, that all this is in the Apostasy;
and so all who prosess reformation flee from these things, and from this
Spirit, and from this Church who forces and kills all them that oppose, who are
under his power; and why should any plead for the holding up of those practices
as good and warrantable when as so many has been killed about them, and so many
has been led from the life and power of godliness while they received and
practiced these humane inventions and vain and customary traditions for the
Doctrine of Christ, and for Apostolic Ordinances? and must it not needs be
concluded them who would tie people up, and bind men to observe such and such
things as is mentioned before in this book, and persecute for not observing,
that they are they who draws back to perdition, and keeps people from laying
hold upon eternal life? Many more vain practices and Doctrines which have been
brought in since the Apostles days might be mentioned, but in that which is
said already, the understanding will see that there has been a great Apostasy
both in life, doctrine and practice from the Apostles time downward until now,
and that which is called the Catholic Church in Rome is in it; And likewise
diverse of them who are separated from her sticks too much in these things,
because of the custom, Tradition and Antiquity of them; In part I have shown
their Antiquiry and their rise, and also shown that which is more ancient then
they, from which they have swarved, to the intent that all may come out of
Babylon, and drink no more of the cup, nor buy no more of the Merchandise, nor
wear no more the harlots cognizance nor the false Churches at tire, but that
all may come to see before this heap of dark confusion, and beyond the vain
observations which has been introduced, which makes no man through the
observation thereof more acceptable unto God, but rather twofold more like
children of the wicked one, who abode not in the truth.

CHAP. XIIII. Something further of the Decrees and Ordinances of the Church of
Rome, which are holden out for Apostolical Ordinances.
POpe Paul about the year 757 condemned the Council at Constantinople for
condemning worshipping of Images, he wrote a book of the worshipping and
vitility of Images, calling them the Laymens Calendar.

Pope Adrian about the year 770 clothed the image of Saint Peter with silver,
and covered the Altar of Saint Paul with a pall of gold, and condemned them for
Heretics, who kept Peter and Paul's Doctrine which declared against idols.

Pope Nicholas about the year 858 enlarged the Popes Decrees, equaling them to
the writings of the Apostles, he decreed that service should be said in Latin.

And although by the Emperors the Pope was first elected, yet now having got
head did climb up so high in power, and pride and arrogance, endeavored that
no Emperor should be crowned without his leave in Germany.

And Pope Clement the fifth excommunicated Andronicus Peleologus Emperor of
Constantinople as a Heretic, because he would not suffer the Greek Church to
appeal to Rome.

And when any Kings or Princes had displeased him, he has excommunicated them,
and given away their Kingdoms to some other, teaching their people to rebel;
and also instigating other Princes to make war against them, and to kill one
another for trifles, and if any displeased him, he caused many Kings to do
penance, and to pay great sums of money to get an absolution from
excommunication; and the Rule and power of the Empire which gave him first his
being to be universal Bishop, and to be called Pope, he has raised war often
against, and if he like not the Election of the Emperor, he has deposed them,
and one he brought into such subjection that he caused him to hold his stirrup,
a thing that the Emperor was not accustomed with, he happened to hold it on
the wrong side, for which he received a sharp reproof by his holiness.

Likewise some difference being between Pope Innocent the fourth, in the year
1250 and the Emperor Frederick the second, the Pope would not be reconciled,
though the King of France strongly interceded, and offered full satisfaction
for all pretended wrongs, would go out of his Empire if the Pope could not
endure him there, never to return into Europe again, so as that his son with
the popes approbation might but succeed him in the Empire, which the Pope would
not do.

And how England and diverse Nations has been troubled with his oppression is
well known, and what exactions and great sums of money there has been enhaused
and squeezed out of the Dominions where he had power, the Nations well
remembers, to maintain the pride of his Court at Rome, which abounded with all
manner of vitiousness, in so much that it was grown to that height that
Vincentius Clemence the popes Legate, said it was now too late, and past
reforming.

But to take the Legates own words as follows against his Master the pope and
his Court, W. H. in his book called a description of England in the 136 page,
says thus, that this Vincentius Clement in the year 1452 being Legate for the
pope, was here in England about the popes business, and hearing that the Clergy
had given the King two tenths for the repaying of his losses which he had
sustained in France, and for the recovering of Bou^deox; this Legate Vincenti^s
coming into the Convocation house, he earnestly required the Clergy to be no
less favorable to their Spiritual Father the Pope, and their Mother the Sea of
Rome then they had been to his vassal and inferior, meaning the King; and in
his speech in the Convocation he showed them how that his holiness the pope was
much disturbed and in daily danger of his life by cutthroats, varlors, and
harlots which did much abound as he said in Rome; but the Clergy in the
Convocation slighted his speech, and said how should we contribute toward the
suppression of such, whenas he and such as you continually uphold them? I grant
says the Legate that there wants just reformation of many things in the City
of Rome which would have been made sooner, but now it is too late and past
reforming; nevertheless I beseech you send the Legate to write unto his
holiness the Pope, to request him that he would abandon and leave that Baby^on
which is but a sink of mischief and of all ungodliness, and keep his Court
elsewhere in some place of better fame; and this is the Legates testimony of
the seat of the Mother Church of Rome.

Besides many of her own Members in England in the year 1245 do manifest what
exaction has been upon this Nation, as may be seen in a supplication written in
the names of the Nobles and Commons of England to Pope Innocent the fourth,
showing how many Subsidies and taxes had been levied and sent out of the R^alm,
and how they had been liberally paid, they complaining also how he sent
Italians and forraigners to possess their Churches and Benefices in England,
who had no regard of peoples souls, and so were no good Shepherds as they said;
and how the Italians received threescore thousand Marks by the year, besides
other vails and excises they do reap more rents then the King himself, and so
when he could not have his subsidies, and raise all the sums which he exacted
from year to year, Pope Innocent persuades the French King to make war with
the King of England, for his not condiscending to the pope in all things,
although he was then one of his sons, and of his Church, but enough of this; it
were large to enumerate the actions and cruelties, the oppressions which has
been done in that which is called Christendom, since the Emperor gave unto the
Pope his power, and how much idolatry, supersttion, her^sie, and Doctrines of
Devils has been spread over the Nations these many hundreds of years, and how
many have been put to cruel death; for not obeying and conforming to the said
Doctrines and practices, Injunctions and Ordinances, and how many he this fall
Church has stirred up to kill one another, and destroy one another about these
things, which has been put upon people under the name of Divine Authority, and
holy subjection, and Apostolical Institutions; by what as i^ written, all may
see that these things are in the Apostasy, and in the fall, in the cu^se, and
in the night of darkness wherein all this wickedness has been wrought by the
false Church which the Lord God will reward double, and dry up her waters under
which she sits, and make her seat desolate, and throw down her pride who has
drunk the blood of the Martyrs, and shed the blood of the Saints, and devoured
the Lambs of Christ, and made merchandise of souls; and therefore all who are
in part departed from her, stay not in the Suburbs, but come out of her-City,
and the Adjacent places thereof, that ye be not partakers of the Judgment
which is to come upon her; But Oh abundance of darkness remains yet in the
Nations, and even in the Protestant Churches who hold up things yet which was
invented by her, insomuch that one belonging to the Church of Rome, Dionysius
Petavius (...) Cardinal lays claim to the Ceremonies which were practiced in
England in the Bishops time; For says he in his book called the History of the
World, the Religion of England and Doctrine is Calvinis^^, the Doctrine of
Geneva, but the Ceremonies are of Rome as they were practiced in England in the
year 1640.

In the time of Leo the fourth, Edelw^lphus King of England went to Rome, for
performance of a vow that he had made, and was courteously received and
accepted by the Pope Leo; For which cause he ordained atribute to be paid
yearly to the Pope, to wit a penny sterling for every house in England that
kindled a Fire. New Protestants look to your Easter reckonings, you have denied
the Popes supremacy, and yet Vicars and Parsons receives his tribute of every
house that kindles a Fire, and this stands yet as a good and wholesome
Institution amongst you.

And so for shame, let all that profess Reformation, and the Doctrine of
godliness, and the faith of Christ, and the practice of the Apostles as their
example, Come out of things which the Harlor has invented, and say as Abraham
said to the King of Sodom, That he would not take a shoe-latchet, least he
should say he had made Abraham Rich; So let them that professes Reformation,
not keep a shoe-larchet, nor one lap of the Whores garment, nor any piece of
her Ornaments, that she may not boast any more that we are made rich by her
merchandise; so purge out horn and huff, and all the old leaven out of your
hearts and out of your Assemblies, and come to believe in Christ the true light
that lights every one that comes into the world, that he may be your
Lawgiver, whose Institutions are spiritual and his Ordinances heavenly, which
makes perfect, and clean and pure the comers there unto, and so let the old
Rom^sh t^ash and foolish Ceremonies about worship alone, many of which are
borrowed from the Heathen; and judge not any for departing from them, nor
per^ecute none for not observing of them; for who so does, will manifest
themselves to belong to the City which is to be overthown, and to be in the
Apostasy, and not Members of the true Church of Christ, the Lambs Wife.

And many more things which stands yet amongst them called Christions, as set
discourses has been set up ^^lled homilies.

And the a^oresaid W. H. shows the ground wherefore they were devised; Some
complained that their Churches and Universities were spoiled with error (as
many are at this day) by which there was a want of able Pastors; four Sermons
were appointed by public order in the year only, and certain homilies was
devised by learned men, and confirmed for sound Doctrine by the Clergy, who
made them, and the Authority of the Prince, which homilies were appointed to be
read by Curates of a mean understanding, and them that had but mean pay, as
five mark or twen^^ Nobles a year, of which sort we had many in England in the
year 1640. I desire we have no more, le^st more ignorance abound; and these
homilies were to be read after a certain number of Psalms read, and the Le^any,
and an Epistle and Gospel, and it may be A^h^nasius or Nicene Creed, and this
was the worship which has been holden out even amongst the reformed as
spiritual worship; all which while people has been exercising themselves in
those things, they have been further and further off from God and the knowledge
of his truth, which is manifest to them that believe not by the Injunctions and
Ordinances of men, but by holy Spirit which leads out of all Error,
Superstition and deceit, and all that believes in it comes to be taught of the
Lord, and worship in that which is pure, and are acceptable in his sight.

CHAP. XV. Something Concerning the General Councils since the Apostles days,
though they have been all of one faith, and though it has been said the Church
could not err, all which of the several Councils belonged to the Church of
Rome, yet see the difference.
IN that which some call a Council or a Syn^d at Jerusalem, Acts 15. when some
dissension arose, because of some of the Phari^ees that believed, and yet would
needs Judge it needful for all that believed to be circum^i^ed; So they that
stickt in the outward Types and Figures would needs lay yoaks upon the necks of
them who were come to the substance; So the Apostles, Elders and Brethren
coming together, seeing the state of the matter stood not disputing years
together, as the Council of Trent forty years; but they as they saw in the
wisdom of God sent some chosen men from Jerusalem to the Gentiles, to certify
the Gentiles, by the Spirit of the Lord that they abstained only from meats
offered to Idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from
Fornication, from which if you keep your selves, you shall do well, Acts 15.
they pressed not upon them the ordinances of the Jews, neither the custom of
the Gentiles in the unbelief, which since this the Church of Rome has done;
and diverse Councils appertaining to her, has cumbred people with multitudes
of things and heavy yoaks, some borrowed from the Jews in the unbelief, and
some from the Heathens in the unbelief, and pressed their Institutions and
inventions as Ordinances of Christ upon all the Members of the Church, which
are so many and so innumerable, and all contrary to the Primitive Church; And
they have been of the nature of those Councils that David speaks of, Psalm. 2.
who took Council against the Lord and against his Anointed, and that was a
Council which condemned the Son of God, Christ Jesus, and these Councils though
Rabbis and great men, yet they ^rred from the life; But to come downward
amongst the Doctors and Bishops of that which they call the Catholic Church,
the Council that was held at Carthage under Cyprian decreed that those who were
baptized by Heretics ought to be baptized again, which others called it error:
And that Councils proceedings was condemned. The Nice^e Council decreed flat
Idolatry about worshipping of Images: and the Council at Constantin^ple
condemned that proceedings and their decrees: The Council of Basil as Albe^^us
P^igius says, decreed against all reason, and against the Scriptures: The
Council of Armenium decreed for the A^me^ia^s that Christ was not God: The
Council of Calcedon which was one of the four that Gregory the great compares
to the four Gospels, that the Decrees were as sure and Constitutions as certain
and infallible as the Scripture* yet Pope Leo did not stick to condemn it and
all them as unadvised; And these Councils has been one against another, and the
multitude of their votes is brought for great proof, not only amongst the
Romanists but also amongst them that are separated from them; so Councils have
erred, and has opposed one another, yet and the Popes and Bishops of Rome to
Leo the fourth abrogated and made void the Acts of Adrian, and yet they both
said they were Peter's successors and infallible; And Stephanus Bishop of Rome
made void the Acts and decrees of Formos^s; and Sabinian the Pope commanded
that Gregory's Mass, and all Pope Gregory's writings should be burnt; And all
of these said they had the Keys to bind and loose, and yet one bound that
which another had loosed, and another loosed that which the former had bound;
and yet all these claimed infalibility; The Council of Carthage Decreed that
the Bishop of Rome should not be called high Priest nor chief of Priests, nor
the head of the Church, but following Councils have styled him chief Priest,
chief Bishop, and head of the Catholic Church.

The Eliberine Council Decreed that no Images should be set up in the Churches;
nor worshipped, nor the walls painted; Likewise the Council of Constantinople
before mentioned, decreed that Images were not to be suffered in the Churches
or Meeting places, but on the other side, the second Nicene Councils
determined, that Images were not only to be placed in the Churches, but also to
be worshipped, and the pope said that Images were to be Laymens Calenders; The
latter Council under Julius the second did repeal the Decrees of the Pisan
Council; The Basil Council deterrmined that a Council of Bishops was above the
Pope; but the Lattern Council under Leo, Decreed that the Pope was above the
Council, and they decreed also that he that should think otherwise should be
held for an Heretic, and yet the Bishops and Abbo^s in the Council of Basil
aforesaid, Decreed that they that judged that the Bishops were not above the
Pope, were Heretics, and yet these Councils the Church of Rome lays claim to,
to be of their Faith and Church, and yet one making void what another had
decreed; The same Council did with an uniform consent remove the Pope Enge^ius,
and put Amidius in his place; But Engenius vilifies the Councils decrees and
condemns them; The Council of Trent commanded that Bishops should teach the
people, and should have no more benefit for preferment then one place; But
since they have made this decree void, and now whole Countries is too little,
and the Protestants imitates the same, and does not teach the people; and so of
what validity have these Councils been worth, or of what force has the Decrees
been of mutable men who have been tossed up and down like waters need; I
nominate the several Convocations and Councils that has been amongst the
reformed Churches as they are called, and their Synods; one while decreeing
this, the next throwing it down again; And yet all these will lay claim to be
Ministers of the True Church, and persecute as Heretics to death them who owns
not their Changeable Decrees, and mutable Institutions; but such has been the
Arogancy and pride of her that has set as a Queen upon the waters, that she
must be the only Judge* and then the Prophets must be slain. Pope Julius said
no Council is of any credit, unless it be confirmed by the Church of Rome; And
Boniface the eighth says, that no man in the world can be saved, unless he be
subject to the Roman Church; And Pope Paschal thus said, as though said he any
Council could make Laws for the Church of Rome, and all Councils do subsist by
it, and receive their strength from it; and that w^h the Pope approves or
disapproveth: And so all Confederacies and Councils of men who are out of the
life and power of God does decree that which brings the Seed of God into
bondage. Now Rome look to thy infallability, and thy universality, which thou
so much cryest up, and thy unity one while sets up one thing, another time
throws it down again when it will not s^rveparticular interests: and what a stir
has here been amongst them that call themselves reformed in these latter ages,
one setting up this, and another that, sometimes this service for a worship,
then the next calls it Idol^trous; and then another service, and this Ceremony
and the other Ceremony, and this Pater noster, and the other Creed, this
Ca^echism and the other Ca^echism, these Articles of Faith, and the next Synod
make them void, and so leads people into distraction and madness, and this
Ca^on and the other Institution, one while its Idolatrous, another while Sacred
and Holy; And thus people has been led up and down many generations, too and
^ro, up and down, and persec^tion about Changeable, Mutable and alterable
things, and the life which redeems out of the world up unto God has not been
sought after; And so all that looks to have peace, and to enjoy the Testimony
of Gods blessed Spirit, come out of this Babylon this City of confusion, whose
seat is ^rected upon the sand, whose Foundation is laid in the waters, and
faith upon the humane institutions of men which are variable and subject to
Mutation, and come to know the Rock of Ages and the unalterable Council of the
Lord, and the wisdom of the most High to rule in your hearts, and wait in the
Immortal Light of God which is within, that you may see over all these
Mountains of darkness which is risen up in the Apostasy, and over all the
Institutions, Decrees, Statutes, Ordinances and Inventions of men, to before
all these things were, and come to him who is the beginning of the Creation of
God, who is that quickening Spirit by which all that believe are raised out of
death to be partakers of the Life which is Immortal which fades not away, and
the Lord will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; Away with all Types and
Figures, Shadows and Vails, humane Institutions and Ordinances of men,
Ceremonies and vain superstitions, Traditions, which God has no pleasure in,
which does not profit at all, and whatsoever leads the mind into visible things
from the invisible God is to be thrown aside as a menstruo^s Cloth, and as the
breath of abominable things which God will confound, because he has no
pleasure in them; for the life is risen, and the vail of the covering is rent
which has been spread over all Nations; the night is gone, the day is come, and
appeared in brightness, the shadows are past away, and the morning of
Righteousness is appeared, the Son of God is come who has given his flock an
understanding, in whom life and blessedness, and peace, and everlasting
Consolation resideth and rests upon his People for ever more.

CHAP. XVI. Something concerning the worship of God, whether that Kings and
Rulers now in Gospel times have any power from God to compel or force about
Spiritual things declared, and some Scriptures answered which has been
perverted by them who are in the Apostasy, to maintain the Beasts power, and
the false Churches worship under the reign of Antichrist.
When the Lord brought Israel out of the land of Eygpt by a strong hand and an
outstreched arm, he made a Covenant with them, and gave forth a Law at Mount
Sina, by the hand of Moses the Judge of Israel, and statures and Ordinances
which Israel should walk in, who were as a family who came of one stock, and
the Laws and Statutes which were then given forth was concerning civil things,
as concerning man and man, and betwixt a man and his Neighbor, and for the
Government of whole families, and the Camp of Israel; And likewise Laws and
Statutes which concerned the worship of the true God; which may be read at
large in Exodus, Numbers and D^uteromony, and that worshipped not the true God
according to the command given in the first Covenant which was outward, were to
have Judgment executed upon them according to the Law; and Moses over Israel
and the rest of the Judges were to see the Laws and Statutes Executed upon the
transgressors, and if any were an Idolater and worshipped a false God or a
Blasphemer, were to be stoned to death, or Sabbath-breaker was to be stoned to
death; And this was according to the Law of God, and their blood was upon their
own heads; And when Israel ^usted after a King, he gave them a King, and they
had many Kings who were Anointed of God, by his appointment, which was to rule
in the same manner as Moses, Joshua and the rest of the Judges had done, and
whosoever were disobedient unto the aforesaid command of God whether in things
civil, or things concerning the worship of God, and several punishments were to
be in^^icted by them for several transgressions, as Blasphemers, Sabbath
breakers, false Prophets, and Wizzards and witches were not suffered to live;
This was before Christ the Seed was manifested in the flesh, this was the old
way* the old paths that Israel was to walk in, But this Covenant was filthy as
the Apostle says, and the Ministers thereof could not continue by reason of
death; The Law was changed and the Priesthood was changed, and the Ordinances
and worship was changed when Christ came to be manifest, the end of the Law for
Righteousness; Now as A^ron and the rest of the high Priests were but types and
figures of the everlasting High Priest; So the Judges and Kings of Israel were
types and figures of Christ, the King of Kings, and King of Saints, and
Lawgiver, and Judge; And their outward power which continued but for a time, in
compelling to the true worship under that Covenant, or restraining from
Idolatry, did but continue until the time of Reformation was; but a type and a
figure of Christ and his spiritual power and weapon, and spiritual execution
upon his enemies who are not subject to his government o^ power, seeing the
Father has committed all power unto him in Heaven and in Earth; And Moses the
Mediator of the first Covenant which stood in outward Ordinances, both the
Mediator, the Covenant and the Ordinance had an end [when the better Covenant
was given, the Covenant of Light, and Christ the Mediator thereof was
manifest;] And this Covenant and Ordinances pertained unto the Jews, and the
compelling unto the worship and punishing for Idolatry partained to the Jews
only, who were under that Covenant, and not to the Gentiles, as it is written
To Jacob he gave his Law, and to Israel his Statutes, to every Nation he did
not so.

So they which would bring people now under this Covenant and the power
thereof, denies the second, the everlasting Covenant and his power; and them
that would preach up compelling and forcing to worship, and bring those
Scriptures of the first Covenant to be their ground, are ignorant of the times
unto which they were spoken; And upon this false Foundation has the false
Church persecuted about worship this many hundred years, and this Doctrine is
in too much credit with many in these days, who say they are under the Gospel;
And this has made people to hate and persecute one another.

And the Ministers of Antichrist has pressed it upon Kings and Rulers, that
God has required it of them to enforce and enjoin all people unto a Worship,
although they themselves are divided amongst themselves, one while for this
thing, and another while for that; and because the Kings of Israel did so, and
had power to do, therefore they have concluded that Princes and Judges ought to
do so, and so have made them put their neck in a yoke which is too heavy for
them to hear, which the Lord has not required at their hands; and because of
this compellings and forceings, many hypocrites have been made, and many of
Gods peoples consciences wounded and burned; and many Kings and Rulers have
lost their Dominions, and they have been taken from them because of this by the
Lord.

So all they that have in truded upon Christ's prerogative and Sovereignty in
this thing, are sure to be reckoned as no other but as usurpers and intruders
into that power which the Father alone has given unto his Son, which Power,
Dominion and Glory he will not give unto any other as to be Judge, Lawgiver in
the hearts and consciences of his people.

Object. But some may say, did not the Prophets exhort to inquire for the old
paths, and the good old way? And did not the Prophets say, Kings should be
nursing Fathers, and Queens nursing Mothers? And must not this be fulfilled in
these days?

Ans. This is true that the Prophet did exhort the Princes and people of Israel
who were in the revolted estate, who had transgressed the Commandments of the
Lord, and had lost the guide of their youth and the rest of their souls; And
therefore he turned them back to consider of the day of old, and inquire after
the good old way that they might walk therein, which they were gone from, but
this does not pertain at all unto this time; for Christ Jesus is the new and
living way which all is to inquire after now, who is the end of the Law for
Righteousness, and the first Covenant unto them that believe; And as for Kings
being nursing Fathers, the Queens nursing Mothers, this was Prophesied by the
Prophet before they went into Captivit, and how the Heathen should have power
over their Kings, Prophets and Priests and people, and Jerusalem should lie
desolate; Now this the Prophet spoke of concerning the return of them unto the
Lord, and they to inhabit their own land, then their own Kings and Queens
should rule over them, and be as nurses to them, when they should return from
their Captivity, then Jacob should rejoice and Israel should be glad, and this
was spoken to the Jews, and this had reference to their state in that time.

Further it may be objected, ought not Blasphemy and Idolatry and Adultery to
be punished, is this to be suffered now? Seeing it was punished under the Law.

Answer, Yea, this is to be punished, and shall be punished, and that even with
death; for as I said the Father has committed all Power unto the Son, who will
execute his judgment upon all them who will not have him to reign in their
hearts, as it is written, these my enemies that would not that I should rule
over them, bring them before me, that I may slay them; with what weapons? With
carnal? nay, but with the sharp two edged Sword which proceeds out of his
Mouth, and with the Sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God; and the
Spiritual weapons which runs through the Blasphemer and kills him, and flayes
the false Prophet, and Soothsayer, and Inchanter, and Idolator, and yet saves
the Creature a live; take one example of Christ the new and living Way, when
the Pharisees brought a woman tempting Christ, which was taken in Adultery,
saying, according to the Law of Moses, she ought to be stoned to death; he that
was the end of the Law, said he that was without sin cast the first stone,
convicting them all that they were in the same nature, and yet did not approve
of the Adultery, but said go and sin no more least a worse thing come upon
thee; Likewise Paul said I was a persecutor, and a Blasphemer; This generation
who professes Paul's words would say, let him dye, he has confessed he was a
Blasphemer; but he was slain with other weapons; Christ slew the Blasphemer and
the Persecutor in him, and left the man alive, and made him a chosen vessel to
declare against Blasphemy, and lead out of all ungodliness.

And herein is the second Covenant more excellent then the first, and the
Ministration more excellent then the former, and the Dominion and Government of
Christ more excellent then the Dominion and government of the Kings of Israel,
and the weapons more excellent then theirs, and the power greater then theirs
which is able to destroy the works of the Devil, as Blasphemy, Idolatry and
Adultery, and save the Creature alive; This is the better Covenant, indeed the
everlasting; and herein is the mercy of God exalted, his Dominion and Power
exalted, and Christ the King of Glory exalted; And these sins beforementioned
punished with great severity and great Judgment; For in the first Covenant they
slew with a temporal death; But Christ when he appears in his power and glory
in flames of fire, renders vengeance within upon the wicked, which burns and
scorches, and brings anguish, and tormenteth all them that are in that Nature,
and banisheth all them from his presence and from the Glory of his power, till
that be dead and slain which would not have him to Reign, to wit, that which is
born of the flesh which is within; And blasphemy, Idolatry, Murder are the
fruits of the flesh, where the flesh is not lived in these things cannot be
brought forth; I speak not of the Creature who is Gods Workman-ship, for that
may be alive, when the birth and fruits which are after the flesh are both
dead; and herein is the mighty power of God made known, and his Justice and his
severe Judgment, which all must pass through before they come to witness eternal
life; He that despised Moses Law, died by the mouth of two or three witnesses,
which was a natural death; of how much sorer punishment shall he be worthy
which treads underfoot the Son of God, and counts the blood of the Covenant
an unholy thing, Heb. 10. 28, 29. and blasphemeth.

But further, it will be objected that the Apostle exhorts for a submission
unto every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2. 13. whether it be
unto Kings as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent of him,
and in Romans the 13. 1, 2. Let every Soul be subject unto the higher power,
for there is no power but of God, and the powers that be are ordained of God.

Ans. From these Scriptures many bad Constructions and Inferences has been
gathered, as that Kings and Rulers were to be obeyed in all things, and that
every worship which is commanded by^a King or Superior ought to be obeyed, and
that Kings and Rulers had power in Spiritual things, to make a Law for such a
Worship, or forbid such a Worship, and all these ought to be obeyed; And so in
the Apostasy the Ministers of Antichrist has brought in many Inventions and
Traditions, and humane Institutions for Divine Worship and Service, and thereby
has pressed Rulers to make Laws, and compel all people to receive them,
although they have been repugnant to the true worship of God, and then such
Teachers has pressed such people to obedience as of duty and necessity,
because the aforesaid Scripture does Command subjection to all Rulers; And thus
has Babylon reared up her City, and gotten Merchants to put off her
Merchandise, and so has cheated both Rulers and people, and has led them to
hate and destroy one another.

Unto these Scriptures, and diverse others which speaks of obedience to
Magistrates in all things, must needs be truly understood to be of things that
are Just and equal, which are only civil; and concerning things between man
and man, and the Ordinances which are for the well being of a Nation, or the
good and wholesome government of a state, and cannot be understood of things
Spiritual, or relating to things appertaining to the Conscience, or respecting
things about the worship of God; My reasons are weighty, for in that time and
age the Apostle wrote, whether Peter, Paul or any other, the Magistrates were
all Heathens, as Herod, Pontius Pilate, Augustus Caesar, Tiberius Caesar, and
Nero, who were all Heathen Emperors of Rome, and Idolators, and at that time
they had power over Rome, and also over Jerusalem and Judea; and Paul writing
to the Romans, and Peter to Capadocia, Pontius and Asia who were also under
Heathen Rulers, and did not worship the true God; doubtless they enjoined not
submission unto the Heathen Rulers in spiritual things, for then they must have
been joined unto Idolatry, for if it be understood that they had power in
spiritual things, which partained unto the Conscience, and that they ought to
be obeyed in all spiritual things, then Peter and John were transgressors
themselves, when they taught boldly the things of the Kingdom of God, in every
City where ever they came; And the Rulers in most places opposed and put Peter
and John out of the City, and commanded the Apostles to speak no more in the
Name of Jesus; And yet they returned again and disobeyed their Command, and
their power and authority, and said, whether it were better to obey God or man,
judge ye; So that no King, Ruler nor Magistrate, as a Magistrate has power
given of God to Imprison or force, or perscribe any Law or worship upon the
hearts and Consciences of men; For that belongs only to Christ the Law given
the Bishop of souls.

But then it will be objected, if not as a Magistrate, yet then as a Christian,
he may enjoin and give Command concerning worship, and compel and punish them
that obey not.

Answer, As a Christian they have no priority, but as they stand in the growth
of truth, not above others for God is no respecter of persons, for the Apostles
and Ministers of Christ who preached the Gospel, and had begotten many into the
Faith through the power of God which was with them by which they spoke, and in
things spiritual might have claimed obedience to their Command much more then
any temporal Prince, and yet they said we are not Lords over men's faith, nor
did they exercise Lorship over men's Consciences, but left every one to Gods
witness, and to the word of his grace which was nigh in their hearts; And
furthermore said, let every one be persuaded in his own mind, and said if any
should be contrary minded, God would reveal it to them, and so waited in the
patience to see the work of God prosper and was content; And so forcing and
compelling about Spiritual matters by temporal punishments and temporal Law is
all contrary to the Apostles practice in the primitive times, though the
heathen persecuted the Christians by their temporal Laws for Spiritual things,
and about Spiritual matters for the worship of God; But we never read of any
called Christians that did so until Pelagius a Bishop of Rome or Pope, when
the Emperor had given Boneface the third this power to be called the Chief
Bishop and head universal over all Christian Churches; Then he begun to make
temporal Laws to punish about Spiritual things: And Pelagius made a decree that
Heretics should be punished with Temporal death about 555 years after Christ;
So let all Princes, Magistrate, and Rulers, who denies the Church of Rome in
her Apostasy, follow not her example, but leave every one free to the Lord in
Spiritual matters as concerning his Worship, for to him must every one give an
account in his own day when it shall be required, from which the wicked shall
not be able to fly.

Another Objection. But then it may be said, what power will you allow unto
Magistrates that profess the Name of Christ? Or how far have they Authority
from God to punish evil doers, and encourage them that do well?

Answer. It is said by me Kings Rule and Princes decrees Justice, there is a
ruling by him, and that is a ruling in the power of God in him; He that rules
in the power of God, measures equal justice unto all men, and rules by the
good and wholesome Laws which are made by the will of God, which is according to
Gods witness which he has placed in every man's heart, and such a one is a
Temporal head over the temporal body and rules in Righteousness in temporal
things; But Christ he is the head of the body that is spiritual which is his
Church. Now the Law is against the lawless, as against Liers, Swearers,
Stealers, Cursed speakers, Murderers, Man-slayers, Man stealers, Violence, and
Oppression, and Deceit, and that which tends to the hurt and destroying of the
Creation; And he that is the Executor of the Law, ought to inflict temporal
punishments for temporal facts, provided, that every punishment be suitable to
the transgression, and go not beyond it, and in so doing he rules for God, and
the sword is to be turned against that which does evil, and to keep peace
amongst all men, and to keep down all strife and Contention, Quarrelling and
fighting, and keeping the unruly from devouring and destroying one another; And
this is to rule for God in a Nation in the Creation, and to countenance the
honest, upright, and quiet and meek, and this is a praise unto them that do
well, and this is that which would keep the Nations at peace; And here
Governors and Rulers comes to be blessed, when the Princes thereof rules in
Righteousness, and when people live under them a holy, godly and quiet life;
But when Godliness, Holiness, Righteousness is counted as a crime, and
wickedness and violence and iniquity set up, that Nation is near a judgment,
and for the iniquity of Rulers, Kings and People, many fruitful Lands has the
Lord made barren, and that which is for the wellbeing and preservation for the
universal good, and all people therein, all people ought to render obedience
unto such Command for conscience sake, and all people ought ^to obey Rulers and
Governors in that which is good and lawful and warrantable in the sight of
God, and unto all just commands to yield obedience, not for wrath, but for
conscience sake; For so the Lord requires, which will be acceptable and
pleasing in his fight. And all Magistrates who are Christians, ought to be
paterns of Holiness and Righteousness to their people, and to admonish, exhort
and reprove the profane and ungodly, and to the worship of the True God who is
a Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; It is the duty of
every true Christian who is a King and a Priest unto God.

CHAP. XVII. Concerning Oaths in the first Covenant and the Lawfulness thereof,
and the unlawfulness thereof discovered in the New Covenant, in Gospel times;
Though Apostates mingle the Ordinances of both together, denying all oaths
proved to be no new Doctrine.
IN the beginning when God Created the Heavens and the Earth, and all things
that are therein, by the Word of his power, and set the bounds and the
habitations thereof, and separated betwixt Light and Darkness; And when man was
Created in his own Image, in the Image of God created he him, Male and Female
created he them; Now the Image of God consists in Righteousness, Holiness,
Equity, long suffering, Patience Goodness, Mercy and Truth, the Glory thereof
is unspeakable, man being in this Image there was no trangression nor sin, nor
sorrow, man was bound unto his Maker by the Power in which he was made, yea he
was in a capacity to Fear, Love, Honor, Obey and Worship his Maker, from the
virtue of that Power and Principle which God had placed in him, which some
ignorantly calls the Law of Nature; (But that is not the intention of my
discourse to contend what it was;) but to show that man was at union with God
and bound unto him by that which God had placed in him, in which his wisdom,
power and dominion stood, to rule over all the Creatures, life was in him,
there was no death then, in this the Obligation stood not in outward written
commands or ordinances, but it stood in that which was internal and invisible,
this was before the transgression, here was no Oaths yet nor outward Covenants
made, nor outward Ordinances.

But after man had transgressed and eaten of the tree of Knowledge of good and
evil, and gone from the power and broken the Covenant, he lost his wisdom, and
folly entered, he lost his dominion, and weakness entered, he lost his
knowledge, and ignorance entered, and an earthly part and a mutable came to have
Dominion, not that this was evil in it self, being subjected by the power and
word in its place, and in the state wherein it was good, but man being gone
from the power and from the Covenant joined to something out of it, and out of
the mind, and listened to that which should have been ruled over, that became a
Leader which God never appointed, and this led man's heart from the invisible
God of life, and light who is immutable, to lust after visible things and
mutable and earthly things, and into instability: And so his heart and mind and
affections became more and more to be alienated from the Lord, and his
understanding more darkened, yet such was the love of God unto mankind, that he
did not wholly cast him off here, but followed him with his mercies, and
promised the Seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents head, and so it did,
yet the Adulterers generation in the transgressing nature were great and fast,
and there was but few before the flood, in comparison of the Multitude who bore
the Image of God, and few in a generation, as Abel, Enock, Seth, and the rest
went after the Imaginations of their own hearts, and set up Images and Idols,
and also after the Flood when the Earth began to be replenished, the cursed
Seed grew faster, and many great Nations were ignorant of the True God, and
made Idols and Images of wood and stone, of gold and Silver according to the
mind of the Crafts man; and worshipped them, and became in love with them and
swore by them: Yet Abraham the Father of the faithful, feared the Living God of
Heaven and Earth, and God was with him in all his ways and he hearked unto his
voice and obeyed it, and followed the Lord where he led him, and God made a
Covenant with him and his seed for ever, and gave him a Son in his old age, and
said unto him, in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will
multiply thee, and this was fulfilled, for Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat
the twelve Patriarchs, and Jacob in the time of famine went into Egypt and
sojourned in that land, he and his Sons, and all that pertained to his family
increased and became a great people: But after many years the Egyptians
afflicted them and multiplied their burdens; insomuch that God considered them
and the Covenant he had made with Abraham, and his seed, and sent Moses his
servant as a Leader to be a guide unto them out of that Land, and they were
brought forth by an outstreched arm, and great was their Deliverance; and he
led them through the wilderness and sed them with Angels food, and at Mount
Sina gave forth a Law and made a Covenant with them suitable to the state
wherein they were, for their minds were outward, and the Covenant was outward,
their minds was Changeable and Murable, and the Covenant was so also; And all
these states and ordinances pertained to a party which was above the Seed, yet
they were shadows of good things to come, and every ordinance in this Covenant
was but a figure or shadow of a more Heavenly thing which was but to be in
force, to wit these ordinances, until the Seed came to be made manifest which
ended them all.

So all Priests, Offerings, Sabbaths, Fasts, Feasts, Oaths, though they were
real in their time, and all vows, yet the Law was changed which pertained to
the changeable party, when the Seed Christ was revealed who is unchangable; The
first had an end, and continued to the time of reformation, take notice of
this, this Covenant was made, to wit the first after the transgression, but
when and wherein Christ is revealed and manifest, the great Reformer and the
restorer they end, and he leaves all to the beginning again, out of deformity
to be for transgression to that in w^h man was bound unto God at the first
before sin entered, and to be for shadows was for all the new Moons, Offerings,
Oaths and Sabbaths were given forth to man when there was a Cloud and a vail
and a shadow over within, that the glory of the invisible God could not be seen
in this state, nor his naked and clear Glory, but as that part comes to be done
away and crucified and subjected, and the cloud scattered, the Shadows and
clouds outward pass away, the Apostle calls the ordinances outward shadows; And
Paul to the Corinthians calls them a Cloud, theywere all baptized into Moses in
the Cloud; And when the day appears and Christ who is the Light is manifest,
the Clouds are scattered and ended, the shadows fly away, and clear air
appears, and glory and clearness is beholden, even the Lord with open face, and
yet man lives and is not afraid of his presence, but is glad because of the
Light of his counrenance; But this is a mystery, and these things are hidden
from the wise and prudent of this world; But this is the some of much, there
was a time when there were no oath outward before the transgression, when man
was the Image of God after the transgression, the oaths were given forth and
the commands outward, but in the restoration or reformation they end again and
there shall be none, for truth it self shall live, and it shall testify in
man, and there shall be no other witness, blessed are they that believes and
understands.

But to come nearer the understandings of all; It is granted in the first
Covenant under the Law, Oaths were commanded and men did and might swear, but
this was after sin entered into the world many hundred years, and the Nations
who were Heathens swore some by their Kings and some by their Heathen Gods; the
Egyptians swore by the life of Pharcoh, and the Romans by the life or fortune
of Caesar, but Israel was to swear by the living God, Deu. 10. 20. Thou shall
fear the Lord thy God, him shall thou serve, and to him shall thou cleave and
swear by his Name, Lev. 19. 11, 12, Ye shall not steal neither deal falsely,
neither lie one unto another, ye shall not swear falsely by my Name, neither
shall thou profane the Name of thy God, I am the Lord, in Number. 30, 2. And if
any vow a vow unto the Lord and swear an Oath to bind his soul with a bond, he
shall not break his bond but do all that proceeds out of his mouth; And so Josua
kept Covenant with the Gibeonites, but when Israel revolted from the Lord in
their hearts and yet swear a true word and said, the Lord lived, yet the
Prophet Jeremiah says, chap. 5. 2. 23. 10. Though they say the Lord lives, yet
they swear falsely; No truer thing could be said or sworn, then that the Lord
lived, but he lived not in them that did lie and steal, and kill and commit
adultery; they held the form but were gone from the life and power, and then it
was a customary thing with them to swear even as its now among the Apostate
Christians, and because of which the Land mourns, and in 4 chap. 15. verse.
Though Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judea so offend, and come not ye to
Gilgal, neither go ye up to Bethaven nor swear the Lord lives; And Amos says,
they that swear by the sin of Samaria, and say the God of Dan lives, and the
manner of Bersheba lives, even they shall fall and never rise up again.

So when they kept the Covenant of God they swore by the Name of the Lord in
truth and in righteousness, but when they revolted they kept the words and
swore without fear and profaned the Name and did swear then by the Heathen by
Maleam and the sin of Samaria, even as the Apostate Christians now swear by any
thing, yea even the most religious swearing is by a book, which is not the
living God; And so this kind of swearing has no ground at all but custom and
tradition, but still this is granted that the Jews and many of the faithful
Fathers swore, as Jacob and Abraham and many others and they all died in the
faith and yet were not made partakers of the (promise) but saw through the vail
and the shadow, and an Oath was a type of Christ the oath of God (and the
promise) but now the promise is come, and the Restorer and reformer is come,
and all is to hear him or else be cut off from having any share in him who is
the promise it self, yea all the promises of him are yea and Amen, in whom, not
only the Children of Abraham after the flesh, but all the Children of the
promise are blessed, and him who fufilled the Law in whom God fulfilled his
Oath, who is the everlasting high Priest after Melchizedecks order, he has put
an end to all oaths and swearing and all the types and shadows.

He says, Mat. 5. 33, 34. It has been said of old time thou shall not
forswear thy self, but shall perform to the Lord thy oaths; But I say unto you
(my Disciples and followers who have believed in me the true and living way who
makes all things a new) swear not at all neither by heaven, etc. Their being
and generation then (as now) who said to swear by the greater is nothing, but
he that swears by the lesser is guilty, he calls them hypocrites, and says
whosoever shall swear by the eternal, the lesser swears by him (the greater)
that dwells therein, and he that swears by Heaven (the lesser) swears by
the Throne of God (and him) that sits thereon (the greater) and if Christ
had only forbid vain swearing and oaths as most do Ignorantly imagine, he had
done no more then the law had done before; but it is manifest he forbids all
swearing, yea even (by Lord;) for if they that swear by heaven, swears by God
that sits upon the Throne, as he himself says, then he prohibits this also,
and says, I say unto you swear not at all, and Jam. 5. 12. Who will know
Christ's mind, says, above all things my Brethren swear not, neither by Heaven
nor by Earth; now we know heaven and earth comprehends all created things, and
yet the Apostle goes further, and excludes all manner of swearing, saying
neither any other oath, and this he commands above and before all things, and
that upon the penalty of condemnation; But much by diverse hands have been
written about this particular; So I desire not to be large, seeing we have a
Cloud of witnesses which have good assurance in themselves by Gods Spirit,
sealing unto them rather then swear and bring condemnation upon themselves,
have denied their estates and liberties which lies at stake upon it, but happy
will they be who has no hand in it to provoke the upright and tempt them aside
out of Christ's way, for woe will come undoubtedly upon such.

And that others may see it is no new thing; Take a few examples of the
faithful in ages past, who suffered as Martyrs, and it were an easy thing to
bring a Cloud of witnesses out of the Ecclesiastical Histories of them that
denied all swearing in diverse ages, I shall instance only a few.

Policarpus, who was as it is said John's Disciple, and had been Acts and
Monuments vol. 2. Fol. 55.
a Christian eighty nine years, when he came to suffer martyrdom, the Proconsul
requiring him to swear by the Emperors good fortune, and by Caesar's
prosperity, which was the custom of the Romans at that time, and diverse
Heathen Emperors set up their own Images to be worshipped, and their persons
to be sworn by; but Policarpus denied and said he was a Christian, and would
show forth the doctrine of Christiany, if he desired the same, if the Proconsul
would appoint a day and hear it; so at that time it seems Christians did not
swear, as afterward they did in the Apostasy.

And Basillides a Soldier and afterward a Martyr, being required Eusebius. lib.
6. chap. page 98.
to swear, affirmed plainly, that it was not lawful for him to swear, for that
he was a Christian; so it seems that it was the mark of a Christian not to
swear.

And the Waldenses or Leonists (whose names are so famous amongst the reformed
Churches) and who are said immediately to succeed the Apostles and were the most
ancient and true Protestants, professed it to be as way Lawful for a Christian
to swear.

In defense of whom in this very thing Bishop Usher late In his book de succes.
cap. 6.
Bishop of Armagh Primate of Ireland, pleaded their cause against the Papists
and Jesuits who are the swearers and breakers of Oaths, and yet pleads for
swearing.

And the plowman in his prayer (which is so much Esteemed Acts and Monuments,
vol. 1. fol. 527.
of, and commended in the Book of Martyrs) says, Lord thou give us a
Commandment of truth, it bidding us say, yea yea, and nay nay, and swear for
nothing; thou give us also a Commandment of meekness, and another of
poorness, But Lord he that calls himself thy Vicar on Earth, has broken both
these Commandments, for he makes a Law to compel men to swear, Fol. 585.

And it is one of John Wickliss Articles (whose works was as much esteemed of
by the Protestants in England and Bohemia as despised by the Papists and their
Clergy) having his bones taken up and burned forty one years after his
decease, and his books, and these articles condemned by the Council of
Constance, who also burned John Hus and Jerome of Prauge for holding John
Wickliss opinions that ^aths which he made for any Contract or civil bargain
betwixt man and man be unlawful.

And Walter Brute a Teacher among the people of God (in Fol. 653.
that age by scorners called the Devils Servants) called Lolards, against whom
the Pope and the King (Richard the second, and then the ungodly Bishops make so
much a do to have the name of Truth extinguished and the professors there cut
off;) This is Walters Testimony, As concerning Oaths, I believe and obey the
Doctrine of Almighty God. and my master Christ Jesus which teaches that
Christian men in affirmation of a Truth, should pass the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees of the old Testament, or else he excludes them from the
Kingdom of Heaven; For he says except your Righteousness exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees you cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; and as concerning Oaths he says it has been said of old time, thou
shall not for swear thy self, but shall perform those things unto the Lord thou
know; but I say unto you thou shall not swear at al, neither by Heaven nor
by Earth, etc. But let your Communication be yea yea, nay nay for whatsoever is
more then this comes of evil; therefore as the perfection of ancient men of
the old Testament was not to for swear themselves; so the perfection of
Christian men is not to swear at all, because they are so commanded of Christ,
whose Commandment in no case must be broken; although the City of Rome is
contrary to this doctrine of Christ, etc. A good Testimony of a blessed Martyr.

Here it appears that the Swearing which Christ forbids, Exodus 20. 7.
is not only profane swearing in the communication, for that was forbidden in
the law, where its said thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain, etc. But solemn swearing which was to be performed, and that was the
perfection of law; And Kings and Princes may take warning by this King Richard
not to fulfill the cruel and bloody desires of their Prelates.

And Chrysostom (who was Bishop of Constantinople) in Acts and Monuments vol.
2. fol. 701.
commendation of whom much is said in the Ecclesiastical histories, he blames
them greatly that brings forth a book to swear upon, charging Clerks that in
no wise they constrain any body to swear, whether they think a man swear true
or false, saying that it is a sin to swear well; now I mentioned before it was
an Emperor that commanded first that men should swear by it book, and this
Chrysostom reproves; so hereby it may be seen by these examples, it is no new
doctrine to deny all swearing, and there has been a people very many years in
the Low Countries, that have denied swearing in any matter, therefore their yea
and nay stand in Courts of judicature equal with an oath, they being men
generally of known integrity, whose yea is yea, and nay nay, in all places and
matters; If they that despise Moses Law died without mercy, of how much more
sorer punishment suppose ye shall they be thought worthy of who treads underfoot
the Son of God, etc. and disobey his commands and teach others so to do, they
shall be shut out of the Kingdom of God and have no part with the obedient, who
keeps Christ's commands, through temptations and sufferings and are not offended
at them, neither counts them grievous (they only are happy and shall inherit
everlasting life.)

Likewise Jerome who was an ancient Father and Teacher in the Church, which all
the Protestants owneth, upon that place the 5 of Mat. and 37. ver. and 5 James
12 These are his words, It was permitted under the law to the Jews as being
tender and as it were infants, that as they were to offer Sacrifices to God,
least they should Sacrifice to Idols, so they might swear by God; not that it
was rightful so to do, but because it was better to swear by the Lord then by
false Gods and devils; but the great Evangelical sincerity and truth admits not
of an oath since every true saying is equivolent thereunto. In like manner does
Theophilact an ancient Father of the Church who^ the Protestants owns, and have
often cited his doctrine for proof upon the place in controversy, says Learn
hence that then under the law it was not evil for one to swear, but since the
coming of Christ it is evil as is circumcision; and in sum whatever is
judaical; for it may become a child to suck but not a man. So that oaths
pertained to the Jews who were under the changable Covenant, and the mutable
Covenant which continued but for a time, till the Seed Christ the oath of God
was revealed, and where he is revealed and witnessed, all the Judaical Types
and Figures and changeable Ordinances has an end.

Likewise Ambrose upon the 118. Psalm, he says None does swear a right but he
that knows what he swears, and the Lord has sworn and will not repent; upon
Psalm 110 Ambrose says let him then swear who cannot repent of his oath; and a
little after the said Ambrose says, do not imitate him in swearing, whom we
cannot imitate in fulfilling; And indeed the principal solution given by him
is, swear not at all; and the aforesaid Waldenses who condemned all manner of
swearing as unlawful, they made it their care to avoid swearing and lying, and
hereby they did give sufficient caution against all inconveniences which may
come thereby as to government in general; for where a testification or
assertion is made without an oath, is as sure as if it had been sworn to.

And Bishop Usher does esteem that place of Matthew the fifth, De succes. cap.
6.
swear not at all to be a sufficient plea for the Waldenses against swearing;
And therefore they who have any esteem of the aforesaid Authors, and of their
doctrine must not condemn the Quakers as for novelties, or for broachers of new
Doctrine; For Reynerius one of the popish inquisitions says amongst all the
sects which are or have been, there is not any more pernicious to the Church,
meaning the Church of Rome, then the Waldenses, and that for three reasons; 1.
Because of their antiquity, and secondly because of their universality, and
thirdly in that they did profess it no way lawful for a Christian to swear on
any occasion, which doctrine was contrary to the Church of Rome which made
Rinerius and Jansenius two papists so much envied the Walden ses in this thing
about keeping the commands of Christ; And yet notwithstanding all this cloud of
witnesses both in primitive times, and after ages, diverse who suffered as
Martyrs did hold the same and also the many testimonies of them who have died
in the faith, yet many are so wilful and so peevish and so envious against
every thing which they cannot join unto, as that they will brand this Doctrine
for Novelty and Heresy; Let such consider how they will condemn this doctrine,
and yet justify Christ's words, and them which have been reckoned as Fathers
and Marryrs, and as Orthodox and found in the faith by all, except the Church
of Rome who too much imitates the Jews, and yet are no Jews, and they have been
the chief criers up of oaths, and swearing, and afterward gives dispensations
to them that breaks them; and therefore all who reckons your selves as
Christians, keep to the doctrine of Christ and the doctrine of the Apostles who
were followers of him, and run not back to the Jews ordinances w^h continued
but til the time of reformation; and you that reckons your selves a^
Protestants, for shame leave off that Doctrine which has been brought in by
the Apostates who has mingled things together without having respect either to
time or age or people, And so have run back to the Jews, and brings those
commands and injunctions which pertained to the Jews, and lays them as yokes
upon the necks of Christians; remember what the Apostle said to the Galathians
concerning the works of the Law, and concerning Types and figures, Gal. 1, 2.
If ye be circumeised Christ profits you nothing, and an oath was a type as well
as circumcision to the Jews, and what if I say of all swearers who has no
better ground for so doing then the Jewish oaths which were types, and testify
unto every one that he that takes an oath and swears at all, is bound to keep
the whole Law. Christ profits him nothing; And so ler all people who fear the
Lord and does believe that they have received Christ in their hearts the end of
the Law for Righteousness, not turn back to the changeable Covenant again,
least he who is the everlasting Covenant say unto them who has required these
things at your hand and also raise up his swift witness to condemn them who
transgresses his pure and holy and righteous, commands, and would compel others
so to do.

CHAP. XVIII. Tithes in their first institution unto whom they were due
according to the Command of God declared; and that Tithes are no way lawful to
be received, neither sought for by any who are Ministers of the new Covenant
and the everlasting Gospel, proved out of the Scripture and Antiquity.
TO omit Abraham's giving tithes, or the tenth part to Melchizedeck, after the
overthrow of his enemies; And Jacobs vowing to give the tenth when he should
inherit the land of Canaan, because a voluntary promise only binds him that
promises, and a free gift from one to another is no command, neither binding
to all generations, because Abraham gave the tenth part to Melchizedeck freely
of the spoil he had taken, and that but once; not of his Families labors or
industries, but of the spoil; This was a voluntary and a free thing both in
Jacob and Abraham, if Jacob had not vowed he had not sinned, and if Abraham had
not given the tenth part of the spoil he had not sinned; So this is no command
or binding example unto future Generations, especially of them that pretends
they are Ministers of the second Covenant and the Gospel, but a very feeble and
a poor thing for them to allege.

Tithes were never commanded to be paid by the Lord to any, but Israel whose
Law was given forth 400 years after the promise, as says the Apostle; neither
were ever payable but by the Jews in the Land of Canaan, and to Levies tribe
only, and to the Jewish Priests that had no inheritance allotted them by the
Lord of all the land of Canaan or beyond Jordan, but only tithes or the tenth
part among their Brethren, and that only according to the command of the Lord,
Deuteronomy. 18. 4. Ezekiel. 45. 13. For the office of the Priesthood, and for the
service of the Tabernacle. At the giving forth of the Law after Israel came out
of Egypt, God chose Aaron and his Sons for the office of the Priesthood, and
the rest of the tribe of Levi for the service of the Tabernacle, God gave unto
the Levites by commandment all the tenth in Israel for an inheritance for their
service, and the Levites out of their tithes were to offer up to the Lord a
tenth part of the tiths and give it unto Aaron the Priest for himself and his
Sons, and no other portion had the Levitical Priests out of the tiths, but the
tenth of the tenth; As for the rest of the Tithes they were for the Levites
that did serve at the Tabernacle, and for strangers, for fatherless and widows.

Moreover the tenth of the tithe the Priest had the first ripe fruits of the
ground of Wheat, of Barley, of Figgs, Grapes and Olives, of Pomgranates and
Dates, at what quantity the owner pleased, a heave offering also of Corn, Wine
and Oil, fleece were given to the Priests at the 60 part, sometime the 50 at
the devotion of the owner.

But how comes it to pass that they that pretend another Priesthood then this,
should receive the 10 of all, of unclean beasts, as Pigs, and Foals, and of
such things as we never read of Tythable, under the Law; of Eggs, Geese and
Turnups, and the tenth of the wood for Faggots for the fire, and yet are not of
this Priesthood, but pretends to be Bishops and Elders in the Christian Church?
so they cannot distinguish of the time; neither of the Ministration, neither of
service and worship that belongs to each Covenant, else they would be ashamed
to claim title to Aarons tyths and the Levites, that was given to them that had
no portion among their Brethren in the Land; But these Bishops, Presbyters and
Priests has a great part of some Counties and Diocese for their revenue, and
their inferior offices tyths of such things as were never tythable under the
Law; so what damnable deceit and hypocrisyis this? Is it any other but the
Popes yoke, an absolute Apostate for hundreds of years, and must this be
received and enjoined as Apostolical doctrine? Oh for shame let it never be
mentioned among them that calls themselves Ministers of Christ, neither of any
who professes themselves to be Christians.

But to return to the Levitical Priesthood, no tyths did the Priest receive
under the Law of the people; For those belonged to the Levites, (...). 18. 2.
that were appointed over the Tabernacle to bear it, and to take it down and to
ser it up, to serve Aaron and his Sons and to keep the instruments thereof; and
for the better ordering of things they were divided into three parts the
Coathites, the Gershonites, and the Mararites, and these received tithes of the
people and delivered, the Priests did not all; so our tythe-^aking priests are
contrary to the Law and first Covenant and the Gospel also; And therefore are
to be looked upon as no other then antichristians; but to return to Aarons
priesthood in the first Covenant, they grew and multiplied, and then the
Priests were divided into 24 ranks or courses, of which our Prebends, Deans and
Chapters takes their example or imitation, so to serve by their turns at
Cathedrals as they are called, or else from the Church of Rome, which is worse;
but the latter I am rather inclined to believe, because there was no such name
of any Ministers among the Jews, neither in the primitive Church truly so
called, but the Priests gave attendance to execute their office, and burn
incense as his turn came, and hereupon Zecharias who is said to be of the
course of Abiah, Luke 1. The Levites that were singers were divided into 24
^anks also or courses, of which I believe the present Queristers or
Surpless-men does imitate, and will bring the Levites for a proofconcerning
their office; but we cannot receive Judaism for Christianity, neither their
practice for Apostolical Ordinances in the Church of Christ.

The Priests and the Levites being separated for the work of the Lord in the
Tabernacle and Temple, ministered according to the command and ordinances of the
first Covenant, which were only Figures of things to come, and shadows of
things that was but to continue until the time of reformation, and then they
all had an end, both the priesthood and Levites, and their service and office,
and maintenance and tithes ended, as the Apostle says to the Hebrews, the
Priesthood is changed, and the law is changed by which they received these
Tithes for the work aforesaid; But to descend and to come unto the Primitive
time, we shall see whether tithes were paid or no to Gospel Ministers in the
second Covenant.

In the fullness of time God raised up another Priest, Christ Jesus who was not
of the Tribe of Levi, nor consecrated after the order of Aaron, for he
pertain'd to another Tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the Altar; He
obtained a more excellent Ministry and of a greater and a more perfect
Tabernacle not of the former building, he being the sum and substance of all
the figures under the first Covenant, he put an end to first Priesthood with
all its shadows and Carnal Ordinances, and changing the Priesthood, which had a
command to take Tithes of their Brethren, there was made of necessity also a
change of the Law, and a disanulling of the Commandment going before.

Christ Jesus when he had finished his Office upon earth by fulfiling all
righteousness, he offered up himself through the eternal spirit and sacrifice
unto God, without spot; The Apostles and Ministers who were made partakers of
the divine nature, and of the word of reconciliation, did not look back to the
former Ordinances of the first Priesthood, but testified an end was put to
them, and witnessed again the Temple wherein the Priests Ministered; Paul and
likewise Stephen was stoned to death and against circumcision, saying, It was
not that of the Flesh, and against all the outward ordinances of that Covenant,
and called them carnal, and preached up Christ Jesus and his doctrine the new
and living way which was not manifest while the first Tabernacle was standing;
they preached freely the ever lasting Gospel, and did not desire or require
settled maintenance, but were Ministered unto only by them who had believed their
report and were turned to Christ Jesus, and were made partakers of spiritual
things, though they often denied that which was given unto them; Here was no
Tithes spoken on, either to the Jews or Gentiles who believed.

At Jerusalem and there abouts, such was the love and unity of heart among the
Saints in the Apostles time, that all things were in common and none wanted; So
likewise the Church gathered by Mark at Alexandria in Egypt followed the same
practice; and the Church at Jerusalem, and Philo Judeus says, in many other
provinces the Christians lived together in societies.

In the Church of Antioch. Galatie and Corinth, the Saints possessed every Acts
11. 29.
man his own Estate, where the Apostle ordained that a weekly offering should
be made of the Saints, that every one might offer freely of that which God had
blessed him with, which was put into the hands of the Deacons of the Churches
whereby the poor was relieved, and other necessary services were supplied.

In the next age, monthly offerings were made, not exacted but freely 1 Cor. 16.
2.
given, as appears plainly by Tertullian in Apologet. chap. 29. where he
upbraids the Gentiles with the piety and charity of the Christians, he says
Whatsoever we have in the Treasury of our Churches it is not raised by
taxation, as though we put men to ransom their Religion; But every man once a
month or when he pleases himself gives what he thinks good, for no man is
compelled but left free to his own descretion, and it is not bestowed in
vanity, but in relieving the poor, and for maintenance of poor Children
Deffitute of Parents, and aged people, and such as are cast into Prisons for
professing the Christian faith. And this way of contribution continued till the
great persecution under Maximinian and Dioclesian about the year 304 as
Eusebius witnesses, and so does Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian and others.

Also about this time some Land was given to the Church Eusebius lib. 4. chap.
22.
by them that believed, and the revenue thereof was distributed, as other free
gifts were, by the Deacons and Elders to the poor, for the fore mentioned uses;
but the Bishops or Ministers meddled not with them; Origin says, It is not
lawful for any Minister to possess Lands given to the Church to his own use.

Cyprian Bishop of Carthage about the year 250 also testifies Cyprian. Epist.
27. 34. 36.
the same, and shows how the Church maintains many poor, and that her own
diet was sparing and plain, and her expenses full of frugality; Prosper says
also that a Minister able to live of himself, ought not to desire any thing to
be given unto him, and he that receives it does it not without great sin; The
Council at Antioch, Anno, 340 finding that much fault had been among the
Deacons to whom it properly belonged to distribute the offerings or free gifts
where there was need, which they detained for their own covetous ends, the
Council did ordain that the Bishop might distribute the Goods, but required
that they took no part thereof to themselves, nor to the use of the Priests,
using the Apostles words, having food and raiment, be therewith content.

Chrysostom notes who lived about the year 400 that Christian converts Hom.
11. in actn
joined in societies, and lived in Common after the example of the former
Saints at Jerusalem, by whose writings it does appear that three was not the
least mention made of Tithes in that age; The Church at this time living
altogether by free offerings of Lands, Moneys and Goods, the people were much
pressed to bountiful Contributions for holy uses, as may be seen in the
writings of Hirome and Chrysostom, who brought the liberality of the Jews in
their payment of Tithes for an example, beneath which they would not have
Christians determine their charity.

Chrysostom says, I speak not these things as commanding or forbidding they
should give more; Yet as thinking it fit they should not give less then the
tenth part; And Hierome also does admonish them to bounty and charity toward
the poor, not binding at all to offer this or that part, leaving them to their
own Liberty; yet pressing them not to be shorter then the Jews in their tenths.

Ambrose who was Bishop of Milane about the year 400 preached up tenths to be
offered up for holy uses, as the phrase was then; But his Authority he produces
wholly from Moses writings; Likewise Augustine Bishop of Hippo joins and agrees
with Ambrose in this thing, but from the Law given to Israel take their whole
Doctrine, and threatened them with great penalties and heavy Judgments from God
that did not give their tenths; But yet take notice to what end they required
them, that the poor might not want, and says God has reserved them for their
use; So by this time love did grow cold in many, and the power of God was much
wanting, which would have kept the hearts of people open in love and mercy to
their members; And therefore they were much pressed on and threatened by the
Bishops to give their tenths; Not that the Bishops had any better ground, but
only the Jewish Law for their foundation, and so in process of time this
Doctrine came to be received, many following the opinion of the ancient
Fathers, yet hitherto it was not laid down as a positive Doctrine, to pay them
as the Jews did, but only brought the Jews for an example, that Christians
should not pay less:

Leo (called the great) about the year 440 who reigned twenty years, he was
very earnest in stiring up men's devotion to offer to the Church, but speaks not
a word of any quantity. Severin also 470 stirred up the Christians in Panona to
give the tenth to the poor; Likewise Gregory not only admonished the payment of
Hom. 16. in Evan. and did. 5. de consecr.
Tithes from Moses Law, but also the observing of Lent, which he reckoned as
the tenth of time in the year; And this he would have given unto God, saying we
are Commanded in the Law to give the tenth of all things unto God; And thus
Ignorance began to enter in, and Judaism among the Christians brought in by
their leaders, and from the opinions of these and other ancient Fathers who
took their ground from the Law, Tithes, Easter, Penticost and other things came
to be introduced and brought into the Church.

Yet notwithstanding the doctrine and hard threats of some of the great Bishops
of that time, It was not a General received doctrine that tithes ought to be
paid till about the year 800. Neither was any thing by the then Church
determined or ordained touching the quantity that should be given, though (no
doubt) in many places the offerings of the devouter sort, tenths or a greater
part of their increase were given according to Ambrose doctrine and others; And
then at this time the offerings or gifts to the Church were disposed of in this
wise, being received into a common treasury, one fourth part to the Priests,
out of which every one had his portion, another fourth part to the relief of
the poor, and sick and strangers; A third to the building and repairing places
of public meeting; And the fourth to the Bishop, and generally the Bishop
lived in some Monastry and his Clergy with him, from whence he sent them to
preach in the Countries and Diocese, and there they received such offerings as
were made and brought them to the Treasury; So that by the way the Reader may
take notice that the Priest had no such a peculiar interest in that which was
given; But now they claim all their meeting places since called Churches was
builded out of the gifts of people, and the poor was relieved and the widow;
But now Tithes taken by force three or four sold, and people compelled to build
and repair their houses or Temples by force, and the poor and the widow has
no share; nay has not many poor been cast into prison, and widows goods
spoiled by the Priests of this generation? and how unsuitable these practices
are unto the Apostle, let all judge; nay they are proud of the ancient Fathers
and their words, but they will not so such as come near them in example in any
thing that's good; So for shame you Protestans leave forcing of maintenances,
and forcing of your wages, and forcing to repair your Houses of worship, and do
not tell us of Church. Church and Antiquity when you are far enough off their
practice, though they were in a declining state in this age I have been
speaking of.

And although diverse of the Fathers and Bishops and Popes in this age did
declare that Tithes were due and ought to be paid, (their ground only taken
from Moses.) yet none of the first eight general Councils did ever so much as
ever mention the name of Tithes, or declare them a duty. The ninth general
Council held at Latteren under Pope Calixtus the second 1119 mentions tithes,
but speaks only of such as had been given to the Church by special
consecration, for at that time people being led to believe that their Tithes
ought to be given to the poor, did dispose of them to the heads and rulers of
religious houses who keeps open hospitality for the poor and for strangers,
they were esteemed holy and good Treasures for the poor, who took care of
distribution of them as is testified by Cassian; But the Council held under
Pope Alexander the third, Anno 1180. Seeing much given to the poor, and little
to the Priests, made a Decree to restrain peoples freedom, and indeed by this
time much wickedness was crept into these houses, as Histories relates.

There was no Law Cannon or Constitution of any General Council as yet sound,
that did command tithes or expressly supposed them a duty of common right before
the Council of Lateren held in the year 1215 under Pope Innocent the third,
about which time the Popes power was grown great and powerful; But still the
people had greater mind to give them to the poor, then to the Priest, and made
Innocent complain and cried out against those that gave their tithes and first
fruits to the poor, and not to the Priests as heinous offenders. At a Council
held at Lions under pope Gregory the 10 in the year 1274 it was constituted
that it should not thenceforth be lawful for men to give their, Tithes at their
own pleasure, as they had done before, but to pay all to the Mother Church.

But the great Decree which speaks most plain, and till then nothing was given
forth which did constitute them, but rather supposed them as by former right,
was made at the Council of Trent under Pope Pius the 4th, about the year 1560.
They commanded tithes to be paid under the penalties of excommunication about
the year 800, 900, 1000 and after tithes were called the Lords goods, the
patrimony of the poor, according to Ambrose, Jerome, and Chrysostoms Doctrine
only borrowed from the Jews. So thus in short I have shown that Tithes were
never reckoned as due to the Clergy for a thousand years, but they did give
them as they would, and how much they would, and that without compulsion, till
the hight of popery and the power of darkness spread over all; And since
forcing Constitutions have been made by Councils of Priests; And so you who
looks upon your selves to be Ministers of Christ, and to follow the Doctrine of
the Primitive times, for shame cease from those things of taking Tithes and
giving tithes which was ordained and Constituted in the midnight of Popery,
when the power of God was lost, which should have opened peoples hearts both to
the poor and to the Ministry, and then this false Church began to force and
compel, or else they could not have subsisted, for the Doctrine had little
influence upon peoples hearts:

About the year 600 or soon after, Gregory the first then the pope of Rome sent
over Augustine the Monk into England, by whom Ethelbert King of Kent was
converted as they call it, but it was but to popery; he and his Clergy long
time after followed the example of former ages, living in Common upon the
Offerings of their convers and those that received them, joined into societies
according unto the primitive practice by Gregory's order, and that they should
in tenderness to the Saxon Church that they should still imitate the primitive
times that they might not make their Religion burdensome; But afterward
having brought a great part of the Nation to their faith, they began to preach
up the old Roman Doctrine, that Tithes ought to be paid; and having taught
people that pardon of sin was merited by good works, and the torments of Hell
be avoided by charity, then it was no hard matter to persuade them to give
their tenths and Lands, but also their outward Riches, and the Clergy had
almost got a third part of the Land into their hand.

As concerning Laws and Canons for tithes, among the Saxons in England, it is
reported that in the year 786 two Legates were sent from Pope Hadrian the
first, to Off a King of Mercland, and Elsewolf King of Northumberland, who made
a Decree that the people of those two Kingdoms should pay tithes; By this it
may be seen chat tithes were not reckoned as due for many hundred years, and
indeed were never due in the second Covenant; So these things that are so
pleaded for by these hireling Priests of this last age which has no better
plea then antiquity for their tyths and forced hire, may be convinced, that
antiquity without truth is nothing, and yet the antiquity of the Churches in
the primitive times condemns these practices; so that let all Protestants deny
these introduced institutions and the popes wages, forced tithes and hire,
which is Antichristian.

A cloud of witnesses might be brought out of the ancient Fathers, who
testified against them, and diverse Martyrs, as Walter Brute and John Wickliff
who suffered Martyrs for testifying the truth against the Idolatry and
superstitions of that age.

Seldom in his History of Tithes, says that before the year 800 or there
abouts, there is not any general Law that yet remains in public, and is of
credit, which ordained any payment of tithes in the Western Church, for the
Eastern never any Law that has been observed, mentions them; So in the first
giving of tenths was by the persuasion of some of the Fathers formentioned, for
the poor and service of the Church, and they were only the free offering or
free gift of the people, as alms which were brought into the Common Treasury
first disposed of by Deacons, for the service of the Church; But they being
found faulty, it were ordered and decreed in a Council that the Bishop or
overseer should dispose of them, to wit the offerings; but they were not
compellable, who did not offer this or that part, but were left free to do as
they had freedom, only exhorted and threatened with the judgments of God, if
they suffered the poor to lack or be in want.

The predecessors of the Protestants, the Bohemians being descended from the
Waldenses forementioned did profess that all Priests or Ministers ought to be
poor, and to be content with the free gift or what the people freely offered
them; So says AEneas Silvius in his Bohemian History, and it is one of John
Wicklifs Articles for which he was censured, viz. that tithes were a free gift
as among Christians, or only pure alms, and that the Parishoners may for the
^ffence of their Curates detain and keep them back and bestow them upon others
at their own will and pleasure.

And this proposition aforesaid is maintained by Acts and Mon. p. 435.
John Husse in the said Book of Martyrs, page 461. That the Clergy are not
Lords and possessors of Tyths or other Ecclesiastical goods, but only Stewards,
and after the necessity of the Clergy is once satisfied, they ought to be
transported to the poor. At Geneva Tiths of all sorts are taken up for the use
of the state, and laid up in the public Treasury. Ambrose Bishop of Millain,
as zealous a man for Church Privileges as we hardly read of the like, Ambrose
Epist.: 3. s^ith, If the Emperor have a mind to Church Lands, he has power to
take them; There is none of us interposeth, the poor may sufficiently be
maintained by popular Collections, let them not create us envy, by taking of
those Lands, let them take them away if they please. It may be observed at this
time that the Ministers were not maintained by settled Tithes, like the Priests
of our time, but both they and the poor were relieved by Oblations of the
people, and by such Lands as were given by the Emperors to the several
Churches; So it was upon this account that Ambr^se thus speaks; And William
Throp of whom I made mention, being examined in the year 1407 being brought
before Thomas Aurandel Archbishop of Canterbury and Chanceller then of
England, gives a clear Testimony against tithes, how that they were no Gospel
maintenance,

In his Answer he says, in the new Law neither Christ nor his Apostles Acts
and Mon. p. 536, 537.
took tithes of the people, nor Commanded the people to pay tithes neither to
Priests nor Deacons; and Christ and his Apostles Preached the Word of God to
the people, and lived of pure alms of the free gift; But after Christ's
Assention when the Apostles had received the Holy Ghost, they traveled with
their hands; and afterward he says, Paul when he was full poor and needy,
Preached among the people, He was not chargious unto them, but with his hands
he traveled, not only to get his own Living, but also to relieve others that
were poor and needy; And further he says, Tithes were given in the old Law to
Levites and Priests, but our Priests come not of L^vi, but since Christ lived
and his Apostles by pure alms, or else by the travel of their hands; At the
which the Bishop said, Gods curse have you and mine, for this Teaching; and
further William says those Priests that challinge to take Tithes dinies Christ
come in the flesh; unto which the Bishop said, heard ye ever Lossel speak thus?
And further William says that the covetousness and pride of the Priests
destroys the virtue of the Priesthood, and also stireth up Gods vengeance both
upon Lords and Commons who suffer these Priests Charitably.

And the Archbishop said, Thou judge every Priest proud that will not go
a^ayed as thou do; By God, I deem him to be more meek that goes every day in
his Scarlet Gown, then thou in thy thread bare blew Gown; An answer much like a
Tything Priest; but I refer the Reader to the whole Testimony of William Throp
which is large in the Book of Martyrs.

David Pareus in his Comentary upon Genesis 28 2. 22. says Tithes or tenths were
freely arbitrary, a man might give them, a man might vow them, or he might not,
as he pleased before the Law; But under the Law they were commanded to be given
to the Priests and Levites; hence says he our Clergy men infer, if they were
so of Old, then they are so now; But this does not follow says he, they had a
Divine Ceremonial right, but that is now ceased, they had Tithes as a
Compensation of that lot they should otherwise have in Land, ours not so, ours
have Towns, Villages, Manors, yea Countries and Provinces, nor is there any
end of their insatiable Covetousness; and he concludes when the Leviticall
Priesthood did cease, then did the right of that Priesthood cease, and the
right of Tithes did revert to God as Governor and Soverain of the World.

Great and Large are the testimonies that might be given both out of ancient
and modern Writers, who were the clearest in their judgments in their age
against Tithes, how that they were no Gospel maintenance, neither of Divine
right do belong to any Ministry under the Gospel, who professes Christ come in
the flesh; What I have said in this particular might be sufficient, seeing so
large things by other pens have been declared; But I am the more willing to
instance diverse Authors, who by our Protestants are owned as Orthodox, that
they may be convinced that it is not a new Doctrine, for which we suffer the
spoiling of our Goods, and our persons Imprisoned, but that tyths have been
testified against by many faithful in ages past, who died in the Faith, who
though they be dead yet their Testimony Lives, and will stand through ages,
even for ever; take this of the Primitive Bishop.

Antonius de Dominis the Learned Bishop of Spalato de Repub. Eccles. L. 9.
Christ himself though he were Lord of Heaven and Earth and the fullness thereof,
yet would not he be possessed of great Lands and Incomes though he seemingly
complained, the fowls of the air have nests and foxes holes, but not the Son of
man where not to rest his head, Luk 9. 58.

Yet did not he imbetter his Condition, although to the affecting thereof,
there needed no more then that he should will it to be so; nor did he demand
Tithes though a Priest after the order of Melchizedeck indubitably; But whilst
he went through the Cities and Castles Preaching the Gospel, and instructing
men for the Kingdom of Heaven, and twelve with him, several women, as Mary
Magdalen, Joane, Susan and others did Minister unto him of their substance,
Luke 8. 1, 2. Nor did he otherwise instruct his Disciples who were to be
Embasadors on Earth toward man kind. In the beginning when he sends them out,
he did not bid them for to receive Tithes or Teach People to pay them, but bids
them to live upon alms; carry not with you Gold nor Silver, or any money in
your purses, not a Scrip, not two Coats, not a staff Suternumerary, For the
Labourer is worthy of his meat, Mat. 10. 9. The Disciples of Christ being thus
taught by their great Master, for saking their Livelihood and Earthly
possession, presumed upon the Goodness of God, who would not so have sent them
abroad, but that he would dispose the hearts of men accordingly in order to
their subsistence; So they relied upon their Converts for necessary supplies,
and received the benevolence of several pious women who Ministered unto them;
For so says Paul, have not I power to eat and to drink, have not I power to
lead about a woman or a Sister as do the other Apostles, and the Brethren of
our Lord, and Cephas? 1 Cor. 9. 5. he at large and very clearly shows how
they who sows Spiritual ought to reap temporal things.

If one should ask the Ministry of this age, by what right they claim Tithes,
they cannot say by a better right then the Apostles had nor I hope will not,
for they pretend to be but successors of them; And if the extent of their
Commission be required, you shall have it in these words forthwith, as my
Father sent me, so send I you, or the like; But if one ask if they will stand
to this in all respects; I have little hope they will comply in point of
maintenance, I have good ground so to judge, even many at this day who have in
times past vaunted and boasted of their call and Ministry, and have thrown many
in prison for these popish Tithes; Now when they are like to be taken from
them, would give over Publication of their Gospel, if they knew how to subsist
for their backs and bellies, which demonstrates that they had no mission from
God, or else why should taking of Tithes away from them invalidate it? Or do
they judge all is converted, there is no more work? Now such will be cried who
have boasted of Calls and Commissions, and if all were gone, they would preach
for nothing or freely without gifts; I am afraid we shall hardly find one of
five hundred, but will rather then quite cease the gainful trade, will
traffic in such Merchandise as the times allows, though they must now be
content with eight for a night-wake, and four for churching a woman, and
sixpence for reading over a grave, or Tithe eggs at Easter, and rather then
they dare stand to Christ's allowance, will take this and such allowance as can
be got under hand and Seal, as the time will afford them; But to return to that
which was in my heart to show out of antiquity, Tithes no Gospel maintenance.

Prosper says, They do live of the Gospel who will be propriators Prosper de
vita contempt lib. 2. chap. 14.
of nothing, who neither have nor desire to have any thing, not possessing
their own but the Common goods; What is it to live of the Gospel, But that he
who labors should receive necessary supplies by them amongst whom he labors
without forcing, though Paul himself would not make use of his permission least
he should create an offense, but labored with his hands, being a tent-maker,
and they that would receive it by voluntary contributions were the Apostles and
others which labored in the Gospel.

Cyril of Alexandria speaking upon that passage of Abraham, Cyril de adorat. in
spir. and ver. lib. 4. ad finem.
Gen 14. 23 who after he had gained victory over the King of Sodomes enemies
and rescued Lot, when the King offered him part of the spoils, he would
receive nothing but a few victuals, Though says he, the holy Teachers do war
in the behalf of perishing-man kind, and though they undergo much pains, yet do
they not take any thing from the men of the World, nor do they heap up unto
themselves riches, least the World should say I have made you rich, they only
ought to receive their sustinance from the hands of those whom they have
benefited; for it is Christ's command says he, that he who Teaches the Gospel
should live thereby; So that it is evident that very many of ancient Fathers
whom this generation of Teachers have talked so much on, did deny Tyths and
forced maintenance from the Word; but in this point it is like they may be
judged for eronious or weak sighted, as they do the Quakers or men of weak
understanding, but I see many will traduce them in words, but few in practice.

Peter and John says Silver and Gold have I none; Behold Origin. homil. 15 in
Levit.
the riches of those who were Priests of Christ, but let us quickly apply these
things faith he unto our selves, who are prohibited by the Law of Christ, if we
have any regard thereunto, to have possessions in the Country or Houses in the
City, what do I say? Possessions, houses, no, not to multiply Coats or Money.
If we have food and raiment let us be therewith content; Hiorom writing to
Nepotianus a Clergy man, he does much extol the poverty of the Clergy, as a
Levite and a Priest says he, I live and am supplied with the Oblations of the
Altar, having food, having Clothes I will be content therewith; and naked
follow the Naked Cross; I beseech you that you would not transform our
Spiritual warfare into a Carnal one, nor Imagine your self in the Clergy, as if
you were in an Army, getting spoils, nor seek after no more then when you came
first into the Clergy, least it be said to you, their lot shall not profit them.

The Albigenses Bedemontane Protestants have preserved their Religion
incorrupt, longer then any Church with a ministry endowed with Tithes and Hire
in the World; And likewise the Primitive times never wanted able Teachers as
the best Histories say, although they lived either upon their labor, or the
free Offering of them that were converted, and was not so disquieted with
political complying opinions and curiosities, and nicities, and distinctions,
and contentions, until Constance began to enrich and give Lands and great
reveneus to the Church; And then they began to side and controvert in State
matters, and grew into Pride, Idleness and Fullness, insomuch that Histories
say, a voice was heard from Heaven, This day poison has been shed in the
Church.

So you Protestants view over your Fathers whom the Ministers has talked on;
And so now if they will own their practice so as to walk in it, and let them
never be reckoned as Ministers of Christ more, who cannot be content with his
allowance, and let forcing alone about maintenance, and the Tithes alone to the
Priest of the first Covenant, and let bargining alone for wages, and seek not
hire of them you work not for; and if your Gospel will not maintain you, you
have good cause to question it, whether it be the very same the Apostle
preached and the Primitive Fathers, and never such a cry be heard more among
people for maintenance and hire, for wages and Tithes; But he that has the
Gospel, let him preach the Gospel, and live of the Gospel, not upon Tithes and
forced maintenance and set stipends, for the Gospel condemns this, a cloud of
witness is against it, both in former and latter ages, yea it is inconsistent
unto reason to require Tithes in this age by the Ministry.

First the Levites were one of the twelve Tribes, if they were not the twelve
part of the people, but so is not the Priests now.

Secondly, they had no portion among the rest of the Tribes, but the Teachers
and Priests now have equal to other men, in Lands and Revenues.

Thirdly, The Priests were but to have the tenth of all clean things, but now
clean and unclean Beasts, Birds and Fowls, Piggs, Eggs, Turnups, and every
thing, which were not Tythable under the Law.

Fourthly, their service was great at the Tabernacle and Temple, and in time of
the war and sojourning, it is not so with Priests, who stays over a few
families all their life long.

Fifthly, Seeing the service is abrogated for which the Levites had Tithes, and
none of the service performed now, no reasons that tyths should be required
now, when the work is not done unto which the tithes belonged.

Sixthly the Levites were of Aarons priesthood, of which tribe Christ came not
(but of the tribe of Juda) but these priests are not after Aaron nor Levi
neither their successors, therefore has no right to tithes.

Seventhly, that which was given by the command of God only to Aaron and his
Sons and Levites, and never to any other priesthood or Ministry; Now seeing the
Law is changed and the priesthood changed, Christ being come, these priests are
unreasonable who demanded them contrary to the command of God, which belongs
only to that priesthood.

CHAP. XIX. Respecting of persons and Complemental bowings and worshipping one
another, and flattering titles no good manners, but are in the transgression,
and has been anciently reproved and condemned.
ALthough this Generation have so far run after every invention and vain
custom and tradition, into complements and flattery and deceit, and respecting
of persons, which is a thing in high esteem, as a piece of good breeding and
education, and good manners accounted not only among the prophaner sort, but
even among Christians so called, who have conformed unto every vain custom of
the Nations; Yet they that know the life of Christ, cannot do so, and they that
abide in his doctrine must not do so, though things be never so applauded by
fallen men, whose glory is in that which is earthly; Yet God beholds not nor
looks not as man, but his thoughts are contrary to man's in that state, and that
which the Sons of men in the fallen estate do highly esteem of, is disesteemed
by the Lord.

The best manner of walking is, that which the Lord directs and leads into,
which is pure and holy and incorrupt, and the Saints practice who were taught
of God, is the best example to follow, and their manner and deportment among
the Sons of men are chiefly to be followed; Although that which is from below,
does and has ever disesteemed their way and the honor that comes from above,
although the Heathen had many Lords and many Gods, Yet it was said to Israel,
thy God is but one, and him shall thou bow unto alone and reverence his Name;
Israel was not to follow the vain customs of the Nations, neither follow their
example who served not the living God with their hearts, and multitudes are not
to be followed in doing evil; Custom without Truth is but a bad plea,
antiquity with unrighteuosnesse is but bad proof, that which leads into
degeneration is not to be minded, but that which leads into restoration and
innocence.

The Redeemed of the Lord and the Israel of God, now who works after the
directions and leadings of Gods holy Spirit, upon whom peace rests, are
otherwise taught then to follow vain customs which begets one another into
pride and deceit, and unbelief, Christ reproved the Pharisees for seeking
honor one of another, and told them they could not believe who sought it; Was
it reprovable then, is it commendable now? are there not many that seek it now?
Yes, that which is offended when it is not complemented and bowed unto, seeks
it and would have it, and is in the unbelief; what capping and cringing, what
bowing and scraping, in which many spends much of their time, what complements
and fained speeches is daily invented, and gestures and Ceremonies, of which
there is hardly any end, which people runs into now, who calls themselves
Christians, many generations before cannot parallel it, and yet this must be
counted good manners and be reckoned as such; Oh! The Lord is grieved with
these things, and they are abominable in his sight, and will provoke the Lord
to anger, if they be persisted in, and the honor which is from above they
despised; And what invented words and names which puffs up the proud minds, is
people run into, and like Ephraim in the transgression seeds upon wind, and
that which will vanish as a buble and pass away as a morning dew; God will
stain it all, and the pride and glory of all flesh, and bring contempt upon all
the honorable of the Earth, for the Saints knew who were come out of the
respect of persons, that the fashion of the world and the custom^ and manners,
and glory, and honor, and esteem thereof should pass away, and that all that
come to the beginning again, to union with God, must die to all these things
which is got and entered into the hearts of men since the transgression, and
while these things are loved they alienate the mind from the Living God, and
from the Honor due unto his Name.

And Oh what strangers are men to the Doctrine and practice of Christ and his
Apostles and to the primitive Saints, that it is even become a dispisable thing
in their eyes, and then practice and manner of walking is now become an offense
and reckoned unmannerly; and (...) but it is counted such an offense and a
crime as diserves punishment; O^ for shame look back upon the Saints practice
for your example, unto their manners for your ^mitation, and not unto the vain
custom of the N^^ions, not unto Mou^tibanks, S^^ge pl^iers, Fiddlers, Roysters
and Ru^^^^^, who make a mock of sin; and live by the sins of the people.

Will it be a good plea do you Judge before the Lord (when the secrets of all
hearts shall be opened, and every action brought unto Righteous Judgment) that
you have followed the fashion of a Nation, the custom of a Court, City or
County, or the most in the world? does not the Scripture say, that the Saints
should not fashion themselves like unto the World, neither be conformable to
it, but rather be transformed in your minds, and seek the things that are
above? for where the mind is transformed and changed from the earthly to the
Heavenly, there the actions will be new and the works new; did the Pharisees
say truly of Christ in this, we know thou respects no man's person, yes they
knew it, though they tempted him; And did not Peter say of a truth, God is no
respecter of persons; and did not Solomon say lie that respects persons will
transgress for a morsel of bread; And did not Elihu say I know not to give
flattering Titles to men, in so doing my Maker would soon take me away: Is not
this a flattering Generation and full of hypocrisy and deceit? Flattering one
another, when in a moment they are like to kill one another, hating one
another, and speaking evil of one another when as soon as one is pa^ted from
another, these things are an abhorrency in the eyes of the Lord.

Consider what James says the Apostle of Christ, Jam. 2. ver. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10. My Brethren, have not the ^aith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord
of Glory with respect of persons, for if there come into your assembly a man
with a Gold Ring, in goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile
raiment, and ^e have respect to him that wears the gay Clothing, and say to
the poor stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool, are ye not then
partial in your selves and are become Judges of evil thoughts; Hearken my
beloved Brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this World rich in faith, and
Heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him? Do not
rich men oppress you, and draw you before the Judgment seats? Do not they
blaspheme that worthy Name, by they which you are* called? If you fulfill the
Royal Law of God according to the Scriptures, thou shall love thy Nighbour as
thy self, ye d^ well, but if ye have a respect to persons* ye commit sin and
are convinced of the Law, as Transgressors. And the Apostle concludes whosoever
shall keep the whole Law, and offend in one point is guilty of all, and such is
the respecting of persons, and giving flattering titles unto men, and they that
do it are Judges of evil thoughts and transgressors of the Law, and is guilty
of all.

Marlorat out of Luther and Calvin says upon this place, to respect persons
here, is to have regard unto the outward habit, garb and attire, and
accordingly to esteem or undervalue him, love or dread him, and that such
respect of persons is repugnant unto true Faith, and is inconsiste^^ with it,
and concludes that none ought to be honored upon the account of Riches; But
this Generation of hypocrites are gone further into the Transgression of the
Law, into honoring or disesteeming of men because of the^^ Clothes or habit, a
gold Ring, a gay Cloak, a Fan or (...) Fether, are become the only cognisa^ce
or badge (...) honorable persons in this age among professors, (...) it was
not so in the days of old, but Modesty, Gravity, Sobriety, Temporance,
Humility were the toke^ of one truly honorable.

Jerome writing to a great person in the world name^ Celentia, directing her
how to live in the midst of h^ riches and honors, says thus, Heed not your
Nobility nor do you thereupon take place of any, repute not them w^ are of a
lower extraction to be your inferiors: Our Religi^ admits no respect of
persons, nor did it lead us to value t^ outward condition of men but their
inward frame of spirit it is hereby that we pronouce men Noble, and base with
Go^ not to serve sin is to be free, and to excel in virtue is to (...) Noble;
Besides it is folly for any to boast of Gentility, sin^ all are equally
esteemed by God, nor is it material in wh^ estate a man is born, the new
Creature has no distinctions; Or was this the Doctrine of one single person
alone, for Paulinius Bishop of Nola reproved Sulpitius Severus for writing
himself in the title of a Letter to Paulinius (your servant,) he says In the
title of my Letter, I have not imitated your excellent Brotherhood; because I
thought it more secure to write truth; Take heed hereafter how you being from a
servant called out unto liberty, do subscribe your self servant unto one who is
your Brother and fellow servants, for it is a sinful flattery, not a Testimony
of humility to pay those honors unto a man, which are due to the one Lord, one
Master, one God; So this is no new Doctrine to deny respecting of persons, and
flattering titles and complements, although it seem strange to this generation,
in whom the corruptable part is exalted, and that which is below, the truth and
the power of God elevated in their minds, which dispiseth the honor which is
from above, and the humility and lowliness of the Saints, and their plainness
and innocence; But all that comes unto Christ and to believe in him and follow
him for their example will come out of all these vain complemental flattering
titles and respecting of persons, and give all honor, and Glory, and Reverence
unto him alone unto whom it is due, and to respect him who is their life, and
have a respect unto all his Commandments, and unto that which leads out of the
vanity of the World and to the beginning again, before deceit, pride and
flattery had a being in the pure innocence and uprightness, where truth is
spoken from the heart without flattery and dissimulation in all plainness.

CHAP. XX. Universities and Schools of Natural Learning are of no use, as to
the making of Ministers of Christ in the Primitive times, but a thing
introduced, and brought in in latter ages by the Apogates who had erred from
the Spirit, who then admired and set up natural Languages and Philosophy, that
thereby they might be furnished to make discourses, speeches and Sermons to get
money by, and as they are holden up at this day, are made an absolute Idol; and
as to their Practice its generally known to be profane, and no way meet to
advance the Church of Christ.
CHrist Jesus the Everlasting High Priest and Minister of the Tabernacle, when
he was manifest in the fullness of time, to fulfill the work which was given him
to do of the Father, he chused unto him twelve Disciples which believed in him,
men who were not brought up at Universities, neither had studied Philosophy nor
natural Tongues, but some Fishermen and such as were illiterate, to be
Ministers of the glad tidings of the Gospel of peace to the Nations; and their
ability stood in the Spirit where the ability of all the Ministers of Christ
now stands, viz. not in the Letter, not in Philosophy, not in natural
Languages, not in Gramar and Music, but in the Spirit which qualified them,
and from whence they received abilities to declare the word of Righteousness,
and by it they had skill to divide it aright, and to give every one their
Portion, and to minister to every one suitable to their state in which they
were, and they were skilled in the word of Righteousness, and many did believe
through their Testimony, though they had not the wisdom that was from below,
nor much read in natural Languages, and some not learned (at all) yet they
wanted not wisdom and utterance, and words meet and suitable to declare and
demonstrate the Heavenly mind of Christ, although it is true many of the Jews
and learned Rabbis opposed them, and set them at naught, the Philosophers,
Stoics and Epicures resisted, yet they desired not to be approved in that
wisdom which man Teaches, but in the wisdom which is from above, which the
natural man with all his natural parts does not understand, and natural men
with their natural parts despises the simplicity of the Gospel, and they seek
qualifications which the Lord never sought, and such will not heed the
qualifications which is laid down by them that were Ministers of Christ, for
they that had received the Spirit and were made Ministers by it, were qualified
by it, and their holy conversations preached unto others, they were vigilent,
they were watchful, they were sober, they were in Temptations and Trials, but
their lives were of good report, no covetous persons, seekers for their gain
from their Quarters, no Lords over men's faith, nor Masters over men's
Consciences, but were servants unto all for Christ's sake; not like the
Ministers in these days who will assume the office but has not received the
gift of God, neither are so qualified or fitted as they were who had no
Universities nor Schools of Learning, and these are they that cries up Natura
Tongues and Languages as the chief Abilities of a Minister of Christ, and that
none are fit to dispense the word of God, but such who are bred up and educated
in these things, and such in former days despised the Cross of Christ, and the
simplicity of the Gospel, and set up Tongues above it, and so do they now; But
let us consider whether soon after the Primitive times they had any such
Universities, or seven years prentiships as they have now, or whether it was
their practice to be studying these things which be bu^ natural, and whether
they did esteem them as any way helpful to the Ministry.

But that I may not be mis-understood, I know each Language and each Tongue
has a proper signification, and is not evil in themselves; Schools of learning
I am not against, natural Languages they may be servicable for natural uses,
natural transaction in civil affairs betwixt Nation and Nation, man and man;
but as they are extolled and cried up to be nurseries of piety, and to fit men
for the Ministry as to make it effectual, is utterly false, and more mischief
is learned and impiety practiced in these Universities then in any other parts
of the Nation, and indeed it is one of the main props and pillars of
Antichrists Throne and Kingdom, and that which upholds his seat; And that they
only are the only fitted and called men to Minister, who have natural Tongues,
and have read a little in a few Heathen Authors, and thereby is able to comment
and make a discourse to the hearing of the ear, (but Gods witness is not
reached at all) and such dispises the spirit, and sets light by them that enjoy
it, which clearly evidences they are out of the power of God which was among
the first Christ^ans, who received the Spirit and spoke from it, which is only
sufficient and able to make a Minister of Christ; So let us see what antiquity
says.

Gaudentius de mor. secul. Justinian says, We do not read that ever the
ancients did ever openly in Schools Teach Philosophy, since they did rather
abhor it; And says a good Author I would fain see a man that could show that
Christians either before or in the time of Justinian did openly teach
Philosophy; And Hadrian Saraviah informs us the Primitive Christians had no
Accademicall Schools like to those now adays, yet there was one at
Alexandria, but in these Schools they read only Catachristicall Lectures; and
we do not read of any Universitie of the Waldenses, Albigenses and Bohemians,
for most of their Ministers were Tradsemen and Handy-crafts men, and did not
spend their time in reading tongues or studying Authors.

Herrald anaimad. in ar. nob. The Christians in the Primitive times, living
excluded from all honors and Magistracies, did neglect these Studies which
were for the discharge of civil employments, because that Sophisters and
Philosophers were the principal Enemies of Christianity; Therefore upon this
Account they condemned also all Polity, Learning, they condemned Tragedies and
Comedies and other poetical writings, being the main part of humane Learning,
as Judging they did not conduce to solid knowledge. Tertullian Liber de
Idolatr. page 138, 139. Judged that Schoolmasters professing learning were
guilty of great Idolatry, because they only explained names and Genealogies and
Fabulous Acts of Heathen Gods: and generally believers in those days harbered
a very bad esteem of Natural Learning, and generally the Christians were
provoked thereunto, because the Gentiles did upbraid them that the Teachers
were Illiterate persons, as Combers of woolls, Weavers, Fullers and the like:
These things being objected aagainst the Christians; The Christians on the
other side rejected all Learning, as an useless thing and no way advantageous
to Salvation, though their adversaries boasted of it: Origin Lib. 3. says the
Christians did declare that men of any Condition might be saved, Servants,
Idiots and Rusticks, and such as the World valued as fools, and that God did
confound the wise in their own wisdom; and Selsus as Origin in his Book says,
that Christians did proclaim it in their Assemblies, (let none that is wise
enter, none that is learned, none that is prudent, for thus it is appointed us
in the Gospel; but if there be any unwise, unlearned, any foolish, let him
approach with confidence, for these were fit to be the servants of God.

Ouzetius in his Animadversions page 25 says, that the Gentiles did object
against the Christians, their rude style, their harsh Language, and how they
were destitute of all Addresses, calling them Rusticks and Clowns; So the
Christians did again term the Gentiles the Polity, the Eloquent and the
Learned; Clemence Romanus says in his writing, lib. 2. chap 6. Abstain from
all the Books of the Gentiles, for what have you to do with strange discourses
or Laws or false Prophets which Seduce weak men from the Truth.

In the Council at Carthage there was a Canon made distinct, 37. cap. Epist.
citante, Jac. Laurentio de lib. gentil. page 41.

Let not a Bishop read Heathen Authors, Gracian says, we see that the Priests
of the Lord neglecting the Gospel and the Prophets, they read Comedies, and
read love verses out of Beuchlies, they peruse Virgil; And what is a sin of
enforced necessity in Children is become their delight, does not he seem to
walk in vanity and darkness of mind, who vexes himself day and night in the
study of Lodgick, who in the persuit of Physical Speculations one while
elevates himself beyond the highest Heavens, and afterward precipitates
himself below the nether parts of the Earth, and diveth into the Abisse, and
charge his memory with the distinct knowledge of verses.

Petrus Belonius says, in Greece amongst the Christians which were very many,
there were very few learned men, because they esteemed not of it, as of
nenessity to Christianity, though they could speak Greek and some Latin, but
few could write or read, in their Libraries were several manuscrips of
Divinity, but no Historians, no Philosophers, for those were anathomized; And
all Christians were exhorted not to study Poetry nor Philosophy; Yet Reader
thou may understand that the Greek Church is highly owned for a true
Christian Church, and highly owned by the Protestants, yet neither they nor the
Pickards nor Waldenses in Bohemia did value learning, so far were they from
esteeming of it as the proper true Religion, Luther de Institu. puer. inter.
aper. Wittenburg, to 7. fol. 444.

Paul exhorts to beware of Philosophy and vain deceit, Col. 2. He had been at
Athens and had acquainted himself with that vainglorious humane wisdom, and
knew the multiplicity of Contradictions which it had procured; What then has
Athens to do with Jerusalem? What fellowship has the Epicures and Stoics with
the Church of Christ? Jerome lib. 1. Contra, Pelag. what has Aristotle to do
with Paul, or Plato with Peter? A multitude of Testimonies might be brought to
this effect, how the Christians did in former ages reject Philosophy and
Heathen Authors, and all such frivilous stories as no way lawful for
Christians to meddle in; nor any way good to propagate Christianity.

Bishop Usher in Vindication of the Waldenses by way of Apology, he says God
did choose Fishermen that so he might not give his glory to another, for as much
as the little ones had asked bre^d came to receive it, and the learned being
busied about vain contentions and disputations were sent empty away; The
Waldenses says Bishop Usher de success chap. 6. 28. We are not ashamed of our
Teachers, because they labor with their hands, procuring thereby a livelihood
to themselves, because both the Doctrine and example of the Apostles does lerd
us to such apprehensions.

And as for the Ceremonies which are found in these Universities and Colleges
and popish superstitious practices, I shall leave the Reader to read them else
where, which are so many and so Superstitious that they come little behind Rome
in Idolatry; and as for their consecration of Priests, and the endless rabble
of Ceremonies which do attend as such times as they take degrees is well known
to many in this Nation, And yet these Universities and Schools are elevated in
some men's minds as though they were the chief propagators of Christianity, when
as indeed they are an inlet of Heathenism and Idolatry and no way of necessity
useful for the true Church of God.

And it is judged by some learned men and that upon good ground, that the
present fashoned Universities Orders and Habits was from the Dominicans; An
order instituted by the Pope to suppress the Waldenses, and their doctoral
degrees by the learned are judged to be no other then Noval and accounted
Antichristian, by the reformed Churches so called, in Scotland, France,
Holland, Switzerland and the Calvinists in high Germany; And so many Doctors
there are in the Universities who never knew how to divide the Word aright, nor
what it is to convert one Soul unto God; A Doctor that is no Teacher he is a
dumb dog and an insignificant piece of formality in the Universities, which
carries a show of something, but is nothing in substance, and the chief
practice is several ridiculous Solemnities, together with constant wearing of a
Coull and some other vestments fetched out of a popish Wardrobe; It was an
Article of John Wicklifs condemned at Constance, who suffered as a Martyr, that
Graduations and Doctorships in Universities and Colleges as they were in use
then did conduce nothing to the Church of Christ, Acts and Monuments, page 449.

Didoclavius in his book Alte Damascanum page 891. says that Hoods, Tippets
and Square Caps were introduced by antichrist to promote his splendour, and it
is a Stage Play dress and altogether ridiculous, being a distinguishment of
some men from others by signs useless and destitute of all Ornament; Upon
their shoulders (says he) there hangs down a hood such as fools used to wear,
being neither handsome nor convenient. Bucer refused to wear a square cap, and
being demanded the reason, he answered that God had made his head round.
Philpot chused rather to be secludvd the Convocation of the Clergy then to wear
a hood and a Tippet, who died a Martyr for the faith of the Protestant Church,
as Fox tells us in his Acts and Monuments, and the superstitious hoods is but a
product of the old Monkish mettel, grounded upon the superstitious exposition
of that place, Heb. 11. they wandered abroad in sheeps skins, etc. And whether
such men are fit to be Ministers of Christ who gives such expositions upon the
Scriptures, or whether it is not altogether detestable and Idolatrous, and
savours altogether of Ignorance, as to expound such a Scripture as this, stand
fast having your loins girt, etc. And this must signify the Episcoparian
girdles with which they tie their Canonical Coats or long black frocks; And
whether this is a good foundation for the College Doctors to stand booted and
spurd in the (Act) because there is mention made in Scripture of being shod
with the preparation of the Gospel; See Statute Accad. Oxon. Tit. 7. parag. 17.
And whether this be not ridiculous and foolish to give for their arms the book
with seven seals? is not that a gross abuse of what is laid down in the
Revelation, as if the liberal Arts (two whereof are Grammar and Fidling) are
typified by these seals, which none were worthy to open but the Lamb?

And as for their habits and black gowns and black Coats, these have been
borrowed from Rome or else from the Chimerians, a sort of people of old among
the Jews who were Idolaters, Hosea, 10. (...). Some of the Kings of Israel who
drew people into Idolatry, and countenanced Idolatrous Priests, 2 Kings 23. Who
were attired in black; These were prophesied against by Hosea 10. chap 5. They
were suppressed by Josiah and Zephany chap. 14. says he, stretch forth his hand
upon Judah and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and cut off the remnant
of Baal and the name of the Chimerims or black-coats with the Priests; Jerome
bids Nepotian being to enter upon the Clergy to avoid black attire.

In Tertullians time every one that did turn Christian or was made a Presbyter,
did renounce his gown which was the Roman vestment, and afterward the Clergy
relinquisht dark colored cloaks for Coats, and the Clergy and Laity in fine
were both alike habited; And a Bishop was condemned of the Council of Ga^grae
for introducing the fashon of long sad colored Cloaks that was condemned by
the Assembly unbeseeming the Priesthood; all this is clear out of Tertullians
writings de pallio with the notes of Salmasius thereon; And all these things
had but a bad Original, and were never commanded by God; And seeing they are
made such Idols of ought no longer to be imitated but to be quite abolished;
But some may object though the original were popish and Antichristian, yet
since they are employed to better uses, (viz) for distinction, order and
decency they may lawfully enough be retained; To this is answered, might not
the Jews have given the same reason to their reformers, that the Golden Calves
and their Groves might not be consumed and turned into ashes, because they
might be better employed to good uses afterward, or might not the Brazen
Serpent have continued as well as the pots of Ma^na; Yet when it was become an
Id^l away it must go; but the sum of all is, all these habits and attir's have
been used for superstitious ends, and pride, and pomp, and vain glory; So they
that retain them, they do no more then the Levite that stole away Michals Gods
from Mount Ephraim and set them up at Dan, where Idolatry became a more public
worship; So all this innovated superstitious trumpery is no way advantageous to
the Church of Christ, neither conduces to any true order, neither has any
congruity with the primitive times, and is to be denied by all that comes out
of Babylon, and out of the Apostasy into the primitive Order and the true
Churches practice and the Saints example.

As for Parish Churches which I mentioned before, some say it was the Decree of
the Lattern Council in the year 1180. But Cambden says that Dyonysius did
only distribute into Diocesses, and others judge into Parishes; and as
concerning Churchyards to bury the dead, its Original is Superstitious, and
all the ringing and singing and the reading before and over the dead is
Iddlatrous and Superstitions; Gaudentius says that of old times, (and so says
the Scriptures) they did bury their dead in their own ground, which custom was
taken away by Pope Innoteat the third, he prohibited that any should cause
themselves to be buried in unconsecrated ground, forsaking the Sepulchers of
their Fathers. Hospinian says that at last it became so superstitious in being
buried in order near the Church that they judged it material even to their
salvation. De Orig. Temple lib. 3. chap. 1. The Waldenses said the uses of
Churchyards is superstitious and invented only for Lucre sake, and it is no
matter in what ground any one is buried, see Usher de Suc^es. Eccles. Christ.
chap 6. And how much there is of this superstition in England now, and what
excessive rates are paid for breaking up ground all is sensible of that, it is
only one of the Popish nets which is holden up to get money by. And so I shall
conclude these things and say with John, Come out of of Babylon, and be not
partaker of her sins, least you be partakers of her Pla^^es, for the hour of
her judgment is come, and the time wherein her filthiness and loathsomeness
shall be made manifest to the Nations, and her skirts shall be uncovered, and
her abominable practices discovered, of which in part I have declared unto all
in this discourse, that all may see the abominations, and depart out of the
snares that leads to death, and these practices which tends to destruction

THE END.

