A VIEW Of that Part of the late Considerations Addressed to H. H. about the
TRINITY. Which concerns the Sober Enquiry, On that Subject. In a Letter to the
former Friend.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns, at the
lower-end of Cheapside, 1695.

A View of the late CONSIDERATIONS addressed to H. H. about the TRINITY.
YOU see, Sir, I make no haste to tell you my Thoughts of what has been
published since my last to you, against my Sentiments touching the H. Trinity.
I saw the Matter less required my Time and Thoughts, than my other Affairs: And
so little, that I was almost indifferent whether I took any notice thereof or
no. There is really nothing of Argument in what I have seen, but what I had
suggested before, and objected to my self, in those very Discourses of mine,
now animadverted on; which not having prevented, with me, the Opinion I am of,
can as little alter it, and should as little any Man's else.

But a little leisure, as it can, without extortion, be gained from other
occasions, I do not much grudg to bestow on this.

I find my self concerned in the late Considerations on the Explications of the
Doctrine of the Trinity -- in a Letter to H. H.

The Author is pleased to give me the honor of a Name, a lank, unvocal one. It
is so contrived, that one may easily guess whom he means; but the reason of his
doing so I cannot guess. Is it because he knew himself, what he would have
others believe?

But I suppose he as well knew his own Name. If he knew not the former, he ran
the hazard of injuring either the supposed Author, or the true, or both. I
could, I believe, make as shrewd a guess at his Name, and express it as
plainly. But I think it not civil to do so; because I apprehend he has some
reason to conceal it, whereof I think he has a Right to be the Judge. But I
will not prescribe to him Rules of Civility, of which that he is a great Judge,
I will not allow my self to doubt.

Yet I will not suppose him to have so very diminishing Thoughts of our
Savior, as not to acknowledge and reverence the Authority of that great Rule of
his, which he knows gained Reverence with some who called not themselves
Christians, [Whatsoever you would that Men should do to you -- etc.] Nor can
divine what greater reason he should have to hide his own Name, than to expose
mine, or make the Person he indigitates, be thought the Author of the Discourse
he intended to expose. Since no Man can imagine how, as the Christian World is
constituted, any one can be more obnoxious for denying three Persons, than for
asserting three Gods: Which latter his impotent attempt aims to make that
Author do.

For his Censures of that Author's style, and difficulty to be understood, they
offend me not. But so I have known some pretend Deafness, to what they were
unwilling to hear. There is indeed one place Sob. Enq. p. 24. in the end of
Sect. 8. where must should have been left out, upon the adding afterward of
can; that might give one some trouble. In which yet, the supposal of a (not
unusual) Asyndeton, would, without the help of Magic, have relieved a
considering Reader.

And for his Complements, as they do me no real good, so, I thank God, they
hurt me not. I dwell at Home, and better know my own Furniture, than another
can.

For himself, I discern, and readily acknowledge, in him, those excellent
Accomplishments, for which I most heartily wish him an Advocate in a better
Cause, without Despair he will yet prove so; when I take notice of some
Passages which look like Indications of a serious temper of Mind, as of
choosing God, and the honor of his Name, for our Portion and Design; and that
he lives in vain, who knows not his Maker, and his God, with the like.

But on the other hand, I was as heartily sorry to meet with an expression of
so different a strain, on so awful a Subject, of making a Coat for the Moon.

That Precept which Josephus inserts among those given the Jews, (...). Lib. 4.
Jud. Antiq.
does for the reason it has in it, abstracting from its Authority, deserve to
be considered. It seems to import a decency to the rest of Mankind, whose
notions of a Deity did not argue them sunk into the lowest degrees of
Sottishness and Stupidity. Good Sir, what needed (think you) so adventurous
Boldness, in so lubricous a Case! It gains nothing to a Man's Cause either of
Strength or Reputation with wise and good Men. A sound Argument will be as
sound without it. Nor should I much value having them on my side, whom I can
hope to make laugh at so hazardous a Jest. I can never indeed have any great
Veneration for a morose Sourness, whatsoever affected appearance it may have
with it, of a simulated Sanctimony or Religiousness; but I should think it no
hardship upon me to repress that Levity, as to attempt dancing upon the brink
of so tremendous a Precipice. And would always express my self with suspicion,
and a supposed possibility of being mistaken, in a case wherein I find many of
noted Judgment and Integrity, in the succession of several Ages, differing from
me.

But go we on to the Cause it self, where he pretends,

1. First to give a View of the Sober Enquirer's Hypothesis.

2. And then to argue against it.

As to the former. He does it, I am loath to say, with less fairness than from a
Person of his (otherwise) appearing Ingenuity, one would expect. For he really
makes me to have said more than I ever did, in diverse Instances; and much less
than I have expressly said; and that he cannot have so little understanding as
not to know was most material to the Cause in hand.

He represents me p. 40. col. 1. saying the Persons are distinct Essences,
numerical Natures, Beings, Substances; and col. 2. That I hold them to be three
Spirits; when in the close of one of those Paragraphs, viz. Calm Discourse, p.
112, 113. I recite the Words of W. J. In the Unity of the Godhead there must be
no plurality or multiplicity of Substances allowed: And do add, nor do I say
that there must. And p. 39, 40. I do not positively say there are three
distinct Substances, Minds, or Spirits. I would ask this my learned Antagonist,
have saying, and not saying, the same signification? And again, when Calm
Discourse, p. 123. my words are, I will not use the Expressions, as signifying
my formed Judgment, That there are three Things, Substances or Spirits in the
Godhead; how could he say, I hold the three Persons to be three Spirits? Is any
Man, according to the ordinary way of speaking, said to hold what is not his
formed Judgment? If he only propose things whereof he doubts, to be considered
and discust by others, in order to the forming of it, and by gentle ventilation
to sift out Truth, it the rather argues him not to hold this or that.

And I think much Service might be done to the common Interest of Religion, by
such a free mutual Communication of even more doubtful Thoughts, if such
Disquisitions were pursued with more Candor, and with less Confidence and
prepossession of Mind, or addictedness to the Interest of any Party whatsoever.
If it were rather endeavored, to reason one another into, or out of, this or
that Opinion, than either by Sophistical Collusions to cheat, or to Hector by
great words, one that is not of my mind. Or if the Design were less to expose
an Adversary, than to clear the matter in Controversy.

Besides, that if such Equanimity did more generally appear, and govern, in
Transactions of this nature, it would produce a greater liberty in
communicating our Thoughts, about some of the more vogued and fashionable
Opinions, by exempting each other from the fear of ill Treatment, in the most
sensible kind. It being too manifest, that the same confident insulting Genius,
which makes a Man think himself competent to be a Standard to Mankind, would
also make him impatient of dissent, and tempt him to do worse, than reproach
one that differs from him, if it were in his power. And the Club or
Fagot-Arguments must be expected to take place, where what he thinks rational
ones, did not do the business. This only on the by.

In the mean time that there is a Trinity in the Godhead, is no matter of doubt
with me; but only whether this be the best way of explaining and defending it.
If this be not the best, or sufficient, some other will, I believe, or has
been found out by some other. Of which I have spoken my sense not only
indefinitely, Calm Disc. p. 81. but particularly of the more common way; not
that I did then, or have yet thought it the best, but not indefensible, p. 73,
74.

And I must now sincerely profess, That the perusal of these very
Considerations gives me more confidence about this Hypothesis, than I allowed
my self before; finding that the very sagacious Author of them, of whose
Abilities and Industry together, I really have that Opinion, as to count him
the most likely to confute it of all the modern Antitrinitarians, has no other
way to deal with it, than first, both partially and invidiously to represent
it; and then, rather to trifle than argue against it. He first paints it out in
false and ugly Colors, before he comes to reasoning. And then, when he should
reason, he says nothing that has so much as a color. It seems to me an
Argument of a suspected ill Cause on his side, that he thought it needful to
prepossess the Reader with the imagination of I know not (and I believe he
knows not) what gross Ideas, as he romances, belonging to this Hypothesis.
Because from those words, Prove. 8. Then was I by him, as one brought up with
him, and daily his Delight; the Author speaks of the delicious Society, which
these words intimate, the Eternal Wisdom, and the prime Author and Parent of
all things, to have each with other.

For my part, I have little doubt but this ingenious Writer is so well
acquainted with the gust and relish of intellectual Delight, that he chose to
expose his Adversary by using that odd Expression of gross Ideas so causlesly,
in accommodation only to the Genius of some other Men, whom he thought fit to
humor, rather than his own. Nor can he be so little acquainted with the
Paganish Theology, as not to apprehend a vast disagreement between this and
that, and a much greater Agreement between the Paganish Notion of the Deity,
and his own.

For the Questions which he supposes me to put, and makes me answer as he
thinks fit, by (misapplied) Passages of that Discourse, I hope it will appear
they were either prevented, or answered at another rate.

At length he says, The Butt-end of this Hypothesis, etc.

I like not that Phrase the worse for the Author's sake, of whom it seems
borrowed, whose Memory greater things will make live, when we are forgot.

But let him proceed -- The Butt-end of this Hypothesis is the true strength of
it. But that true strength he has either had the hap not to observe, or taken
the care not to represent, i. e. from what is so often inculcated in that
Discourse, the necessary existence of two Hypostases of and in the first, and
of an omnimodous simplicity groundlesly supposed in the Divine Being, he has
kept himself at a wary cautious distance, when he might apprehend there was its
strength. Therefore I cannot also but observe, that as he has marked this
Hypothesis, with (most undue) ill Characters; so he has maimed it too, of what
was most considerable belonging to it, that he might expose it by the former
means, so as to make it need much defense; and that by the latter, it might
seem quite destitute of any defense at all.

And now when (not without some untoward Disfigurations) it has thus far
'scap'd his hands, and is (in none of the best shapes) set up only to be beaten
down; The Argument he first attacks it with is the inartificial one of
Authority. And yet his Argument from this Topic, is only negative, that the
Opinion he would confute wants Authority, That the Enquirer was the first that
ever dreamt of it. And that no learned Divine of any Persuasion will subscribe
to it: q. d. It Is false, and impossible to be true; the Enquirer only proposing
what he offered, as possible for ought we know, is not otherwise opposed than
by asserting it to be impossible. This therefore he must say, or he says
nothing to the purpose; And why now is it impossible? Because no Body said it
before. So, then, was every thing that any Man first said; but afterward, by
being often spoken, it might, it seems, at length become true!

For any learned Divines subscribing to it, I suppose he intends that in the
strict sense. And so the Enquirer never said he would subscribe it himself,
otherwise than that his Judgment did more incline to it, as liable to less
exception than other ways of defending the Doctrine of the Trinity, or than
denying it, which he thought least defensible of all.

But now supposing one should find learned Divines of the same Mind, (and
perhaps some may be found more confident than he) I would ask the Considerator,
whether he will therefore confess a Trinity a possible thing?

If not, he deals not fairly, to put the Enquirer upon quoting Authorities to
no purpose: Or that he would have them conclude him, by whom he will not be
concluded himself.

He seems indeed himself to have forgot the Question (with which afterward he
charges the Enquirer) as it is set down Sober Enquiry p. 1. Whether a Trinity
in the Godhead be a possible thing? This was the Question, not what John, or
Thomas, or James such a One thought?

But while he pretends to think no body else is of the Enquirer's Mind in the
particular point he is now speaking to, i. e. the Delicious Society the Divine
Hypostases are supposed to have with each other; give me leave freely to
discourse this matter. I would fain know what it is, wherein he supposes the
Enquirer to have overshot his Mark: Or of what makes he here so mighty a
Wonderment*

It can be but one of these two things:

Either that there are three Divine Persons in the Godhead really distinct; Or,

That they have (if there be) a Delicious Society or Conversation with each
other.

Will he say the former is a singular Opinion? Or that it is Novel? Was there
never a real Trinitarian in the World before? Does he not, in his own express
words, sort the Enquirer with one, whom he will not deny to be a learned
Divine, p. 43. of these his present Considerations, col. 1. [The Author of the
28 Propositions, and Mr. H -- w, as he calls the Enquirer, are honest Men, and
real Trinitarians.] By which former Character he has, I dare say, ten thousand
times more gratified his Ambition, than by calling him learned too. And I
believe he will as little think this a novel Opinion, as a singular one.

Nor shall I thank him for acknowledging it to have been the Opinion of the
Fathers, generally, not only Ante-Nicene and Nicene, but Post-Nicene too, for
some following Ages, unto that of P. Lombard, so obvious it is to every one
that will but more slightly search.

For my part, I will not except Justin Martyr himself, whom I the rather
mention, both as he was one of the more ancient of the Fathers; and as I may
also call him, the Father of the Modalists; (...).
nor his Notion even about the Homoousian-Trinity, as he expressly styles it.

For tho it will require more time than I now intend to bestow, to give a
distinct account of every Passage throughout that Discourse of his, yet his
Expression of the (...) must not be so taken, as if it were to be torn away
from its coherence, and from it self. When therefore he says the (...), the
being unbegotten, begotten, and having proceeded, are not Names of the Essence,
but ((...)) Modes of Subsistence; he must mean they are not immediately Names
of the Essence, but mediately they cannot but be so. For what do they modify?
Not nothing. When they are said to be Modes of Subsistence, what is it that
subsists? We cannot pluck away these Modes of Subsistence from that which
subsists, and whereof they are the Modes. And what is that? You Will say the
(...), the one Essence, which he had mentioned before; and that one Essence is,
it is true, as perfectly one, as it is possible; for what is of it self, and what
are from that, to be with each other, i. e. that they are congenerous, as the
Sun and its Rays (according to that Heb. 1. 3. (...), the effulgency of Glory)
or as Mind, and (where there is nothing else but Substance) consubstantial
Thought or Word. Therefore this Oneness of Essence must be taken in so large
and extensive a sense, as that it may admit of these Differences. For so he
afterward plainly speaks, if (...); If the one (the Father) has his Existence
without being begotten, (...), another (the Son) by being begotten, (...), but
that (the Holy Ghost) by having proceeded, here it befalls us to behold
differences ((...)) or the things that import difference. There must be a
sense, therefore, wherein he understood this Essence to be most truly One; and
a sense wherein he also understood it to have its differences, and those too
not unimportant ones, as being unbegotten, and being begotten, signify no light
differences.

And in what latitude of sense he understood the Oneness of Essence, whereof he
had before spoken, may be seen in his following Explication, when what he said
he would have be ((...)) more manifest; he makes Adam's peculiar Mode of
Subsistence to be that he was (...), not begotten, but made by God's own Hand;
but for them that were from him, he intimates theirs to be, that they were
begotten, not made. If then you enquire concerning the same Essence that was
common to him and them, you still find that Man is the (...), the Subject,
whether of formation, as to him, or of generation, as to them. And who
apprehends not in what latitude of sense the humane Nature is One, which is
common to Adam, and his Posterity? Tho the Divine Nature is incomparably more
One, which is common to the Father, Son, and Spirit, as we have formerly
insisted, and shall further show it cannot but be, in all necessary, and
continually-depending Emanations.

Yet I might, if there were need, again (as to this part) quote the
Considerator to himself. For I suppose he will not disown the Considerations in
1693. in which, page 15. col. 1. are these words, Dr. Cudworth by a great
number of very pertinent and Home-quotations, has proved that his Explication
(I mean that part of it which makes the three Persons to be so many distinct
Essences, or Substances) is the Doctrine of the Principal, if not of all the
Fathers, as well as of the Platonists. And it is added, and I (for my own part)
do grant it.

Upon the whole then, I reckon that as to this first part, we stand clear not
only to the rest of the World, but with this Author himself, that to be a real
Trinitarian is not so unheard of a thing, or what no learned Divine of any
Persuasion ever dreamt of before the Enquirer. But now for the

Second Part. The Delicious Society supposed to be between (or rather among)
the three Persons. Is this a Dream! And so strange a One! Why, good Sir! Can
you suppose three Persons, i. e. three intellectual Subsistences, perfectly
Wise, Holy, and Good, co-existing with, inexisting in one another, to have no
Society? Or that Society not to be delicious? He says, How can it be? I say,
how can it but be? Herein I am sure the Enquirer has far more Company than in
the former. For whether the three Persons have all the same numerical Essence,
or three distinct; all agree they most delightfully converse. Will he pretend
never to have read any that make Love (as it were intercurrent between the two
first) the Character of the third? In short; Is it the Thing he quarrels with
as singular, or the Word? At the Thing, supposing three Persons, he can have no
Quarrel, without quarreling with the common Sense of Mankind. For the Word, he
has more wit and knowledge of Language than to pretend to find fault with that.
For let him but consult Expositors (even the known Critics) upon the mentioned
place Prove. 8. (whom, in so plain a case, I will not be at the pains to quote
and transcribe) and take notice whether none read those words, fui in deliciis.
Therefore I believe the Considerator will be so ingenuous, as to perceive, he
has, in this part of his Discourse, grossly overshot, or undershot, or shot
wide of his own Mark, if indeed he had any, or did not (letting his Bolt fly
too soon) shoot at Rovers, before he had taken steady aim at any thing. In
short, all this Dust could be raised but with design only, because he could not
enlighten his Readers, to blind them.

But now when he should come by solid Argument to disprove the Hypothesis, by
showing that three individual Divine Natures, or Essences, can possibly have no
Nexus, so as to become one entire Divine Nature, and, at the same time, (which
this Hypothesis supposes) remain still three individual Divine Natures and
Essences, he thinks fit to leave it to another to do it for him, who, he says,
if he cannot prove this, can prove nothing. And when we see that Proof, it will
be time enough to consider it.

In the mean time I cannot here but note what I will neither, in Charity, call
Forgery in the Considerator, nor, in Civility, Ignorance, but it cannot be less
than great Oversight; his talk of these Three, so united as to become One: the
Enquirer never spoke (nor dreamt) of their becoming One, but of their being
naturally, necessarily, and eternally so.

Then he comes to put the Question, as (he says) it is between the Enquirer and
the Socinians. And he puts it thus, How three distinct, several, individual,
Divine Beings, Essences, or Substances, should remain three several individual
Substances, and yet, at the same time, be united into One Divine Substance
called God? One would have thought, when he had so newly waved the former
Question, as wherein he meant not to be concerned, he should presently have put
a new One, upon which he intended to engage himself. But we have the same over
again, even with the same ill look of an equivalent Phrase unto [becoming]
[united] into One, to insinuate to his Reader, as if his Antagonist thought
these Three were de novo united, not in, but into One. Which he knew must have
a harsh sound, and as well knew it to be most repugnant to the Enquirer's most
declared Sentiment. Nor will it be any presumption, if I take the liberty to
set down the Question according to the Enquirer's Mind, who have as much reason
to know it, as he; and I am sure it will be more agreeable to the tenor of his
Discourse now referred to, Whether the (...), or the Divine Being, may not
possibly, for ought we know, contain three Natures, or Essences, under the
Names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, so far distinct, as is necessary to found
the distinct Predications or Attributions severally given them in the Holy
Scriptures, and yet be eternally, necessarily, naturally, vitally so united, as
notwithstanding that remaining distinction, to be One God.

And let us now see what he has to say;

First, To the Enquirer's Illustrations of it, as possible.

Secondly, What he brings to prove it impossible.

As to the former part. He first falls upon what the Enquirer had said
concerning the vegetative, sensitive, and intellective Natures in our selves.
And upon this he insists so operously, as if the whole weight of the Cause had
been laid upon it, and seems to think the Enquirer had forgot the Question,
when he mentioned it; because he says, those are only distinct Faculties, not
Persons, or Substances (tho Persons were not in his Question) without ever
taking any notice of the Enquirers waving it, with these words, That he would
content himself with what was more obvious. But this is is all Art. To raise a
mighty posse, and labor to seem to those that he believed would read what he
writ only, not what the other did, most effectually to expugne what he saw was
neglected, tho not altogether useless, as we shall see anon.

In the mean time, it is observable how needlessly he slurs himself in this his
first brisk Onset. He says, No Man ever pretended -- That the vegetative,
sensitive, and intellective Faculties (or Powers) are so many distinct,
individual Persons, Substances, or Essences, we grant, etc.

What did no Man ever pretend that these three distinct Natures, the
vegetative, sensitive, intellective, were, in Man, three distinct Substances,
or Souls, concurring by a certain subordination in him? What necessity was
there, that to heighten his Triumph, in the Opinion of his credulous Followers,
he should, with so glorious a Confidence, put on the vain and false show of
having all the World on his side; and herein either dissemble his Knowledge, or
grossly bewray his Ignorance in the mere History of Philosophy. And most
imprudently suppose all his Readers as ignorant, as he would seem! What, did he
never hear of an Averroist in the World? Does he not know that Physician and
Philosopher, and his Followers, earnestly contended for what he says no Man
ever pretended to? Or that diverse other Commentators upon Aristotle, have some
abetted, others as vehemently opposed them in it? Not to insist also that some
thought the Intellectus Agens, and Patiens to be distinct Substances, belonging
to the Nature of Man, as others had also other Conceits about the former? And
if he look some hundreds of Years back, as far as the time, and extant Work of
Nemesius, Bishop and Philosopher (as he writes himself) of the Nature of Man,
(who lived in the Time of Gregory Nazianzen, as appears by an Epistle of his
writ to him, and prefixed to that little Book of his) he will find that Author
takes notice there were diverse that took Man to consist of Mind, Soul, and
Body, and that some did doubt whether the Mind super vening to the Soul, (...),
etc. cap. 1.
as one to the other, did not make the latter intelligent. And in several other
parts of that Work (easy, if it were necessary to be recited) he speaks it as
the Judgment of some, That the unreasonable Nature in Man did exist by it self,
(...).
as being of it self an unreasonable Soul, not a part of the reasonable,
accounting it one of the greatest Absurdities, (...), cap. 16.
that the unreasonable Soul should be a part of that which is reasonable.

And he carries us yet much farther back, Enn. 6. lib. 7. cap. 5, 6, 7, etc.
referring us to Plotinus, in whom any that will, may read much more to that
purpose in many places.

It matters not whether this Opinion be true or false, but a great mistake (or
misrepresentation) it was, to say no Man ever pretended to it.

And be that as it will; if all the Readers will suspend their Judgments, That
a Trinity in the Godhead is impossible, till the Considerator shall have
proved, by plain demonstration, the concurrence of three such Spirits (a
vegetative, sensitive, and intellective) vitally united in the Constitution of
Man, is a thing simply impossible, I believe he will not in haste, have many
Proselytes.

I, for my part, as his own Eyes might have told him, laid no stress upon it;
but only mentioned it in transitu, as I was going on to what is obvious, and in
view to every Man, the union between our Soul and Body. Nor was I sollicitous
to find this an exact Parallel, as he fancies I was obliged to do. What if
there be no exact Parallel? Will any Man of a sober Mind, or that is Master of
his own Thoughts, conclude every thing impossible in the uncreated Being,
whereof there is not an exact parallel in the Creation? If any Man will stand
upon this, come make an Argument of it, let us see it in form, and try its
strength. [Whatsoever has not its exact parallel in the Creation, is
impossible in God,] etc. He will sooner prove himself ridiculous, than prove
his Point by such a Medium.

It Is enough for a sober Man's purpose, in such a case as we are now
considering, if we find such things actually are (or might as easily be, as
what we see actually is) among the Creatures, that are of as difficult
conception, and explication, as what appears represented in the Enquirers
Hypothesis concerning a Trinity. It Is trifling to attempt to give, or to ask a
parallel exact per omnia. It abundantly serves any reasonable purpose, if there
be a parallel quoad hoc, viz. in respect of the facility or difficulty of
Conception. And tho the vegetative, sensitive, and intellective Natures be not
so many distinct Substances, a Trinity is not less conceivable in the Divine
Being, than three such Natures, or natural Powers, in the One humane Nature.

And whoever they be that will not simplify the Divine Being into nothing (as
the Excellent Author of the 28 Propositions speaks) must also acknowledge the
most real Perfections in the Divine Being, tho not univocal, but infinitely
transcendent to any thing in us. And are they no way distinct? Let any sober
Understanding judge, will the same Notion agree to them all? Is his Knowledge,
throughout, the same with his effective Power? Then he must make himself. For
who can doubt he knows himself? And is his Will the self-same undistinguishable
Perfection, in him, with his Knowledge? Then the Purposes of his Will must be to
effect all that he can. For does he not know all that he can do? And the
Complacencies of his Will must be as much in what is evil, as good, even in the
most odious turpitude of the vilest, and most immoral Evils! For he knows both
alike. I know what is commonly said of extrinsecal Denominations: But are such
Denominations true, or false? Have they any thing in re correspondent to them,
or have they not? Then some distinction there must be of these Perfections
themselves. If so, how are they distinguished?

And there appears great reason, from God's own Word, to conceive greater
distinction of the three Hypostases in his Being, than of the Attributes which
are common to them, as is said, Sob. Enq. page 140. In reference whereto, it is
not improper or impertinent to mention such Differences, as we find in our own
Being, tho they be not distinct Substances.

Less distinction in our selves may lead us to conceive the possibility of
greater in him, in whom we are wont to apprehend nothing but Substance.

What he adds concerning the Union of Soul and Body in our selves, (which he
cannot deny to be distinct Substances) is, from a Man of so good sense, so
surprisingly strange, and remote from the Purpose, that one would scarce think
it from the same Man; but that he left this part to some other of the Club, and
afterward writ on, himself, without reading it over; or this was with him
(what we are all liable to) some drowsy Interval.

For when he had himself recited as the Enquirer's words, or sense, If there is
this Union between two so contrary Natures and Substances, as the Soul and
Body, why may there not be a like Union between two or three created Spirits?
He, without shadow of a pretense, feigns the Enquirer again to have forgot the
Question, because Soul and Body are not both intelligent Substances. And why,
Sir, does this argue him to have forgot the Question? It Is as if he expected a
Man to be at the top of the Stairs, as soon as he touched the first Step. In a
Series of Discourse, must the beginning touch the end, leaving out what is to
come between, and connect both parts? What then serve Mediums for? And so
farewell to all reasoning, since nothing can be proved by it self. He expected,
it seems, I should have proved three intelligent Natures might be united,
because three intelligent Natures might be united!

But say I (and so he repeats) if there be so near Union between things of so
contrary Natures as Soul and Body, why not between two or three created
Spirits? The Question is, as he now states it himself, why may not three
intelligent Substances -- be united? And hither he (with palpable violence)
immediately refers the mention of the Union of Soul and Body; and says he, Why
Sir, are Body and Soul intelligent Substances? And, say I, but why, Sir, are
not the three (supposed) created Spirits intelligent Substances? And now,
thinks he, will my easy admiring Readers, that read me only, and not him, say,
What a Baffle has he given the Enquirer? What an ignorant Man is this Mr. --
to talk of Soul and Body, as both intelligent Substances? But if any of them
happen upon the Enquirer's Book too, then must they say, how scurvily does this
Matter turn upon himself? How inconsiderate a Prevaricator was he that took
upon him the present part of a Considerer, so to represent him? And I my self
would say, had I the opportunity of free Discourse with him in a Corner, (which
because I have not, I say it here) Sir, is this sincere Writing? Is this the
way to sift out Truth? And I must further say, this looks like a Man stung by
the pungency of the present Question. If Soul and Body, things of so contrary
Natures, that is, of an intelligent and unintelligent Nature, can be united
into one (humane) Nature, why may not three created Spirits, all intelligent
Natures, be as well united into some one thing? It appears you knew not what to
say to it; and would fain seem to say something, when you really had nothing to
say, and therefore so egregiously tergiversate, and feign your self not to
understand it, or that your Antagonist did not understand himself. The
Enquirer's Scope was manifest. Nothing was to be got by so grossly perverting
it. Is there no Argument but a pari? Might you not plainly see, he here argued
a fortiori? If contrary Natures might be so united, why not much rather like
Natures?

When you ask me this Question, Do not Body and Soul remain two Substances, a
bodily, and a spiritual, notwithstanding their concurrence to the Constitution
of a Man? I answer, Yes. And I thank you, Sir, for this kind Look toward my
Hypothesis. If they were not so, the mention of this Union had no way served
it. You know it is only Union, with continuing distinction, that is for my
purpose. I doubt you nodded a little, when you asked me that Question; and I do
annuere.

But when the Discourse was only of a natural Union, what, in the Name of
Wonder, made you dream of a Christmass-Pye? Had you writ it at the same time of
Year I am now writing, I should have wondered less. But either you had some
particular, preternatural Appetite to that sort of Delicate; or you gave your
Fancy a random liberty, to make your Pen write whatever came to your fingers
end, and that whirled you unaware into a Pastry, and so, by mere chance, you
came to have your finger in the Pie. Or you thought to try whether this wild
Ramble might not issue as luckily for you, as Dr. Echard's Jargon of Words
fortuitously put together (to ridicule Hobbes's fatal Chain of Thoughts) at
length ending in a Napkin; which was mightily for your turn, in your present
Case.

But upon the whole Matter* when you let your Mind so unwarily be in pati^nis,
your Cookery quite spoiled your Philosophy. Otherwise, when you had newly read
those words in the Sob. Enquiry, (as I find you had) page 17. [Waving the many
artificial Unions of distinct things, that united, and continuing distinct,
make one thing, under one Name, I shall only consider what is Natural] you
would never have let it (your Mind, I mean so fine a thing) be huddled up, and
sopt, with Meat, Plums, Sugar, Wine, in a Christmass-Pye; or have thought that
the Union of an humane Soul with an humane Body was like such a jumble as this.
I believe when some among the Ancients made use of this Union of Soul and Body,
(as I find they have) to represent a very sacred, viz. the Hypostatical One,
they little thought it would be so debased; or that any thing would be said of
it so extravagant as this. And, if we design doing any Body good by writing,
let us give over this way of Talk, lest People think, what I remember Cicero
once said of the Epicureans arguing, that they do not so much consider, as
(sortiri) cast Lots what to say.

But now it is like we may come to some closer Discourse. We see what is said to
the Enquirer's Elucidation of his Hypothesis to represent it possible, which by
mere Oversight and Incogitance (as I hope now appears) was too hastily
pronounced an Oversight, or Incogitancy.

2. We are next to consider what he says to prove it impossible. And so far as
I can apprehend the drift of the Discourse, what he alleges will be reduced to
these two Heads of Argument.

Viz. That three such Hypostases (or Subsistents, as I have chosen to call
them) can have no possible Nexus, by which to be one God.

1. Because they are all supposed intelligent.

2. Because they can neither be said to be finite, nor infinite.

He should not therefore have said the Hypothesis was mere incogitance and
oversight; for he knows I saw, and considered them both. (In the Sob. Enquiry
it self; the former page 20, 21. the latter page 70, 71. with page 122, 123.)
And thought them unconcluding then, as I still think. Nor do I find the
Considerer has now added any strength to either of them. But I shall, since he
is importune, go to the reconsideration of them with him. And

1. As to the former, I cannot so much as imagine what should make him,
confessing (which he could not help) the actual Union of an intelligent and
unintelligent Being, deny the possible Union of intelligent Beings. He seems to
apprehend many dangerous things in it, that if he cannot reason, he may fright
a Man out of it, and out of his Wits too. It will infer associating,
discoursing, solacing. But where lies the danger of all this? Or to whom is it
dangerous? He says it introduces three Omniscient, Almighty Beings, as I
expressly call them, associating, etc. But he cites no place where, and I
challenge him to name any Persons among whom, I so expressly called them. He may
indeed tell where I blamed him for representing some of his Adversaries, as
affirming three Almighties, and denying more than One; but that is not expressly
calling them so my self. And he may know in time it is one thing expressly to
call them so, and another to put him (as he is concerned) to disprove it.

Ay, but it will further infer Tritheism. It will make three Gods. And if this
be not to make three Gods, it can never be made appear that the Pagans held
more Gods -- Yes, if there be no natural, vital Nexus, if they be not united in
One, of which the Pagans never talked: Or, if they be coordinate, not
subordinate, as Dr. Cudworth speaks. And I add, if that subordination be, not
arbitrary, but by necessary, natural, continual emanation of the second from
the first, and of the third from both the other; so as that their goings forth
may be truly from everlasting, as is said of the One, and may as well be
conceived of another of them.

I would have the Trinitarians be content with the Reproach of falling in,
quoad hoc, with Plato; and not envy their Antagonists the honor of more
closely following Mahomet. And, Sir, there is more Paganism in denying this,
and the Divine Revelation upon which it is grounded, than in supposing it.

No. But there can be no such Nexus. Conversation, Consociation, mutual
Harmony, Agreement, and Delectation -- cannot be conceived, but between Beings
so distinct and diverse, that they can be One in no Natural respect, but only
in a Civil, or Oeconomical. This is loud, and earnest. But why can there not?
Setting aside Noise and Clamor, I want to know a Reason, why intelligent
Beings may not be as intimately, and naturally united with one another, as
unintelligent, and intelligent? And if so, why such Union should spoil mutual
Conversation and Delight? Perhaps his Mind and mine might not do well together;
for he cannot conceive, and I, for my part, cannot but conceive, that most
perfect intelligent Natures, vitally united, must have the most delightful
Conversation, Harmony, and Agreement together; and so much the more, by how
much the more perfect they are, and by how much more perfect their Union is.

Whereas then I expect a Reason, why intelligent Beings cannot be capable of
natural Union, and no other is given me, but because they are intelligent. And
again, why such Beings naturally united cannot converse, and no other is given
me, but because they are naturally united, i. e. Such things cannot be, because
they cannot be. By how much the less such Reasons have to convince, they have
the more to confirm me, that the Hypothesis I have proposed is not capable of
being disproved. And for my increased Confidence I must profess my self so far
beholden to the Considerator.

This, in the mean time, I do here declare, that I see not so much as the
shadow of a Reason from him, why three spiritual, or intelligent Beings cannot
be naturally and vitally united with each other, with continuing distinction,
so as to be really and truly One thing. If they cannot, I would know why? i. e.
Why they cannot as well, or much rather than the Soul and Body, so as to be one
entire Man. If they can; such a created Union is acknowledged possible; which
is all that part of our Discourse contends for. And it is enough for our present
purpose; for this will be an Union of (...), i. e. of things of the same
nature, the Soul and Body are (...), i. e. things of very different Natures.
And it sufficiently prepared our way, as was intended, to advance further, and
add,

That if such a created or made Union be possible, it cannot be understood why
a like uncreated or unmade Union should be thought impossible.

And if it be possible, the noisy Clamor, that a Trinity in the Godhead is
impossible, or that it will infer Tritheism, must cease, and be hushed into
everlasting silence. Or if it shall still be resolved to be kept up, to carry
on the begun Humor, can only serve to fright Children, or unthinking People;
but can never be made articulate enough, to have any signification with Men of
sense.

For when the Father is acknowledged on all hands to be the Original, or
Fountain-Being, existing necessarily, and eternally of himself; the Son
existing by eternal Promanation necessarily of, and from, and in the Father;
the Holy Ghost of, and in them both; These, because they all exist necessarily,
cannot but be each of them God, and, because they exist in necessary, natural,
eternal Union, cannot but be one God.

And he that shall attempt to make Tritheism of this, will sooner prove himself
not the third part of a wise Man, than from hence prove three Gods. We may
truly and fitly say the Father is God, the Son is God, the Holy Ghost is God.
But that form of Speech, the Father is a God, the Son is a God, the Holy Ghost
is a God, I think unjustifiable. The former way of speaking well agrees with
the Homoousiotes of the Deity, the Substance whereof is congenerous. You may
fitly say of three drops of the same Water, they are each of them Water. But if
you should say they are each of them a Water, one would understand you to mean
they were all drops of so many different sorts of Water. I do upon the whole
judge the Substance or Essence of the three Hypostases to be as perfectly One,
as can possibly consist with the emanation of some from other of them. But now
next.

In his way to his second Topic of Argumentation, he is guilty of a strange
sort of omission, i. e. he twice over says he will omit, what he greatly
insists upon, as a mighty matter, that this (meaning the Enquirer's Hypothesis)
is Heresy among those of his own Party, whether they be the nominal, or the
real Trinitarians, who all agree, That each of the Divine Persons is perfect
God, in the most adequate and perfect sense; and this too, as such Person is
considered sejunctly, or as the Athanasian Creed speaks, by himself, etc.

To this I only say, in the first place, that, if this weigh any thing, it
ought in reason to be as heavy upon him, as me; for I believe the same People
that will call this account of the Trinity Heresy, will call his denial of it
Heresy much more. But if he be not concerned at that, I am the more obliged to
him, that he has a kinder concern for me than himself. And if he really have,
let it ease his mind to know, that let the Opinion be Heresy never so much, I,
for my part, am however resolved to be no Heretic, as he, and they may well
enough see, by the whole tenor of that Discourse.

But yet I humbly crave leave to differ from him in this, as well as in greater
Matters. I am apt enough indeed to think that the Nominal Trinitarians will
judge the Opinion of the Real Trinitarians to want Truth; and the Real will,
perhaps, more truly judge theirs to want Sense. But neither the one, nor the
other will say that each of the Divine Persons is perfect God, in the most
adequate and perfect sense. For both cannot but agree that God, in the most
adequate and perfect sense, includes Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; but they will
none of them say that each, or any of the Persons is Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. And I am very confident, he that shall so represent them, will betray
them by it into such inconveniences, and so much against their mind and
intent, that if ever they did trust him, as I believe they never did this
Considerator, to express their sense for them, they never will do it more. As
for Athanasius himself, whose Creed he mentions, tho he often speaks of an
equality of the Persons in point of Godhead; yet he also often, Tom. 2. p. 576.
most expressly excepts the Differences (which I take to be very important) of
being unbegotten, begotten, and proceeding. And which is a Difference with a
Witness, in his Questions and Answers; He asks how many Causes are there in
God? [(Q. 11.) (...),] and answers, One only, and that is the Father. And then
asks [Q. 12. (...)] How many effects, or things caused? And answers two, the
Son and the Spirit. And adds, The Father is called a Cause, because he begets
the Son, and sends out the Spirit. The Son and Spirit are said to be caused,
because the Son is begotten, and does not beget; the Spirit is sent forth, and
does not send. Now can he be thought all this while to mean an absolute
equality? And whereas he uses the Term (...), which our Author renders
sejunctly, or by himself, that he may make it seem opposite to what is said by
the Enquirer, page 50. I, for my part, say, as Athanasius does, that each of
these Persons is (...), singly God, and Lord; but I say not, as he does not;
and he denies what the Sober Enquiry denies, in the mentioned place, That any
one of the Persons sejunctly, is all that is signified by the Name of God,
which words this Author slily leaves out, for what purpose he best knows. But
his purpose, be it what it will, can no longer be served by it, than till the
Reader shall take the pains to cast back his Eye upon page 50. of the Sober
Enquiry. And I must here put the Considerator in mind of what I will not
suppose him ignorant, but inadvertent only, at this time; That one may be
sejoin'd, or abstracted from another two ways, or by a twofold abstraction,
precisive, or negative. That we may truly say of the Father, Son, or Holy
Ghost, that the One of them is, or is not God, abstracting from both the other,
according as you differently abstract. If you abstract any one of the Persons
from both the other by precisive abstraction, and each of them is God or Lord,
(...), or singly considered; but if by negative abstraction you sever any one
from the other, so as to say the one is God, and not the other, or any one is
all that is signified by the Name of God, I deny it, as before I did; for so
you would exclude the other two the Godhead; which is but what was expressly
enough said Sob. Enquiry, page 47. The Father is God, but not excluding the Son
and the Holy Ghost, the Son is God, but not excluding -- etc.

And if (as this Author quotes) we are compelled by the Christian Verity so to
speak, I wonder it should not compel him, as it is Christian Verity, or at
least as it is Verity, as well as the rest of Christians, or Mankind. Why has
he only the privilege of exemption from being compelled by truth? Athanasius
his word is (...), we are necessitated; and if the Considerator's own
Translation grieve him, he might relieve himself by considering that all
Necessity is not compulsive.

And because he has brought me to Athanasius, I shall take the occasion to
say, I cannot apprehend him to have any sentiment contrary to this Hypothesis.
His business was against the Arians, or the Ariomanites (as he often called
them, as symbolizing also with Manes.) And because with them the Controversy
was, whether the Son and Spirit were Creatures, in opposition hereto he
constantly asserts their consubstantiality with the Father, never intending
(for ought that appears) that their Being was numerically the same with his;
but of the same kind, uncreated, coessential, coeternal with his own. For so he
expressly speaks in his other (or additional) Questions, Quaestiones aliae.
i. e. asking (Quest. 6.) How many Essences (...), i. e. How many sorts of
Essence (as the Answer will direct us to understand it) do you acknowledge in
God?

The Answer is, I say, one Essence, one Nature, one Form ((...)) and adds, one
Kind, ((...)) which sufficiently expounds all the rest. He acknowledged no
different kinds of Essence or Nature in the Godhead, but that One only, which
was eternal and uncreated; agreeably to what he elsewhere says against the
Followers of Sabellius. Contra Sabellii Gregales.
It Is impossible things not eternal -- Beings not partaking Godhead, should be
ranked, or put in the same order with the Godhead. Afterward speaking of the
Father and the Son, he says, (...), the One is such (not the same) as the
other, the other such as he. And that the Son was not to be conceived under
another Species ((...)) nor under a strange and foreign Character ((...)) but
was God as the Father. And I appeal to any Man's Understanding and Conscience,
If that great Author believed a numerical sameness of Essence, common to the
three Persons, what should make him blame the Sabellians for making the Son
(...), (...). Tom. 1. p. 241. Edit. Paris.
not (...), when by the latter in that case, he must mean the same thing as by
the former?

In the forecited Questions, he expressly says we were to acknowledge in the
Deity (...), three Individuals. Answer to Quest. 7. ubi prius.

And elsewhere he as distinctly asserts (...), three things. And what could he
mean by three things, not three Deities, (as he often inculcates) but he must
certainly mean three Entities, three Essences; for by three things, he could
not possibly mean three Non-Entities, or three Nothings. His great care plainly
was to assert the true Deity of the Son and Spirit, or their Preeternity, or
that it could never be said ((...)) there was a time when they were not, which
he inculcates in an hundred places, still insisting that one Deity, one Essence
was common to them, but still with distinction; and as warmly inveighs against
Sabellius and P. Samosatensis, as against Arius every whit.

And that which puts his meaning quite out of doubt, speaking how the Father,
Tractat. de Definitionibus, Tom. 2. 45. ubi vid. plura.
Son and Spirit, tho of one and the same sort of Essence, are three Hypostases,
he plainly says the Nature wherein they partake is so One, as the humane Nature
is One in all Men. We Men, says he, consisting of a Body and a Soul, are all
((...)) of one Nature and Substance, or Essence; but we are many Hypostases.
And to the same purpose [Dial. 2. de Trinitate] his Anomoeos comparing the
Father, Son and Spirit, to a Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon, he brings in the
Orthodox saying, they have all the same Nature, being each of them Man; as an
Angel, a Man, and an Horse, have different Natures.

In the mean time, because Men are not inseparably, and vitally united with one
another, as the Divine Persons are, and cannot but be, by reason of the
necessary, eternal, perpetual emanation of the two latter from the first, they
cannot admit to be called one Man, as the three Persons in the Godhead, are and
cannot but be one God. Inasmuch as these three Divine Persons partake real
Godhead (as existing necessarily each of them) they are each truly God: but
because they partake it in necessary, eternal, vital Union; and so that the
first is the radix, the second perpetually springing from the first, and the
third from both the other, they are therefore together one God As Branches, tho
really distinct from each other, and the Root, are altogether notwithstanding
but one Tree, and all omoousial, or consubstantial to one another; which is an
illustration familiar with the the Ancients.

And if there be any, now a days, that will call this Heresy, (tho as I said, I
will be no Heretic however) yet if I must make a choice, I had rather be an
Heretic with the Ante-Nicene and Nicene Fathers, and Post-Nicene, for ought
appears to the contrary, through some following Centuries, than be reputed
Orthodox with P. Lumbard, etc. whom a German Divine, not of meanest account,
calls one of the four Evangelists of Antichrist.

But having now done with what he said he would omit, but did not, (tho he
might to every whit as good purpose) we come to what he overlooks not, because
(he intimates) he cannot. And let us see whether he looks into it, to any
better purpose, than if he had quite overlooked it. He is indeed the more
excusable that he overlooks it not, because (he says) he could not. In that
case there is no remedy. Nor do I see how he well could, when the Sober
Enquirer had once and again so directly put it in his view, and, as was said,
objected it to himself.

But he thinks, however, to make an irrefragable Battering Ram of it, wherewith
to shiver this Doctrine of the Trinity all to pieces, and he brings it into
play with the two Horns before mentioned.

The Father, he says, for instance, is either infinite in his Substance, his
Wisdom, his Power, his Goodness, or he is not.

With the like pompous apparatus, and even in the same Terms, (...), etc. Sext.
Empir. adversus Mathematicos, Lib. 8.
I find a series of Argumentation is by a noted Sceptick adorned, and set forth
against the Being of any God at all.

If there be any Divine Being, it is either Finite or Infinite, etc.

And he reasons upon each Head, as the Matter could admit, and probably thought
as well of the Performance as our Author does of his.

But let us see how much to the purpose our Author uses it in the present case.

The Enquirer had represented three really distinct Subsistents in the Godhead
as possible, for ought we know, not presuming to determine herein, this way or
that, beyond what is plain in it self, or plainly revealed. And so still he
thinks it may be, for ought he knows; for he professes not to know any thing to
the contrary. Yes (says the Considerator) but I do. No doubt, if any Man. But
say I, how know you? I know, says he, they can neither be finite, nor
infinite, therefore there can be no such thing at all.

But, say I, Do you know what infinite is, or can you comprehend it? Yes, very
well, Considerations on the Lord Bishop of Worcester's Sermon; p. 7, 8.
says he; for I have an infinite all-comprehending Mind. What a Cyclopick
understanding is this? Nay, and he pretends he can comprehend the very Being of
God (otherwise all Religion must cease) after he had granted, we (including
himself) cannot comprehend the least spire of Grass. And yet that Being of God
is nothing else with him, but Existence, (i. e. not to be nothing) which he
there vafrously inserts, but very imprudently; for every one sees he said it
only to avoid the purpose he was to speak to, and so said it not to any present
good purpose at all? As if it had been the Bishop's word, and all one with
God's Being. It Is true that his Being includes his Existence: But has he
therefore a clear, distinct and adequate conception what God is, because he,
indistinctly, conceives a Being, vulgarly signified by the Name of God, does
exist? Bring the matter to Creatures, and because he knows, as he may by the
sight of his Eye, that such a Creature exists, does he therefore understand its
Nature? Existence is to be extra causas, and this is common to all Creatures;
as to be necessarily, and without a cause, is peculiar to God. If therefore
Existence, and their Being be all one, all Creatures are the same, and differ
not from one another; for to be extra causas is that wherein they all agree.
And extend it further, as Existence is to be, in rerum natura, abstracting from
being caused, or uncaused; and so God, and Creatures will be all one. And see
whether this will not make all Religion cease too?

But if he say, tho Existence abstractly taken, distinguishes not God from
Creatures; yet his Existence does distinguish him. Very true; but that leads us
back to the Consideration of his Being, of what sort that is. Which therefore,
if he had pleased, he might as well have let stand before as it was; and might
have considered that Existence, and that which does exist, are not of the same
import. Or that it is not all one, to say that God does exist, and what he is
that does exist.

But it will be worth the while to examine a little further this Author's
comprehension of Infinites. He says it is to have a clear, distinct, and
adequate conception of them, so he comprehends the infinite Attributes of God.
His Eternity, i. e. that Duration, by which he is without all beginning, and
end. This tells us what it is not. But does it tell us what it is? q. d. An
infinite Duration is a boundless Duration: A Grammatical Definition! Or rather
a mere Translation of Latin into English. And so he might teach a mere Latinist
what boundless is, by turning the English back again into Latin. And greatly
has he edified his Disciple! As much as he should, without such change of
Language, by saying Invasion is Invasion. And does he give any better account
of infinite Wisdom and Power? Are his Conceptions of them clear and distinct.
It Is possible to know much, and not be very wise. I do not think that
therefore, which he gives, a very good account of Wisdom. Again, knowing is
doing somewhat. He speaks not now of making this or that, but more generally of
doing any thing. Nor does any one know any thing, but what he can know.
Therefore his Wisdom is Power; for so is an ability to know, Power, as truly,
as an ability to do any thing else. Here is confusion, therefore, instead of
distinction. And to the comprehending any thing, I should think it as requisite
a Man's Conception be true, as distinct. Now when he pretends to have distinct
Conceptions of God's infinite Wisdom and Power, if also his Conceptions be
true, those infinite Attributes are distinct. I am sure he comprehends them
not, if, whereas he clearly conceives them distinct, they are not so. But if
they are distinct, they are distinct, what? Substances? or Accidents? If the
former, according to him, distinct Divine Substances must be distinct Gods. If
the latter, let him weather the Difficulties as he can of admitting Accidents
in the Divine Being. Either way, he must as little pretend to believe an
omnimodous simplicity there, as the Enquirer. But would he then have him give
better and fuller Conceptions of these infinite Attributes, or rather of the
Infinity of them, which is his present business? No, no, that is none of the
Enquirer's part. He pretends not to comprehend Infiniteness. It Is enough for
One, among Mortals, to offer at (that ingens ausum) so great a thing!

When again he says his Conception of the Infinite Divine Wisdom, Power, etc.
is adequate, telling us they are those Properties whereby God knows, and can
do, whatsoever implies not a contradiction to be known, and done: I ask, but
does he comprehend in his Mind all those things which it implies not a
contradiction for him to know and do? If not, what is become of his adequate
Conception? He may so comprehend all that the most learned Book contains,
because he knows the Title, or something of its Cover; and he has a very
adequate Conception of all that is contained in the Universe, because he has
some general notion of what is signified by the word World. Let him then
pretend as long as he please to comprehend Infiniteness, no sober Man will
believe him, and the less, because he pretends it. If he put his Mind upon the
trial, and deal justly and truly when he has tried, I would ask him, let him
put the Notion of Infiniteness upon what he pleases, Space, for instance,
whether, as he thinks away any whatsoever bounds of it, new ones do not
immediately succeed? And let him think away those, whether still he does not
presently conceive new? Yes, but he can divert and think no more of it, i. e.
he can think* what Infinite is, by not thinking! And yet if he did understand
Infinites never so well, it would be no small spite to him if a Man did but
assert the Infiniteness of one of the Persons (the Father), and only (...) as
to the other two, as knowing their intimate Union with him, makes his Wisdom,
Power, etc. as truly theirs, as if it first resided in themselves; his Argument
is quite undone by it to all intents and purposes.

But I shall however, farther state and weigh this case of [knowing, or not
knowing, three such Hypostases cannot be infinite.] And

1. Show what might cast a thinking Man upon, supposing they may be all
infinite for ought one knows.

2. Then consider the difficulty that is in it.

1. As to the former. That the Father virtually (or eminently rather)
comprehends all being, created and uncreated, there is no doubt. Nor again,
that what is from him, by perpetual, natural, necessary Emanation, cannot but
be homoousial to himself, the Athanasian Differences only supposed, of being
unbegotten, and begotten, etc. But how to understand these is the difficulty;
i. e. How the same numerical Nature is both begotten, and no^ begotten; nor
will I determine it. Let them do it that can better. I, for my part, as I have
said, assert nothing in this matter, only have proposed to be considered what
may be thought possible herein.

But if any would set themselves to consider this matter, I would have them
take the difficulty they are to consider, entirely, and as it truly is in it
self; that they may not be short in their reckoning. And to that purpose to
bethink themselves what is the proper Character (as Athanasius, and before him
Justin Martyr phrase it) or Modus of the Son (for instance) that it is to be
begotten. This methinks should bear very hard upon the mere Modalists, who
hereupon must say, that to be begotten is the only thing begotten, and so
consequently that to be begotten, is the thing that is peculiarly said to be
incarnate, and that suffered, etc. For they must assign that which
distinguishes the Son from the Father, otherwise they will make the Father be
begotten, which is somewhat harder than to be Patripassians, or to make him to
have suffered.

But it must also be upon the matter even the same difficulty, to say, the same
numerical Nature, with the Modus, is begotten. For then the same numerical
Nature must still be both unbegotten, and begotten, which is very hard. And if
they reply, Yes, but under a distinct Modus. Well; but what is that distinct
Modus? And when they find it is but to be begotten, they must be hugely
abashed, as one of less deep Thought than they would think. For so, the Nature
being common both to the Father and the Son, all that is peculiar to the
begotten, from the Begetter, will still be but to be begotten, i. e. When the
Question is asked, What only is begotten? the Answer will be but as above, to be
begotten. It has hitherto, therefore, been only enquired, Whether it will not
seem easier to suppose each Subsistent to have its own singular Nature, tho
Homoousial, as, the two latter being by emanation from the first, it cannot but
be? Which has been often inculcated, and is plain in it self. Mere arbitrary
Productions may be very diverse from their Original, but purely natural,
especially emanative, cannot be so. And then the only considerable difficulty
which remains is this now before us, viz. The finiteness or infiniteness of
these three Hypostases: It Is plain they cannot be all finite. But here our
present Adversary places his principal pains, and labor, to prove, what he
knows no Body will deny, that they cannot be so. And hence he carries away
glorious Trophies, That three, or three thousand finites, will never make one
infinite. -- Spolia ampla --!

But how knows he they are not all Infinite? That, in short, which he has here
to say, is but this, and can be no more than this, till his Thoughts have run
through and compassed the never-utmost range of Infiniteness, viz. That he
knows they are not, he knows not what! But how can he soberly say that? How can
he either affirm or deny of another what he does not understand? Is this his
demonstration of the impossibility of a Trinity in the Godhead? Suppose the
Father infinite, cannot the other two be infinite also, for ought he knows? How
does he know they cannot? By the same medium, by which he knows it, he may make
other Mortals know it too, if he think fit to communicate it. Which, from so
mighty Confidence, especially when he pretends it to be so easy, I have
hitherto expected, but in vain. Is it because the first is infinite, therefore
the two other cannot be so? I am sure he ought not to say so, whatever others
may, or whatsoever the truth of the thing is (which we shall enquire into by
and by) for he has over and over acknowledged more Infinites than one. As when
he ascribes infinite Comprehension to the Mind of Man (as has been noted, page
8. of these Considerations) he does not indeed say the Mind is simply in it
self infinite, but it is so in respect of its Comprehension, which
Comprehension must therefore be infinite. How agreeable or consistent these
Terms are, the infinite Comprehension of a finite Mind, we are not to consider;
let him take care for that, who can easily make light of such trivial
Difficulties as these. But in the mean time this infinite Comprehension is an
infinite something, not an infinite nothing; and then so many Minds, so many
Comprehensions, and so many Infinites. No doubt he includes his own Mind; and
it is possible he may think some other Minds as comprehensive as his own. And
ought not to think it impossible, supposing an uncreated, eternal Word, and
Spirit, in the Deity, that they may be infinite, as well as the comprehension
of his own and some other Minds. These Considerations, p. 31, 32.
Besides what he seems to grant of infinite Guilts, and Punishments due, tho he
does not grant the Sacrifice of Christ to be an equivalent for them. All shows
he thinks there may be many Infinites, and even in the same kind.

But tho to him, to whom it is not easy to guess what would be difficult, this
would seem a very vincible Difficulty; it is of much greater importance, that
we may do right to Truth, to consider it, as it is in it self. And I acknowledge
it (as I have said over and over) to be in it self, a great difficulty, as all
sober Men have been wont to do, that have had any occasion to employ their
thoughts that way.

But my part herein has less of difficulty in it; which is only to expect, and
examine, what another will attempt to prove from this Topic, not to assert any
thing my self. My Opponent takes upon him boldly to pronounce, there cannot be
three distinct Hypostases in the Deity. Why? say I. Because says he, that will
suppose each of them infinite, which cannot be. I say, why can it not be? He
perhaps may tell me, if any one be infinite, nothing can be added thereto, or
be without its compass, much less can there be another Infinite added to the
former. I only now say, you talk confidently in the dark, you know not what.
And so as to involve your self in Contradictions, do what you can.

1. In saying nothing can be added to what is infinite.

2. In pretending to know, if any thing can be added, how much, or how little
can.

1. In saying nothing can be added to, or be without the compass of, what is
infinite. For then there could be no Creation, which I cannot doubt him to
grant. Before there was any, was there not an infinitude of Being in the
eternal Godhead? And has the Creation nothing in it of real Being? Or will you
say the Being of the Creature is the Being of God? I know what may be said (and
is elsewhere said) to this, and 'twill better serve my purpose than his.

2. In pretending to know what can, or cannot be added. Or that, in the way of
necessary eternal Emanation, there cannot be an infinite addition; tho not in
the way of voluntary, or arbitrary and temporary production. The reason of the
difference is too obvious to need elucidation to them that can consider. But
for your part (I must tell my Antagonist) you have concluded your self, even as
to that which carries the greatest appearance of impossibility, come off as you
can. Considerations, page 8.
You say, a Body of an Inch square, is not only not infinite in extension, but
is a very small Body; yet it has this infinite power, to be divisible to
infinity. So, I suppose, you must say of half that Inch, or a quarter, or the
thousandth part of it, much more of two, or twenty, or a thousand Inches. You
say, indeed, this Body it self is not infinite. Nor will I insist upon the
trite and common Objection against you. How can any thing be divisible into
parts which it has not in it? Which yet Men have not talked away, by talking it
often over. Still haeret lateri -- Nor of an infinite Power's being lodged in a
finite (and so minute a) Subject. But, in the mean time, here are Infinites
upon Infinites, an infinite Power upon an infinite Power multiplied infinitely;
and still these infinite Powers greater and less than other, as either the Inch
is augmented, Ibid.
or diminished. And he says the Mind of Man has the Property of infinite or
eternal duration. Therefore so many Minds, so many Infinites. And he must
suppose the infinite duration of some Minds to be greater than of others,
unless he think his own Mind to be as old as Adam's; or do not only hold their
preexistence, but that they were all created in the same moment. Which if he
do, I am sure he can never prove. And so, for ought he knows, there may not
only be many Infinites, but one greater than another.

What therefore exceeds all limits that are assignable, or any way conceivable
by us, as we are sure the Divine Being does, it is impossible for us to know
what differences that vast Infinitude contains. And we shall, therefore, but
talk at random, and with much more presumption than knowledge, when we take upon
us to pronounce it impossible, there should be three infinite Hypostases in the
Godhead. Especially considering that most intimate vital Union that they are
supposed to have each with other, in respect whereof, the Son is said to be
(...), inexisting in the Father (as Athanasius's Phrase is) agreeably to the
Language of Scripture, Joh. 14. 11. and elsewhere. And which, by parity of
Reason, is to be conceived of the Holy Ghost too, who is also said to search
all things, even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. In respect of which
Union, and the (...), which may thence be collected, whatever of real
Perfection, Wisdom, Power, Goodness, etc. is in any one, is each ones as truly
as any ones, all being originally in the Father, as the first and everliving
fountain of all. As was said, Sober Enquiry, p. 31, 32.

But whereas the Considerator urges, If the Father be infinite in his
Substance, in his Wisdom, his Power, his Goodness, he is God in the most
adequate and perfect sense of the Word. I say, well, and what then? If
therefore he mean the Son and the Holy Ghost must be excluded the Godhead, let
him prove his consequence if he can. And he may find the answer to it, Sob.
Enquiry, page 53. I shall not transcribe, nor love, when I have writ a Book, to
write it over again. His Notion may fit Pagans well enough, or those who are
not otherwise taught. Christians are directed to understand that the Deity
includes Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Their equality I acknowledge with the
mentioned Athanasian Exception; notwithstanding which, that they equally
communicate in the most Characteristick difference of the Deity, from all
Creatures, viz. Necessity of Existence, is conceivable enough.

To sum up all, the Considerator I understand, even by the whole management of
his Discourse, and specially by the conclusion of that part wherein the
Enquirer is concerned, to have most entirely given up this Cause, as ever did
any Man.

The Enquirer's only Undertaking was to maintain the possibility of a Trinity
in the Godhead, in opposition to his former, daring Assertion, of its being
impossible, and nonsense.

He now, in conclusion, says, the Enquirer saw there must be a Nexus;
intimating, if there can, that he has gained his point; but, it is added, he
durst not venture to say what it was. To which I must say,

That this is most uncautiously said, I will not say, deceitfully, tho I know
it is said untruly; and he might have known (or remembered) too, that he (the
Enquirer) often spoke of it, as a necessary, natural, eternal, vital, and most
intimate Union.

He further says, he only explains it by the Union of Soul and Body. Which
again,

1. Is so great a Misrepresentation, that I wonder he would say it here, when
he himself but two or three Pages off recites as the Enquirer's words, [If God
could unite into one, two such contrary Natures, let any Man give me a reason
why he might not (much more) first make, and then unite two, and if two, why
not three Spirits, etc.] Is this only to explain it by the Union of Soul and
Body?

But by the way that [first make, and then unite] was none of the Enquirer's,
but appears thrust in to make what was manifestly possible, seem impossible.
Sic notus -- Let two Substances be created entire, with no natural Propension
to each other, they are capable of no natural Union, without change of their
Natures. Who sees not, it were a Contradiction to suppose them, the same still,
and not the same? But suppose them created with mutual aptitudes to Union, and
united, what should hinder but they may continue united, without being
confounded?

2. And it is said impertinently, as well as untruly; for what if he had not
explained it at all, is it therefore impossible, which it belonged to him to
prove, or he did nothing; and he has done nothing toward it. I have asked him
before, and now I put it again seriously to him, whether he do in his
Conscience believe this a good Argument [Such an Union, i. e. natural,
necessary, etc. has no pattern or parallel in the Creation; therefore it is
impossible in the Nature of God?]

For what he adds, That the Soul and Body in a Man are not united into one
Substance or Essence, nor possibly can be; The Cause indeed depends not on it,
but lies remote from it. Methinks however it is very feat, and shows him
pinch't, that he can be brought to this! Has a Man no Substance? Is he a
shadow? Or has he no Essence? Is he a Nonentity? Or is his Essence a Body?
Then a Body is a Man. Or is his Essence a Spirit? Then, a Spirit is a Man. If
he say either of these, I wish he would tell us the quantity of those
Propositions, that we may know whether he means that every Body is a Man, or
every Spirit is a Man? I am sure where the Essence is, there must be the
Essentiatum. Or whether Soul and Body united, make nothing different from
either, or both disunited? Or whether a Man be only such a thing as a Pie? Or
why might not a Pudding serve as well, if made up of several Ingredients? He
has greatly indeed obliged Mankind for such an Honor done them! If indeed the
Cause depended on it, he would have good store of Philosophers to confute, and
all that have any concern for their own kind, before he could disprove the
possibility of the supposed Union in the Deity, and you have nothing for it but
his bare word: Which (at least, without the addition of his Name) will not do
the business. Nor, if he could also bring us a demonstration against the Union
of Soul and Body, can he thereby prove such an Union as we suppose in the
Godhead impossible. The case is quite another. The Union of the Soul and Body
was never by me called essential; for I well know, if they were essentially
united, in the strict sense they could never be disunited. But it is commonly
called a substantial Union, and I called it natural in respect of the
Principle, Nature, in contradistinction to Art. As for the supposed Union we
speak of in the Deity, that, being necessary, original, eternal, it must be
essential, or none; but with such distinction as before was supposed. For it
was Union, not Identity, that was meant, which Union, with such distinction,
till they be proved impossible, the Enquirer's Cause is untoucht. And is
certainly to any such purpose, not in the least touched by the Considerator.

Whether there be any such Union that may admit to be called essential among
the Creatures, does neither make nor mar. We have never said there was, nor
does the stress of the Cause lie upon it.

I find indeed an ingenious, merry Gentleman animadverts upon a Postscript writ
against the Sober Enquiry, and upon a Letter in answer to it, who at a venture
calls all essential Union, essential Contradiction, and substantial Nonsense.
Who this is, I will not pretend to guess, only I guess him not to be the same
with the Considerator, for this, besides other Reasons, that he calls the
Author of the Considerations a great Man; and I scarce think he would call
himself so. His Wit, and sportful Humor, I should have liked better in a less
serious Affair. For this heboldly pronounces, in immediate reference to the
Trinity it self, (that the World might know he has a Confidence, at least,
equal to his Wit) I can easily abstain from asserting that any created Unions
are to be called strictly essential, because then they must be simply
indissoluble. And I see not but whatsoever things the Creator has united, he
may disunite, if he be so pleased. Yet one might have expected this Author to
have been a little more civil to him whom he styles the late famous Dr. More,
who has published to the World his express Sentiments in this matter, that
created Spirits have real amplitude, made up of indiscerpible parts,
essentially united, so as not to be separable, without annihilation of the
whole. One would think he should not have treated him so, as to make his
essential Union, substantial Nonsense.

But there are those left in the World, who have that Veneration for the
Doctor, as to think it no indecent rudeness to this Gentleman, not to put his
judgment in the balance against the Doctor's, or to distinguish between his
calling it Nonsense, and proving it so.

But if any wonder that they who think there is no such thing as an essential
Union among Creatures, do yet think there may be in the uncreated Being, they
will show themselves mighty wise in their wonder, i. e. in wondering that the
Creatures are not God. And if they further hereupon enquire, why we will then
make use of Unions not essential, among Creatures, to illustrate that which is
supposed essential in the uncreated Being, and expect very particular, distinct
accounts of every thing so represented; they will show themselves as wise in
their Expectations, i. e. that they think nothing can serve to illustrate,
unless it be like in all respects.

That Question still returns. Is every thing to be judged by any Man of sense
impossible in God, whereof he has not given distinct and explicit accounts,
and illustrations from somewhat in the Creatures? And another will be added, Is
there any thing originally in God, not essential to him?

But when the World is so full of instances of substantial Unions, without
Confusion, or Identification, that he cannot so much as name me a created
Substance, that he can be sure exists absolutely simple, I am sure it can be no
contradiction to suppose that there may be uncreated, necessary, eternal Union,
without Confusion or Identification; and that it would be, as he phrases it,
essential Contradiction, or substantial Nonsense, to say that things united
necessarily (tho distinct) can possibly ever admit of Separation. And if our
modern Anti-Trinitarians (for I will not call them by the inept Name of
Unitarians, which as rightfully belongs to them whose Adversaries they are
pleased to be, as to themselves, and therefore cannot distinguish the one from
the other) would allow it to be their Method to understand the Doctrine of the
Orthodox Ancients, before they decry and hoot at it, they would find that as
they allow sufficient distinction of the sacred Hypostases; so the Union they
assert, is not such as identifies them, but only signifies them to be
inseparable. So speaks Athanasius himself, We think not as the Sabellians, that
the Son is of one and the same Essence with the Father, but consubstantial --
Nor do we assert three Hypostases separated as with Men, (...).
bodily, lest with the Gentiles, we should admit Polytheism, etc.

So do Liberius and he agree in Sentiment. Liber. Epist. ad Athan. (...).
The one says, The Son is not separated from the Father's Hypostasis. The
other, Rescript. Ath. ad Liberium. (...).
We hold not the Son divided from the Father, etc.

And upon the most impartial, faithful, and diligent search and consideration,
I do solemnly declare there needed nor more of rationality, or intelligibleness
in this Doctrine, to keep it from being ridiculed, as contradictious, and
nonsense; but only less prejudice, and more modesty in the Opposers of it, with
more reverence of the Divine Majesty, upon this (obvious) apprehension, that if
it be true, it must be Sacred, Divine Truth.

This Author would fain have me with him to the Playhouse, whither really I
have no leisure to accompany him, nor much temptation; for I perceive it has
filled his Mind with Ideas not useful to my purpose; nor, I think, to any good
one of his own. If there he learned to jest away that which should be the best
part of himself; and of which Socrates, dying, told his Friends it would be
gone far enough out of their hands, and for that which was left behind, they
might bury, or do with it what they pleased. If there he was taught to ridicule
the Holy Apostle's distinction of (an (...), and (...),) an inner and an outer
Man; and when he has thrown the former of these out of his Notion of himself,
for my part, I must think of that which is left, that the silly Indian is the
less silly Creature of the two.

And besides, as he is too much given to play, to mind any thing of serious
Discourse, so I find he is not throughout honest in his Play neither; but that
even when he pretends to sit out, and be but a Spectator, only taking care that
there be fair play, he falls in himself, and plays booty. Nor do I find he has
any thing of Argument in his Discourse, which has not been considered already
in the Discourse I have had with the Considerator. I therefore take leave of
them both together, and of you too, Sir, being in great Sincerity

Your Affectionate Humble Servant, The Enquirer.

Errata. Page 21. l. 20. 1. (...). P. 51. l. 11. r. (...).

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Letter to the Clergy of both Universities, came not to my Sight, or
Notice, till some hours after the last Sheet of this Discourse was brought me
from the Press; I have not time therefore to say much to it, nor yet should say
more than I do had I never so much. The Author seems to think what he was now
doing, as to the Enquiry, superfluous, because he said it was so fully done by
an ab^er Hand, etc. In the mean time he was ^n ill case, that he was neither
able to write to any purpose, nor be silent: A most deplorable double
Impotency? But he has notwithstanding his Modesty, shown a double Ability, to
invent and make an Hypothesis of his own Fingers Ends, and then most
dexterously to combat that Shadow. Three inadequate Gods, is indeed (to use his
own Phrase) his own Invention, constantly disavow'd by the Enquirer, who, with
the generality of Trinitarians, calls the three Subsistents in the Godhead,
God; being each of them necessarily existent, but none of them alone
exclusively, a God.

What Art he has is shown in fighting this his own Figment. As also that of
Parts of the Deity, other than conceptible, which no Man can avoid. So we have
his Dream of a third part of a God, about which he so learnedly raves in his
Dream, as to disprove, as effectually, any God at all. For I appeal to what
Sense he has left himself, whether Power alone be God exclusive of Wisdom and
Goodness? Then it is an inadequate, or a not complete Notion of God, then by his
profound reasoning, not eternal. No more are Father, Son, and Holy Ghost Parts,
unless you be enamoured of the Bull, impartible Parts, that never were parted,
nor ever can be. As what are necessarily united (tho unconfounded) cannot
without Nonsense and Contradiction, be said to be parted. His Fiction, that
what is from the eternal Father by necessary Emanation, cannot be eternal, but
must have a beginning, is of the same stamp. He did not need when he writ, to
have abandoned all Logic and common Sense, that would have told him relata
sunt simul natura. His so confidently taking it for granted on all Hands, that
all Infinites are equal, shows his little compass of Thought, and how
unacquainted he is with the Difficulties of a Controversy, wherein yet he will
be so over-meddlesome. Qui pauca respicit, etc. But who so bold as --? I leave
him to compound that Difference with his abler Considerator, Whether one Inch
and two Inches be equal? and so bid him good night.

FINIS.
BOOKS written by the Reverend Mr. JOHN HOW.
1. THE Blessedness of the Righteous: The Vanity of this Mortal Life, on Psalm.
17. ver. 15. and Psalm. 89. 47.

2. Delighting in God.

3. Living Temple.

4. Self-dedication discoursed in the Anniversary Thanksgiving of a Person of
Honor for a great Deliverance.

5. Of Thoughtfulness for the Morrow. With an Appendix concerning the
immoderate Desire of fore-knowing things to come.

6. Of Charity in reference to other Men's Sins.

7. The Redeemer's Tears wept over lost Souls, in a Treatise on Luke 19. 41,
42. With an Appendix, wherein somewhat is occasionally discoursed concerning
the Sin against the Holy Ghost, and how God is said to will the Salvation of
them that perish.

8. A Funeral Sermon for that Faithful and Laborious Servant of Christ, Mr.
Richard Fairclough, (who deceased July 4. 1682. in the sixty first Year of his
Age.)

9. A Sermon directing what we are to do after a strict Enquiry whether or no
we truly love God.

10. A Funeral Sermon for Mrs. Esther Sampson, the late Wife of Henry Sampson,
Dr. of Physic, who died Nov. 24. 1689.

11. The Carnality of Religious Contention. In two Sermons Preached at the
Merchants Lecture in Broadstreet.

12. A Calm and Sober Enquiry concerning the Possibility of a Trinity in the
Godhead.

13. A Letter to a Friend concerning a Postscript to the Defense of Dr.
Sherlock's Notion of the Trinity in Unity, relating to the Calm and Sober
Enquiry upon the same Subject.

BOOKS Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, the lower End
of Cheapside.
A Body of Practical Divinity, consisting of above one hundred seventy six
Sermons on the lesser-Catechism composed by the Reverend Assembly of Divines at
Westminster: With a Supplement of some Sermons on several Texts of Scripture.
By Thomas Watson, formerly Minister at St. Stephen's- Walbrook, London.

A Paraphrase on the New Testament, with Notes, Doctrinal and Practical. By
plainness and brevity fitted to the Use of Religious Families, in their daily
Reading of the Scriptures; and of the younger and poorer sort of Scholars and
Ministers, who want fuller Helps. With an Advertisement of Difficulties in the
Revelations. By the late Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter.

Six hundred of Select Hymns and Spiritual Songs collected out of the Holy
Bible. Together with a Catechism, the Canticles, and a Catalogue of Virtuous
Women. The Three last hundred of Select Hymns collected out of the Psalms of
David. By William Barton, A. M. late Minister of St. Martins in Leicester.

Spiritual Songs: Or Songs of Praise to Almighty God upon several Occasions.
Together with the Song of Songs, which is Solomon's: First turned, then
paraphased in English Verse. By John Mason.


