A DISCOURSE OF DUNKIRK, With some REFLEXES UPON The late Surrender thereof, etc.

And other Additions, By a knowing and very worthy Person.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Samuel Speed, at the Rainbow in Fleetstreet. 1664.

A Discourse of DUNKIRK.
IT can hardly be parallelld in Story, That any place of such Defense, as
Dunkirk pretends to be, had more various turns of Fortune, and change of
Masters in so short a revolution of time; For this is the Fifth New-Master that
Dunkirk has had in less then the compass of XX years, whereof four of them got
Her by Force; Which makes the World much question the strength and tenableness
thereof.

The late Surrender that England made of this Town to the French, though it was
a pure Act of State, (therefore not disputable by any) yet being a business of
that general concernment, and so open to the Eye of the world, it has
ministered matter of much Talk, and banding of Opinions among the Critiques of
the Times, as well Forreners as Others.

The dessein of this small Tract is to set down the Arguments Pro and Contra,
relating to this great Action: For according to the Rule of the Schools,
Contraria juxta se posita magis elucescunt; Contraries put cross grow more
clear. And as out of the Collision of Flint and Steel, there issues forth Fire,
so by confrontation, and clash of Argument, Truth comes to appear more
perspicuous.

The Affirmatif Arguments for detaining of Dunkirk.
1. IT stood convenient to invade Flanders, France, and some Territories of the
Hollanders. 2. It might have served for a Nursery of training up Soldiers. 3.
It had secured Navigation, and the Traffic of his Majesty's Subjects. 4. It
might have bin brought to have bin a Porto Franco, a Free Port, and so have
advancd Trade. 5. It had bin a Repute for England to have kept it, And a
Disparagement to part with it.
This I believe is all that can be said for the Affirmatif part.

BEfore Arguments be producd to the contrary, it is expedient that this
distinction should precede, Viz.

That there are Foreign Possessions or Places of two sorts.

1. There are some that are got by the discovery of the Merchant, where finding
the Clime temperat, the Soil healthful, and proper, by the help of Industry,
to produce some Staple Commodities that may feed Trade, and be fit for Sale or
Barter, He takes firm footing, puts in his Spade, and Plants. Such Transmarin
Possessions carry many advantages with them; They increase Shipping and Seamen;
They disburden the Kingdom of superfluous Peeple; They nourish and improve
Mutual Commerce, and all this while consume nothing of the Public Tresure,
but are able to subsist of themselfs, The Souverain Prince giving only his
Royal Protection, encouragement and countenance, with fit Governors thereunto:
Virginia, Maryland, the Bermudas, Barbados, with others of the Caribbe Islands,
and diverse more in the Indies, are places of this nature, as Jamayca, etc. And
there are great hopes that in Afric Tanger will prove so, with other
extraordinary advantages besides.

2. But there are other Foreign Possessions which cannot support themselfs
either by benefit of Trade, or Contributions of the adjacent Country, but are
merely maintained by Praesidial Forces or Garrison, and by the exported tresure
of the possessing Prince. England in Ages passd has had diverse Foreign places
of this quality, But it was daily found, That they still Exhausted her Tresure
and Armories; They encreasd her cares and trouble; They begot Jelousies in her
Neighbors; They disturbd her repose and quietude at home, England slept best
when she was without any such. And in the procedure of this Discourse, I
believe Dunkirk will appeer to be a place of that nature.

This Distinction going before, we will now take the Affirmatif Arguments for
keeping of Dunkirk in their order.

Touching the first three, It Is true that Dunkirk by the site thereof, stands for
a convenient Inlet into Flanders, and the Territories annexd; But for France
and the United Provinces, there is another Prince's Country interposd before an
Army can enter any of them, but may be interrupted, unless leave be granted;
And to force a passage would be an infringement of the peace by the one party;
And to permit a passage may be a breach of Article by the other part, being in
friendship with both.

But touching the foresaid Nations, there be choice of other places, and bold
coasts far cheaper for England, and more accessible, and easy to be made use
of for an Invasion in case of a war, without keeping such a costly Key as
Dunkirk, yet not knowing when we should have occasion to make use of it, In
regard His Majesty is at present in good terms with the said Nations, and like
to continue so for the future, His Inclinations propending naturally rather to
Peace then War, according to the Genius of his two blessed Immediate
Predecessors. Now the keeping still of Dunkirk would have inevitably drawn a War
upon us, and perchance from all the three. And let this surlice for an answer
in part to the first three Arguments, till we proceed further.

Touching the other Argument, viz. that Dunkirk might have served for a
Seminary of Soldiers which England might have made use of in time of need; To
this it is answered, That the hundred and thirty thousand Pounds Sterling that
went yearly to maintain those Soldiers in Dunkirk, (and toward the fortifying
thereof) which exported money may be said to be like the Soul of Judas, which
never came back again, as the Italian has it; I say, that huge sum would be far
better spent at home within the Land to maintain a Military actual strength for
security of Prince and Peeple against any Civil Insurrection, by constant
Regiments of Horse and Foot ashore, and a Squadron of Iusty men of War at Sea,
both which the Moneys that were transported weekly to Dunkirk, will be able to
keep in constant pay.

Touching the fifth Argument, viz. That the keeping of Dunkirk would have securd
Navigation and Traffic; It Is answered, That the next year after that England had
a Garrison and Governor in Dunkirk, the town of Ostend and those of Biscay did
us more mischief far then Dunkirk ever had done in so short a time: for the
Dunkirk-Men of War going to those places, there were ships of ours of greater
bulks, and richer burdens taken then before; the strength and soul of Dunkirk
passing as it were by a kind of transmigration into those places. Moreover,
observable it is, That when Queen Elizabeth was advisd by the Hollanders to
take Dunkirk, the matter being referrd to her Privy Council, after much
deliberation it was resolved, That England was better without Dunkirk then with
it, and that for diverse reasons of State; One whereof was, That it would be a
means that English Ships of a greater burden would be built, and cause her
Marchant-men to go better armd abroad, and with stouter Vessels, which in case
of necessity might serve the Public.

Touching security of Trade; It Is well known that England has Ports and Castles
of her own, to make her Seas narrow enough for Her, to check and give Law to
any that shall sail in her Channels, and consequently to defend her Merchants
and others without the help of Dunkirk: But touching Trade it self, Now that
Dunkirk is in Other hands, it will be much more advantageous unto England in
point of Trade; for while we kept it, there was scarce any Commerce at all in
that Town, or the Country about it; And far less now since the French have had
it.

Touching the making of Dunkirk a Free-Port (or a kind of Sound as that in the
Baltik) it is but a sandy Conceit, For the Nations round about being but ill
inclind unto us in this particular, we should not have bin able to have beaten
any considerable Trade into the Inland Countries unless we had forcd it, which
could not have bin done without a violation of the Peace.

Besides, how much this would have prejudicd our so long settled Staples in
Dort, and Hamborough, let any man judge: But the truth is, Dunkirk is not a
place proper for a Free Port, because it is made a Port rather by Chance then by
Nature; for it is observd that the Harbor which goes from Mardike to Dunkirk,
together with the Splinter, is accidentally causd by the great Scowre that
proceeds from the check, or reverberations and Eadies which the stream receaves
that runs from the West twixt Dover and Callis, by the Cliffs which jett out
from the English shore; And the shore on that side being all sand, was easily
in tract of time worn into a Harbor. But such Harbors have bin known to alter
as the points of the Cliffs did wear out and vary, or as the sands did fill, or
were washd away: whereof diverse Examples may be producd, as the Port of Stavere^
in Friseland, which was once a Town of much Traffik, but now is become a poor
place, the Haven being choakd up with sand. Add hereunto, that scarce any Boat
can come to Dunkirk upon low water, but the Keele will be grating upon the
sands all along; nor can any ship of any great burden come near her but upon a
Spring-tyde. It Is also a wild kind of Harbor lying open to the Sea, without any
windings or highland shelter: so that let the wind blow from what point of the
Compass it will, the ships riding there are exposd to the fury of it, and upon
the dragging of an Anchor, wrecks do commonly follow upon the adjoining strand.

Touching the punctilios of honor that England may hazard in parting with
Dunkirk, it is answered, That it was nothing dishonorable for England to give away
that which she never got: for indeed it was the French King who got it; He had a
Royal Army of Effectif men both Horse and Foot to beleager it; it was His Musket
that killed Marquess de Leda the brave Governor; there was only a Brigade of
English Auxiliaries, who, it is true, performed their parts very gallantly, and
did contribute much to the service: But it was the French King with whom the town
did capitulat; it was to Him she opend her Gates, and gave up her Keys; it was He
who did ride Conqueror into the place, where he put up his Standard, causd Te
Deum to be sung, and so took full possession of it. It Is true, a little after,
according to private Articles with Cromwell, he left there an English Garrison,
and a Scotch Governor, who had then dependence of service upon him, as having
bin bred in his Court; Now, the Gallican Civilians say, that Cromwell to whom
the Article was made being dead, and the Government of England quite alterd,
(from a kind of Commonwealth to a Kingdom) the French King was not obliged to
perform it longer, for in some cases, Pactum moritur cum Persona.

Moreover, touching point of Honor, It had bin (under favor) rather a kind of
Dishonor that England should still hold Dunkirk: For first, it had been to
continue the Fame of an infamous Rebel, in regard the world held Dunkirk to be
an Acquest of His. Add herunto that the Honor of England among the wisest
Nations began to be questiond both in point of Prudence and Providence, for her
to export and expend such a vast tresure to hold so dry a place, (the Benefit
whereof made such poor Returns) and not to accept of 400 thousand pounds
Sterling En Argent comptant, specially now that there is such a general
complaint of scarcity of Coin in England; whereas Hen. 8. though a high
boisterous Prince, had not much above the third part of such a sum for Tournay
and Terwyn, and that to be paid in twelve years by the French.

Furthermore, by the opinion of the knowingst Commanders who had sometimes
servd in Flanders, and having bin quarterd a long time in Dunkirk, knew evry
inch of the unsortifiable and sandy loose instable soil about it; I say, by the
Positive Opinion of old experienced English Officers, Dunkirk was not a place
Tenable, she was not Leager-proof; for if she had bin so, she would not have
changd Masters so often in 18 years; I say, Dunkirk was not Tenable in case a
numerous storming resolut Army had stood before it, (unless such another
numerous Army had bin in the town to oppose it) but that half that money which
was given for it might have servd to have regaind it, and a private sudden
League might have bin struck to that effect twixt the French, Spaniard and
Hollander, or any two of them, who would have concurred in hot tertio: For they
did all malign us that we kept such footing in Flanders. Nor could there ever
have bin a perfect Cordial Peace twixt us, and any of the said three Nations
while we kept Dunkirk, but it would have still ministered matter of Jelousy, of
Quarrels about Contributions, of Plottings ever and anon how to make us weary
of holding it; which made one say, That the English settling in Dunkirk, was
like the Mouse who made her Neast in the Cats ear.

Add herunto that it is well known (though not by All) that in the late Treary
and transactions of Peace twixt France and Spain, there was a private Article
relating to Dunkirk, which bound both the Kings in reciprocal ties, to the
prejudice of England in this particular.

We know that England has had from time to time diverse Extraneous Possessions
of this nature; yet they were but as feathers in her Cap, never any did quit
cost, or by any real advantages countervail her trouble, expenses, and hazards
in keeping them. Now among all such, the town of Callis bears the nearest
analogy and similitude with Dunkirk: But first we will give a touch only at the
other in order of time.

The first Foreign thing that England ever had, was Normandy, which came to be
her Inheritance; a rich and copious Country, yet we could never make that
Country subsist of it self, but our Money, Men, and Arms went still over to
secure it. William the Conqueror, though her Native Duke, did (as an
authentic Historian has it) Angliam deglubere, He did shear England to keep
it; Rufus his son did Angliam Excoriare, He did fley England to preserve it;
His Granchild did Angliam emulgere usque ad sanguinem, He did milk England till
the blood came forth to defend Normandy, being forcd to raise 13 Castles to
protect it against the Incursions of the confining French; insomuch that when
the Duke of York was Regent, a computation being made of the charge in keeping
Normandy, it was found in the Chamber of Accounts, that the Expenses from the
beginning in keeping that Province exceeded the Revenues thereof three hundred
forty and eight thousand pounds, which was a prodigious sum in those days.

The next Foreign Country that came to truckle under England, was Aquitane,
Guyen, and Gascony, the most exuberant and fertillst Provinces of all France,
yet they could never countervail the cost, but they still draind moneys, and
multitudes of men out of England, who at their returns in steed of spoils and
wealth, brought nothing but poverty, and so increasd the number of Beggars and
Thiefs.

The town of Bourdeaux her self, though a rich Mercantile City, did hardly
defray the Salary of the English Praesidiary forces that were in it; and
Fronsack Castle alone did cost 1000 l. per ann. as the Record has it; As also,
that it was deliverd in Parliament 7 Ric. 2. that Gascony with other places we
held then in France, stood England in above the Revenues thereof, 24000 l. a
year.

The benefit we receavd by taking footing in Armorica, or little Britain, may
appeer by a few examples; For it was declard in Parliament 3 Hen. 2. That ad
defensionem Britanniae non sufficiebat the saurus totius Angliae. The Town and
Castle of Breast alone cost Ric. 2, 12000 Marks a year, and the 9 of his Reign
it stood in 13118 l. 18 s. 6 d. as the Record has it.

Touching Tournay (and Terwya) Hen. 8. spent most of that mighty tresure his
parsimonious Father left him, in getting and keeping it: But finding the charge
so excessive, he sold it to the French for a far smaller sum then was had for
Dunkirk: For he had but 150000 l. for it, and that to be paid in twelve years,
whereof some part is not paid to this day. And touching the town of Bulloigne,
his son Edw. 6. sold it, not many years after, but for 100000 l.

We are now come to Callis, which notwithstanding the Contributory Territories
about it be far more large then those adjoining to Dunkirk, and that the
transfretation thence to England be shorter half in half, yet it stands upon
good Record, That from Edw. 3. who first got it, to the 2 of Queen Mary who
lost it, it cost England 337400 l. 9 s. 4 l.

Concerning Ireland, which comes in the rank of Foreign Acquests, though it be a
fruitful felf-sufficient Country, and as one said, a good fat Goose to pluck,
yet the Revenues thereof never counter-balancd the charge till the Earl of
Staffords time, who maybe said to be the first which made Ireland a Nown
Substantif to stand by it self, without any support of tresure from England.
Nor could Queen Eliz. though cried up for a great Housewife, bring it to
subsist of it self, no not in time of Peace, but still Moneys were sent over
from the Exchequer in Westminster, which may be seen upon exact record: But in
time of War, the example of Sir John Perrot may serve for all, who in his two
years Government there, spent England 116368 l.

The last Foreign places which England had, were the Cautionary Towns of
Flushing, Brill, and the Ramakins; But when the 80000 l. for which they were
hypothequd or pawnd was paid King James, it was found that almost the whole sum
had bin drunk up in paying the English Garrisons all the while.

From these Premises this Conclusion may be deducd, That no Outlandish or
Transmarin Possessions (except those lately in the Indies pointed at before,
which are supported by the Merchant) did ever make England thrive, but they
were a cause of perpetual issues of tresure, which is the great Artery of any
Country, whereby England may be said to have spent her very blood and Vital
Spirits upon them from time to time.

Now, the Reason may well be, that such Excentrique Possessions did not prosper
with England, in regard that by the Primitive institution of God and Nature,
the I Will of Great Britain is a complete distinct Mass of Earth, and an Empire of
it self; She may be said to be as the Spaniard says of Her, Comola Tortuga en
su concha, like a Tortoise in her shell, who is so prodigiously armd, (but for
Defense only) and the Divine Providence accordingly has made Great Britain
more apposit and proper to Defend, then to Extend her self further. And to that
Defensive end she has those two properties which the Philosopher requires in a
strong self-preserving Country, viz. An easy Egress for the Natives who know
her shallows and shelfs of sands, her Flats and Rocks, etc. and a hard Ingress
for the Stranger who knows them not.

Moreover, Great Britain has the advantage of having the best shipping of any
other for her own Defense; For no Country has such tough Oak as she has for
K^ee-Timber, and for other Naval uses: Her Peeple also have a Natural Dexterity
and Aptitude to Navigation, with a courage extraordinary that way.

Add herunto, that the Position of her Seas, with the straightness thereof in
point of distance from her Neighbors, is such, and her Ports upon those Seas
are so advantagiously situated, that none can pass or repass through her Sleeve
or Channels, but she may control them without the help of Dunkirk, or any
other coadjuvant place on her opposite Coasts, specially at such a monstrous
rate: For according to the cautious old saying, A man may buy Gold too dear.

To conclude: Whereas some do insist much on point of Honor by parting with
Dunkirk, in the judgment of the most serious and well-weighd men, it had bin
taken rather as a Dishonor for a King of Great Britain to distrust his strength
so much, as not to be able to guard his own Seas and Subjects as his Royal
Progenitors did, without the adventitious help of a Foreign place got by so
notorious a Regicide, with an aim and intent to enable him the more to have
still kept him out. And it may be well remembered, that his present Majesty of
England appeerd then against the taking of it; to which purpose the Dukes of
York and Gloucester were actually in Arms in the field for opposing it; and it
was the Duke of York who gave the first charge, and did notable execution.

Lastly, It may well stand with the reach of true Policy, and the interest of
England, to leave the town of Dunkirk like a bone twixt France and Spain, as
very probably it is like to prove in time. Moreover, this so near approach of the
French begins already to make some Impressions of Jelousie in the Hollanders,
being awakend by the old Proverb, Ayez le Francois pour ton Amy, non pas pour
ton Voisin; Have the French for thy Friend, not for thy Neighbor if thou can
choose.

Thus have we twisted this great Business upon a small bottom, for the
satisfaction of evry true Child of Reason, and confutation of those who, being
transported by Aerie Conceits, cry it down for an Unpolitik Act of State.

Jam. Howell.

New Additions Concerning the HARBOR AT DUNKIRK.
THe Sea retreats upon every ebb and low water at the least one English Mile
back from the Harbor, so that the Harbor is all dry, and a man may go along
the deepest part of the said Harbor with his shoes dry a Mile toward the Sea.

And at the highest Spring-tyde there is no deeper water at the coming in, or
at the going out of the Harbor at the utmost, but 15 English foot.

Insomuch, That no Ships or Vessels can go out, or come into the said Harbor,
which go deeper then 11 or 12 foot; and when the Ships or Vessels which go deep
11 or 12 foot, that must be just at the highest Spring-tyde, within an hours
time before the water begins to ebb or fall, and that the weather and Sea be
smooth and calm, otherwise if the Sea be rough and tumbling, the Ships or
Vessels by the cappling of the Sea will strike to the ground, and break
themselves in an hundred pieces, as very often is seen, if they take not great
heed. The Ground within and without the Harbor is hard all over, and the Ships
or Vessels within must lie at every ebb of the water upon the hard ground, in
danger to crack and break themselves by their own weight, with that of their
Ordnance and Lading.

And every Frigate, Ship or Vessel of about 180 or 200 Tun in burden, with
their Cargos, and Ordnance, and Provision in it, goes at the least 12 or 13
foot deep: insomuch that Dunkirk is only a Harbor for small Vessels and
Boats, such as their first and former Trade of Fishing and drying of Herrings
was; and nothing at all fit for any men of War, or Ships of consequence.

The Splinter or Schourtien of Mardike, which is a Creek along the Sea there,
about an English Mile in length, accidentally occasioned by the current of the
Sea all along the shore, or coast, is of a much deeper water, and of more
consequence then the Harbor of Dunkirk but it lies so open to the Sea, that by
hard winds and stress of weather no ships can possibly ride there in winter but
are in danger to break their Cables, and be cast upon the shore by any Westerly
Winds.

The Splinter or Schourtien goes not to the Harbor of Dunkirk, but is by one
Mile or more short of the Harbor: but if any Ships will go from thence to
Dunkirk, they must pass over a hard s^ndy Bank, where no Ships can go over
which go deeper then 8 or 9 foot at the highest Spring-tyde; and that must be
with a calm water, or smooth Sea.

And for to gain two foot deeper, all Ships that are of any considerable
burden, must go round about, and backwards by the Sea to come into Dunkirk at
the highest Spring-tyde, over the sand-banks, which are a great many, all
about, two or three Leagues broad near the said Harbor and Seashore, and very
moveable, and altering upon every stress of weather, so that most great Ships
or Men of War going from thence are put to the trouble to provide themselves
with an extraordinary Pilot, or Costerer, as they call him, by reason of the
said shelfs and banks of sands, between which the Hollands Men of War were used
to lie at Anchor, but in Summer only.

Captain Cadde and others have made several Sea-Maps of the said sandy Banks
for their better information, which are printed, and may be had for 6 or 8 d.
apiece.

Dunkirk is not worth the tenth part of the Charges which a Garrison must needs
cost to keep the said Town, if the King of England, the King of France, or the
States of Holland should possess it.

And indeed it is not fitting for any to hold, excepting it be for the King of
Spain, whose Country lies round about it, being a fit Port for his subjects,
and their in ward Commerce, and commodity of Trading, because the King of Spain
needs not have any greater Garrison therein then two, three or four Companies of
Footsouldiers to keep the Inhabitants in obedience.

Moreover, Dunkirk is enclosed, bounded and confined between Graveling,
Bourborgh, Linken, Wynox-Bergen, Honscatey, Furne and Newport: so that the
Garrisons in Dunkirk can go no further, nor have any Contribution beyond it out
of any Friends or Enemies Country; being so narrowly encompassed, that it is
not possible to maintain and nourish the tenth part of the Garrison with
Victuals, if they be not supplied from abroad ever and anon.

Now, if Dunkirk should have a bold and ventrous Enemy coming from or along the
Seashore, the said Enemy may lodge himself the first night between the Fort
rouge and the Harbor, and be Master of the said Harbor the first night, so
that no Vessel can go out, nor come in, or subsist in the said Harbor, but may
be be battered in pieces: whereby it is no hard matter to destroy also the
Brick-wall between the Town and the Harbor level to the ground, and so take
the Town that way by a Ship-bridge over the said Harbor, or at low water, in
spite of all their fortifications round about it.

But to think to make there a kind of Sound, as that in the Baltik Sea between
Elsenore and Elsenborg, which are but one League distance the one from the
other, is but a shallow imagination: for England could not do it when she had
Calis by reason of the great distance the one from the other, which is seven
Leagues from Dover; and much less likely is such a thing to be done between
Dover and Dunkirk, being twelve Leagues distant the one from the other:
besides, the impeachment of the many shallows, and ill-favored banks under
water in the Sea, and the contrary courses of the streams, occasioned by the
said banks, make commonly the passage more confused and uncertain by many hours
difference in sailing.

J. Haes Donke.

FINIS.
There is lately Published,
A Most excellent Discourse concerning the Precedence of Kings; wherein the
Reasons and Arguments of the three greatest Monarchs of Christendom, who claim
a several Right thereunto, are faithfully Collected and Rendered. Whereunto is
adjoined a distinct Treatise of Ambassadors. Fol. Price 7 s.

The Conduct and Character of Count Nicholas Serini, Protestant Generalissimo
of the Auxiliaries in Hungary, the most prudent and resolved Champion of
Christendom. Price one shilling.

Pharamond: An excellent new Romance, written by the Author of Cassandra and
Cleopatra. Fol. Price 10 s.

The Villain, a Tragedy, by T. Porter, Esquire Price 1 s.

The Ungrateful Favorite, a Comedy, by a Person of Honor. Price one shilling.

Parsons Law, or a View of Advowson's. 8.

Bibles in Latin in 12.

Genealogies of the Bible in all Volumes.

Holdsworth's Sermons, 4.

Purchase of Bees, 4.

Wise-mans Crown, or the Glory of the Rosie-Cross, by J. Heydon, 8.

Painting of the Ancients, 4.

White on the Sabbath, 4.

Buchanus Body of Divinity, 4.

Greenbill on Ezekiel, second part, 4.

Holiokes Doctrine of Life, 4.

Oughtred of Proportions, 8.

Henry the fourth of France his Life, by the Bishop of Rodez, 8.

These, with variety of all sorts of Books, are to be sold by Samuel Speed, at
the Rainbow in Fleetstreet.

FINIS.

